

The Photoshop Tricks  
for Designers Book Team
Managing Editor
Kim Doty
Technical Editor
Cindy Snyder
Art Director
Jessica Maldonado
PUBLISHED BY
Peachpit Press
©2016 Kelby Corporate Management, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or 
transmitted in any form, by any means, electronic or mechanical, 
including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage 
and retrieval system, without written permission from the publisher, 
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review. 
Trademarks
All terms mentioned in this book that are known to be trademarks 
or service marks have been appropriately capitalized. Peachpit 
Press cannot attest to the accuracy of this infor mation. Use of a 
term in the book should not be regarded as affecting the validity  
of any trademark or service mark. 
Photoshop is a registered trademark of Adobe Systems Incorporated.
Warning and Disclaimer
This book is designed to provide information about designing in 
Adobe Photoshop. Every effort has been made to make this book 
as complete and as accurate as possible, but no warranty of fitness 
is implied.
The information is provided on an as-is basis. The author and 
Peachpit shall have neither the liability nor responsibility to any 
person or entity with respect to any loss or damages arising from 
the information contained in this book or from the use of the  
discs, electronic files, or programs that may accompany it. 
THIS PRODUCT IS NOT ENDORSED OR SPONSORED BY ADOBE 
SYSTEMS INCORPORATED, PUBLISHER OF ADOBE PHOTOSHOP.
ISBN 10: 0-134-38657-4 
ISBN 13: 978-0-134-38657-7 
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Printed and bound in the United States of America
www.peachpit.com 
www.kelbyone.com
#KelbyOneBooks

This book is dedicated to my father!  
You were the one that saw it in me to be an artist  
and made that path possible for me. Thanks, Dad!

This page intentionally left blank 

v
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
About the Author
Corey Barker
Corey Barker has been a well-known Photoshop instructor for the 
past 10 years, but has been using Photoshop for the past 20 years. 
Since version 2.0, Corey has used and mastered every version of 
Photoshop and continues to inspire through his art and teachings 
with the latest versions. Corey was attending Ringling College of Art 
& Design, where he was pursuing a degree in illustration, when in 
his fourth year, he discovered Photoshop. It was at that moment the 
craftsman found his tool of choice. 
Corey has since gone on to become an award-winning designer 
and educator in a variety of fields. In 2006, he joined the Photoshop 
Guys on the popular videocast Photoshop User TV and is a regular 
contributor to Photoshop User magazine, where he writes the pop-
ular Down & Dirty Tricks column. He is also author of the best-selling 
books, Photoshop Down & Dirty Tricks for Designers, volumes 1 & 2. 
He teaches at live events, such as the Photoshop World Conference 
and Adobe MAX, and he taught the Down & Dirty Tricks seminar 
tour to thousands live all over the country. 
Corey was recently inducted into the Photoshop Hall of Fame 
for his contributions to the education of Photoshop and continues 
to inspire through his online training, books, articles, and training 
events. He recently founded PhotoshopMasterFX.com, which is a 
Photoshop design and effects online training site with inspired im-
agery and next-level training that helps users get the most they can 
out of Photoshop and their creative selves.
Learn more and follow Corey online by visiting him at:
His Site: PhotoshopMasterFX.com
Facebook: www.facebook.com/coreyps3D
Instagram: @coreyps3D
Twitter: @coreyps3D
YouTube: www.youtube.com/user/cbarker33

vi
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Table of Contents
Chapter 1 
Type Effects 
1
Stone Age Text ..............................................2
Highlighted Text Overlay ..................................6
Another Layer Style Texture Trick ..................... 10
Image Inside Text with a Twist ......................... 12
A Clever Little 3D Trick .................................. 16
Chapter 2
Commercial Effects 
19
Blending Different Images 
of the Same Subject ...................................... 20
Blending Patterns and Images ......................... 24
Hollywood Inspired Effects ............................. 30
Vector Frame Elements .................................. 37
Chapter 3
Graphic Effects 
43
Graphic from a Photo, 
Blended with a Texture .................................. 44
Geometric Shape Elements ............................. 48
Instant HUD Elements.................................... 53
Blending Frame Elements 
with Photos ................................................ 56
Graphic Ad from Photos 
and Textures ............................................... 59
Chapter 4
Photo Effects 
63
Sketch Fade Effect ........................................ 64
Stylized Light Effects ..................................... 68
Quick and Easy Double Exposure Effect ............. 73
Using Patterns to Blend Photos ........................ 78
Chapter 5
Texture Effects 
83
Blending Graphics with 
Seamless Textures ......................................... 84
Vintage Sports Ad with 
Blended Elements ......................................... 87

vii
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Table of Contents
Blending Textures Through 
Styles & Masking .......................................... 93
Instant Rain and Snow ................................... 96
Mobile App Brush Effects ............................... 99
Chapter 6
Light Effects 
105
The Design of Bokeh ................................... 106
Adding Spark Elements ................................ 109
Light Flares & Rings .................................... 114
Simple Light Streak 
Design Elements ........................................ 118
Chapter 7
Color Effects 
123
Isolated Color Effects 
Using Adjustment Layers .............................. 124
Creating a Duotone Effect 
with Camera Phone Images .......................... 126
Color Blending Effects 
Using Shape Layers ..................................... 129
Painted Color Effects 
Using Photos ............................................. 134
Cinematic Color 
Compositing Effects .................................... 136
Chapter 8
Hollywood-Style Effects 
143
Silhouette Design Elements ........................... 144
Grunge-Style Effects .................................... 150
Room With a City View ................................ 156
Chapter 9
3D Effects 
163
Instant Macro Effects 
Using 3D .................................................. 164
Quick 3D Text & 2D 
Texture Blend ............................................ 167
True Beveled Text 
with 3D ................................................... 170
INDEX ..................................................... 176

viii
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
(1) Who should have this book?
This book was designed to be a quick-access
handbook, mainly for working designers and
artists, but that doesn’t mean that photogra-
phers or even hobbyists can’t get something
out of these pages either. Whether you need 
quick instruction or even just a little inspira-
tion, this book is for you!
(2)  What is the user level of
this book?
This book assumes an intermediate or 
higher-level user—especially later in the 
book when you get to the Hollywood-style 
and 3D chapters. But, that does not mean 
it excludes beginners. The exercises are 
easy to follow along with for newbies, if 
you are patient with the steps, but it helps 
to at least have a good foundation of how 
Photoshop works.
(3)  What about the fonts used
in this book?
The fonts used in this book, in many cases, 
are the default fonts that are part of your 
OS. However, quite a few are from Adobe 
Typekit, which is a font service that is part 
of Adobe’s Creative Cloud and allows you 
to sync fonts to your desktop applications. 
This service is only available to full Creative 
Cloud subscribers.
(4)  What version of Photoshop
do I need for this book?
The exercises in this book were created in 
Photoshop CC 2015. If you are using an 
older version of Photoshop, I first have to 
ask, why? I am kidding. Though, seriously, a 
lot of the techniques within this book can be 
done in some older versions of Photoshop, 
but if you are a Creative Cloud subscriber, 
you should have the newest version anyway.
(5) What about exercise downloads?
You can follow along with the projects by
downloading low-res versions of the same
image files used in the book. This way
you can make sure you understand the
techniques, so you can then apply them
to your own projects. You can download
these files over at kelbyone.com/books
/psdesignbook.
Seven Questions & Answers About This Book

ix
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
(6)  How about the use of
stock images?
While in some cases I use images I have 
shot with my camera or my phone, I have 
always been a big proponent of using stock 
images. Throughout this book, I utilize a lot 
of stock images from Adobe Stock (former-
ly Fotolia.com). This is a fantastic resource 
and the best part is that it is built right into 
the Creative Cloud, though it is a separately 
priced service. When you sign up, you get 
10 free images, and you can download wa-
termarked comps of any image. 
(7) What about other resources?
In addition to Adobe Stock, there are a few
other resources I use that I wanted you to
be aware of. While these are not resources
I have used in this book, they’re ones I do
use occasionally and, as a designer, you can
never have too much.
PixelSquid.com: The folks at TurboSquid 
.com have created a resource for 3D objects 
developed specifically for Photoshop. How-
ever, they do not use Photoshop 3D in the 
normal sense. You use a special plug-in to 
import the 3D objects into your Photoshop 
designs. You can control the angle of an 
object, but only in the plug-in window. As 
of this writing, this service is free but that 
may change. It’s an impressive resource.
DaFont.com: While Typekit is a robust and 
user-friendly font library, I will still go to 
Dafont.com for more stylized and unusual 
fonts. These fonts are free, but be aware of 
the usage rights for each font.
Archive3D.net: Photoshop’s ability to cre-
ate 3D objects and effects from scratch is 
really impressive, but you can also import 3D 
objects created in other applications. One 
resource I use is Archive3D.net. They have 
a lot of cool 3D models that you can import  
into Photoshop, and they are all free. Be 
warned though, they don’t always work 
when you import them into Photoshop. In 
most cases, they work fine but sometimes 
they come in exploded or missing parts. 
They can be adjusted, but sometimes they 
are just hopeless, but that’s the risk you take 
when it’s free.


1
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Type Effects
Working with type is an essential skill for a designer, and now Photoshop 
allows you to do more with type than you ever thought possible. In this 
chapter, you’ll learn a few tricks that will help you think a little more 
creatively about text as a design element.

2
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Stone Age Text
©ADOBE STOCK/AVANTGARDE
This effect was inspired by the movie  
Jurassic World. It’s a cool way of using a 
single texture and layer styles to get an  
interesting result.
STEP ONE: Start by pressing Command-O 
(PC: Ctrl-O) and opening the texture image 
you want to use as your base. You can ei-
ther use your own or you can download 
the texture used in this exercise from the 
book’s downloads page, mentioned in the 
book’s introduction.
STEP TWO: Once the file is open, go to the 
Edit menu and choose Define Pattern. 
When prompted, give the new pattern a 
name and click OK.
STEP THREE: Next, press Command-N (PC: 
Ctrl-N) to create a new document measur-
ing 2000 pixels wide by 1000 pixels tall. 
Click on the Background Contents color 
swatch and set the color to Black, then 
click OK.
STEP FOUR: Now, select the Horizontal Type 
tool (T), press D, then X to set your Fore-
ground color to white, and click on the 
canvas to set a new text layer. Choose a 
thick font in a fairly large size to show as 
much of the texture as you can. Here, I am 
using a font called BT Machine. Use the 
Character panel to adjust the text to your 
liking (I kerned the second word to match 
the width of the first).
STEP FIVE: With the text layer selected, click 
on the Add a Layer Style icon at the bottom 
of the Layers panel and choose Pattern 
Overlay. Click on the Pattern thumbnail, 

3
Chapter 1: Type Effects
locate the texture you defined in Step Two 
(it should be the last one), and click on it 
to select it. Once you select the texture, 
you can position it in the text manually by 
clicking on the image and dragging around. 
Click OK when you’re done.
STEP SIX: Make a duplicate of this layer by 
pressing Command-J (PC: Ctrl-J).
STEP SEVEN: Double-click on the layer style 
name below this duplicate layer in the Lay-
ers panel to reopen the Layer Style dialog, 
and add a Bevel & Emboss layer style to the 
existing Pattern Overlay. Use the settings  
I have here to give the text a chiseled look. 
Click OK.
STEP EIGHT: Now, click on the Add Layer 
Mask icon at the bottom of the Layers 
panel to add a mask to this duplicate text 
layer. Then, choose the Brush tool (B) in the 
Toolbox. In the Brush Picker in the Options 
Bar, choose a simple spatter brush like the 
one shown below, which is part of the de-
fault brush set. Click the folder icon to the 
right of the brush thumbnail to open the 
Brush panel, and under Brush Tip Shape, 
set the Spacing to around 50%. Turn on 
the Shape Dynamics checkbox, and set the 
Size and Roundness Jitters to 0 and the 
Angle Jitter to 100%. (Note: Make sure 
the Pen Pressure icon in the Options Bar 
is off, so you control pen pressure in the 
Brush panel.)

4
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP NINE: Make sure your Foreground color 
is set to black, then with the layer mask ac-
tive, dab on the image in just a few random 
areas of the text to get a chiseled look as 
it redraws the bevel (you’re masking away 
the small areas where you’re painting). Be 
sure not to overdo it.
STEP 10: Next, click on the Create a New 
Layer icon at the bottom of the Layers panel 
to create a blank layer above the text layers. 
Press-and-hold the Option (PC: Alt) key as 
you click on the ƒx icon on the layer below 
and drag-and-drop it onto the blank layer 
above. This will copy the layer style to your 
blank layer.
STEP 11: Now, using a cool particle brush, 
we’ll add dust and debris falling off the 
text. We look at creating brush effects in 
Chapter 5, but you can download these 
brush presets to use here from the book’s 
downloads page, mentioned in the book’s 
introduction (double-click on the file and 
it will appear in your Tool Presets panel, as 
well as your Brush options panel, ready to be 
used). Just dab around the chipped areas of 
the text to add the falling particles. 

5
Chapter 1: Type Effects
Final
STEP 12: As a final touch, make sure your 
Foreground color is still set to black and 
make a duplicate of the Background layer. 
Then, apply the same stone texture as a 
Pattern Overlay layer style to this layer for a 
background element. However, in the Layer  
Style dialog, drop the Opacity to 75%. 
Then, click on Gradient Overlay on the left, 
and set the Blend Mode to Multiply and the 
Opacity to 75%. Choose the Foreground to 
Background gradient in the Gradient Pick-
er, set the Style to Radial, and turn on the 
Reverse checkbox, then increase the Scale 
to 115%. You can manually position the 
gradient by clicking-and-dragging directly 
on the image.
STEP 13: Finally, go back to the original text 
layer that just has the texture, and apply 
a Drop Shadow layer style to give it some 
dimension against the backdrop. As a final 
option, you can add a Color Overlay layer 
style to the beveled layer to create more 
separation, as I did here (I chose an orange 
color, set the Blend Mode to Overlay, and 
lowered the Opacity to 50%).

6
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Highlighted Text Overlay
©ADOBE STOCK/DANIEL KORZENIEWSKI
A common design feature these days is  
a text overlay blended with a background 
photo in a stylish way. Here we will create 
a sports-themed poster, but you can theme 
it to just about anything.
STEP ONE: Press Command-O (PC: Ctrl-O) 
to start by opening the shot you want to 
use as your base image. Here, I am going 
with a sports theme by doing a basketball 
poster. You can download this file from  
the book’s downloads page, mentioned in 
the book’s introduction, or use any image 
you want. This technique works on just 
about anything.
STEP TWO: Press Command-N (PC: Ctrl-N) 
to open the New dialog, and create a new 
document that is 1200 pixels wide by 1700 
pixels tall, with the Background Contents 
set to White. Use the Move tool (V) to 
drag-and-drop the base image onto this 
new document. Press Command-T (PC: 
Ctrl-T) to go into Free Transform, and scale 
and rotate the image into its final position, 
then press Return (PC: Enter) to commit  
the changes.
STEP THREE: Now, to a get a quick, gritty look 
on this sports photo, just make a duplicate 
of the layer by pressing Command-J (PC: 
Ctrl-J), then go under the Filter menu, un-
der Other, and choose High Pass. Set the 
Radius to 10 pixels and click OK.

7
Chapter 1: Type Effects
STEP FOUR: Change the blend mode of this 
high pass layer to Overlay. This will sharpen 
and enhance the contrast of the subject.
STEP EIGHT: Select the original photo layer  
in the Layers panel and drop its Opacity  
to 55%.
STEP FIVE: Next, we are going to colorize the 
image using a Black & White adjustment 
layer. Oh yeah, you heard me right. With 
the topmost layer selected, click on the 
Create New Adjustment Layer icon at the 
bottom of the Layers panel, and choose 
Black & White.
STEP SIX: In the Properties panel, turn on the 
Tint checkbox at the top, then click on the 
swatch to the right to open the Color Pick-
er. Choose a color for the base background 
and click OK. Here, I am using a gold color 
(R=174, G=127, B=15). Remember, it is an 
adjustment layer, so you can change this  
at any time.
STEP SEVEN: Once you choose the tint color, 
using the various color sliders below, you 
can adjust the intensity of the color by color 
ranges in the image. For instance, increasing 
the Reds amount will make the shadow  
areas lighter, thus making the tint color 
show more. You can continue to adjust the 
other sliders where needed until the image 
is to your liking.

8
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP NINE: Go under the View menu and 
choose New Guide Layout. Turn off the 
Columns checkbox, and turn on the Mar-
gin checkbox, then set all sides to 100 px. 
Click OK.
STEP 10: Grab the Horizontal Type tool (T) in 
the Toolbox. Then, click on the top left mar-
gin corner and drag out a text box inside 
the margin guides. Choose a font in the 
Options Bar (I used Futura Medium), then 
set the text to fit the theme. I typed “BAS-
KETBALL” but split the word onto three 
lines, changing the font size and kerning 
to make it fit evenly, as you see here.
STEP 11: Highlight the first line of text, then 
press-and-hold Command-Option-Shift (PC:  
Ctrl-Alt-Shift) and press the period key re-
peatedly, until the last letter jumps to the 
next line, then go back one step by pressing 
the comma key. Do this to the remaining 
lines to fill the width of the box with the text. 
Adjust the leading in the Character panel, 
if necessary (I adjusted it so the lines were 
close, but not touching).
STEP 12: Double-click the text layer’s thumb-
nail to select the text. Then, go to the Options 
Bar and click on the color swatch to open the 
Color Picker. Here, I am using this bright 
magenta red color since my background is 
yellow. You may need to experiment with 
other colors if using a different color back-
ground. Click OK when done.

9
Chapter 1: Type Effects
STEP 13: Now just change the text layer’s 
blend mode to Difference, and this will 
result in an interesting color mix with the 
background. Finally, as an option, you can 
add a subtle Drop Shadow layer style to 
the text layer to create a sense of depth, as 
you see here. Also, if you change the tint 
color in the adjustment layer, you will see 
various interesting results with the way it 
is all blending.

10
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Another Layer Style Texture Trick
Here is a rather cool trick for combining 
styles and textures while still being able to 
keep all the elements on separate layers. 
This is yet another reason why mastering 
layers is key to using Photoshop.
STEP ONE: This effect is similar to the stone 
texture effect earlier in this chapter but with 
a little twist to it. It is a pretty cool trick for 
being able to have complex effects while 
maintaining full editability of the original 
text layer. Start by pressing Command-O 
(PC: Ctrl-O) and opening the texture file 
you want to use. Here, we have an inter-
esting rust texture.
STEP TWO: Define this texture as a pattern 
by going under the Edit menu and choos-
ing Define Pattern. Name the texture when 
prompted. Click OK.
STEP THREE: Press Command-N (PC: Ctrl-N) 
to create a new document measuring 2000 
pixels wide by 1000 pixels tall, with the 
Background Contents set to Black. Now, 
select the Horizontal Type tool (T) in the 
Toolbox, click in your document to set a 
new text layer, and type some text. Here,  
I typed a simple, bold, two-word title. Be sure 
to use a really thick font for this (I used a 
font called Swiss Black), and use the Char-
acter panel to adjust the text to your liking  
(I kerned it and adjusted the leading).
STEP FOUR: Once the text is set, go to the 
Layers panel and add a new blank layer 
above or below the text layer (I added mine 
below by Command-clicking [PC: Ctrl-click-
ing] on the Create a New Layer icon at the 
bottom of the panel).
STEP FIVE: Now, Command-click (PC: Ctrl-
click) on both the text layer and the blank 
layer to select them, and press Command-G 
(PC: Ctrl-G) to group them in a folder (the 
layers are still separate, but just nested in 
this group). The cool thing about this is we 
can apply a layer style to the group and it 
will see the layers as one, even though they 
are separate. 
STEP SIX: With the group folder selected, 
click on the Add a Layer Style icon at the 
bottom of the Layers panel, and choose Pat-
tern Overlay. Click on the Pattern thumbnail 
and choose the texture you defined in Step 
Two (it should be the last one). Remember, 
©ADOBE STOCK/MIRO NOVAK

11
Chapter 1: Type Effects
you can adjust the position of the texture 
manually by clicking-and-dragging directly 
on the image. Don’t click OK yet.
STEP SEVEN: Click on Bevel & Emboss on 
the left and use settings similar to what  
I have below to give the text some dimen-
sion on the edges. The bevel will become 
more pronounced in a minute.
STEP EIGHT: Okay, remember that blank 
layer? Click on the small arrow to the left 
of the group folder in the Layers panel to 
reveal the layers in the group. Then, click on 
the blank layer to select it.
STEP NINE: Now you just want to introduce 
some graphic element on this layer and it 
will blend with the text via the layer style 
applied to the group. For instance, here  
I used the Brush tool (B) with a brush made 
from a splash of water (we look at creating 
brush effects a couple times in this book, but 
you can download the brush I used here from 
the book’s companion webpage). If you just 
dab the brush a couple times around the 
text, it immediately gives you something in-
teresting. So, press D to set your Foreground 
color to black, and click a few times around 
the text. Notice how the texture is revealed 
where the new elements appear. Doing it 
this way, you have more control over the 
placement of the text and other elements 
because they are still on separate layers; 
they are just in a group. Cool, huh?
Final

12
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Image Inside Text with a Twist
This one I just had to do because it is such 
a cool effect. I saw it in a sports ad on-
line, and it’s a very creative way of masking 
an image inside of text. We’ll utilize some 
handy layer tricks to achieve this effect.
STEP ONE: Start by opening the image of the 
subject (press Command-O [PC: Ctrl-O]). 
Here, we’re using this tennis player on a 
white background for easy extraction, 
which you can download from the book’s 
companion webpage (mentioned in the 
book’s introduction).
STEP TWO: Go to the Channels panel (Win-
dow>Channels) and click on the Blue chan-
nel to select it, since it has the most contrast. 
Then, Right-click on it and choose Duplicate 
Channel from the pop-up menu. Just click 
OK when the dialog opens.
STEP THREE: Select the duplicate channel and 
press Shift-Delete (PC: Shift-Backspace) to 
open the Fill dialog. Set the Contents to 
Black and the mode to Overlay, and click 
OK. This will force the subject’s gray areas 
to become blacker and will not affect the 
white background.
STEP FOUR: There are still some gray areas in 
the head and arms, so you can apply the 
Overlay fill one or two more times to make 
it darker. For some fine-tuning, you can get 
the Brush tool (B) and use a soft-edged 
brush with the tool’s blend Mode set to 
Overlay (in the Options Bar) to paint those 
gray areas to black. You want the subject to 
be solid black against a white background.
©ADOBE STOCK/FRANCK CAMHI

13
Chapter 1: Type Effects
STEP FIVE: Once you have the subject blacked 
out, press Command-I (PC: Ctrl-I) to invert 
the image. Now, if you see any light gray 
areas around the edge, use a simple Levels 
adjustment to get rid of these (press Com-
mand-L [PC: Ctrl-L]).
STEP SIX: Click on the main RGB channel 
in the Channels panel, and then go to the 
Select menu and choose Load Selection. 
Choose Blue copy in the Channel pop-up 
menu and click OK.
STEP SEVEN: If, at this point, you still need 
to clean up the selection around the soft 
edges, you can go under the Select menu 
and choose Refine Edge to open the Re-
fine Edge dialog. It’s not necessary, but it’s 
an option. Once your selection is finished, 
press Command-J (PC: Ctrl-J) to copy the 
selected area onto a new layer.
STEP EIGHT: Next, we’ll bring this subject into 
a new document with a background. Here, 
I used the Move tool (V) to move him onto 
a background file with a simple color-filled 
layer with both Pattern and Gradient Over-
lay layer styles applied.

14
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP NINE: Now, use the Quick Selection 
tool (W) to select just the shirt area of our 
subject. Once it is selected, you can click 
the Refine Edge button in the Options Bar 
and use that to adjust the selection, if need-
ed. Sometimes it is just handy to see if the 
whole thing is selected.
STEP 11: Grab the Horizontal Type tool (T) 
and click on the canvas to set a text layer. 
You can use a quote, or a group of random 
words, but it needs to be a bold font (I used 
the font Swiss721BT Black Extended). Then, 
you’ll need to format each line of the text 
according to where it falls within the shape 
of the shirt, since that is our guide. Similar 
to the way we formatted the text in the 
image of the basketball player (in the High-
lighted Text Overlay technique), we need 
to make each line readable within the area 
of the shirt. So, I have a simple quote here 
that I need to format to different sizes and 
line positions to fit within the visible area. 
Also, be aware of the leading. You’ll need 
to keep the space between lines very small, 
but so the letters are not touching.
STEP 10: Go under the Select menu, un-
der Modify, and choose Expand. Set the 
amount to 2 pixels and click OK. This will 
take care of anti-alias edging that wasn’t 
picked up in the original selection. Then, 
press Command-Shift-J (PC: Ctrl-Shift-J)  
to cut the selection out and put it onto a 
new layer.

15
Chapter 1: Type Effects
STEP 13: Now, even if you get as close as 
you can, some small parts of the text will 
still be visible beyond the edge of the sub-
ject, so here is a clever fix: Command-click 
(PC: Ctrl-click) on the thumbnail of the shirt 
layer to load it as a selection. Then, with the 
text layer selected, click on the Add Layer 
Mask icon at bottom of Layers panel. This 
will mask the excess outside of the shirt 
area and you can still continue to fine-tune 
the formatting of the text to fit in that area.
Final 
STEP 12: Once you have the text format-
ted to the shape of his shirt, click on the 
layer with the shirt and drag it above the 
text layer in the Layers panel. Press Com-
mand-Option-G (PC: Ctrl-Alt-G) to clip the 
shirt layer inside the text. You’ll also see 
where the text sits inside the shape. Use 
the same formatting shortcuts to contin-
ue to adjust the text to fit in the shape as 
much as possible, if needed.

16
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
A Clever Little 3D Trick
Here is a rather simple, yet cool, 3D trick 
you can do with text or a photo, just using 
a couple simple text layers:
STEP ONE: Press Command-N (PC: Ctrl-N) 
and create a new document with the Back-
ground Contents set to black. Now, start by 
selecting the Horizontal Type tool (T), set-
ting your text color to white (in the Options 
Bar), and then clicking on the canvas to set 
a new text layer. Input and format (using 
the Character panel) your desired text. Just 
one or two words will do.
STEP TWO: With the text layer selected, go to 
the 3D menu, under New Mesh from Lay-
er, and choose Postcard. This will place the 
text layer into its own 3D environment. In 
the Layers panel, you will see that your text 
layer has changed into a 3D layer. (Note: If 
this is your first time using 3D, Photoshop 
will ask if you want to switch to the 3D 
workspace, which opens the 3D and Prop-
erties panels.)
STEP THREE: In the 3D panel, make sure the 
Current View is selected. Then, in the Prop-
erties panel, you will see the camera setting 
for FOV. Set this number to around 7 mm 
lens. This will now give you a view of the 
text as if through a very-wide-angle lens.
STEP FOUR: Use the 3D Mode tools at the 
right end of the Options Bar to move the 
text. Use the Slide the 3D Camera tool to 

17
Chapter 1: Type Effects
slide the text closer, then use the Orbit the 
3D Camera tool to rotate the view angle of 
the text and you will see the wide-angle ef-
fect. This is very handy for getting extreme, 
but accurate, perspective. Just position the 
text at the angle you want, then go under 
the 3D menu and do a quick render when 
you’re done.
To use this layer in another image, simply 
select the Move tool (V), and drag-and-
drop it onto the image, as I have below. 
Tweak the position with the 3D Mode tools, 
if needed, then Right-click on the layer and 
choose Convert to Smart Object. This al-
lows you to work with the 3D layer as if  
it were a regular smart object, but still  
allows you to change the 3D aspects of it 
(just open the original by double-clicking  
on the smart object thumbnail).
TIP:  Remember, it is a 3D layer, so you can go 
to the Layers panel and double-click on the 
main Diffuse sublayer to access the original 
document with the text layer. Just highlight 
the text and type a new word, then close 
the document and save the changes. It will 
update automatically.
Final 
©ADOBE STOCK/ALEKSEI DEMITSEV


19
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Commercial Effects
In this social media world of short attention spans, it is critical to create 
commercial design that is eye-catching and impactful in a short time. 
This chapter explores some ways to use ph otos, textures, graphics, and 
text in creative ways to grab your audience quickly.

20
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Blending Different Images of the Same Subject
This effect is a cool and stylish way of blend-
ing a couple shots of a subject in different 
scenarios. Here we will take a look at a 
sports-ad-inspired effect.
STEP ONE: Press Command-O (PC: Ctrl-O) 
and open the first image that will be used 
as the base. Here, we’re using a baseball 
player ready at bat.
STEP TWO: Now, open the second image  
that will be blended with this image. Here, 
we have the same player, but in this image 
he is making a diving catch.
STEP THREE: Once you have the second image 
open, go under the Edit menu and choose 
Define Pattern to save the image into Photo-
shop, because we will be applying the image 
via a layer style in a little bit. You can name 
the pattern when prompted.
STEP FOUR: Now, go back to the first image 
of the ball player. Choose the Rectangle 
shape tool in the Toolbox (or press Shift-U 
until you have it), then go up to the Op-
tions Bar and set the tool mode (the pop-up 
menu on the left) to Shape. Set the Fill color 
to white, or any color you like, and set the 
Stroke color to none. 
STEP FIVE: Start by creating a vertical shape 
over the image, as shown here. Drawing 
the first shape will create a new shape layer 
and fill the shape with the selected color. 
Click on the Path Operations icon in the 
Options Bar and choose Combine Shapes.
until you have it), then go up to the Op-
tions Bar and set the tool mode (the pop-up
STEP FOUR: Now, go back to the first image
of the ball player. Choose the Rectangle
shape tool in the Toolbox (or press Shift-U
until you have it) then go up to the Op
©ADOBE STOCK/BETO CHAGAS
©ADOBE STOCK/BETO CHAGAS

21
Chapter 2: Commercial Effects
STEP SIX: Then, add another vertical rect-
angle somewhere else on the canvas. It 
should add a new shape to the existing 
shape layer. Continue to add more rectan-
gle shapes until it looks like you see above. 
We will modify the placement of these in 
a moment.
STEP SEVEN: Click on the Add a Layer Style 
icon at the bottom of the Layers panel and 
choose Pattern Overlay. Click on the Pattern 
thumbnail and, in the Pattern Picker, locate 
the image we defined in Step Three (it should 
be the last one). Make sure the Opacity 
and Scale are set to 100%. As an option, 
remember that you can move the pattern 
image around within the rectangles by click-
ing directly on that image and dragging it 
around while the Layer Style dialog is still 
open. Once you’re done, click OK.

22
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP NINE: Once you have the rectangles 
arranged, you can add more stylized separa-
tion from the background by double-clicking 
on the layer style to reopen the Layer Style 
dialog and clicking on Drop Shadow on the 
left, and then use the settings shown here.
Next, click on Bevel & Emboss, start with 
the settings below, and tweak them where 
necessary if using different images.
STEP 10: With the overall effect done, we 
just need to add some text to finish it up. 
Here, I am using Eurostile Bold Extended 
with the title in two colors. So, get the 
Horizontal Type tool (T), click on the image, 
and start typing. Highlight each half of the 
text with the tool and change the color 
using the color swatch in the Options Bar. 
Then, add a Drop Shadow Layer style with 
the Opacity set to around 55%.
STEP 11: I want the text to be roughly the 
same angle as the vertical bars. So go under 
the Edit menu, under Transform, and choose 
Skew. Option-click-and-hold on the top mid-
dle control point again, and drag to the right 
until the angle is close to that of the rect-
angles. Press Return (PC: Enter) when done.
STEP EIGHT: With the shape layer selected, go 
under the Edit menu, under Transform Path, 
and choose Skew. Then, Option-click (PC: 
Alt-click) on the top middle control point, 
and drag to the right to make the rectan-
gles lean to the right. Press Return (PC: En-
ter) to lock in the change when you’re done 
(click OK in the warning dialog).
In this case, we want to reveal the better 
parts of each image, so the position of the 
rectangles must be kept in mind. Remem-
ber, you can use the Direct Selection tool, 
which is the white arrow nested under the 
Path Selection tool (Shift-A), to modify in-
dividual control points or paths to make the 
rectangles thinner or thicker.

23
Chapter 2: Commercial Effects
STEP 12: As a finishing touch, make a dupli-
cate of this text layer by pressing Command-J 
(PC: Ctrl-J). In the Layers panel, position this 
duplicate layer just above the Background 
layer and below the rectangle shape layer. 
STEP 13: Press Command-T (PC: Ctrl-T) to 
activate Free Transform, then press-and-hold 
the Shift key as you grab a corner handle 
and scale the text fairly large. Press Return 
(PC: Enter) when you’re done. Finally, set the 
layer’s blend mode to Overlay and drop the 
layer’s Opacity to around 25%.
Final

24
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Blending Patterns and Images
©ADOBE STOCK/EUGENE ONISCHENKO
This is another one inspired by a sports ad 
I saw. It’s a good example of using pattern 
elements, along with various images, to 
create a composite with really slick com-
mercial appeal.
STEP ONE: Let’s start by extracting the main 
subject, which in this case is this soccer player. 
I was able to find this one with a white back-
ground, so extracting him should be similar 
to what we did with the tennis player in the 
Image Inside Text with a Twist technique in 
Chapter 1. Start by going into the Channels 
panel and making a duplicate of the Blue 
channel by Right-clicking on the channel 
itself and choosing Duplicate Channel.
STEP TWO: Once the duplicate channel is 
made, press Command-I (PC: Ctrl-I) to In-
vert the channel copy.
STEP THREE: Now, press Shift-Delete (PC: 
Shift-Backspace) to open the Fill dialog. Set 
the Contents to White and the Mode to 
Overlay. Click OK. This will force most gray 
areas to white and leave the black areas 
alone. Do this a second time to fill in the 
gray even more.
STEP FOUR: If there is still some gray area 
that needs to be forced to white, doing 
a global fill might overdo it in some ar-
eas. So instead, grab the Brush tool (B), 
then in the Options Bar, choose a soft-
edged round brush in the Brush Picker, 
set the tool’s blend Mode to Over lay, 
and paint with white in the gray areas 
until the channel is black and white, with  
no gray.

25
Chapter 2: Commercial Effects
STEP FIVE: With this channel copy prepared, 
go back to the color image by clicking on 
the RGB channel at the top. Then, go to 
the Select menu, choose Load Selection, 
and choose the Blue copy channel from 
the Channel pop-up menu. At this point, 
you can use the Refine Edge dialog (also 
found under the Select menu) to clean up 
the selection, if needed. When done, copy 
the selected area to a new layer by pressing 
Command-J (PC: Ctrl-J).
STEP SIX: With the subject extracted, press 
Command-S (PC: Ctrl-S) to save this docu-
ment, and then Command-N (PC: Ctrl-N) to 
create a new one measuring 250 pixels by 
250 pixels, with a black Background layer.
STEP SEVEN: Zoom in to about 300%, so 
you can see what you’re doing, then press 
Command-R to activate the document rul-
ers. Drag out a vertical and horizontal guide 
from the rulers to the center of the canvas. 
It should snap to the center for both (unless 
you have turned this off in the View menu).

26
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP EIGHT: Select the Line tool in the Tool-
box (it’s nested with the shape tools) or 
press Shift-U until you have it. At the left 
end of the Options Bar, set the tool mode 
to Shape. Then, set the Fill color to white, 
the Stroke color to none, and the line width 
to 3 pt. Finally, click on the Path Operations 
icon (just to the right of the Height field), 
and choose Combine Shapes.
STEP NINE: Starting at the top center, press-
and-hold the Shift key and draw a line 
straight down along the vertical guide. 
Keep the Shift key held down, and draw a 
horizontal line along the horizontal guide.
STEP 10: Do the same thing again, except  
start in the upper-left and then upper-right 
corners and Shift-click-and-drag lines at 
45-degree angles, from corner to corner.
STEP 11: Click on the Create a New Layer 
icon at the bottom of the Layers panel to 
create a new blank layer, and press Com-
mand-A (PC: Ctrl-A) to Select All. Then, go 
under the Edit menu and choose Stroke. 
Set the Width to 5 pixels, the Location to In-
side, and the Color to white, and click OK.
STEP 12: Turn off the Background layer’s 
Eye icon, then go under the Edit menu and 
choose Define Pattern. Name the pattern 
when prompted.

27
Chapter 2: Commercial Effects
STEP 13: Now, create a new document to 
build the final design in, measuring 1450 
pixels wide by 2100 pixels tall. Set the 
Background Contents to a dark blue color. 
(Note: I am basing my colors on the colors 
our subject [the soccer player] is wearing.)
STEP 14: Next, grab the Horizontal Type tool 
(T) and click in the document to set a new
text layer. The text will be a big part of the
background, so choose a bold font and a
color that will stand out from the back-
ground. Here, I am using a font called Old
School United Regular, and I chose yellow
to match our subject’s shoes. I skewed this
text similar to the way we skewed the text
in the last tutorial to get a dramatic angle
(go under the Edit menu, under Transform,
and choose Skew), but this time, grab the
top-right corner handle and drag upward.
You can use the Character panel to adjust
the tracking and leading, as needed.
STEP 15: Use the Move tool (V) to drag-
and-drop the extracted subject layer onto 
the main design. Make sure to position it 
at the top of the layer stack in the Layers  
panel, so it is above the text. Also, press 
Command-T (PC: Ctrl-T) to go into Free 
Transform to scale our subject to fit in the 
composition (press-and-hold the Shift key 
while you click-and-drag a corner point to 
keep him proportional).
STEP 16: Click on the Background layer in 
the Layers panel, and then add a new blank 
layer above it. You want to make sure the 
layer is above the Background layer, but 
below the text layer. Press Shift-Delete (PC: 
Shift-Backspace) to open the Fill dialog, set 
the Contents to 50% Gray, and click OK.
STEP 17: With this gray layer active, click on 
the Add a Layer Style icon at the bottom of 
the Layers panel and choose Pattern Over-
lay. Click on the Pattern thumbnail to open 
the Pattern Picker and choose the pattern 
we defined earlier (it should be the last 
one). Then, set the Blend Mode to Overlay 
and the Scale to around 50%. Next, go to 
Blending Options near the top of the list 
on the left and click on it. In the Advanced 
Blending section, drop the Fill Opacity to 0. 
This will allow the pattern to blend with the 
background. Click OK.

28
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP 18: Now, click on the Add Layer Mask 
icon at the bottom of the Layers panel to 
add a layer mask to this pattern layer. Then, 
get the Gradient tool (G), and in the Options 
Bar, click on the gradient thumbnail and 
choose the Foreground to Transparent in 
the Gradient Picker, and click on the Radial 
Gradient icon (the second icon to the right 
of the gradient thumbnail). Click-and-drag 
to add a few gradients to the mask to fade 
the pattern randomly.
STEP 19: Open the image of the stadium 
background (you can download it from the 
book’s downloads page, mentioned in the 
book’s introduction). Drag-and-drop it onto 
the main design, then use Free Transform 
to scale and rotate it, so that the horizon 
line of the photo matches the angle of the 
text. Position it above the pattern layer in 
the Layers panel.
STEP 20: Finally, add a layer mask to this lay-
er and use the same radial gradient to add 
some fades to the top and bottom edges of 
the stadium layer.
BONUS TIP: You can add a little extra blending 
to the text by selecting the text layer, then 
clicking on the Add a Layer Style icon, and 
choosing Blending Options. Then, in the 
Blend If section, Option-click (PC: Alt-click) 
on the white Underlying Layer slider knob 
to split it, and drag the left side to the left  
a little bit until you see the highlights start 
to show through. Click OK. 
©ADOBE STOCK/EFKS

29
Chapter 2: Commercial Effects
Final

30
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Step 4
Hollywood Inspired Effects
In this exercise, I wanted to show you how 
Hollywood effects can influence design  
for commercial products. This compositing 
technique has been used quite a bit lately in 
many a movie poster, but since most of us 
aren’t really designing movie posters, here’s 
how to spin the effect to work for a fake 
whiskey ad.
STEP ONE: Start by pressing Command-N 
(PC: Ctrl-N) and creating a new document 
for our final design measuring 1745 pixels 
wide by 2000 pixels tall. Just set the Back-
ground Contents to White for now.
STEP TWO: Next, open a texture to be used 
as the background. Here, we have a texture 
from a collection from PhotoArt Textures. Go 
ahead and use the Move tool (V) to bring this 
texture into the main document, then use 
Free Transform (Command-T [PC: Ctrl-T]) 
to scale and position it to fit in the canvas.
Step 2
Step 3
Step 3
STEP THREE: Now open the paint spatter im-
age (download it from the link mentioned in 
the book’s introduction). This will be a fram-
ing element for the overall design. However, 
we need to extract it from the background. 
This spatter is the wrong color, but that 
doesn’t matter since we just need the shape.
STEP FOUR: Press Command-Shift-U (PC: Ctrl-
Shift-U) to remove the color from the image. 
Then press Shift-Delete (PC: Shift-Backspace) 
to open the Fill dialog and set the Contents 
to Black and the blend Mode to Overlay. 
Click OK. Do this one more time to make 
the spatter darker.
STEP FIVE: Press Command-I (PC: Ctrl-I) to 
Invert the image. Then, open the Channels 
panel and press-and-hold the Command 
(PC: Ctrl) key as you click on the RGB channel 
thumbnail. This will load the shape as a selec-
tion. In the Layers panel, click on the Create 
a New Layer icon at the bottom of the Layers 
panel to create a new blank layer, press D to 
set your Foreground color to black, and then 
press Option-Delete (PC: Alt-Backspace) to 
fill the selection with your Foreground color. 
©PHOTOART TEXTURES
©ADOBE STOCK/UNDREY
St
4

31
Chapter 2: Commercial Effects
Press Command-D (PC: Ctrl-D) to Deselect, 
and then use the Move tool (V) to drag-and-
drop this spatter element layer onto the 
main document.
STEP SIX: Once the spatter is in place over 
the texture, open the image of the whiskey 
bottle and glass. Drag-and-drop this image 
onto the main layout, and then use Free 
Transform to scale and position it so the 
bottle and glass are roughly centered in 
relation to the background spatter.
STEP SEVEN: Click on the Add Layer Mask 
icon at the bottom of the Layers panel to 
add a mask to this layer. Then, press G to get 
the Gradient tool, choose the Foreground to 
Transparent gradient in the Gradient Picker 
in the Options Bar, and click on the Radial 
Gradient icon to the right of the gradient 
thumbnail. Set your Foreground color to 
black and click-and-drag out some gradients 
to fade the edges of the bottle layer. This illus-
trates how you can sometimes blend images 
without complicated extraction methods.
Step 5
Step 7
St
5
St
7
©ADOBE STOCK/ALEXANDR VLASSYUK

32
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Step 10
Step 8
Step 9
©ADOBE STOCK/PAUL TARASENKO
©ADOBE STOCK/OLLY

33
Chapter 2: Commercial Effects
STEP EIGHT: Now, open the first subject image. 
Here, on the left, we have a girl in sunglass-
es, because why not? Like the bottle image, 
bring this image into the main layout and 
then scale and position it just above and to 
the right of the bottle. Then, add a black 
(Hide All) layer mask by Option-clicking (PC: 
Alt-clicking) on the Add Layer Mask icon.
STEP NINE: Use the same gradient as in Step 
Seven, but set your Foreground color to 
white instead of black, and add a gradient 
in the area of the subject’s face. Add multi-
ple smaller gradients to reveal more of the 
subject, where needed. Now you can see it 
coming together.
STEP 10: Do the same thing with the sec-
ond subject, the guy in sunglasses. Why? 
Because! Go ahead and drag-and-drop him 
onto the main image and position him above 
and to the left of the bottle. Then, add a 
black layer mask and reveal him with a white 
radial gradient like before.
STEP 11: Now, as a result, I can see we need to 
add a couple abstract elements to the sides 
to help with the blending of the subjects. 
Here, I have a rather interesting collection of 
particle elements that will work nicely.
STEP 12: Since these are white on black, all 
you need to do is press Shift-Delete (PC: 
Shift-Backspace) to open the Fill dialog, 
set the Contents to White and the blend 
Mode to Overlay, and click OK to make 
them brighter.
STEP 13: Next, go to the Channels panel and 
Command-click (PC: Ctrl-click) on the RGB 
channel thumbnail to load the highlight ar-
eas as a selection. Then, create a new blank 
layer and fill the selection with black.
Step 11
Step 12
Step 13
©ADOBE STOCK/VLADYSLAV BASHUTSKYY

34
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Step 15
Step 16
Step 17
Step 14
STEP 14: Use the Lasso tool (L) to make a 
loose selection of the top left particle shape, 
then get the Move tool and drag-and-drop  
it onto the main layout. Position the layer 
above the spatter layer in the Layers panel, 
and then position the particle element on 
the right side of the spatter in the compo-
sition and resize it using Free Transform. 
Now, because it is abstract, go under the 
Edit menu, under Transform, and choose 
Warp. Then, use the grid to change the 
shape of the particle element to better con-
form to the existing spatter. Press Return 
(PC: Enter) when done.
STEP 15: For the other side of the spatter, use 
a different particle element or just use the 
same one you already used, but this time, 
once you are in Free Transform, Right-click 
inside the bounding box and choose Flip Hor-
izontal, then warp it again to change it a bit.
STEP 16: Now go to the layer with the original 
spatter and add a layer mask to it. Then, use 
a black radial gradient to fade around the 
particle edges to hide any superfluous areas.
STEP 17: Select the topmost layer in the Layers 
panel. Then, press-and-hold the Option (PC: 
Alt) key as you click in the top-right corner 
of the Layers panel and choose Merge Visible 
Step 14
Step 15
Step 16
Step 17

35
Chapter 2: Commercial Effects
from the flyout menu. This will create a flat-
tened version on a new layer at the top.
STEP 18: Press Command-Shift-U (PC: Ctrl-
Shift-U) to remove the color from the layer. 
Then, go under the Filter menu and choose 
Filter Gallery, then under Texture, choose 
Grain. Set the Intensity to 25 and the Con-
trast to 3. Also, set the Grain Type to Speckle, 
and then click OK.
STEP 19: Press Command-U (PC: Ctrl-U) to 
open the Hue/Saturation dialog. Turn on the 
Colorize checkbox, then set the Hue to 30, 
the Saturation to 50, and the Lightness to 
–10. Click OK.
STEP 20: Set the layer’s blend mode to Color. 
Add a layer mask and select the same Gra-
dient tool we’ve been using, but go into the 
Options Bar and drop the tool’s Opacity to 
75%. Now add a few gradients to the center 
area to reveal the original, but with a hint  
of the textured layer showing through.
STEP 21: Finally, just drop in some text  
(using the Horizontal Type tool; I used the 
font Swiss721BT Black Extended) to finish 
the design, making sure the text layer is 
positioned above the other layers.
See the next page for the final image.
Step 18
Step 20
Step 20
St
18

36
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Final
Fi
l

37
Chapter 2: Commercial Effects
Here, we’ll take a look at a creative way to 
use vector elements to frame your design. 
This is especially handy with commercial 
products, as it gives you a unique and cus-
tomizable way to spice up an ad and be 
able to edit it easily throughout.
STEP ONE: Let’s start by defining a texture 
we will add to the background. I like to de-
fine them as patterns because they will be 
there to use whenever I need them. Here, 
we have a water drop background that will 
work great.
STEP TWO: Remove the color from the im-
age by pressing Command-Shift-U (PC: 
Ctrl-Shift-U), then go under the Edit menu 
and choose Define Pattern. Name it when 
prompted, and then click OK.
STEP THREE: Press Command-N (PC: Ctrl-N) 
and create a new document measuring 1000 
pixels wide by 2000 pixels tall with the Back-
ground Contents set to black.
Vector Frame Elements
STEP FIVE: Grab the Rectangular Marquee 
tool (M) in the Toolbox, and click-and-drag 
out a selection in the rectangle defined by 
the guides. Click on the Create a New Layer 
icon at the bottom of the Layers panel, then 
press Shift-Delete (PC: Shift-Backspace) to 
open the Fill dialog, choose 50% Gray from 
the Contents pop-up menu, and click OK.
STEP FOUR: Go under the View menu and 
choose New Guide Layout. Just turn on the 
Margin checkbox and set all sides to 75 px. 
Click OK.
©ADOBE STOCK/AFRICA STUDIO

38
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP SIX: Now, open the image of the sub-
ject of the ad. Here, we’ll go with a fitness 
theme. Just use the Move tool (V) to drag-
and-drop this image onto the main layout, 
and position the layer at the top of the layer 
stack in the Layers panel. Then, press Com-
mand-Option-G (PC: Ctrl-Alt-G) to clip the 
subject’s layer into the gray layer, and use 
Free Transform (Command-T [PC: Ctrl-T]) to 
scale and position it to best fit in the frame.
STEP SEVEN: Click on the Background layer 
in the Layers panel, then add a new blank 
layer. Fill it with a base color, like 50% 
gray. Then, click on the Add a Layer Style 
icon at the bottom of the Layers panel and 
choose Pattern Overlay. Click on the Pattern 
thumbnail to open the Pattern Picker and 
choose the water drop pattern (it should be 
the last one). Adjust the scale, if necessary. 
Remember, you can also click directly on 
the image and move the texture around.
Set the Blend Mode to Overlay. Since the 
base color of the layer is gray, you will see 
no change, but if you change the layer col-
or, then the water texture will blend accord-
ingly. For instance, here I made the layer fill 
a little darker gray.
©ADOBE STOCK/ARTEM FURMAN

39
Chapter 2: Commercial Effects
STEP EIGHT: Now select the Rectangle shape 
tool (U). Set the tool’s mode to Shape in 
the Options Bar and set the color Fill to a 
yellow-gold. Draw a rectangle shape at the 
top of the canvas, going beyond the edge 
of the canvas on the top and both sides. 
This will automatically create a new shape 
layer. Now click on the Path Operations icon 
in the Options Bar and set it to Combine 
Shapes. Then, add a few more horizontal 
bars to the shape layer.
STEP EIGHT N
l
t th R
t
l
h
STEP NINE: Once you have all the bars in 
place, use the Path Selection tool (A) to 
select all of them by clicking-and-dragging 
out a rectangle around all of them. Then, 
go under the Edit menu, under Transform 
Path, and choose Skew. Move your cursor 
over the control point on either the left or 
right side, then press-and-hold the Option 
(PC: Alt) key and drag up or down to skew 
along this axis. Press Return (PC: Enter) 
when done.

40
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Step 10
Step 11
STEP 10: With the paths still selected, grab 
the Rectangle shape tool again, press-and-
hold the Option (PC: Alt) key, and starting 
in the center of the area you want to sub-
tract, click-and-drag out a new rectangle 
that will be subtracted from the existing 
shapes, essentially hiding the shapes in the 
areas it overlaps. Use Free Transform to po-
sition the shape in the composition and keep  
it selected.
STEP 11: Go under the Edit menu, under 
Transform Path, and choose Warp. Yes, 
you can warp a vector path. Once the grid 
appears, manipulate the shape by click-
ing-and-dragging the individual points to 
warp it, which will result in a variation of 
the masking effect on the yellow bars. Press 
Return (PC: Enter) when done.
STEP 12: Click on the Add a Layer Style 
icon at the bottom of the Layers panel and 
choose Gradient Overlay from the pop-up 
St
10
St
11
Step 12
Step 12

41
Chapter 2: Commercial Effects
menu. In the dialog, click on the gradient 
thumbnail and choose the Black, White gra-
dient, and then set the Blend Mode to Soft 
Light. Also, set the Style to Reflected and 
turn on the Reverse checkbox, and use the 
Angle setting to set a different angle for 
the gradient.
Next, click on Drop Shadow on the left, then 
set the Opacity to around 42%, Distance to 
26 px, Spread to 0, and Size to around 21 
px. Then, just manually position the shadow 
by clicking directly on it in the image and 
dragging it where you want it. When you’re 
done, click OK.
Finally, just use the Horizontal Type tool 
to drop in some text (I used the font 
Swiss721BT Black Extended), or drag-and-
drop a logo onto the image, and you are 
all done.
Final


43
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Graphic Effects
The great thing about Photoshop is its unending ability to incorporate 
graphic elements into your designs, especially vector graphics, not to 
mention the graphic effects you can apply to photo and texture ele-
ments. This chapter contains a few graphic tricks you can add to your 
design arsenal.

44
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Graphic from a Photo, Blended with a Texture
I have seen this effect in numerous ads 
for movies and TV shows. It is a neat trick, 
even if you have a rather low-res photo, 
to be able to convert a photo to a black-
and-white graphic, and then blend it with 
a texture.
STEP ONE: Start by opening the image of 
the main subject. (You can follow along by 
downloading these files from the book’s 
downloads page, mentioned in the introduc-
tion.) Now, even though we are not extract-
ing the subject for this effect, the simpler the 
background, the better. This one is a simple 
studio shot on a neutral background.
STEP TWO: Next, you need a texture for 
the background. (Again, you can use the 
one provided or use your own). This will 
also be the document we will use to build  
the design.
STEP THREE: With both files now open, go 
back to the main subject image and remove 
the color from the image by pressing Com-
mand-Shift-U (PC: Ctrl-Shift-U).
STEP FOUR: Press Command-L (PC: Ctrl-L) 
to open the Levels dialog. Select the white 
(highlights) eyedropper under the Options 
button, then go over to the image and click 
on the gray background area to the right of 
the subject’s shoulder (as shown here). This 
will force most of the background to white.
©ADOBE STOCK/YSBRANDCOSIJN
©ADOBE STOCK/PAKHNYUSHCHYY

45
Chapter 3: Graphic Effects
STEP FIVE: Go back to the Levels dialog and 
grab the Input Levels shadows slider (the 
one on the left) below the histogram, and 
drag it to the right. Also move the midtones 
(middle) slider a little to the right, and then 
grab the highlights slider (on the right) 
and push it to the left a little. Do these 
adjustments until you have a pure black-
and-white version of the subject. Click OK 
when you’re done.
STEP SIX: Now use the Move tool (V) to drag-
and-drop this image over onto the image 
of the background texture. Then, use Free 
Transform (Command-T [PC: Ctrl-T]) to scale 
and position the image in the composition, 
so it looks similar to the original.
STEP SEVEN: Once in place, change the sub-
ject’s layer blend mode to Multiply. This  
will leave only the dark areas visible over 
the texture.

46
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP EIGHT: Now, to give the subject layer a 
hint of color, press Command-U (PC: Ctrl-U) 
to open Hue/Saturation. Turn on the Col-
orize checkbox, set the Hue to around 34, 
and set the Saturation to around 32. This 
will put a warm cast on the subject layer, 
helping it blend with the background more.
©ADOBE STOCK/BURIY
STEP NINE: If you add a little more Levels 
adjustment after adding the color cast, you 
will get some interesting color effects. You 
can see where I moved the sliders here, but 
you can experiment here to get the look 
you want.
STEP 10: Next, click on the Add a Layer Style 
icon at the bottom of the Layers panel and 
choose Blending Options. Then, go down 
to the Blend If section, press-and-hold 
the Option (PC: Alt) key, and click on the 
white Underlying Layer slider knob to split 
it. Now, drag to the left to allow some of 
the background texture to peek through. 
Click OK.
STEP 11: As an option, you can take a  
texture, like this particle image, and just 
drag-and-drop it onto the main image. 
Then click-and-drag the layer in the Layers 
panel and position it between the Back-
ground layer and the subject layer in the 
layer stack. Also, use Free Transform to re-
size and position the particle image within 
the background.

47
Chapter 3: Graphic Effects
Final
STEP 12: Now, just change the layer’s blend 
mode to Color Burn and drop the layer’s 
Opacity to 75%. If needed, you can always 
use the Horizontal Type tool (T) to drop in 
some text, and you are all done.

48
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Geometric Shape Elements
Oftentimes, a simple graphic element can 
make quite an impact if used the right way. 
Here, we will take a simple shape and make 
a custom brush which we will use to paint in 
a background element. I also have a couple 
bonus tips.
STEP ONE: Start by pressing Command-N 
(PC: Ctrl-N) to create a new document 
that is 2000 pixels wide by 1000 pixels tall. 
Then, click on the Create a New Layer icon 
at the bottom of the Layers panel to create 
a new blank layer. Click on the Foreground 
color swatch at the bottom of the Toolbox 
and, when the Color Picker opens, choose 
an orange color using the same RGB num-
bers I have here, then press Option-Delete 
(PC: Alt-Backspace) to fill your blank layer 
with this color.
STEP TWO: Next, create another new docu-
ment, but this time, make it 1000 pixels by 
1000 pixels at 300 pixels per inch.
STEP THREE: Then, go to the shape tools in 
the Toolbox and locate the Polygon tool 
(or click Shift-U until you have it). In the 
Options Bar, set the tool’s mode to Shape, 
then set the Fill to none and the Stroke col-
or to black. Also, near the right end, set the 
number of Sides to 3.
STEP FOUR: On your square document, start 
in the middle of the canvas and click-and-
drag out a triangle shape. Do not take it 
beyond the image boundaries. If you want 
the stroke thicker or thinner, just go back 
to the Options Bar and enter a different 
amount for the Stroke size. Note: If you 
need to move the shape while you are cre-
ating it, just press-and-hold the Spacebar 
while you drag.
STEP FIVE: When you’re done, go under the 
Edit menu and choose Define Brush Preset, 
then give the brush a name when prompt-
ed and click OK.

49
Chapter 3: Graphic Effects
STEP SIX: Go back to the other document 
created in Step One and make sure the 
orange layer is selected in the Layers panel. 
Then, click on the Add a Layer Style icon, at 
the bottom of the Layers panel, and choose 
Gradient Overlay. Choose a simple Black, 
White gradient and change the Blend Mode 
to Overlay. Drop the Opacity to around 78%, 
set the Style to Radial, turn on the Reverse 
checkbox, and increase the Scale to 150%.
Once these settings are in place, you can 
click-and-drag on the image to position the 
center of the gradient over to the left side 
of the composition, like you see here. Click 
OK when you’re done.
STEP SEVEN: Choose the Brush tool (B) and 
make sure the triangle brush is selected in the 
Brush Picker (it should be the last one). Then, 
click the little folder icon to the right of the 
Brush Picker to open the Brush panel. Click 
on Brush Tip Shape, set the Size to around 
800 px, and increase the Spacing to around 
150%. Next, click on Shape Dynamics on the 
left and set the Size Jitter and Angle Jitter 
to 100%. Then, click on Scattering, turn on 
the Both Axes checkbox, and set the Scatter 
amount to around 120%. 
STEP EIGHT: Now we’re going to use this 
brush. Click on the Create a New Layer 
icon to create a new blank layer and set the  
layer’s blend mode to Overlay. Press D, then 
X, to set your Foreground color to white, 
and paint some random triangles around 
the background, starting in the light areas 
of the gradient, as shown here.
STEP NINE: This next step is just an option, 
but to add some blur effects to the graphics, 
start by double-clicking the Quick Mask icon 
(the second icon from the bottom of the 
Toolbox). In the Quick Mask Options dialog, 
make sure the Selected Areas radio button 
is turned on, and then click on the Color 
swatch and choose a bright medium blue 
color. Set the Opacity to 75%, and click OK.

50
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP 10: Get the Gradient tool (G), choose 
the Foreground to Transparent gradient in 
the gradient thumbnail in the Options Bar, 
click on the Radial gradient icon to the right 
of the gradient thumbnail, and press Q to 
activate Quick Mask mode. Then, click-and-
drag out a few gradients (as shown here; 
the blue is merely a color mask overlay). 
Press Q again to turn Quick Mask off and 
see your circular selections.
STEP 11: Next, go under the Filter menu, 
under Blur, and choose Gaussian Blur. Set 
the Radius to 10 pixels and click OK. Press 
Command-D (PC: Ctrl-D) to Deselect.
STEP 12: Now that we have the background 
done, here’s an image of a skier that I want 
to mask on the background with a texture. 
So, go ahead and use the Move tool (V) to 
drag-and-drop this image into the main im-
age. Use Free Transform (Command-T [PC: 
Ctrl-T]) to scale and position it.
STEP 13: Here’s a texture that will be great 
to create a mask from. Remove the color by 
pressing Command-Shift-U (PC: Ctrl-Shift-U), 
then press Shift-Delete (PC: Shift-Backspace) 
to open the Fill dialog, and set the Contents 
to Black and the Mode to Overlay. Click OK.
©ADOBE STOCK/DULE964
©ADOBE STOCK/SAMOTT
©ADOBE STOCK/SAMOTT

51
Chapter 3: Graphic Effects
STEP 14: Press Command-I (PC: Ctrl-I) to 
Invert the image. Then, in the Channels 
panel, press-and-hold the Command (PC: 
Ctrl) key and click on the RGB thumbnail to 
load the white area as a selection.
STEP 15: Now, with any selection tool cho-
sen, click inside the active selection and 
drag it into the main image. Make sure the 
skier layer is selected in the Layers panel, 
and click on the Add Layer Mask icon at 
the bottom of the panel to mask the image 
inside the selected area.
STEP 16: Click on the chain link icon in be-
tween the image and mask thumbnails to 
unlink them. Then, click on the layer mask to 
select it, and use Free Transform to rotate and 
reposition the mask to better reveal the skier.
Step 15
Step 16

52
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Final
Final
Finally, if necessary, just use the Horizontal 
Type tool (T) to drop some text in, and you 
are all done.

53
Chapter 3: Graphic Effects
Instant HUD Elements
©ADOBE STOCK/FET
HUD (heads-up display) graphics seem to 
be popping up everywhere. They can defi-
nitely add something to an image or design 
to really give it an instant cool look. Here 
we will look at defining HUD elements that 
you can use anytime you want.
STEP ONE: First you need to open up the 
HUD graphic element for this exercise, or 
if you have one that is similar to the one 
above, go ahead and use that.
STEP TWO: Now, remove the color using a 
Gradient Map because that gives it more 
contrast. So, press D to set your Fore-
ground and Background colors to their 
defaults, then go under the Image menu, 
under Adjustments, and choose Gradient 
Map. Click OK when the dialog opens.
STEP THREE: Use Levels (press Command-L 
[PC: Ctrl-L]) to boost the contrast even 
more. The point here is to make the back-
ground mostly black and force the lighter 
areas to white. You can see where I have 
positioned the sliders here to keep some 
of the gray areas, as well. Click OK when 
you’re done.
STEP FOUR: In the Channels panel, press-
and-hold the Command (PC: Ctrl) key and 
click on the RGB channel to load the lighter  
areas as a selection. Press Command-J  
(PC: Ctrl-J) to copy this selected area to 
a new layer.

54
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
©ADOBE STOCK/ARTEM FURMAN
STEP FIVE: Turn off the Background layer (by 
clicking on the Eye icon to the left of its 
thumbnail), then go under the Edit menu, 
choose Define Pattern, and name the new 
pattern when prompted. When you have 
the graphic saved in Photoshop like this, 
you can use it any time you want without 
opening the image.
STEP SIX: Press Command-O (PC: Ctrl-O)  
and open an image that you want to ap-
ply the graphic to. Here, we have a cool 
fitness image. Go ahead and create a new 
document to build the design in (press Com-
mand-N [PC: Ctrl-N]) that is 2000 pixels wide 
by 1000 pixels tall. Then, use the Move tool 
(V) to drag-and-drop the image over onto the 
composition, and resize and position it using
Free Transform (Command-T [PC: Ctrl-T]).
STEP SEVEN: Click on the Create a New Lay-
er icon at the bottom of the Layers panel, 
and then press Shift-Delete (PC: Shift-Back-
space) and fill it with a base 50% gray 
color (from the Contents pop-up menu). 
Then, click on the Add a Layer Style icon  
at the bottom of the panel and choose  
Pattern Overlay. Click on the Pattern thumb-
nail and locate the pattern you just defined 
(it should be the last one). Set the Blend 
Mode to Overlay and the Opacity to 75%. 
Also, increase or decrease the Scale until 
you like the size of the pattern. 

55
Chapter 3: Graphic Effects
STEP NINE: Lastly, I just dropped in some 
white text (using the Horizontal Type tool 
[T] and the Eurostile Extended font), added
a simple white Stroke layer style, and in
the Blending Options, changed the Blend
Mode to Overlay and dropped the Opacity
a bit.
Remember, because the HUD elements are 
applied as layer styles, that means you can 
modify the settings at any time.
Final
STEP EIGHT: Click on Blending Options on the 
left and, in the Advanced Blending section, 
drop the Fill Opacity to 0%. Then, with the 
Layer Style dialog still open, just click on the 
image and drag it around to reposition the 
graphic in relation to the subject image. 
Click OK when you’re done.

56
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Blending Frame Elements with Photos
Here is another example where less is more. 
Just by adding something as simple as a 
stroked box to a photo, and then masking 
certain elements, you can add an instant 
commercial look to a photo.
STEP ONE: Of course, start by pressing Com-
mand-O (PC: Ctrl-O) and opening the pho-
to you want to use, or use this image from 
the book’s downloads page (mentioned in 
the book’s introduction).
STEP TWO: Select the Rectangle shape tool 
(U) in the Toolbox and then go up to the left 
end of the Options Bar and make sure the
tool’s mode is set to Shape. Set the Fill to
none and the Stroke color to white. Leave
the Size at 3 px for this image, but you may
want to change it, depending on the size
of your image.
STEP THREE: Click-and-drag out a rectangle 
over the image, as you see here. This will 
automatically create a new shape layer, 
and the path will appear as defined in the 
Paths panel.
STEP FOUR: Choose the Quick Selection tool 
(W) from the Toolbox, and then make sure
the Background layer is selected in the Lay-
ers panel. Select the parts of the subject
where the rectangle shape crosses over
them, so here you only need to select part
of her head (the top part of the rectangle)
and her arms and side (the bottom part of
the rectangle).
©ADOBE STOCK/GPOINT STUDIO

57
Chapter 3: Graphic Effects
STEP FIVE: Once your selection is in place, 
click back on the shape layer in the Layers 
panel. Then Option-click (PC: Alt-click) on 
the Add Layer Mask icon at the bottom of 
the panel to mask away the selected areas.
Step 8
Step 6
Step 5
STEP SIX: Make a duplicate of the Back-
ground layer by selecting it and pressing 
Command-J (PC: Ctrl-J). Then, click back on 
the Background layer, click on the Create 
New Adjustment Layer icon at the bottom 
of the panel, and add a Hue/Saturation ad-
justment layer. Turn off the duplicate layer’s 
Eye icon to hide it for now.
STEP SEVEN: In the Properties panel, turn on 
the Colorize checkbox, and set the Hue to 
33, the Saturation to 26, and the Lightness 
to 10.
STEP EIGHT: In the Layers panel, reduce the 
Hue/Saturation layer’s Opacity to around 
55% to bring some of the original colors 
back into the image. Turn the duplicate 
layer’s Eye icon back on and Option-click 
on the Add Layer Mask icon to add a Hide 
All layer mask.

58
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Final
STEP NINE: Now, set your Foreground color 
to white, and then with the layer mask ac-
tive, just add a few gradients in the area of 
the subject to reveal the original color im-
age. So, get the Gradient tool (G) and, up in 
the Options Bar, choose the Foreground to 
Transparent gradient in the Gradient Picker, 
then click on the Radial Gradient icon to the 
right of the gradient thumbnail, and click-
and-drag out your gradients.
STEP 10: Finally, use the Horizontal Type 
tool (T) to drop some text inside the box 
area to finish it up (here, I used Futura Bold 
Condensed). You can see how adding just 
these couple simple elements can change 
the whole feel of the image.
Step 9

59
Chapter 3: Graphic Effects
Graphic Ad from Photos and Textures
This one was inspired by an ad I saw for a TV 
show. It was an interesting blend of photo 
and texture elements to get a cool design 
result. Along with some text, you can apply 
this design to just about anything.
STEP ONE: Start by pressing Command-O 
(PC: Ctrl-O) and opening the texture that 
will be used as the background. I like this 
texture because of the darker elements 
around the edges.
STEP FIVE: Go under the Edit menu and 
choose Fade Grain. Set the blend Mode to 
Hard Light and click OK.
STEP TWO: Next, open a city skyline image. 
Here, we have a skyline image of Chicago, 
since the theme of our ad is a Chicago 
cop show.
STEP THREE: Press Command-N (PC: Ctrl-N) 
and create a new document (our working 
document) that is 2000 pixels by 1000 
pixels. Then, use the Move tool (V) to 
drag-and-drop the texture image onto this 
document, and use Free Transform (Com-
mand-T [PC: Ctrl-T]) to scale and position it.
STEP FOUR: Next, go back to the image of 
the city and remove the color by pressing 
Command-Shift-U (PC: Ctrl-Shift-U), then 
go under the Filter menu and choose Filter 
Gallery. In the dialog, click on Texture, and 
then click on Grain. Choose Speckle for 
the Grain Type, set the Intensity to 7, the 
Contrast to 3, and click OK.
Note: You can have these filters appear in  
the Filter menu by going to Photoshop’s 
Preferences (under the Photoshop [PC: Edit] 
menu), clicking on Plug-Ins, and turning 
on the Show All Filter Gallery Groups and 
Names checkbox. 
©ADOBE STOCK/ROYSTUDIO
©ADOBE STOCK/MIKE LIU

60
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP SIX: Now, bring this processed city  
image into the main image with the tex-
ture layer and position it at the bottom of 
the document. In the Layers panel, set the 
layer’s blend mode to Multiply and click on 
the Add Layer Mask icon at the bottom of 
the panel. Select the Gradient tool (G) and 
set your Foreground color to black. Then, in 
the Options Bar, choose the Foreground to 
Transparent gradient in the Gradient Picker, 
and click on the Linear Gradient icon. Click 
near the top center of the skyline image and 
drag downward to add a linear gradient 
fade at the top edge of the city layer.
STEP SEVEN: Click on the city skyline thumbnail 
in the Layers panel, and press Command -U 
(PC: Ctrl-U) to open the Hue/Saturation di-
alog. Turn on the Colorize checkbox, then 
set the Hue to around 209, the Saturation 
to 39, and the Lightness to 25.
STEP EIGHT: Select the Horizontal Type tool 
(T) in the Toolbox, and click on the canvas
to add a new text layer. Here, I have set the
title in Eurostile Extended 2 and Eurostile
Bold Extended 2. For the color, I merely
clicked on the color swatch in the Options
Bar, and then sampled the darker blue area
of the city graphic using the Eyedropper
tool. I tweaked the tracking and leading
using the Character panel. I also changed
the layer’s blend mode to Multiply to dark-
en the text a little more.

61
Chapter 3: Graphic Effects
STEP NINE: Next, click on the Add a Layer  
Style icon at the bottom of the Layers pan-
el, and choose Pattern Overlay. In the Pat-
tern Picker, I chose the cracked texture used 
in the Stone Age Text exercise in Chapter 1.  
Set the Blend Mode to Hard Light, then 
drop the Opacity to 40%, and increase the 
Scale to around 125%. Don’t click OK yet.
Final
STEP 10: Click on Blending Options at the 
top left, and go to the Blend If section. 
Press-and-hold the Option (PC: Alt) key as 
you click on the white Underlying Layer slid-
er knob to split it, then drag the knob to the 
left a little. This will allow the background 
texture to show through a bit. Click OK.
STEP 11: Now, one final effect: click on the 
Create a New Layer icon at the bottom of 
the Layers panel to add a new blank layer 
and change its blend mode to Color Burn. 
Then, select the Gradient tool and make 
sure the Foreground to Transparent gradi-
ent is still selected, and click on the Radial 
Gradient icon. Option-click (PC: Alt-click) 
on the background texture to make that 
color your Foreground color, and then add 
a few gradients around the top edges to 
enhance the texture color.


Photo Effects
Little design is done these days without a photo being used at some 
point. Photos can be part of a design or can be the design themselves. 
In this chapter, we will explore a few ways to take your photos to the 
next level and turn even the most seemingly mundane shots into 
amazing design elements!
63
Photoshop Tricks for Designers

64
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Sketch Fade Effect
This is a really cool effect I have used for 
years. It’s really quite simple to achieve and 
can be used on almost any photo. I will 
often use this effect to make an otherwise 
dull photo a bit more interesting, or it can 
be used in a commercial sense as a back-
ground image for a product.
STEP ONE: Begin by pressing Command-O 
(PC: Ctrl-O) and opening the photo you 
want to apply the effect to (or just down-
load the photo I am using here from the 
book’s downloads page, mentioned in the 
book’s introduction). 
STEP TWO: Now, press Command-N (PC: 
Ctrl-N) and create a new document that is 
2000 pixels wide by 1300 pixels tall to build 
the final design in.
STEP THREE: Once the document is created, 
let’s add a light-colored texture to it. This 
will be the base texture the design will be 
built on. You can also use a simple solid col-
or if you like, as well. So, open the texture 
image (you can download this one from the 
book’s downloads page, too), use the Move 
tool (V) to drag-and-drop it into your new 
document, and then press Command-T 
(Ctrl-T) to activate Free Transform and scale 
it to fit. Press Return (PC: Enter) when done.
STEP FOUR: Now, let’s drag-and-drop the 
photo from Step One into this document. 
Activate Free Transform, again, and scale it 
to fit in the canvas area. Press Command-J 
(PC: Ctrl-J) to make a duplicate of the sub-
ject layer, then click on the duplicate’s Eye 
icon to turn it off for now. Reselect the 
original subject layer. 
STEP FIVE: Go under the Filter menu, under 
Stylize, and choose Find Edges. This will 
create an instant sketch look on the photo. 
You will see some color in the lines, so press 
Command-Shift-U (PC: Ctrl-Shift-U) to 
make it black and white. Now, open Levels 
by pressing Command-L (Ctrl-L) and adjust 
the highlights (white) and midtones (light 
gray) sliders (beneath the histogram) to 
force the background to white and reduce 
other light gray areas. Click OK.
©ADOBE STOCK/ASJACK
©ADOBE STOCK/ROYSTUDIO

65
Chapter 4: Photo Effects
STEP SIX: In some cases, the lines may be 
thicker than you want them to be. To fix 
that, go under the Filter menu again, un-
der Other, and choose Maximum. Set the 
Radius to 0.5. Other images may require a 
higher setting, so you will have to experi-
ment a little. Choose Roundness from the 
Preserve pop-up menu and click OK.
STEP SEVEN: Change the layer’s blend mode 
to Multiply to hide the white area, and then 
drop its opacity to around 75%. Next, press 
Command-U (Ctrl-U) to open the Hue/
Saturation dialog. Turn on the Colorize 
checkbox, and then set the Hue slider to 
whatever color you’d like the lines to be. 
Here, I chose a light blue color by setting it 
to 191. Click OK.

66
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP EIGHT: Turn the duplicate layer at the top 
of the layer stack back on, and then select 
it. Go under the Filter menu, and choose 
Filter Gallery, and then under Texture, click 
on Grain. Again, the settings here will vary 
with different images, but for this one, I set  
the Grain Type to Speckle, the Intensity  
to 10, and the Contrast to 15. Click OK. 
(Note: To have all the Filter Gallery filters ap-
pear in the Filter menu, open Photoshop’s 
Preferences and, on the Plug-Ins tab, turn 
on the Show All Filter Gallery Groups and 
Names checkbox).
STEP NINE: Set this layer’s blend mode to 
Multiply, as well, then press-and-hold the 
Option (PC: Alt) key and click on the Add 
Layer Mask icon at the bottom of the Lay-
ers panel. This will add a black layer mask, 
which hides the entire layer.
STEP 10: Select the Brush tool (B) from the 
Toolbox, choose a simple, round, soft-
edged brush from the Brush Picker in the 
Options Bar, and then open the Brush panel 
(Window>Brush). Now, if you are using a 
pressure-sensitive tablet, click on Transfer 
on the left and set the Opacity Jitter and 
Flow Jitter Control pop-up menus to Pen 
Pressure. This allows you to reveal the im-
age based on how hard you press. If you do 
not have a pressure-sensitive tablet, then 
just set the brush Opacity to 50% in the 
Options Bar. Each stroke will build upon the 
next as you paint.

67
Chapter 4: Photo Effects
STEP 11: Once the brush is set, press D to 
set your Foreground color to white, and 
then start painting on the layer mask in 
the area of the subjects you want to reveal. 
How much you reveal is up to you, but like 
I always say, don’t overdo it. 
Once it looks good to you, you can drop in 
some text (I used the font Futura Medium 
with a Stroke layer style) or a logo for a 
finished commercial look.
Final

68
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Stylized Light Effects
Here’s a cool light and color effect tech-
nique that adds a fantasy-like lighting look 
to a photo by taking a photo of a subject 
shot in a studio setting and blending them 
into an outdoor scene. 
STEP ONE: Begin by pressing Command-O 
(PC: Ctrl-O) and opening the image of the 
subject. As always, you can download the 
image we’re using here from the book’s 
downloads page, mentioned in the book’s 
introduction. (Note: I would recommend 
following along with the download files, 
so you get a better understanding of the 
technique. Then, experiment with other 
images afterwards.) We’ll need to extract 
the subject here, so get the Quick Selec-
tion tool (W) and paint over her to make 
an initial selection.
STEP TWO: Click on the Refine Edge button 
up in the Options Bar and, in the dialog, se-
lect the Refine Radius tool, and then make 
your brush Size a little larger than one of 
the subject’s eyes. Now, brush in the areas 
of her hair to include the rest of it. Do this 
to all the hair edges and any other edges 
that need to be selected. Also, boost the 
Contrast to around 15% to tighten up the 
selection around the softer edges. When 
you’re done, set the Output To pop-up 
menu to New Layer and click OK.
STEP THREE: Next, open the background im-
age. We’re using a rather ominous outdoor 
scene, here, which will make a cool back-
ground for the composite. The challenge is 
to make the studio-shot subject blend with 
this outdoor scene, but let’s modify the 
scene a bit first. Press Command-R (Ctrl-R) 
to reveal the Rulers, then click on the ver-
tical ruler on the left and drag a vertical 
guide to the center of the image. It should 
snap in place when you get close (if you 
have the Snap To Guides setting turned on 
in the View menu). 
©ADOBE STOCK/GROMOVATAYA
©ADOBE STOCK/GUDELLAPHOTO

69
Chapter 4: Photo Effects
STEP FOUR: Make a duplicate of the Back-
ground layer by pressing Command-J (PC: 
Ctrl-J), then go under Edit menu, under 
Transform, and choose Flip Horizontal. Get 
the Rectangular Marquee tool (M) from the 
Toolbox and draw a selection over the left 
half of the image, then click on the Add 
Layer Mask icon at the bottom of the Layers 
panel to mask the unselected area. This cre-
ates an instant symmetrical image. You can 
get a different view by selecting the layer 
mask and pressing Command-I (PC: Ctrl-I) 
to Invert the values and thus revealing the 
other half of the image on each side (as  
I did here). It’s magic.
STEP SEVEN: With only the subject layer 
visible now, open the Channels panel 
(Window>Channels), press-and-hold the 
Command (PC: Ctrl) key, and click on the 
main RGB channel thumbnail to select the 
bright areas. Press Command-Shift-I (PC: 
Ctrl-Shift-I) to Inverse the selection, then 
press Command-J (PC: Ctrl-J) to copy the 
selected area to a new layer.
STEP EIGHT: Now, press Command-U (PC: 
Ctrl-U) to open the Hue/Saturation dialog. 
Turn on the Colorize checkbox, and then 
set the Hue to 220 and the Saturation to 
35. Click OK.
STEP FIVE: Once you decide which one you 
like, press-and-hold the Option (PC: Alt) 
key, and from the Layers panel’s flyout 
menu, choose Merge Visible to create a 
merged copy at the top of the layer stack.
STEP SIX: Now, using the Move tool (V) 
click-and-drag this new scene into the 
subject image, placing its layer below the 
extracted subject layer in the layer stack. 
Then, press Command-T (PC: Ctrl-T) to 
activate Free Transform and scale it to fit 
in the scene however you want it. When 
you’re done, click on this layer’s Eye icon  
to turn it off for the moment, and then 
select the extracted subject layer.

70
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP NINE: Set the layer’s blend mode to 
Multiply, then press Command-J (PC: 
Ctrl-J) to duplicate it. Drop the Opacity of 
this duplicate layer to 75%, and then turn 
the outdoor scene layer back on. You can 
also turn off the original Background layer 
(if it’s still on).
STEP 10: Select the original extracted subject 
layer, then press-and-hold the Command 
(PC: Ctrl) key and click on its thumbnail. 
Then, go under the Select menu, under 
Modify, and choose Contract. Set the 
amount to 10 pixels and click OK.
STEP 11: Press Command-Shift-I (PC: Ctrl-
Shift-I) to Inverse the selection, and then 
press Command-J (PC: Ctrl-J) to copy the 
edge selection to a new layer. Go under the 
Filter menu, under Blur, and choose Gauss-
ian Blur. Set the Radius to 10 pixels and 
click OK. Change the layer’s blend mode to 
Color Dodge, then press Command-J (PC: 
Ctrl-J) to create a duplicate to intensify the 
edge effect.
STEP 12: Command-click (PC: Ctrl-click) on 
the first edge layer to select both edge layers, 
and then press Command-G (PC: Ctrl-G) to 
put them in a group. Drop the group’s layer 
Opacity to 65%, and then move the group 
to the top of the layer stack.

71
Chapter 4: Photo Effects
STEP 13: Command-click (PC: Ctrl-click) on 
the original extracted subject layer’s thumb-
nail to make another selection. Then, click 
on the Create a New Layer icon at the bot-
tom of the Layers panel to create a new 
blank layer, and move it below the subject 
layer. Press Shift-Delete (PC: Shift-Back-
space) to open the Fill dialog and change 
the Contents to White.
STEP 14: Press Command-D (PC: Ctrl-D) to 
Deselect, then go under Filter menu, under 
Blur, and choose Gaussian Blur, again. Set 
the Radius to 25 and click OK. Now, set the 
layer’s Opacity to around 80%.
STEP 15: Create another blank layer, move it 
to the top of the layer stack, and set its blend 
mode to Screen. Press D, then X, to set your 
Foreground color to white. Select the Gra-
dient tool (G) and, in the Options Bar, click 
on the gradient thumbnail and choose the 
Foreground to Transparent gradient. Also, 
click on the Radial Gradient icon (second 
icon to the right of the gradient thumbnail). 
Then, click-and-drag out a couple gradients 
on each side of the subject to create a light 
flare effect. 
STEP 16: Now, create one more blank layer, 
then click on the Linear Gradient icon in 
the Options Bar, set the gradient Opaci-
ty to 75%, and then press X to set your 
Foreground color to black. Click-and-drag a 
gradient from just below the bottom edge 
up a little ways to create a subtle fade.

72
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Final
STEP 17: Finally, select the background scene 
layer, then go under the Filter menu, under 
Blur, and choose Gaussian Blur, again. This 
time, set the Radius to 5 and click OK. This 
will create a depth-of-field effect. 

73
Chapter 4: Photo Effects
Quick and Easy Double Exposure Effect
There are, of course, many ways to achieve 
a double exposure effect, as it has become 
quite a popular look these days. Here is a 
simple way to achieve that effect with some 
layer tricks. This is one of those techniques 
that once you have it figured out, you’ll try 
it on almost everything.
STEP ONE: Start by pressing Command-O (PC: 
Ctrl-O) and opening the image of the subject 
you want to use as the base shape for the ef-
fect. Here, we have a profile shot of a model 
on a simple background for easy extracting.
STEP TWO: Get the Quick Selection tool (W) 
and paint over the subject to select her. 
Then, click on the Refine Edge button, up in 
the Options Bar, and use the Refine Radius 
tool to adjust the selection around her hair 
and any other soft areas. Choose New Lay-
er from the Output To pop-up menu near 
the bottom of the dialog, then click OK.
STEP THREE: Now, press Command-N (PC: 
Ctrl-N) and create a new document mea-
suring 1400 pixels wide by 2000 pixels tall, 
with the Background Contents set to White. 
Use the Move tool (V) to drag-and-drop 
the extracted subject over onto this new 
document, and then press Command-T 
(PC: Ctrl-T) to activate Free Transform and 
scale and position it like I have it here. 
Press Return (PC: Enter) when done. Now, 
desaturate the subject by pressing Com-
mand-Shift-U (PC: Ctrl-Shift-U).
©ADOBE STOCK/PAFFY

74
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP FOUR: Next, open the city street image. 
This is a cool one to blend with the subject 
for this double exposure effect because it 
has interesting negative space in the sky 
area, which will have a cool result in the 
final image. First, though, we need to 
change some things: Desaturate the image 
(like we just did with the subject), and then 
press Command-L (PC: Ctrl-L) to open Lev-
els. Click on the highlights (white) eyedrop-
per, beneath the Options button, and then 
click in the sky area to force it to white. 
Now, push the shadows (black) slider, be-
neath the histogram, to around 25 to boost 
the overall contrast. Click OK when done.
STEP FIVE: Press Command-A (PC: Ctrl-A)  
to select the entire image, then go un-
der the Edit menu, under Transform, and 
choose Flip Horizontal (I discovered that 
the blend worked better when I flipped  
it, so don’t be afraid to try that to get a 
different result you might like better). Now, 
drag-and-drop this image onto the main 
layout, and use Free Transform to scale and 
position it toward the top of the subject.
STEP SIX: With the city layer still selected, 
press Command-Option-G (PC: Ctrl-Alt-G) 
to clip it inside the subject layer below, and 
then click on the Add Layer Mask icon at the 
bottom of the Layers panel. Get the Gradi-
ent tool (G), click on the gradient thumbnail 
in the Options Bar, choose the Foreground 
to Transparent gradient, and then click on 
the Radial Gradient icon (the second icon to 
the right of the gradient thumbnail). With 
your Foreground color set to black, add a 
few gradients in the areas where you want 
to see the face of the subject. Don’t overdo 
it, though. 
©ADOBE STOCK/MAKSYMOWICZ

75
Chapter 4: Photo Effects
STEP SEVEN: Now, we’re going to blend one 
more image. I want to add this dead trees 
image to the bottom of the subject at the 
neck area. Again, start by removing the col-
or info by pressing Command-Shift-U (PC: 
Ctrl-Shift-U), then use Levels to force the 
sky to white (I pushed the shadows slider 
to around 60 this time).
STEP EIGHT: Open the Channels panel (Win-
dow>Channels), then press-and-hold the 
Command (PC: Ctrl) key and click on the 
RGB channel thumbnail to load the lumi-
nosity as a selection. Press Command-Shift-I 
(PC: Ctrl-Shift-I) to Inverse the selection to 
the trees. Finally, press Command-J (PC: 
Ctrl-J) to copy the selection to a new layer.
STEP NINE: Now, drag-and-drop this trees 
image into the main layout. Activate Free 
Transform, then Right-click and choose 
Rotate 180° to flip the layer upside down. 
Also, scale and position it down by the 
neck area of the subject. Right-click once 
again, and choose Warp from the pop-up 
menu. Use the control handles around the 
mesh to reshape the trees image to the 
contours of the neck shape. Press Return 
(PC: Enter) when done. Now, just add a 
layer mask to this layer, then get the Gra-
dient tool again, click on the Linear Gradi-
ent icon (the first icon to the right of the  
gradient thumbnail) in the Options Bar, 
and use the Foreground to Transparent 
gradient to fade the top edge of the trees 
layer to blend with the subject. I also add-
ed a layer mask to the subject layer and, 
with the Brush tool (B), used a low-opacity 
black brush to fade the bottom edge of  
her neck.
©ADOBE STOCK/IGOR STEVANOVIC

76
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP 10: Now we need to add a texture to 
the background. Here’s one that has good 
texture to it, but I don’t really care for the 
color. No problem. Just desaturate this 
texture (just like before), then bring it over 
onto the main image, placing it just above 
the Background layer in the layer stack, and 
drop the layer‘s Opacity to 50%.
STEP 13: With the trees layer still selected in 
the Layers panel, click on the Create New 
Adjustment Layer icon at the bottom of the 
panel and choose Gradient Map. Click on 
the gradient in the Properties panel to open 
the Gradient Editor. Then, click on the gear 
icon to the right of Presets and choose Pho-
tographic Toning from the flyout menu. Click 
OK in the dialog that appears, then choose 
the Cobalt-Iron 2 preset at the bottom of the 
presets, and click OK. 
At this point you are pretty much done short 
of any adjustments you want to make. For 
instance, I did a further Levels adjustment to 
the subject layer to help better match the 
contrast of the city image. As a final option, 
you can drop in some text (I used the font 
Futura Book), and you’re all set.
STEP 12: Now, select the main subject layer 
in the Layers panel and set the layer blend 
mode to Multiply. This will drop the white 
from the blended image and let the texture 
show through. Also, select the trees layer 
and drop the layer Opacity to 60%. 
STEP 11: Click on the Add a Layer Style 
icon at the bottom of the Layers panel 
and choose Gradient Overlay. Click on the 
Gradient thumbnail and choose the Fore-
ground to Background gradient, then set 
the Style to Radial. Set the Blend Mode to 
Linear Burn, the Opacity to 85%, and the 
Scale to 150%. Finally, turn on the Reverse 
checkbox and adjust the Angle slightly to 
give the background a subtle vignette ef-
fect. Click OK when done.
©PHOTOART TEXTURES
©

77
Chapter 4: Photo Effects
Final
Fi
l

78
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Using Patterns to Blend Photos
This is an effect I saw over on Pinterest 
(lots of cool ideas floating around there). 
I loved the result and the elegance of the 
technique—so simple, yet so effective.
STEP ONE: Start by pressing Command-N (PC: 
Ctrl-N) and creating a new document that’s 
500 pixels by 500 pixels at 100 ppi, with the 
Background Contents set to White.
STEP TWO: Choose the Ellipse shape tool 
(press Shift-U until you have it) from the 
Toolbox and then, up in the Options Bar, 
set the Tool Mode to Shape, the Fill to 
black, and the Stroke to none. Press-and-
hold the Shift key, click on the upper-left 
corner, and drag to the lower-right corner 
to create a circle in the square (press-and-
hold the Spacebar as you drag to reposition 
the circle). You will want the edges of the 
circle to touch the edges of the canvas, if 
not extend beyond just a tiny bit. Once you 
have the shape drawn, click on the Eye icon 
to the left of the Background layer to turn it 
off, so you can see transparency.
STEP THREE: Go under the Edit menu and 
choose Define Pattern. Give the pattern a 
name and click OK.
STEP FOUR: Create another new document 
that’s 1500 pixels wide by 2000 pixels tall, 
with a white background. Click on the Cre-
ate a New Layer icon at the bottom of the 
Layers panel, and then press Shift-Delete 
(PC: Shift-Backspace) to open the Fill dialog. 
Choose 50% Gray from the Contents pop-
up menu and click OK.
STEP FIVE: Now, click on the Add a Lay-
er Style icon at the bottom of the Layers 
panel and choose Pattern Overlay. Click 
on the Pattern thumbnail and locate the 
circle pattern we just created (it should be 
the last one), then use the Scale setting to 
change the size of the pattern. Here, I set 
it to 35%. You can also move the pattern 
around manually by clicking directly on it in 
the image window and dragging it around 
to change its position. Click OK when done.

79
Chapter 4: Photo Effects
STEP SIX: We now need to clip an image 
layer with the circle layer, but it won’t work 
right now because it would clip based on 
the gray fill and not the circles. So, first 
we need to get rid of the gray by simply 
dropping the layer Fill setting to 0%, near 
the top right of the Layers panel. Then, 
Right-click on the circle layer and choose 
Convert to Smart Object. This will maintain 
the transparency without having to raster-
ize the layer. (Note: The Fill setting will go 
back to 100% after you choose this.)
STEP SEVEN: Next, press Command-O (PC: 
Ctrl-O) and open the subject image you 
want to use. Here, we have a dancer on 
a white background (you can download 
this from the book’s companion webpage, 
mentioned in the book’s introduction). Drag-
and-drop the image into the working layout, 
and then press Command-T (PC: Ctrl-T) to 
activate Free Transform and position it in 
the composition. Press Return (PC: Enter) 
once it’s positioned, then press Command-J 
(Ctrl-J) to make a duplicate of this layer, and 
place one layer above and one below the 
pattern layer (as shown here).
©ADOBE STOCK/LOBANOV DMITRY PHOTOGRAPHY

80
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP EIGHT: Select the subject layer at the 
top of the layer stack, and then press Com-
mand-Option-G (PC: Ctrl-Option-G) to clip 
it to the pattern layer below.
STEP 10: Select the subject layer at the top 
of the layer stack again, and then click on 
the Create New Adjustment Layer icon at 
the bottom of the Layers panel and choose 
Gradient Map. Click on the gradient in 
the Properties panel to open the Gradient 
Editor. Then, click on the gear icon to the 
right of Presets and choose Photographic 
Toning (the same presets we used in the last 
technique) from the flyout menu. Click OK 
in the dialog that appears, then choose the 
Sepia-Cyan preset and click OK. 
STEP NINE: Now, select the other subject 
layer below the pattern layer and activate 
Free Transform, again. Move this layer to 
the left a little bit and then scale it up 
(press-and-hold the Shift key to keep it 
proportional), and you will see the effect 
take shape. Notice how I positioned this 
subject layer in relation to the one above 
the pattern layer. If using other images, the 
arrangement may take some trial and error. 
Press Return (PC: Enter), and then drop the 
layer’s Opacity to 75%.

81
Chapter 4: Photo Effects
Finally, I added some text using the Eurostile 
ExtendedTwo font that I filled with white 
and blended by choosing the Difference 
layer blend mode, which makes the text 
dark on light backgrounds and light on 
dark backgrounds.
Final


83
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Texture Effects
I am a huge fan of textures. I have as many texture images in my library 
as I do stock images. Textures are all around you everyday and now, 
with advanced smartphones, you can capture them on your phone and 
implement them right into your workflow. In this chapter, we’ll look at a 
few cool ways to use textures in Photoshop.

84
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Blending Graphics with Seamless Textures
Here, we have a couple cool techniques you 
can use separately or combined, as I have. 
We will look at defining a seamless texture, 
then creating a custom-lit background, and 
then we will blend a logo to the texture.
STEP ONE: Let’s start with the texture itself. 
I did a simple search for a seamless dia-
mond plate texture over at Adobe Stock. 
It is easier to find a ready-made seamless 
texture than to make one, as there are quite 
a few on the site. Note: You can check that 
it is seamless by opening the texture, then 
going under the Filter menu, under Other, 
and choosing Offset. Set the offset to any 
numbers within the image dimensions and 
turn on Wraparound. If the texture is truly 
seamless, you should see no edges in the 
tiling. Click Cancel when done.
STEP TWO: With the seamless verified, go  
under the Edit menu and choose Define Pat-
tern. Then, name the pattern and click OK.
STEP THREE: Now, press Command-N (PC: 
Ctrl-N) and create a new document that is 
2000 pixels wide by 1200 pixels tall. Set the 
Background Contents to White.
STEP FOUR: Click on the Create a New Layer 
icon at the bottom of the Layers panel to 
create a blank layer, and then press Shift- 
Delete (PC: Shift-Backspace) to fill it with 
any color. Here, I set the Contents to 50% 
Gray. This is just a base fill on the layer for 
the layer style we are going to apply next.
STEP FIVE: Click on the Add a Layer Style 
icon at the bottom of the Layers panel and 
choose Pattern Overlay from the pop-up 
menu. Click on the Pattern thumbnail to 
open the Pattern Picker, and choose the 
diamond plate pattern defined in Step Two 
(it should be the last one). Once the pattern 
is selected, you can adjust the Scale. It will 
tile the pattern automatically, hence the 
reason for a seamless pattern. Here, I have 
it set to 45%. You can also click directly 
on the image and move the pattern around 
manually. Do not click OK yet.
©ADOBE STOCK/ARENACREATIVE

85
Chapter 5: Texture Effects
STEP SIX: Next, click on Gradient Overlay 
on the left. Make sure you have the simple 
Black, White gradient chosen, then set the 
Blend Mode to Multiply. Set the Opacity to 
around 90%, the Style to Radial, and turn 
on the Reverse checkbox so the light area 
is the center of the gradient. Also, increase 
the Scale to around 130%.
You can also click on the image and drag 
the gradient around, thus changing the 
lighting on the texture. Here, I dragged 
the light area to the center of my image.  
I use this Gradient Overlay method for light-
ing effects all the time. In fact, I’ve used it a 
few other times in this very book. Click OK 
when you are done, but remember it’s a 
layer style, so you can change the settings 
whenever you want.
STEP SEVEN: Now that we have set the scene, 
we just need to add a subject or graphic. 
Here, we have a simple graphic element. 
Get the Move tool (V) and drag-and-drop 
it onto the texture. We’ll blend it using an 
old, but handy, feature.
©ADOBE STOCK/MARTIALRED

86
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Final
STEP EIGHT: With the graphic in place and 
its layer positioned above the texture lay-
er in the Layers panel, click on the Add a  
Layer Style icon again, and choose Blend-
ing Options.
STEP NINE: Go to the General Blending sec-
tion and change the Blend Mode to Hard 
Light. Then, go down to the Blend If section 
at the bottom. Press-and-hold the Option 
(PC: Alt) key and click on each of the Under-
lying Layer slider knobs to split them as you 
drag them toward the center to allow the 
texture below to peek through the graphic.  
In this case, I only needed to split the shad-
ows slider knob. This gives the graphic a 
worn-out, aged look. Where you position 
the slider knobs depends on how much of 
the effect you want. Click OK when done.  
I also added a little text, using the Horizontal 
Type tool (T) and the font Swiss721BT Black 
Extended, and blended it the exact same 
way as the graphic.
Now you can define a texture, scale it, light 
it, and then blend a graphic with it realis-
tically. And, all of this is non-destructive to 
the layers themselves.

87
Chapter 5: Texture Effects
Vintage Sports Ad with Blended Elements
Here is an example of using a texture again 
as a base element for a composite design. 
You can combine elements from images 
with different lighting, and essentially use 
a texture to hide any blending problems.
STEP ONE: First, press Command-N (PC: 
Ctrl-N) and create a new document to build 
the finished the design in. Here, we’re go-
ing with a sort of square format with the 
Width at 1000 pixels and the Height at 
1200 pixels. Set the Background Contents 
to White.
STEP TWO: Now, press Command-O (PC: 
Ctrl-O) and open the texture image. Here,  
we have a good one that I found over at 
Adobe Stock, and that you can download 
from the book’s downloads page (men-
tioned in the book’s introduction). It has 
good texture and color all around.
STEP THREE: First, make this texture vertical 
by going under the Image menu, under Im-
age Rotation, and choosing 90° Clockwise, 
since our layout is slightly more vertical. 
Then use the Move tool (V) to drag-and-
drop this image onto your new document.
STEP FOUR: Once it’s there, press Command-T 
(PC: Ctrl-T) to activate Free Transform, then 
press-and-hold the Option (PC: Alt) key 
while you click-and-drag a corner handle to 
disproportionately resize the texture from 
both sides to fit in the visible canvas area. 
Press Return (PC: Enter) when done.
STEP FIVE: Make a duplicate of this texture 
layer by pressing Command-J (PC: Ctrl-J), 
then reselect the original layer below the 
duplicate. Go under the Filter menu, under 
Blur, and choose Average. This will fill the 
layer with the overall dominant color of 
the texture.
©ADOBE STOCK/JESSICAHYD

88
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP SIX: Reselect the duplicate layer, 
change its blend mode to Multiply, and 
drop the layer’s Opacity to around 90%. 
We will come back to this layer in moment.
STEP SEVEN: Now, open the subject image, 
which in this case is a football player on 
a white background for easier extraction. 
Just use the Quick Selection tool (W) to 
make a selection of the background. If you 
select any of the subject, press-and-hold 
the Option (PC: Alt) key and paint back 
over that area. Once your selection is done, 
press Command-Shift-I (PC: Ctrl-Shift-I) to 
flip the selection to the subject.
©ADOBE STOCK/BROCREATIVE

89
Chapter 5: Texture Effects
STEP EIGHT: Click on the Refine Edge button 
in the Options Bar. There aren’t really any 
soft edges here to necessitate the Refine 
Radius tool, so just nudge the Edge De-
tection Radius slider to around 1.5 px, and 
then set the Output To pop-up menu to 
New Layer. Click OK. Once it is extracted, 
go ahead and run a 2-pixel defringe on the 
layer by going under the Layer menu, under 
Matting, and choosing Defringe.
STEP NINE: Go ahead and drag-and-drop 
this subject over the texture background in 
the main document. Use Free Transform to 
scale and center him in the composition, 
if needed.
STEP 10: Now, open the image of the stadi-
um. Yes, I realize that this is a photo of a 
soccer field, but we won’t see the field part 
in the final anyway. I just like the way the 
stands and lights look in this one.
STEP 11: Press D to set your Foreground and 
Background colors to their defaults, then 
go under the Image menu, under Adjust-
ments, and choose Gradient Map. This will 
remove the color and leave more contrast 
than just desaturating.
©ADOBE STOCK/EFKS

90
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP 12: Drag-and-drop this stadium im-
age over onto the main image and place 
it above the texture layer and below the 
subject layer in the Layers panel. Then, use  
Free Transform to scale and rotate the 
image, as you see here. Press Return (PC: 
Enter) when done.
STEP 13: Click on the Add Layer Mask icon 
at the bottom of the Layers panel to add 
a mask to this layer, then select the Gra-
dient tool (G). With the default colors still 
set, click on the gradient thumbnail in the 
Options Bar and choose the Foreground to 
Transparent gradient in the Gradient Picker, 
and then click on the Linear Gradient icon 
to the right of the thumbnail. Click-and-
drag in from all four sides to fade the image 
into the background texture. Then, change 
the layer’s blend mode to Multiply.
To add some color to this layer, click on the 
stadium image’s thumbnail in the Layer’s 
panel and press Command-U (PC: Ctrl-U) 
to open the Hue/Saturation dialog. Turn on 
the Colorize checkbox, and set the Hue to 
35 and the Saturation to 25, then click OK.
STEP 14: Select the subject layer in the Lay-
ers panel, and make a duplicate by pressing 
Command-J (PC: Ctrl-J). Click on the Eye icon 
to the left of the duplicate layer’s thumbnail 
to turn the layer off, and reselect the layer 
below. Do the exact same color effect we did 
in the last step to this layer. Also, change the 
blend mode to Multiply and then drop the 
layer’s Opacity to around 75%.

91
Chapter 5: Texture Effects
STEP 15: Turn the duplicate layer back on, 
and set its Opacity to 85%. Then, add a layer  
mask, and with the Gradient tool still ac-
tive, click on the Radial Gradient icon. Use 
a radial foreground-to-transparent gradient 
to fade this layer around the arms and legs 
to reveal the monochromatic image below 
(as shown here).
STEP 16: Now, the last thing is to drop in 
some text using the Horizontal Type tool (T).  
Here, I added the words “MASTER EVERY 
PLAY” using the font Impact in all caps and 
filled with a color sampled from the back-
ground. Drag the text layer below the sub-
ject layer, but above the stadium layer, in the 
layer stack and set the layer’s blend mode 
to Linear Dodge (Add) and Opacity to 55%.
STEP 17: Finally, double-click on this text layer 
to open the Blending Options and, in the 
Blend If section at the bottom, Option-click 
(PC: Alt-click) on the shadows (dark gray) 
Underlying Layer slider knob to split it, and 
spread both halves apart to allow more of 
the darker areas of the texture to show 
through. Click OK when you’re done.

92
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Final

93
Chapter 5: Texture Effects
Blending Textures Through Styles & Masking
Here we will look at another way of blend-
ing textures, with a photo of a model in 
the mix. Being able to utilize layer styles in 
various ways affords you the flexibility to 
modify the effect whenever you want.
STEP ONE: Open this first texture (you can 
find it on the book’s downloads page, men-
tioned in the book’s introduction). It is sized 
to 1700 pixels by 1100 pixels.
STEP TWO: Next, open the subject image. 
I chose this one because the lighting and 
color are great, and the background is sim-
ple. I also like the position of the subject. 
Go ahead and use the Move tool (V) to 
drag-and-drop this image onto the tex-
ture image, then use Free Transform (press 
Command-T [PC: Ctrl-T]) to scale it to fit, 
completely covering the texture. Press-and-
hold the Shift key as you click-and-drag to 
keep the image proportional. Press Return 
(PC: Enter) when done.
STEP THREE: Now, open the second texture 
image. We’ll use this one as a texture mask, 
but first we need to adjust a couple things. 
Press Command-L (PC: Ctrl-L) to open the 
Levels dialog. Grab the highlights (white) 
eyedropper and click it on the lightest gray 
area in the image to force that shade of gray, 
and anything lighter, to white. Click OK.
©ADOBE STOCK/ANDREY KUZMIN
©ADOBE STOCK/EDWARDDERULE
©ADOBE STOCK/EKY CHAN

94
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP FOUR: Drag-and-drop this texture im-
age onto the main image and make sure 
the layer is positioned at the top of the layer 
stack in the Layers panel. Use Free Trans-
form to scale it proportionately to fit in the 
composition, completely covering the sub-
ject. Make sure there is more light area than 
dark in the visible canvas area, as shown 
here. Press Return (PC: Enter) when done.
STEP FIVE: Open the Channels panel (Win-
dow>Channels) and press-and-hold the 
Command (PC: Ctrl) key as you click on 
the RGB thumbnail to load the luminosity 
of the image as a selection. Once the se-
lection is active, turn off this texture layer’s 
Eye icon (to the left of the layer’s thumbnail 
in the Layers panel) and select the subject 
layer below.
STEP SIX: Click on the Add Layer Mask icon 
at the bottom of the Layers panel to add a 
layer mask to the subject layer and hide the 
unselected area of the layer, creating an in-
teresting texture effect on the photo. Also, 
change the layer’s blend mode to Multiply 
to help the rest of the subject blend with 
the other texture layer below it. Once you 
do this, it may be necessary to adjust the 
mask texture. Just click on the layer mask 
itself to make it active, then open Levels 
again and adjust the contrast by making 
the texture lighter, which will reveal more of 
the masked image. I dragged the Input Lev-
els shadows slider to 7, the midtones slider 
to 1.38, and the highlights slider to 193.

95
Chapter 5: Texture Effects
Final
STEP SEVEN: Select the bottom texture layer, 
then click on the Create New Adjustment 
Layer icon at the bottom of the Layers panel 
and choose Hue/Saturation. In the Proper-
ties panel, turn on the Colorize checkbox, 
and then set the Hue to 40 and the Satura-
tion to around 25. This will put a warm cast 
over the background texture.
STEP EIGHT: Now, the face is still a tad dark, 
so we are going to fix this with a simple 
layer trick. Select the subject layer again,  
then click on the Create a New Layer icon 
at the bottom of the Layers panel to add a 
blank layer above it. Press D, then X, to set 
your Foreground color to white. Select the 
Gradient tool (G) and, in the Options Bar, 
click on the gradient thumbnail and choose 
the Foreground to Transparent gradient. 
Also, click on the Radial Gradient icon to the 
right of the gradient thumbnail. Then, click-
and-drag from the center of the subject’s 
face outward to add a simple white radial 
gradient over her face. Change the layer’s 
blend mode to Overlay and drop the layer’s 
Opacity to 30%. Finally, you can use the 
Horizontal type tool (T) to drop in some text 
or leave the image as is.
Final

96
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Instant Rain and Snow
I use this technique quite often when I need 
a quick rain or snow effect. It is really easy 
and once you have it created and saved it 
into Photoshop as a defined pattern, you 
can have it on call whenever you need it.
STEP ONE: We will start with rain. Press Com-
mand-N (PC: Ctrl-N) and create a new doc-
ument that is 2000 pixels by 2000 pixels at 
125 ppi. Just set the Background Contents 
to White.
STEP TWO: Press D set your Foreground and 
Background colors to their defaults, then 
go under the Filter menu, under Noise, 
and choose Add Noise. Set the Amount 
to the maximum of 400%. Then, set the 
Distribution to Gaussian and turn on the 
Monochromatic checkbox. Click OK.
STEP THREE: Go under the Filter menu again, 
but this time, go under Blur and choose 
Gaussian Blur. Set the Radius to 1 pixel and 
click OK. (This is for rain. For snow, you’ll set 
this to 7 pixels, and then go to Step Seven.)
STEP FOUR: Go under the Filter menu once 
more, and this time, go under Stylize and 
choose Wind. Set the Method to Wind and 
the Direction to From the Left. Click OK.
STEP FIVE: Reapply the Wind filter by press-
ing Command-F (PC: Ctrl-F). Do this 8–10 
more times to build the stylized wind effect.
STEP SIX: Then, go under the Image menu, 
under Image Rotation, and choose 90° 
Counter Clockwise. Now the rain is upright.
STEP SEVEN: Press Command-L (PC: Ctrl-L) 
to open the Levels dialog. Grab the shad-
ows (black) eyedropper below the Options 
button, and click anywhere in the image 
(preferably in a lighter gray area, but I blindly 
clicked on the image several different times 
and got the same result). Instantly, you will 
see the rain appear.
It still may be a bit much, so push the 
shadows and highlights Input Levels sliders 
in a little bit to increase the contrast and 
thus lessen the amount of rain: push the 
shadows slider in to lessen the overall rain, 
and then push the highlights slider in just 
a little bit to lighten what is left. Here, I set  
shadows to 61, midtones to 0.68, and 
highlights to 232.

97
Chapter 5: Texture Effects
Note: For snow, you can just push the 
shadows and highlights Input Levels sliders 
inward until you get the amount of snow 
you want. Click OK. Then, go under the Fil-
ter menu, under Other, and choose Offset. 
Set the Horizontal and Vertical to where 
you have the edges centered like crosshairs.
Now get the Patch tool from the Toolbox, 
and with the sampling set to Content Aware 
in the Options Bar, select the lines and drag 
to another part of the image to fill it until 
the lines are gone. Now go on to Step Eight.
STEP EIGHT: Go to the Layers panel, and click-
and-drag the Lock icon on the Background 
layer onto the Trash icon to unlock the lay-
er. Press Command-T (PC: Ctrl-T) to activate 
Free Transform, and then go to the Options 
Bar and set the rotate angle to 10 degrees. 
Next, go to the scale settings to the left, 
and click on the chain icon to link them. 
Then, set one of the settings to 125% and 
the other will set automatically. This will 
scale it to fill the canvas area. Press Return 
(PC: Enter) when done.
STEP NINE: Go under the Edit menu and 
choose Define Pattern. Then, name the 
pattern when prompted and click OK.

98
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Final
STEP 10: Now, just open a design or photo 
you want to add the effect to. Then, click on 
the Create a New Layer icon at the bottom 
of the Layers panel, press Shift-Delete (PC: 
Shift-Backspace) to open the Fill dialog, and 
choose 50% Gray from the Contents pop-
up menu to fill it with a base color. Click on 
the Add a Layer Style icon at the bottom of 
the Layers panel and choose Pattern Over-
lay. Click on the Pattern thumbnail to open 
the Pattern Picker, and locate the defined 
pattern (it should be the last one). Then, 
set the Blend Mode to Screen and drop the 
Opacity to 75%.
Here is the best part: you can scale the pat-
tern for rain that appears to be closer or 
farther away. Here I am starting with it at 
150%. Do not click OK yet.
STEP 11: The base color of the layer is still 
obstructing it, so click on Blending Options 
on the left and set the Fill Opacity under 
Advanced Blending to 0%.
While you have the Layer Style dialog open, 
you can click on the rain pattern directly 
in the image and manually move it around 
to reposition it. Now that you can see the 
rain on the image, you can go back and 
make any adjustments to the other settings 
if needed. In fact, I encourage you to try 
different settings to see what they do. Click 
OK when done.
Fi
l
©PIXELSQUID

99
Chapter 5: Texture Effects
Mobile App Brush Effects
Let’s explore one of the companion mobile 
apps for the Creative Cloud, called Adobe 
Capture, which you can link to your Creative 
Cloud account so you can use captured 
assets, like brushes, in your desktop appli-
cations. Here we will turn a simple movie 
ticket stub into an abstract scatter brush for 
Photoshop by using a smartphone.
STEP ONE: With the Capture app launched 
on your smartphone, sign in to your Cre-
ative Cloud account and tap Brushes at the 
top of the screen, then tap the + (plus sign) 
at the bottom. Position the camera over 
the graphic or object you want to turn into 
a brush (I placed the movie ticket stub on 
a blank piece of paper), then tap on the 
background to knock it out. Use the slider 
below to adjust it, so just the text of the 
ticket is visible.
STEP TWO: Once the image is captured, 
you can adjust the cropping border to just 
the graphic area, then tap Next at the top 
right. You will see a list of different types of 
brushes you can create. Scroll down until 
you see Adobe Photoshop CC Brushes. Tap 
the first brush under this heading, then tap 
Next again. You will then be able to test 
the brush. If all looks good, tap Next again, 
and then tap Save Brush at the bottom of 
the next screen.
STEP THREE: Now, tap the brush in the Brush-
es list and tap the place in folder icon at 
the bottom left of the screen. Here, you will 
see available libraries in your CC account. 
Tap on the Brushes library (if you haven’t 
created one in your Photoshop Libraries 
panel yet, go ahead and create a new one 
named “Brushes” here in Capture) to save 
this brush to the cloud, and it will be avail-
able when you get started in Photoshop.
TIP:  If you do not have Capture, you can 
take a regular picture of a ticket with your 
phone, download it to your computer, open 
it in Photoshop, adjust the contrast with Lev-
els, and then define the brush like normal 
by going under the Edit menu and choosing 
Define Brush Preset.

100
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP FOUR: Now, open the image of your 
subject (you can download the one I’m using 
from the book’s downloads page, mentioned 
in the book’s introduction). You can see this 
image is a simple model shot on a white 
background. There is good shadow area, and 
the hair and eyes are nice and dark.
STEP FIVE: Press D to set your Foreground 
and Background colors to their defaults, 
and then make the image black and white 
using the Gradient Map method we used 
earlier in this chapter by going under the 
Image menu, under Adjustments, choosing 
Gradient Map, and clicking OK.
STEP SIX: Next, press Command-I (PC: Ctrl-I) 
to Invert the image. Then, press Command-L 
(PC: Ctrl-L) to open the Levels dialog, and 
boost the contrast by dragging the Input Lev-
els sliders toward the center. Here, I dragged 
the shadows slider to 18, the highlights slider 
to 212, and the midtones slider to 0.97 to 
darken the lighter gray areas and brighten 
the white areas. Click OK.
STEP SEVEN: Open the Channels panel (Win-
dow>Channels), and then Command-click 
(PC: Ctrl-click) on the RGB channel’s 
thumbnail to load the image brightness as 
a selection.
©ADOBE STOCK/VALUA VITALY

101
Chapter 5: Texture Effects
STEP EIGHT: Click on the Create a New Layer 
icon at the bottom of the Layers panel to 
create a new blank layer, and then click on 
the Add Layer Mask icon. This will create a 
layer mask with the selected area in white 
and the background in black, essentially 
applying the image to the layer mask.
STEP NINE: Now, create another new layer 
below this layer by pressing-and-holding the 
Command (PC: Ctrl) key as you click on the 
Create a New Layer icon. Press X to set your 
Foreground Color to white, and then press 
Option-Delete (PC: Alt-Backspace) to fill this 
layer with white.
STEP 10: Select the Brush tool (B) in the 
Toolbox, and then open the Libraries panel 
(Window>Libraries). Go to the menu at 
the top and choose the Brushes folder. Your 
brush should be available at the top of  
the list.
STEP 11: Open the Brush options panel 
(Window>Brush) and, in the Brush Tip 
Shape section, set the Size to 350 px. Then 
set the Spacing to 135%. Next, click on 
Shape Dynamics on the left and set the 
Size Jitter to around 35%, then go to the 
bottom and turn on the Flip X Jitter and 
Flip Y Jitter checkboxes. 
STEP 12: In the Layers panel, click back on 
the layer with the layer mask, and make 
sure the image thumbnail, not the layer 
mask, is selected. Press X to switch your 
Foreground Color back to black, and start 
painting on the layer. The painting will ap-
pear through the white area of the layer 
mask. Just continue to paint to build the 
effect and reveal the subject.

102
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP 13: Now, to add to the effect. Create a 
new blank layer at the top of the layer stack, 
and drop its Opacity to 25%. Then, increase 
the brush Size to around 750 px and paint 
randomly around the background area, as 
seen here.
STEP 14: Open a texture image and use 
the Move tool (V) to drag-and-drop it 
onto your image of the woman, placing it 
above the white fill layer in the Layers pan-
el. Press Command-T (PC: Ctrl-T) to open 
Free Transform and resize it, so it covers 
the layer. Then, drop the layer’s Opacity 
to around 25%. I just used the same base 
texture here, from the Blending Textures 
Through Styles & Masking technique earlier  
in this chapter.
STEP 15: Finally, select the topmost layer in 
the Layers panel, then click on the Create 
New Adjustment Layer icon at the bottom 
of the panel, and choose Hue/Saturation. 
Turn on the Colorize checkbox and set the 
Saturation to around 35. Then, just drag 
the Hue slider to a color you like and you’re 
done. Pretty cool effect with a simple movie 
ticket stub, huh?

103
Chapter 5: Texture Effects
Final
Fi
l


Light Effects
Any photographer will tell you that lighting is one of the key aspects 
of great photography, if not the main one. You could say the same for 
design, as well. Utilizing light and shadow with these cool tricks can give 
your work that extra element.
105
Photoshop Tricks for Designers

106
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
The Design of Bokeh
The bokeh effect is actually a photography 
thing where specks of light that are outside 
the focal range of a photo will have a sort of 
aesthetic blur to them. Here we will explore 
how to create a graphic version of that effect 
that can be used in your own designs.
STEP ONE: Start by pressing Command-N 
(PC: Ctrl-N) and creating a new document 
that is 2000 pixels by 2000 pixels at 100 ppi. 
Set the background to any color you want 
to use. Here, I am using a blue background.
STEP TWO: Now, choose the Brush tool (B) 
in the Toolbox, and then open the Brush 
options panel (Window>Brush). In the pan-
el, click on Brush Tip Shape near the top 
left and choose a hard, round brush. Set 
the Size to 750 px and then increase the 
Spacing to around 225%.
STEP THREE: Next, click on Shape Dynamics 
on the left. Set the Size Jitter to around 70%.
STEP FOUR: Then, click on Scattering on the 
left. Turn on the Both Axes checkbox and 
set the Scatter amount to 240%.
STEP FIVE: Finally, click on Transfer on the 
left. Set the Opacity Jitter amount to 85%. 
You can see how this will look in the pre-
view area at the bottom of the panel. Now, 
click on the Create a New Layer icon at the 
bottom of the Layers panel to create a new 
blank layer, and set the layer’s blend mode 
to Overlay.

107
Chapter 6: Light Effects
STEP SIX: Press D, then X, to set your Fore-
ground color to white. Now go ahead and 
start painting some bokeh. You will notice 
that the size and opacity vary as you paint. 
This has more of a look of regular bokeh. In 
fact, if you make the brush size smaller and 
drop the Hardness in the Brush Tip Shape 
section, you get a very realistic bokeh effect 
on a photo. In this case, however, we could 
use it for a background design element, but 
let’s add one more thing.
STEP SEVEN: Click on the Add a Layer Style 
icon at the bottom of the Layers panel and 
choose Stroke. Set the Size to 1 or 2 px and 
make sure Position is set to Outside. Also, 
change the Blend Mode to Multiply. Then, 
click on the Color swatch to open the Color 
Picker and click on the background color 
of the image you started with to sample it. 
Click OK. Lastly, drop the Opacity to 90% 
and click OK. You can now see an interest-
ing stroke effect appears around the dots. 
This changes the more you paint in.
Once done, you have a background, and 
you can create text or drag-and-drop graph-
ics or photos over it, as you see below.
Final
Step 6
©ADOBE STOCK/MARKOS86
Final
©ADOBE STOCK/MARKOS86

108
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
BONUS TIP: Since the brush randomizes the 
effect differently each time, you can press 
Command-A (PC: Ctrl-A) to select the en-
tire document, and then paint the effect 
with different strokes. If you do not get 
what you like, just press Delete to erase the 
contents of the top layer, and paint again 
until you get what you want.
EXTRA BONUS TIP: If you want to save the 
brush with all the Brush panel settings, just 
click on the Tool Preset icon at the left end 
of the Options Bar, then click on the Create 
New Tool Preset icon (it looks like the Cre-
ate a New Layer icon) at the top right of 
the panel. This will save all the properties 
of the brush, so you can use it whenever 
you want. You will just need to remember 
to apply the Stroke layer style to the layer 
to get that graphic look.

109
Chapter 6: Light Effects
Adding Spark Elements
Sparks are a common and cool design ele-
ment these days, especially in movie posters 
and such. Here, we will take a look at a 
couple different ways to use simple spark 
elements in your own design work.
STEP ONE: Open the sparks image I’m using 
here (download it from the book’s down-
loads page, mentioned in the book’s intro-
duction), or use a sparks image of your own 
if it is similar to what I am using here.
STEP TWO: Next, open the design element 
you want to add the spark effect to. Here, 
we have a simple music note graphic on a 
textured background that I applied a gradi-
ent overlay to, like we did in the Blending 
Graphics with Seamless Textures technique 
in Chapter 5. This is actually one of the pre-
set shapes from Photo shop’s Custom Shape 
tool. (This file is also available on the book’s 
downloads page.)
STEP THREE: I applied an Outer Glow layer 
style to the music note, with the Blend Mode 
set to Linear Dodge (Add), the Opacity to 
41%, the Foreground to Transparent gradi-
ent’s color to orange, and the size to 24 px.  
I also applied a Drop Shadow layer style 
to act as a secondary glow on the texture 
below by setting the Blend Mode to Linear 
Light, the color to the same orange, the 
Opacity to 100%, the Distance to 5 px, and 
the Size to 152 px. This makes the graphic 
appear more red hot. 
©ADOBE STOCK/VIDADY
©ADOBE STOCK/VIDADY

110
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP FOUR: Now go to the sparks image and 
use the Move tool (V) to drag-and-drop it 
over onto the file with the glowing music 
note. Once the sparks image is placed, scale 
it to fit in the window using Free Transform 
(Command-T [PC: Ctrl-T]), and rotate the 
layer so the sparks are coming in from the 
bottom, like you see here. Press Return  
(PC: Enter) when it’s where you want it. 
Make sure the layer is at the top of the  
layer stack in the Layers panel, then change 
its blend mode to Screen to hide the  
black background. 
STEP FIVE: Next, go under the Edit menu and 
choose Puppet Warp. Then, click on the 
right side of the image, where the sparks 
enter the frame. This will place a control 
point. Click in the middle of the sparks to 
add another, and then on the left side to 
add a third. (Note: I turned off the Show 
Mesh checkbox in the Options Bar.) If you 
don’t like the placement of a pin, just click 
on it and press Delete (PC: Backspace) to 
remove it.
STEP SIX: Now you can grab each control 
point and manipulate the sparks around the 
graphic. Also, if you select a control point and 
then press-and-hold the Option (PC: Alt) key, 
you will see a rotation guide appear (shown 
here in the inset). Just keep the Option key 
held down and move your cursor over the 
guide and in different directions to change 
the rotation of the image at that point. If you 
have never used Puppet Warp, I would sug-
gest playing with the settings a little to get 
used to them. When it looks good to you, 
press Return (PC: Enter) to lock in your warp.

111
Chapter 6: Light Effects
STEP SEVEN: Depending on the graphic, you 
may want to add more sparks: just drag 
another copy of the sparks into your docu-
ment and repeat the process as many times 
as needed.
Below is the same effect applied to some 
text (using the font Trajan Pro 3 Bold, 
along with the same layer styles applied 
to the music note) using multiple copies of 
the same sparks, but with different warps 
applied to give each one a unique look.  
I also added the same spark image in the 
extreme foreground and gave it a simple 
5-px Gaussian Blur (under the Filter menu,
under Blur) to add a sense of depth.
BONUS EXAMPLE: Here is another quick ex-
ample of a cool use of sparks, using an 
image of embers floating on a black back-
ground. We need to first extract these from 
that background.
©ADOBE STOCK/TOROOK
©ADOBE STOCK/TOROOK

112
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP ONE: Open the Channels panel (Win-
dow>Channels), and you will see from each 
of the RGB channels that the Red channel 
obviously has the most detail of the embers. 
Press-and-hold the Command (PC: Ctrl) key 
and click on the Red channel thumbnail to 
load that channel as a selection.
STEP TWO: Go back to the Layers panel and 
press Command-J (PC: Ctrl-J) to copy the 
selected area to a new layer.
STEP THREE: Now, if you turn off the Back-
ground layer (click on the Eye icon to the 
left of the layer’s thumbnail), you will see 
that some of the black background was 
lifted with the embers. There is actually a 
feature in Photoshop designed to deal with 
this: go under the Layer menu, to very bot-
tom, to Matting, and choose Remove Black 
Matte. Voila! All residual black pixels gone.
STEP FOUR: Now, just drag-and-drop the ex-
tracted embers onto the image you want 
to add them to. Position the embers at the 
bottom of the image, then go under the Edit 
menu, under Transform, and choose Warp.
STEP FIVE: When the Warp grid appears, use 
it to push and stretch the sparks to add more 
chaos to the scene. The stretching also has 
the added byproduct of giving the embers a 
subtle motion blur effect. Press Return (PC: 
Enter) when done. Then, change the blend 
mode of this layer to Screen. (Note: As an 
option, you can grab the Eraser tool [E] and, 
using a simple round brush, go around and 
erase a few random embers to lessen the 
overall amount.)

113
Chapter 6: Light Effects
Bonus Final
Bonus Final
©ADOBE STOCK/SANDABOY AND NEJRON PHOTO

114
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Light Flares & Rings
Flares have quickly become a standard design 
element in a lot of composite work. Here is a 
quick way to create a cinematic flare brush, 
and then another cool little trick you can do 
with it:
STEP ONE: Open this flare image (you can 
download it from the book’s companion 
webpage, mentioned in the book’s intro-
duction), or use one of your own. You can 
find lots of flare images by doing a simple 
Google image search, as well.
STEP TWO: Press Command-Shift-U (PC: Ctrl-
Shift-U) to remove the color in the image, 
and then press Command-I (PC: Ctrl-I) to 
Invert it.
STEP THREE: Next, open Levels by pressing 
Command-L (PC: Ctrl-L), then push the 
white Input Levels (highlights) slider to the 
left a little to force the background to pure 
white, just in case there are any barely visible 
gray areas. Here, I dragged the light gray 
(midtones) slider a little to the left, as well. 
Push the dark gray (shadows) slider to the 
right a little bit to darken the flare, and then 
click OK.
STEP FOUR: Now, go under the Edit menu 
and choose Define Brush Preset. Name the 
brush when prompted, and now you have 
a flare brush in Photoshop.
STEP FIVE: To use your brush, just open the 
image you want to add a flare to, get the 
Brush tool (B), then go to the Brush Picker 
in the Options Bar and select the brush. 
Click on the Create a New Layer icon at the 
bottom of the Layers panel to create a blank 
layer, and paint in the flare where needed. As 
an added bonus, you can add an Outer Glow  
layer style to the flare to get a color effect 
to match the scene (as you can see reflected 
on the text in the Final image).
©ADOBE STOCK/ELSAR

115
Chapter 6: Light Effects
Final
©ADOBE STOCK/JULENOCHEK AND ZHU DIFENG

116
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
BONUS EXAMPLE: Here is a cool trick you can 
do with your new flare brush:
STEP ONE: Press Command-N (PC: Ctrl-N) to 
create a new document that is 2000 pixels 
by 2000 pixels, and set the Background 
Contents to black. With the Brush tool (B) 
active and the flare brush selected, press 
D, then X to set your Foreground color to 
white. Create a new blank layer above the 
Background layer.
STEP TWO: With the brush size at around 
1500 pixels, just dab three instances of 
flares near the bottom edge of the canvas.
STEP THREE: Then, go under the Filter menu, 
under Distort, and choose Polar Coordi-
nates. Make sure Rectangular to Polar is 
turned on, and click OK. This will give you 
a really cool flare ring.

117
Chapter 6: Light Effects
STEP FOUR: Now, just take this ring and add 
it as part of an image design. Here, I have 
added it to a sports image, along with the 
HUD element from Chapter 3 and a Gradi-
ent Overlay layer style on the subject layer 
(like we created in Chapter 5). I also added a 
cool Outer Glow layer style to the ring layer, 
like I mentioned earlier. You can use my set-
tings here as a starting point, but they may 
need to be tweaked based on the image and 
your preference. I set the Blend Mode to Lin-
ear Dodge (Add), the Opacity to 100%, the 
color to a medium bright blue, and the Size 
to 210 px.
©ADOBE STOCK/ARTEM FURMAN

118
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Simple Light Streak Design Elements
There are a number of different ways to use 
this effect once you know how it works. This 
is a simple example of creating a light streak 
effect as a design element to help separate 
parts of an image in an interesting way.
STEP ONE: First, we need to go ahead and 
set up the layout for the effect. We will 
start with a photo of a subject. As usual, 
you can use the image I am using here (you 
can find it on the book’s downloads page, 
mentioned in the book’s introduction) or 
one of your own.
STEP TWO: Now, press Command-N (PC: 
Ctrl-N) to create a new document measur-
ing 1350 pixels wide by 2000 pixels tall at 
100 ppi. Click on the Background Contents 
color swatch and fill the Background layer 
with whatever background color works 
with the image. Here, I am using a teal col-
or. Then, go ahead and use the Move tool 
(V) to bring the subject image into this new
canvas. Once in place, make a duplicate of
your subject layer by pressing Command-J
(PC: Ctrl-J), and then turn off the Eye icon
(in the Layers panel) for this duplicate layer
for the moment.
STEP THREE: Click on the original subject layer 
in the Layers panel and activate Free Trans-
form (press Command-T [PC: Ctrl-T]). Scale 
this image to almost 200% of its original 
size, then Right-click on the image while 
still in Free Transform, and choose Flip Hor-
izontal. Press Return (PC: Enter) to commit 
the change. Now, press Command-Shift-U 
(PC: Ctrl-Shift-U) to remove the color, and 
drop the layer’s Opacity to 20%.
©ADOBE STOCK/OLLY

119
Chapter 6: Light Effects
STEP FOUR: Click on the Create a New Layer 
icon at the bottom of the Layers panel to 
create a blank layer above the enlarged 
subject layer but below the duplicate layer.  
Grab the Rectangular Marquee tool (M)  
and click-and-drag out a narrow verti-
cal rectangle on the canvas. Then, press 
Shift-Delete (PC: Shift-Backspace) to open 
the Fill dialog, choose 50% Gray from the 
Contents pop-up menu, and click OK.
STEP FIVE: Turn the duplicate layer’s Eye icon 
back on and select the layer, then go into 
Free Transform and resize the image so 
the subject fills the layer. Press Return (PC:  
Enter), then press Command-Option-G 
(PC: Ctrl-Alt-G) to clip the duplicate layer 
inside the gray rectangle layer. Notice that 
you can move the shape and the clipped 
image independently.
STEP SIX: Now, for the light streaks. We will 
use these to make the edges of the rect-
angle more interesting. Start by creating 
a new blank layer at the top of the layer 
stack, and then selecting the Brush tool (B) 
in the Toolbox. Click on the brush thumbnail 
in the Options Bar to open the Brush Picker, 
and choose a standard round, soft-edged 
brush. Here, I have the brush around 65 px  
in size with a Hardness of 0. Open the Brush 
panel (Window>Brush) and click on Shape 
Dynamics on the left. In the Size Jitter Control 
pop-up menu, choose Pen Pressure, even if 
you are not using a pressure-sensitive tablet.
STEP SEVEN: Get Pen tool (P) in the Toolbox 
now, and make sure the tool mode near the 
left end of the Options Bar is set to Path. 
Start at the top edge of the canvas at the 
top-left corner of the rectangle and click 
to start a path. Press-and-hold the Shift key 
and click on the bottom-left corner of the 
rectangle to make a straight vertical path 
along the left edge of the shape.
STEP EIGHT: Open the Paths panel (Window> 
 Paths) and make sure the path layer is select-
ed. Then, click on the top-right corner of 
the panel and choose Stroke Path from the 
flyout menu. Choose Brush from the Tool 
pop-up menu and turn on the Simulate 
Pressure checkbox. Click OK. This will add 
a cool light streak along that edge.

120
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP NINE: Next use the Path Selection tool 
(A) to grab the vertical path and drag it to
the other side of the rectangle. It should
snap to the edge when you get close.
STEP 10: Since you have already applied the 
brush once to the path, you can just click 
on the Stroke Path icon (the second from 
the left) at the bottom of the Paths panel. 
It remembers the last brush used.
STEP 11: Now, just click on the Add a Layer 
Style icon at the bottom of the Layers panel 
and add a simple Outer Glow layer style to 
get a colored glow, like we did in the last tech-
nique. You can also select both the rectangle 
and streak layers (by Command-clicking 
[PC: Ctrl-clicking] on each) and skew them 
(under the Edit menu, under Transform) for 
a more interesting layout. Always entertain 
different options when you can. 
I also added a Gradient Overlay layer style 
(using a Foreground-to-Transparent radial 
gradient) to the background color layer to 
add some lighting to it so it seemed less 
flat. To add the layer style, you’ll have to 
double-click on the Background layer, then 
click OK to unlock it.

121
Chapter 6: Light Effects
Final
Final with Gradient Overlay layer style added
Fi
l


123
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Color Effects
I included this chapter on designing with color effects because using 
the wrong colors alone can kill a good design. Also, understanding how 
Photoshop uses color can help you get creative with the way you use it 
in your own work. 

124
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Isolated Color Effects Using Adjustment Layers
This effect can be achieved a number of dif-
ferent ways, but this is the way I use it most 
often. It uses the color in the original image 
and the process is non-destructive. It is sim-
ple, but in the end has quite an impact.
STEP ONE: Open the image you want to ap-
ply the effect to. I like this shot because it 
emphasizes the jewelry. Let’s enhance that 
by isolating the color to the jewelry, lips, 
and nails.
STEP TWO: We will use a simple gradient 
map trick to convert the image to black and 
white. Just press D to set your Foreground 
and Background colors to the default black 
and white, then go to the Layer menu, under 
New Adjustment Layer, and choose Gradient 
Map. Click OK in the dialog, and you will see 
the adjustment layer appear in the Layers 
panel with a layer mask already applied.
STEP THREE: Choose the Brush tool (B) in the 
Toolbox, and in the Options Bar, choose a 
simple, round, soft-edged brush from the 
Brush Picker. Now, this next step applies to 
those of you using a pressure-sensitive tab-
let, like a Wacom. If you are not using one,  
I encourage you to check them out. If you 
are, go to the Brush options panel (Win-
dow>Brush), click on Transfer on the left, 
and set the Opacity Jitter Control pop-up 
menu to Pen Pressure. If you do not have a 
tablet, you can drop the brush’s Opacity in 
the Options Bar to 10%.
STEP FOUR: Now, paint on the layer mask 
in the areas you want to hide the gradient 
map (in other words, reveal the color from 
the original image). Here, I painted over 
the jewelry, lips, and fingernails. Using my 
Wacom pen and the Pen Pressure setting, I 
just pressed lightly and built the reveal with 
each passing stroke. Thus, it hints at the col-
or, rather than revealing it 100%. Note: You 
can do the same without Pen Pressure by, 
again, simply adjusting the Opacity of the 
brush to 10%, and then each time you click-
and-drag over the same place, it reveals a  
little more.
©ADOBE STOCK/SOFIA ZHURAVETC
©ADOBE STOCK/SOFIA ZHURAVETC

125
Chapter 7: Color Effects
STEP FIVE: Once the color is revealed, let’s 
boost the contrast of the subject a bit more 
by adding a Levels adjustment layer (under 
the Layer menu, under New Adjustment 
Layer), and then positioning it below the 
Gradient Map adjustment layer in the Lay-
ers panel. Once in place, set this adjustment 
layer’s blend mode to Soft Light.
Final
STEP SIX: In the Properties panel, move the 
white (highlights) slider below the histo-
gram to the left quite a ways to blow out 
the whites in the image (here, I dragged it to 
185). I also moved the light gray (midtones) 
and dark gray (shadows) sliders to the right 
a little (to 1.11 and 5, respectively). This 
gives it a stylized look.
STEP SEVEN: Finally, just use the Horizontal 
type tool (T) to drop in some text and you 
are all set. I used Trajan Pro Regular, and 
then set the text layer’s blend mode to Dif-
ference, which made it look like the “L” has 
some of her hair curled in front of it.

126
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Creating a Duotone Effect with Camera Phone Images
I like to use images I take with my phone in 
creative ways, because it is the one camera 
I always have with me. Sometimes I shoot 
things with specific design uses in mind. 
This is a shot I took of the Staples Center in 
Los Angeles. I liked the lines and angles of 
the building, and thought it would make a 
cool color background effect.
STEP ONE: Open the image from the book’s 
downloads page (mentioned in the book’s 
introduction), or feel free to use an image 
of your own. Let’s start by removing the 
color with a gradient map, the same way 
we did in the last tutorial, only this time go 
to the Image menu, to Adjustments, and 
choose Gradient Map to apply it directly to 
the layer rather than as an adjustment layer. 
Just click OK in the dialog.
STEP TWO: Now, press Command-N (PC: 
Ctrl-N) and create a new document that is 
1100 pixels wide by 1500 pixels tall at 100 
ppi. Click on your Foreground Color swatch 
at the bottom of the Toolbox, input R=238, 
G=20, B=91, and click OK. Then, fill the 
Background layer with this color by pressing 
Option-Delete (PC: Alt Backspace).
STEP THREE: Go back to your original im-
age, then go to the Image menu again, 
and under Adjustments, this time choose 
Levels. We’ll use this to increase the con-
trast. In this case, I dragged the dark gray 
(shadows) slider to the right and the white 
(highlights) slider to the left to increase the 
overall contrast and lighten the sky more. 
Click OK when you’re done.
COREY BARKER

127
Chapter 7: Color Effects
STEP FOUR: Press Command-I (PC: Ctrl-I) to 
Invert the image to look like a negative.
STEP FIVE: Open the Channels panel (Win-
dow>Channels), and press-and-hold the 
Command (PC: Ctrl) key as you click on the 
RGB thumbnail to load the light areas as  
a selection.
STEP SIX: Back in the Layers panel, click  
on the Create a New Layer icon at the bot-
tom of the panel, and then choose a bright 
blue color for your Foreground color (here, I 
used: R=0, G=0, B=255) and fill the selection 
with that color by pressing Option-Delete 
(PC: Alt-Backspace). Press Command-D (PC: 
Ctrl-D) to Deselect.
STEP SEVEN: Now, use the Move tool (V) 
to click-and-drag this new layer into the 
document we created in Step Two. Press 
Command-T (PC: Ctrl-T) and use Free 
Transform to scale and position it in the 
new composition. Here, I enlarged it and 
rotated it slightly.

128
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Final
Final
STEP EIGHT: Next, go to the Layers panel and 
change this layer’s blend mode to Multiply 
and its Opacity to 75%.
STEP NINE: Finally, use the Horizontal Type 
tool (T) to drop some text in, and you’re 
done. Here, I used Eurostile Extended 2 and 
Bold Extended 2, and added a Drop Shadow  
layer style. All from an iPhone image.
Final
Final
Here is another example, using another  
iPhone shot I took in my car. See how getting 
creative with color can make you look at  
images in a whole new way, even seem-
ingly bad ones?
COREY BARKER

129
Chapter 7: Color Effects
Color Blending Effects Using Shape Layers
Here is a cool commercial effect you can 
use on products. It utilizes simple color bars 
to create an interesting layout, and then 
blend modes to blend the product with  
the background.
STEP ONE: Press Command-N (PC: Ctrl-N) and 
create a new document measuring 2000  
pixels wide by 1000 pixels tall at 100 ppi. 
Then, press Shift-Delete (PC: Shift-Backspace) 
and, in the Fill dia log, choose 50% Gray 
from the Contents pop-up menu and click 
OK. Press Command-R (PC: Ctrl-R) to make 
the rulers visible. Then, click in the vertical 
ruler, drag out a guide, and place it at the 
500-pixel mark on the horizontal ruler. Place  
two more guides at the 1000- and 1500- 
pixel marks.
STEP TWO: Go to the Toolbox and select the  
Rectangle shape tool (U). In the Options Bar,  
set the tool’s mode to Shape and set the 
Stroke color to none. Click on the Fill swatch, 
then click on the rainbow-colored swatch 
at the top right of the Color Picker, and set 
the color to the green color I am using here 
(R=57, G=181, B=74). Click OK.
STEP THREE: Now, click on the first guide, 
just above the canvas edge, and draw a 
green rectangular shape over the entire 
first section. This will also create a shape 
layer automatically.

130
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP FOUR: Next, draw a rectangle over the 
next section defined by the guides. Each 
new shape will create a new shape layer. The 
shapes should snap to the guides when you 
get close to them. If not, go under the View 
menu and make sure Snap is turned on.
STEP FIVE: Double-click on the second shape 
layer’s thumbnail to open the Color Pick-
er. Set the RGB numbers to R=0, G=114, 
B=188 for a middle blue color. Click OK.
STEP SIX: Create another rectangle shape 
over the next area between the guides 
and change the color to orange (R=248, 
G=148, B=29).
STEP SEVEN: Create the final rectangle shape 
at the right end of your document, and fill 
it with black.
STEP EIGHT: Click on the topmost shape 
layer in the Layers panel, then Shift-click 
on the bottom shape layer to select all 
four, and press Command-T (PC: Ctrl-T) 
to activate Free Transform. Right-click on 
one of the shapes and choose Skew from 
the pop-up menu.
STEP NINE: Press-and-hold the Option (PC: 
Alt) key, click on the top-middle control 
handle, and drag it to the right. Skew the 
shape to around –20 degrees, and press 
Return (PC: Enter) when you’re done. Click 
OK in the warning dialog that appears.

131
Chapter 7: Color Effects
STEP 10: Now, we have areas by the green 
and black rectangles revealing the gray 
background. So, choose the Direct Selec-
tion tool (the white arrow; press Shift-A 
until you have it) from the Toolbox.
STEP 12: Next, press Command-O (PC: Ctrl-O) 
and open the product image. In this case, 
we are creating a fake headphone ad, so 
we have a nice headphone image here. First, 
we need to extract it from the background. 
So, select the Quick Selection tool (W) from 
the Toolbox, and click-and-drag around the 
white area surrounding the headphones. 
Don’t forget the area in the middle of the 
headphones. Once you have that, go under 
the Select menu and choose Inverse (or press 
Command-Shift-I [PC: Ctrl-Shift-I]) to flip 
the selection to the headphones.
STEP 13: Click on Refine Edge in the Options 
Bar. Then, use the Refine Radius tool (to the 
left of the Edge Detection section) to paint 
over the bottom area where it touches the 
surface to select some of the shadows. 
When your selection is done, set the Output 
To pop-up menu to New Layer and click OK.
STEP 11: Click on the green shape layer in 
the Layers panel, and use this tool to grab 
the top-left control handle of the shape, 
then drag it over to the left to cover the rest 
of the corner. Do the same with the black 
shape layer to cover the lower-right corner.
©ADOBE STOCK/DESTINA

132
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP 14: Go under the Layer menu, under 
Matting, and choose Defringe. Set the 
Width to 2 pixels and click OK. This will clean 
up the anti-alias noise around the edge.
STEP 15: We don’t need the headphones 
in color, so remove it by pressing Com-
mand-Shift-U (PC: Ctrl-Shift-U). This will 
leave the contrast a little softer than the 
gradient map method.
STEP 16: Now, switch back to the color bar 
image and click on the top layer in the Layers 
panel to make it active. Use the Move tool (V) 
to drag-and-drop the headphones onto the 
color bar image. Then, press Command-T 
(PC: Ctrl-T) to use Free Transform to scale 
the headphones to cover the first three col-
or bars like you see here. Press Return (PC: 
Enter) when you’ve got them the way you 
want them. 
STEP 17: Change the blend mode of this layer 
to Difference and drop the layer’s Opacity to 
75%. Magically, the color effect takes shape.
STEP 18: Go back to the headphone image 
and drag-and-drop another copy of the 
headphones over onto the color bar image. 
Then, use Free Transform again to scale 
this one down to fit in the black bar area. 
Also, while in Free Transform, Right-click on 
the headphones and choose Flip Horizontal 
and then move your cursor just outside the 
bounding box and rotate them a little bit. 
Press Return (PC: Enter) when you’re done.

133
Chapter 7: Color Effects
STEP 19: Now, press Commend-L (PC: Ctrl-L) 
to run a Levels adjustment using the settings 
I have here (drag the highlights slider to 230, 
the midtones slider to 0.60, and the shad-
ows slider to 59) to get more contrast in the 
image against the black background.
Finally, just use the Horizontal Type tool (T) 
to drop in some text (I used the font Futura 
Light here), or add a logo, and there you 
have it.
Final

134
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Painted Color Effects Using Photos
I love brushes in Photoshop! They can be a 
designers best weapon and can be used in 
so many different ways. Here we will define 
a photo of a dancer into a brush and then 
use the brush features to create an interest-
ing color blend effect.
STEP ONE: To start, we of course need a pho-
to of the subject. It’s best if you can get the 
subject on a white background like this. If 
not, you will need to extract the subject and 
then make the background white. Here, we 
have a dancer in a cool mid-air pose. This 
image is 2000 pixels by 2000 pixels.
STEP TWO: Go ahead and remove the color us-
ing a gradient map by pressing D to set your 
Foreground and Background colors to their 
defaults, then go under the Image menu, un-
der Adjustments, and choose Gradient Map. 
Click OK when the dialog appears.
STEP THREE: Now, go under the Edit menu, 
choose Define Brush Preset, and then name 
the brush when prompted. Click OK, and 
then you can close the image.
STEP FOUR: Select the Brush tool (B) in the 
Toolbox, then click on the Brush thumbnail 
in the Options Bar to open the Brush Picker 
and make sure this new brush is selected 
(it should be the last one). Next, open the 
Brush options panel (Window>Brush). Se-
lect Brush Tip Shape on the left, and set 
the brush Size to around 1600 px and the 
Spacing to 150%.
STEP FIVE: Click on Shape Dynamics on the 
left. Set the Size Jitter to 75% and the  
Angle Jitter to 100%.
STEP SIX: Click on Transfer on the left. Set 
the Opacity Jitter to 50%.
STEP SEVEN: Finally, click on Color Dynamics 
on the left, and set the Hue Jitter and the 
Purity to 100%. (Note: You can experiment 
with lower settings once you see how this 
effect works.)
©ADOBE STOCK/MARKOS86

135
Chapter 7: Color Effects
STEP EIGHT: Here, I am using a parchment 
texture for the background, which you 
can download from the book’s downloads 
page, as well. Once open, click on the Cre-
ate a New Layer icon at the bottom of the 
Layers panel to create a blank layer. Then, 
you need to set the Foreground color to a 
color (Hue Jitter will not work with white or 
black), so click on its swatch at the bottom 
of the Toolbox, choose a color in the Color 
Picker, and click OK. Note: The color you 
start with does affect the colors you see, so 
try different ones.
BONUS TIP: You can save the brush and all  
its properties by saving it as a Tool Preset. 
Click on the very first icon in the Options 
Bar to access the Tool Preset menu, and 
then click on the Create New Tool Preset 
icon (it looks like the Create a New Layer 
icon). Name it, and it saves all the settings, 
including the current color if you want. Click 
OK when done.
STEP NINE: Once you have a color chosen, 
start painting on the blank layer. Here, I start-
ed roughly in the middle and then moved 
outward in a spiral. You get a different color 
arrangement and distribution every time you 
click, so you can undo and paint again sev-
eral times until you get something you like.
Finally, change the layer’s blend mode to 
Multiply, so it will blend with the texture be-
low. You can leave this as-is or add some text.
Final
©PHOTOART TEXTURES

136
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Cinematic Color Compositing Effects
Of course I had to throw in a little Holly-
wood, as well. This is a trick I see in movie 
posters a lot. It is compositing a scene with 
a monochromatic background to focus 
attention more on the main subject, who 
is in color. Basically, it’s drawing attention 
with color.
STEP ONE: Here, I have a nice shot of a wom-
an in a warrior costume. She is shot on a 
white backdrop, which makes her easier to 
select. So much so, in fact, that we will use 
the Magic Wand tool (Shift-W) this time. Use 
the default Tolerance of 32 in the Options 
Bar, and then click on the white background 
to select it. Don’t worry too much about the 
area around her feet because we’re not go-
ing to see them anyway, but do make sure 
that the areas inside the loop at the end of 
the axe handle and the areas by her head 
are selected. Just press-and-hold the Shift 
key as you click in these areas to add them 
to the selection.
STEP TWO: When done, press Command- 
Shift-I (PC: Ctrl-Shift-I) to Inverse the selec-
tion. Then, click Refine Edge in the Options 
Bar, and use the Refine Radius tool (to the 
left of Edge Detection) to adjust the areas 
around her hair and any other soft edge 
areas by painting over them. Set the Edge 
Detection Radius to 0.5 px. Lastly, set the 
Output To pop-up menu to New Layer with 
Layer Mask and click OK.
STEP THREE: Now, press Command-N (PC: 
Ctrl-N) and create a new document that is 
1350 pixels by 2000 pixels, and make sure 
the background is white.
©ADOBE STOCK/FILIN28

137
Chapter 7: Color Effects
STEP FOUR: Get the Move tool (V) from the 
Toolbox, and drag-and-drop the extracted 
subject layer over onto this new document. 
Then, use Free Transform (Command-T [PC: 
Ctrl-T]) to scale and rotate the subject to a 
more interesting angle, like you see here. 
Press Return (PC: Enter) when done.
©ADOBE STOCK/LEONID TIT
STEP FIVE: Next, we need the background 
element. Here, we have a nice generic win-
ter forest scene. It is in color, which we do 
not need in this case, so just press Com-
mand-Shift-U (PC: Ctrl-Shift-U) to desatu-
rate the image.
STEP SIX: Now, use the Move tool to bring 
this image into the main layout and posi-
tion this layer below the subject layer in 
the Layers panel. Go into Free Transform 
and resize and rotate the image to a similar 
angle as the subject, then grab the left and 
right middle control handles and basically 
squeeze the image to fit in the composition. 
Press Return (PC: Enter) when you’re done. 
Drop the layer’s Opacity to 90%.

138
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP SEVEN: Click on the Create New Adjust-
ment Layer icon at the bottom of the Layers 
panel and choose Levels. In the Properties 
panel, below the histogram, drag the center 
gray midpoint slider to 2.31 and the white 
highlights slider to 253, then drag the gray 
shadows Output Levels slider to 22, like  
I have here to lighten the background.
STEP EIGHT: Click back on the forest layer, and 
then click on the Create a New Layer icon 
at the bottom of the Layers panel to add  
a new blank layer above it. Press D to set 
your Foreground color to black, and select 
the Gradient tool (G) in the Toolbox. In the 
Options Bar, click on the thumbnail gradient 
and choose the Foreground to Transparent 
gradient in the Gradient Picker, and then 
click on the Linear Gradient icon (to the 
right of the gradient thumbnail). Click-and-
drag out a simple black-to-transparent linear 
gradient at the bottom of the image.
STEP NINE: Now click on the Levels adjust-
ment layer in the Layers panel, and then 
add a Hue/Saturation adjustment layer. In 
the Properties panel, turn on the Colorize 
checkbox. Set the Hue to 204 and the Sat-
uration to 30. This will give the background 
a monochromatic blue color and will also 
lighten it. Visually this diminishes the back-
ground to a single tone, focusing attention 
on the subject. However, we do want the 
subject to blend into the scene a bit more.

139
Chapter 7: Color Effects
STEP 10: Press-and-hold the Option (PC: Alt) 
key, go under the Image menu, and choose 
Duplicate to create an instant copy of the 
file. Create a new blank layer and place 
it just below the subject layer in the layer 
stack. Press Shift-Delete (PC: Shift-Back-
space) to open the Fill dialog, choose 50% 
Gray from the Contents pop-up menu, 
and click OK. Then, go under the Layer 
menu and choose Flatten Image.
STEP 11: You should only see the subject 
on a gray background. Go under Image  
menu, under Adjustments, and choose HDR 
Toning. Start by setting the Saturation to 
–100%. This will give you a high-contrast,
grittier version. Then, set the Edge Glow
Radius to 36 px, the Edge Glow Strength to
0.63, the Exposure to –0.68, and the Detail
to 149%, and click OK.
STEP 12: Now, drag-and-drop this new HDR 
toned layer back onto the original image. 
Press-and-hold the Shift key as you drop 
it, so it lands centered and aligned. Place 
the layer above the original subject layer 
in the layer stack and press Command-Op-
tion-G (PC: Ctrl-Alt-G) to clip this layer to 
the layer below. Change the layer’s blend 
mode to Multiply and drop its Opacity to 
around 75%.

140
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP 13: Press Command-U (PC: Ctrl-U) to 
open the Hue/Saturation dialog. Turn on 
the Colorize checkbox, and set the Hue to 
221, Saturation to 45, and the Lightness 
to +21. This will apply a blue cast to the 
HDR, which results in a cool overlay to help 
it match the cool atmosphere surrounding 
the subject and helping her blend a little 
better. Click OK when you’re done.
STEP 14: Select the main, extracted subject 
layer in the Layers panel, and press Com-
mand-U (PC: Ctrl-U) to open the Hue/
Saturation dialog again. This time, drop the 
Saturation to –15 and click OK to make the 
subject less warm.
STEP 15: Add a new blank layer at the top 
of the layer stack, and select the Gradient 
tool again with a Foreground to Transparent 
linear gradient. Press-and-hold the Option 
(PC: Alt) key to temporarily activate the 
Eyedropper tool and click on a dark blue 
spot on the background to make that your 
Foreground color (make sure the Eyedrop-
per tool is set to Sample All Layers in the 
Options Bar). Then, add a gradient at the 
bottom to add a dark fade.
STEP 16: Now add another blank layer, press 
D, then X, to change your Foreground color 
to white, click on the Radial Gradient icon, 
and add a white radial gradient in the top-
left corner to add a light flare. Bring it over 
the subject a little bit to blend her in the 
scene a bit more.

141
Chapter 7: Color Effects
STEP 17: Select the forest layer, then go un-
der the Filter menu, under Blur, and choose 
Gaussian Blur. Set the Radius to around 2 
pixels and click OK. This will create a subtle 
sense of depth of field.
Finally, I added the quick snow effect that 
we created in Chapter 5.
Final


143
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Hollywood-Style Effects
Are you really surprised that I included a Hollywood-Style Effects chapter 
in this book? Entertainment design has been a big influence for me, 
and I get a lot of inspiration from it. While not all of us are designing for 
movies or other entertainment, we can take what we learn and apply it 
to our own work to get that Hollywood look.

144
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Silhouette Design Elements
This effect is used quite often in movie 
ads, as well as in commercial product ad-
vertising. It uses the shape of a subject to 
create a silhouette frame to then composite 
elements in and around. The result is pretty 
impressive and can be used in a number 
of different ways. Once you have this tech-
nique down, try experimenting with other 
shapes.
STEP ONE: It’s best to start with a subject that 
is on a solid background (preferably white), 
so you can easily extract them. The one 
we’re using here looks like it’s right out of 
an action movie and should be pretty easy 
to extract (you can, of course, download 
this from the book’s companion webpage, 
mentioned in the book’s introduction).
STEP TWO: Open the Channels panel (Win-
dows>Channels), then press-and-hold the 
Command (PC: Ctrl) key and click on the 
RGB thumbnail to load the luminosity as a 
selection. Since this selects the background, 
press Command-Shift-I (PC: Ctrl-Shift-I) to 
Inverse the selection to the subject. Press 
Command-J (PC: Ctrl-J) to copy the select-
ed area to a new layer, then click on the 
Eye icon to the left of the Background layer 
to turn it off. 
STEP THREE: Press Command-J (PC: Ctrl-J) 
four more times to build the density back 
into the transparent areas. Then, Shift-click 
on Layer 1 to select all the layers, except the 
Background layer, and press Command-E 
(PC: Ctrl-E) to merge them together into 
one layer. Now, go under the Layer menu, 
under Matting, and choose Defringe. Set it 
to 2 pixels and click OK.
©ADOBE STOCK/FRANCK CAMHI-VISION

145
Chapter 8: Hollywood-Style Effects
STEP FOUR: Next, press Command-N (PC: 
Ctrl-N) and create a new document mea-
suring 1400 pixels wide by 2000 pixels tall, 
with the Background Contents set to White.  
Using the Move tool (V), click-and-drag the 
extracted subject into this new document. 
Press Command-T (PC: Ctrl-T) to activate 
Free Transform, then press-and-hold the 
Shift key (to keep things proportional), and 
scale and position the subject in a dramat-
ic way within the composition. Here, I’m 
concentrating on the vertical space from 
his right knee up to his head. That area is 
where we will clip in another image. Press 
Return (PC: Enter) when done.
STEP FIVE: Select the Gradient tool (G) in the 
Toolbox, and then press D to set your Fore-
ground color to black. In the Options Bar, 
click on the gradient thumbnail and choose 
the Foreground to Transparent gradient from 
the Gradient Picker, then click on the Radial 
Gradient icon to the right of the gradient 
thumbnail, and set the tool’s blend Mode to 
Overlay. In the Layers panel, click on the 
Lock Transparent Pixels icon (the checkered 
box above the top layer’s thumbnail) to lock 
the layer’s transparency, and then click-and-
drag out a few gradients in the legs and 
lower torso area to black out the detail.

146
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP SIX: Next, open the city image you want 
to blend within the subject. Here’s a cool 
shot of Shanghai that I’ve used numerous 
times. Go ahead and drag-and-drop it into 
the working document and place this layer 
on top of the subject layer. Then, use Free 
Transform to scale and position it, so the 
tower is in the area of the subject I men-
tioned in Step Four. Once in place, press 
Command-Option-G (PC: Ctrl-Alt-G) to clip 
this layer inside the subject layer below it.
STEP SEVEN: Press Command-Shift-U (PC: Ctrl-
Shift-U) to remove the color, and then press 
Command-I (PC: Ctrl-I) to Invert the tones.
©ADOBE STOCK/CHUNGKING

147
Chapter 8: Hollywood-Style Effects
STEP EIGHT: Click on the Create New Adjust-
ment Layer icon at the bottom of the Layers 
panel and choose Hue/Saturation (be sure 
this adjustment layer is at the top of the layer 
stack). In the Properties panel, turn on the 
Colorize checkbox and then set the Hue to 
around 200 and the Saturation to around 40. 
STEP NINE: Select the inverted city layer in 
the Layers panel and drop its layer Opacity 
to 50%. Click on the Add Layer Mask icon 
at the bottom of the panel, then switch 
back to the Gradient tool, set its blend 
Mode to Normal (leave the other settings 
as is), and add a couple gradients around 
the subject’s face and upper torso area. 
STEP 10: Now, make a duplicate of the city 
layer with its layer mask, and then position 
it beneath the main subject layer. Make 
sure the image thumbnail is selected, then 
Invert the city image, again, to put it back 
to normal, and drop the layer Opacity to 
25%. This will pick up the color from the 
Hue/Saturation adjustment layer.

148
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP 11: Remember the HUD graphic ele-
ment from Chapter 3? We’re going to add 
that here. Click on the Create a New Layer 
icon at the bottom of the Layers panel to 
create a new blank layer, and then move 
that layer beneath the Hue/Saturation ad-
justment layer at the top of the layer stack. 
Press Shift-Delete (PC: Shift-Backspace) to 
open the Fill dialog, choose 50% Gray from 
the Contents pop-up menu, and click OK. 
STEP 12: Now, click on the Add a Layer Style 
icon at the bottom of the Layers panel and 
choose Pattern Overlay. Click on the Pattern 
thumbnail and find your HUD graphic pat-
tern, then set the Blend Mode to Difference, 
and position the graphic manually (just click 
outside the Layer Style dialog, and drag it 
around in your image). Then, select Blending 
Options on the left, set the Opacity to 25%, 
and drop the Fill Opacity to 0, so the HUD will 
blend with the image. Click OK.

149
Chapter 8: Hollywood-Style Effects
STEP 13: Finally, add a layer mask to this lay-
er and use the radial Gradient tool, again, to 
add some fades to the HUD graphic in the 
areas where needed. Then, just drop in some 
text (I used the font Eurostile Bold Extended 
Two), with a little flare magic (see Chapter 6), 
and you are done.
Final
Fi
l

150
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Grunge-Style Effects
Now this effect should probably be in the 
commercial chapter, but I finished that 
chapter a while back, and it does qualify 
as a Hollywood effect. It is a cool way of 
taking a simple photo, even one from your 
phone, and making it look like something 
you would see in a poster frame.
STEP ONE: Here, we have a nicely timed shot 
of a biker mid-jump (which you can down-
load from the book’s companion webpage, 
mentioned in the book’s introduction). The 
background is subtle enough to get a good 
selection of the subject, so open the Chan-
nels panel (Window>Channels) and click on 
the Blue channel since that’s where the biker 
has the most contrast from the background. 
Make a duplicate of it by dragging it onto 
the Create New Channel icon at the bottom 
of the panel.
STEP TWO: With the duplicate channel se-
lected, press Command-L (PC: Ctrl-L) to 
open Levels. Click on the white (highlights) 
eyedropper, beneath the Options button, 
and click on a light area to the left of the 
subject to force the background to white. 
Continue clicking on any other areas in the 
background that are still gray to force them 
to white. Then, adjust the sliders beneath 
the histogram to boost the overall contrast 
of the channel (here, I set the shadows [dark 
gray slider] to 66, the midtones [light gray 
slider] to 0.37, and the highlights [white 
slider] to 156). Click OK when done.
STEP THREE: Press Command-I (PC: Ctrl-I) to 
Invert the channel, making the subject white. 
Don’t worry about the areas that are still 
black—we don’t need a full selection here.
©ADOBE STOCK/SILVANO REBAI

151
Chapter 8: Hollywood-Style Effects
STEP FOUR: Next, Command-click (PC: Ctrl-
click) on the Blue Copy channel thumbnail 
to load it as a selection, then click on the 
RGB channel and press Command-J (PC: 
Ctrl-J) to copy the selection to a new layer.
STEP FIVE: Press Command-N (PC: Ctrl-N) and 
create a new document measuring 1500 
pixels wide by 2000 pixels tall, with the 
Background Contents set to White. Then, 
press Command-O (PC: Ctrl-O) and open 
the background texture image. Notice what 
we’re using here is a light texture with subtle 
detail (if you want to use your own texture). 
Using the Move tool (V), drag-and-drop this 
texture into your new document.
STEP SIX: Go back to the subject file, Shift-
click to select both the Background layer 
and the extracted subject layer, and drag-
and-drop them both onto the texture 
image. With both still selected, press Com-
mand-T (PC: Ctrl-T) to activate Free Trans-
form, press-and-hold the Shift key (to keep 
things proportional; press Command-0 
[zero; PC: Ctrl-0] to reach the control han-
dles), and then scale and position both of 
them together, so they stay aligned. Once 
in place, press Return (PC: Enter).
©PHOTOART TEXTURES

152
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP SEVEN: Click on the Eye icon to the left 
of the extracted subject layer to turn it off. 
Then, select the original subject layer, set 
its blend mode to Linear Burn, and drop its 
Opacity to 80%. Now, press-and-hold the 
Option (PC: Alt) key and click on the Add 
Layer Mask icon at the bottom of the Layers 
panel to add a Hide All (black) layer mask.
STEP EIGHT: We’re now going to use a brush, 
which I’ve also made available for you to 
download on the book’s companion web-
page. Once you’ve downloaded it, get 
the Brush tool (B), then click on the brush 
thumbnail in the Options Bar and, in the 
Brush Picker, click on the gear icon in the 
top right. Choose Load Brushes from the 
pop-up menu, find the brush, and click 
Open. It’ll now appear at the bottom of the 
Brush Picker. Click on it, and then open the 
Brush options panel (Window>Brush). Set 
the Size to around 1400 px and the Spacing 
to 50%, then click on Shape Dynamics on 
the left and set the Angle Jitter to 100%.
STEP NINE: Turn the extracted subject layer 
back on and make sure the layer mask on 
the layer below is still selected. Press D to 
set your Foreground color to white, and 
then dab a few spatters on the layer mask 
to reveal the original image. 

153
Chapter 8: Hollywood-Style Effects
STEP 10: Let’s add some color to these spat-
ters. Click on the Add a Layer Style icon at 
the bottom of the Layers panel and choose 
Color Overlay. Then, click on the color 
swatch, choose a blue color in the Color 
Picker, set the Blend Mode to Overlay, and 
drop the Opacity to 75%. Click OK.
STEP 11: Select the extracted subject layer, 
then go under the Filter menu, and choose 
Filter Gallery. In the dialog, under Artistic, 
choose Poster Edges. Set all three sliders on 
the right to 2 and click OK.
(Note: To see the Filter Gallery filters in the 
Filter menu, open Photoshop’s Preferences 
and, on the Plug-Ins tab, turn on the Show All  
Filter Gallery Groups and Names checkbox.)
STEP 12: Now, press Command-U (Ctrl-U) to 
open the Hue/Saturation dialog and move 
the Hue slider around to change the color 
range of the subject. Below, I set it to –35. 
Click OK.

154
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP 13: As an option, you can add a gradi-
ent overlay to the texture layer. Just select 
it in the Layers panel, then click on the Add 
a Layer Style icon and choose Gradient 
Overlay. Set the Blend Mode to Overlay, the 
Opacity to 75%, and the Style to Radial. Set 
the Scale to around 100%, then adjust the 
Angle a bit, and move it manually towards 
the bottom right of the image. This will help 
give it a subtle vignette effect. Click OK.
STEP 14: Let’s now add a simple blue oval 
beneath the bike. Get the Elliptical Marquee 
tool (press Shift-M until you have it) from 
the Toolbox and click-and-drag to create an 
oval down by the tires. Click on the Create a 
New Layer icon at the bottom of the Layers 
panel to put this oval on its own layer, then 
press Shift-Delete (PC: Shift-Backspace) to 
open the Fill dialog. Choose Color from the 
Contents pop-up menu, and then choose a 
darker blue color from the Color Picker. Click 
OK in both dialogs. Now, press Command-T 
(PC: Ctrl-T) to activate Free Transform and 
scale and position it like I have here. Press 
Return (PC: Enter), and then drop the layer’s 
Opacity to 75% and set its blend mode to 
Linear Burn. Press Command-D (PC: Ctrl-D)  
to Deselect.
STEP 15: Click on the Add Layer Mask icon, 
then get the Brush tool again and, with a 
black, soft-edged round brush, click on the 
area of the oval beneath the bike, so that it 
blends better. Let’s also let the texture show 
through some more, by clicking on the Add 
a Layer Style icon and choosing Blending 
Options. Press-and-hold the Option (PC: 
Alt) key, click on the gray Underlying Layer 
slider knob, and drag to the right to split it. 
Do the same with the white slider knob, but 
click-and-drag to the left. 

155
Chapter 8: Hollywood-Style Effects
Lastly, just add some text. Here, I have “The 
Grind” in a cool font, called Hard Grunge.  
I filled it with an orange color sampled from 
the orange color patch in the bike, set the 
layer blend mode to Difference, and added 
a simple Drop Shadow layer style to make 
it more readable. 
Final
Fi
l

156
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Room With a City View
This effect, it seems, has been used nu-
merous times for many films. In fact, I have 
even seen many use the same backdrop 
image. After you follow along the first 
time, you’ll easily be able to swap out the 
background image with any other image, 
without having to start over. 
STEP ONE: Press Command-N (PC: Ctrl-N) 
and create a new document measuring 
1350 pixels wide by 2000 pixels tall. Then, 
press Shift-Delete (PC: Shift-Backspace) to 
open the Fill dialog and set the Contents to 
50% gray. Press Command-R (PC: Ctrl-R) to 
reveal the rulers, and then drag out a verti-
cal guide to the 400-pixel mark, another to 
the 950-pixel mark, and then a horizontal 
one to the 1500-pixel mark. 
STEP TWO: Now, grab the Rectangular Mar-
quee tool (M) and draw a vertical selection 
to the left of the first vertical guide. Make it 
the full height of the document and around 
35 pixels wide (just keep an eye on the tool 
tip that appears when you’re dragging). 
Click on the Create a New Layer icon to 
put this on a new layer, then press D, then 
Option-Delete (PC: Alt-Backspace) to fill the 
selection with black. While it’s still selected, 
press Command-Option-Shift (PC: Ctrl-Alt-
Shift) and click-and-drag a duplicate of it to 
the right side of the second vertical guide. 
Finally, create a selection along the bottom 
of the horizontal guide, the same thickness 
as the previous selections, and fill this one 
with black, as well. Press Command-D (PC: 
Ctrl-D) to Deselect.
STEP THREE: Press Command-O (PC: Ctrl-O) 
and open the background image. Here, 
we have a typical New York skyline back-
drop (which you can download from the 
book’s companion webpage, mentioned in 
the book’s introduction). Using the Move 
Tool (V), drag-and-drop it onto the work-
ing background and place it below the 
black bar layer in the Layers panel. Press 
Command-T (PC: Ctrl-T) to activate Free 
Transform, and then scale and position it 
however you want. When done, press Re-
turn (PC: Enter) and drop the layer’s Opacity 
to 75%.
©ADOBE STOCK/MIHAI ANDRITOIU

157
Chapter 8: Hollywood-Style Effects
STEP FOUR: We’ll want to hide the excess im-
age appearing beneath the horizontal line, 
so add a rectangular selection to the entire 
area beneath the guide. Then, Option-click 
(PC: Alt-click) on the Add Layer Mask icon 
to hide the excess. 
STEP FIVE: Make a duplicate of the city layer 
by pressing Command-J (PC: Ctrl-J), then 
click on the chain icon between the image 
thumbnail and layer mask on the duplicate 
layer to unlink them. Now, go under the 
Edit menu, under Transform, and choose 
Flip Vertical. Then, click on the layer mask, 
so it’s active, and press Command-I (PC: 
Ctrl-I) to Invert it.
STEP SIX: Click back on the duplicate city 
layer’s image thumbnail to make it active 
and drop its layer Opacity to 10%. With the 
Move tool, press-and-hold the Shift key 
and drag the image down to where the top 
of the buildings are showing as a reflection 
on the fake floor. 
Step 4
Step 5

158
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP SEVEN: Now, open the main subject 
image. The subject, here, is at the right 
stance and perspective for the scene. Since 
the background is pure white, just grab 
the Magic Wand tool (Shift-W) and set 
the Tolerance, in the Options Bar, to 10. 
Then, click on the background to select it. 
Don’t forget to Shift-click to add the areas 
between his thumbs and fingers to the se-
lection. Go under Select menu and choose 
Inverse to flip the selection, and then press 
Command-J (PC: Ctrl-J) to copy the select-
ed subject to a new layer. 
STEP EIGHT: Once extracted, drag-and-drop 
him onto the main image (make sure this 
layer is at the top of the layer stack), and 
then use Free Transform to scale him to fit 
in the scene, like you see here (press-and-
hold the Shift key to keep things propor-
tional). Press Return (PC: Enter) when done. 
To get rid of any white fringe around him, 
go under the Layer menu, under Matting, 
and choose Defringe. Enter around 2 pixels 
and click OK.
STEP NINE: Make a duplicate of the subject 
layer, and then position it below the original 
subject layer in the layer stack. Go under the 
Edit menu, under Transform, and choose Flip 
Vertical, and then press-and-hold the Shift 
key and drag this duplicate down to where 
the reflection of his legs and feet looks real. 
Click on the Add Layer Mask icon at the bot-
tom of the Layers panel, and then get the 
Gradient tool (G). In the Options Bar, click  
on the gradient thumbnail and choose the 
Foreground to Transparent gradient, click 
on the Linear Gradient icon (to the right 
of the gradient thumbnail), set the Opacity 
to around 75%, and then (with your Fore-
ground color set to black) add a subtle fade 
from the bottom of the image.
©ADOBE STOCK/CHENPG

159
Chapter 8: Hollywood-Style Effects
STEP 10: Select the gray Background layer 
in the Layers panel, then set the Gradient 
tool’s Opacity back to 100%, and add small 
black gradients to the top and bottom of 
the layer. 
Step 11
Step 10
STEP 12: Click on the Create New Adjust-
ment Layer icon at the bottom of the 
Layers panel and choose Hue/Saturation. 
Make sure this layer is positioned below the 
subject layers, but above the background 
layers, in the layer stack. In the Properties 
panel, turn on the Colorize checkbox, set 
the Saturation to around 25 and the Hue 
to around 200. When done, drop the layer’s 
Opacity to 50%.
STEP 11: Now, select the black bars layer in 
the Layers panel, and use the Rectangular 
Marquee tool to draw a selection over the 
entire floor area and lower half of the hor-
izontal black bar (as shown above). Press 
Command-Shift-J (PC: Ctrl-Shift-J) to cut 
this area to a new layer (if you see a visi-
ble line now, after making this cut, just use 
the Move tool to move this cut layer up a 
little). Now, add a layer mask to this layer, 
and then add a black linear gradient to the 
bottom of it to give the window frame re-
flection a fade. 

160
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP 13: Now, let’s add some detail to the 
highlights in the subject. Click on the main 
subject layer, and then click on the Lock 
Transparent Pixels icon near the top of the 
Layers panel to lock this layer. Grab the 
Brush tool (B) and choose a simple, soft-
edged brush from the Brush Picker in the 
Options Bar. Set the brush’s blend Mode to 
Overlay, and paint along the edges of the 
subject to enhance the highlights more.
STEP 14: Select the original city background 
layer, and then go under the Filter menu, 
under Blur, and choose Gaussian Blur. Give 
it a 2-pixel blur, click OK, and then do the 
same thing to the reflected city layer.
STEP 15: Let’s add one last atmospheric ele-
ment. Click on the Create a New Layer icon 
at the bottom of the Layers panel to create 
a new blank layer and move it to the top of 
the layer stack. Get the Gradient tool again, 
and using the same Foreground-to-Trans-
parent gradient, click on the Radial gradient 
icon to the right of the gradient thumbnail, 
then press-and-hold the Option (PC: Alt) key 
and click in a cool area of the sky to select 
that color. Then, starting beyond the image 
boundary in the upper right (drag out your 
image window), click-and-drag out a gradi-
ent in the corner. Drop the layer’s Opacity to 
75% and set the blend mode to Screen. 
Finally, just add some text in (I used Trajan 
Pro 3 Regular here), and you are all set. You 
can always change the background image 
and its reflection to get a whole new scene.

161
Chapter 8: Hollywood-Style Effects
Final
Fi
l


163
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
3D Effects
Like layer styles, 3D in Photoshop has quickly become an integral part of 
designing in Photoshop. You can achieve a lot more than you think, once 
you know what you can do. In this chapter, I cover a few condensed tech-
niques that will give you impressive results, even if you have little to no  
3D knowledge. It just might make you want to learn more.

164
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
Instant Macro Effects Using 3D
We’ll start here with a cool macro trick you 
can do to photos and graphics. You can also 
do this to text to create that macro look of 
being really close. So, here, we will use a 
simple text block, but be sure to experiment 
with images, as well. This is similar to what 
we did in the text chapter, but here we will 
utilize some depth of field.
STEP ONE: Press Command-N (PC: Ctrl-N) 
and create a new document measuring 
2500 pixels wide by 1200 pixels tall, with 
the Background Contents set to White. 
Then, select the Horizontal Type tool (T) and 
click-and-drag to create a text box the exact 
size of the document—start at the top-left 
corner and drag to the bottom-right corner.
STEP TWO: In the Options Bar, set the font 
size to 35 pt, and choose a font—here, I am 
using Times Regular. In the Paragraph panel,  
(Window>Paragraph), click on the Justify 
All icon at the top right.Then, go under the 
Type menu and choose Paste Lorem Ipsum. 
This will place filler text. (Of course, if you 
have your own text you want to use, then 
go ahead and use that.) Now, this will only 
paste a paragraph of text, so go under the 
Type menu, again, and choose Paste Lorem 
Ipsum a few more times to fill the box.
STEP THREE: Highlight a small area of text 
and then type in a word or message you 
want to emphasize. Here, I set STAND OUT 
in all caps and filled it with red—just click 
on the color swatch in the Options Bar 
when the text is highlighted and choose a 
color from the Color Picker.

165
Chapter 9: 3D Effects
STEP FOUR: Now, click on the Move tool in the 
Toolbox, then go under the 3D menu, under 
New Mesh from Layer, and choose Postcard. 
This will put the flat 2D layer in 3D space. In 
the Layers panel, double-click on the Lorem 
Ipsum sublayer, under the Diffuse texture, 
and then click OK in the resulting dialog to 
open the original text file. Command-click 
(PC: Ctrl-click) on the Create a New Layer 
icon at the bottom of the Layers panel to 
create a new blank layer below the text layer, 
and then press Shift-Delete (PC: Shift-Back-
space) to open the Fill dialog. Choose White 
from the Contents pop-up menu, and then 
press OK to fill the new layer with white. 
Notice you can edit the text if you want here, 
as well. When done, close this type image 
and save the changes.
STEP FIVE: In the 3D panel, select Current 
View, then in the Properties panel, drop the 
FOV (Field of View) setting to 10mm lens. 
This will give you a wider scope lens, so you 
can get really close. Also, set the Depth to 
7. This will make the image look blurry for
the moment. Now, select the Background
layer in the Layers panel, press Shift-Delete
(PC: Shift-Backspace) to open the Fill dialog,
and choose Black from the Contents pop-up 
menu to fill it with black.
STEP SIX: Make sure the Move tool is still se-
lected, click back on the 3D layer, and then 
use the 3D Mode tools at the right end of 
the Options Bar to manipulate the postcard 
in 3D space. These tools do take some time 
to get used to if you have never used them 
before, so be patient and play with them 
for a while to get better acquainted with 
how they work. Here, I used the Orbit, Pan, 
and Slide tools and positioned the text at 
an extreme angle with the red text in view. 
Once in place, press-and-hold the Option 
(PC: Alt) key, and you’ll see a small target 
icon appear in place of the cursor. This 
allows you to set the focal point. So, just 
click on the image where you want it to be 
in-focus. Try it all over to see the different 
results. (Note: It’s still fuzzy because it needs 
to be rendered.)

166
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP SEVEN: Go back to the 3D panel and 
click on the Filter By: Lights icon (the light 
bulb icon at the top of the panel), and then 
make sure Environment is selected in the list 
below. Over in the Properties panel, turn 
off the IBL (Image Based Light) checkbox. 
This will basically turn the lights off and 
make it dark. Go back to the 3D panel, 
click on the Add New Light to Scene icon  
(the light bulb icon) at the bottom of the 
panel, and choose New Point Light. Then, 
back in the Properties panel, click on the 
Move to View icon to bring the light up 
front. Now, use the 3D Mode tools again 
to position the light just above the text like 
you see here. The light bulb icon near the 
top right, here, indicates where the light is 
outside the window. 
STEP EIGHT: Once the light is in place and the 
focal point is set, go ahead and render the 
image by going under the 3D menu and 
choosing Render 3D Layer. If you need to 
make any adjustments, you can stop the 
render at any time by pressing the Esc key. 
Final

167
Chapter 9: 3D Effects
Here is another quick and easy way to add 
3D to your design without a lot of 3D train-
ing. All you need is a texture and a little text. 
STEP ONE: Press Command-O (PC: Ctrl-O) 
and open the texture image you want to 
use or open the one I’m using here (you can 
download it from the book’s companion 
webpage, mentioned in the book’s intro-
duction). Grab the Horizontal Type tool (T), 
set a text layer, and then input some text.  
A nice thick font will work best, but be sure 
to try different ones. Here, I am using Futura 
Extra Bold and set the word METAL in all 
caps at around 100 pt. For the color, click 
on the color swatch in the Options Bar, and 
then just click to sample a light gray from 
the background to fill the text with.
Quick 3D Text & 2D Texture Blend
STEP TWO: Once the text is set, click on the 
Move tool in the Toolbox, then go under 
the 3D menu and choose New 3D Extru-
sion from Selected Layer. This will extrude 
the text. (Note: I turned off the default 3D 
Ground Plane here, by going under the 
View menu, and choosing it under Show.)
STEP THREE: Now, select the texture layer  
in the Layers panel and press Command-J  
(PC: Ctrl-J) to make a duplicate, and then 
go under 3D menu again, under New Mesh 
from Layer, and choose Postcard. We need 
to merge these two 3D objects together, 
but when you merge one layer with anoth-
er, it assumes the properties of the bottom 
layer. So, in order to keep the lighting of 
the text, click-and-drag the texture post-
card layer above the text layer in the layer 
stack, then press Command-E (PC: Ctrl-E) 
to merge it down.
©ADOBE STOCK/MEXRIX

168
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP FOUR: In the 3D panel, select Environ-
ment. Then, in the Properties panel, set the 
IBL Intensity slider to 50%. 
STEP FIVE: At the top of the 3D panel, click 
on the Filter By: Lights icon (it looks like a 
light bulb), and select the default Infinite 
Light. Then, go to the Properties panel, 
choose Point from the Type menu, and click 
on the Move to View icon. Also, set the In-
tensity to around 100% and the Softness to 
50%. Now, use the 3D Mode tools, at the 
right end of the Options Bar, to position the 
light just above and to the left of the text 
(here, I used the Drag and Pan tools). You 
can see the shadow move as you move  
the light. 

169
Chapter 9: 3D Effects
Final

170
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
True Beveled Text with 3D
We all know that you can bevel text in Photo-
shop using layer styles, but that is just an 
illusion of a beveled edge. With three 
simple 3D tricks, you can achieve actual 
beveled-edged text and graphics. You can 
also light it and add texture in very dra-
matic ways.
STEP ONE: Begin by pressing Command-O 
(PC: Ctrl-O) and opening the start file for this 
exercise (which you can download from the  
book’s companion webpage, mentioned in 
the book’s introduction). I have already for-
matted the text in in a font called Mauritius 
Bold, which is part of Typekit. You should 
have this font, but if not, in the font menu in 
the Options Bar, click on the Typekit icon on 
the far right to open Typekit and search for 
it, or you can replace it with something close. 
Here, I have the fictional title The Beast of 
Burden. (No, I am not that big a Stones fan.)
STEP TWO: With the text layer selected, go 
under the 3D menu and choose New 3D 
Extrusion from Selected Layer. This will put 
a large extrusion on the text, but we do not 
need any extrusion at all in this case. (Note: 
I turned off the default 3D Ground Plane 
here, by going under the View menu, and 
choosing it under Show.)
STEP THREE: So, go to the 3D panel and 
select the main text layer item in the list. 
Then, go to the Properties panel and set the 
Extrusion Depth to 1 px.

171
Chapter 9: 3D Effects
STEP FOUR: Next, select Environment at the 
top of the list in the 3D panel. Then, in the 
Ground Plane section in the Properties pan-
el, set the Shadows Opacity to 1%. 
STEP FIVE: Click back on the main text layer 
item in the 3D panel, then click on the Cap 
icon at the top of the Properties panel (it’s 
the third one from the left). Under Bevel, 
set the Width to 100%.
STEP SIX: Now, go back to 3D panel and 
select The Beast of Burden Front Bevel Ma-
terial. In the Properties panel, set the Shine 
to 75% and the Reflection to 100%. Also, 
set the Roughness to 10 to soften the re-
flection. At this point, you should see the 
default IBL (Image Based Light) reflected in 
the text. 

172
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP SEVEN: Next, open the abstract chrome 
texture. Press Command-A (PC: Ctrl-A) to 
select the entire image, and then copy it 
to the clipboard by pressing Command-C 
(PC: Ctrl-C). Go back to our main image 
and replace the default IBL by selecting 
Environment in the 3D panel, then clicking 
on the icon to the right of the IBL preview 
in the Properties panel and choosing New 
Texture from the pop-up menu. Go ahead 
and click OK when the New dialog appears, 
then go back into the IBL pop-up menu and 
choose Edit Texture. When the IBL image 
window opens, press Command-V (PC: 
Ctrl-V) to paste the chrome texture image 
into it. Then, just close the document and 
save the changes. Also, drop the IBL Inten-
sity setting to 75% and set the Shadows 
Opacity to around 1%. 
STEP EIGHT: You’ll now see a ghost image in 
the background and a small sphere in the 
center. These are just visual aids to help you 
position the IBL—think of it as a translucent 
ball around the text. You can use the 3D 
Mode tools, at the right end of the Options 
Bar, to move the IBL around to get a differ-
ent look on the text surface. 
©ADOBE STOCK/ZOZULINSKYI

173
Chapter 9: 3D Effects
STEP NINE: Now, let’s add some imper-
fections to this. Here, we have a simple 
stone texture image. Start by removing 
the color by pressing Command-Shift-U 
(PC: Ctrl-Shift-U). Make a duplicate of the 
Background layer by pressing Command-J 
(Ctrl-J), and then change the duplicate’s 
blend mode to Screen. Make a couple more 
duplicates to lighten the background more, 
and then flatten the image back down to 
one layer by choosing Flatten Image from 
the Layers panel’s flyout menu. Finally, 
select the image, and then copy it to the 
clipboard like we did before.
STEP 10: Back in our main image, go to the 
3D panel and select The Beast of Burden 
Front Bevel Material, again. Then, in the 
Properties panel, go to the Bump setting, 
click on the folder icon to its right, and 
choose New Texture from the pop-up 
menu. Photoshop should remember the 
dimensions of the stone texture image in 
the clipboard, so just click OK. When the 
document opens, paste the stone texture in 
this canvas, then close the document and 
save the changes. You will immediately see 
the little dings in the chrome. 
STEP 11: You can adjust this texture’s posi-
tion by going back into the Bump pop-up 
menu and choosing Edit UV Properties. 
Now, I prefer to use the scrubby sliders in 
the Texture Properties dialog, by placing my 
cursor over a setting name, and then click-
ing-and-dragging left/right. The change is 
live, so you can see it on the object. Here, 
I only adjusted the Scale. Click OK when 
done, and then decrease the Bump setting 
to 3%.
©ADOBE STOCK/OLGA KOVALENKO

174
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
STEP 12: Back in the 3D panel, select the de-
fault Infinite Light near the top of the list. In 
the Properties panel, go to the Type menu, 
and choose Point to change it. Then, click on 
the Color swatch just below, choose a gold-
ish yellow color from the Color Picker, and 
then boost the Intensity to around 110%. 
Click on the Move to View icon below to 
place it in front, then use the 3D Mode 
tools to reposition it, if needed. (Note: You 
can make your background black, like I did 
here, by clicking on the Background layer 
in the Layers panel, pressing Shift-Delete 
[PC: Shift-Backspace], and then choosing 
Black from the Contents pop-up menu.)
Now, just choose Render 3D Layer from the 
3D menu, and you are pretty much done (or 
continue on to the bonus tips up next). I just 
added some small flares (see Chapter 6) as  
a finishing touch, here. 
BONUS TIPS: Now, at this point, you can be 
done, but I wanted to show you a couple 
more things to demonstrate the flexibility 
of 3D in Photoshop.
TIP #1: Say you want the text to be gold, 
rather than silver. Well, click on Environ-
ment in the 3D panel, then choose Edit 
Texture from the IBL pop-up menu to open 
the IBL image of the abstract chrome. Click 
on the Add New Adjustment Layer icon at 
the bottom of the Layers panel and choose 
Hue/Saturation. In the Properties panel, 
turn on the Colorize checkbox, then set 
the Hue to around 35 and the Saturation 
to around 50. Close the IBL image and save 
the changes. Voila! Gold text. 

175
Chapter 9: 3D Effects
TIP #2: Also, say you wanted to adjust the 
font or even change the text itself. Go to 
the 3D panel and choose the main text 
item in the list. At the bottom of the Prop-
erties panel, click on the Edit Source button 
to open the original text file. Now, you can 
make whatever changes you want. Here,  
I made the font regular instead of bold and 
eliminated the word “The.” Just close and 
save the changes, and your text is updated 
with all the 3D effects still intact. You may 
need to make a few minor tweaks, depend-
ing on the changes that you make, but it’s 
much better than starting all over again. 
Final

176
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
INDEX
3D effects, 16, 163
beveled text, 170
macro effects, 164
text, 16, 167
tricks, 16
3D Ground Plane 
turning off, 170
3D layers
converting to Smart Object, 17
3D menu, see specific menu options
3D Mode tools 
Drag, 168
Orbit, 17, 165
Pan, 165, 168
Slide, 16, 165
3D panel
Add New Light to Scene icon, 166
Current View settings, 16, 165
Environment options, 168, 171, 172, 174
Filter By: Lights icon, 166, 168
Front Bevel Material, 171
New Point Light, 166
Roughness setting, 171
3D Text, 167
50% Gray
filling with, 78, 98, 119, 129, 139, 148
90° Counter Clockwise adjustment, 96
A
Add a Layer Style icon, 2, 10, 38, 40, 46, 49, 54, 61, 
76, 84, 86, 98, 107, 120, 148, 153
Add Layer Mask icon, 3, 15, 31, 51, 57, 60, 66, 69,  
74, 90, 94, 101, 147, 152, 154, 157, 158
Add Noise filter, 96
Adjustment layers
Black & White, 7
Hue/Saturation, 46, 57, 138, 159
Gradient Map, 76, 80, 124, 126
Levels, 125, 126, 138
Adobe Capture, 99
Adobe Photoshop CC Brushes, 99
Adobe Stock, 84
Adobe Typekit, 170
Artistic filter, 153
Average filter, 87
B
Background color
setting, 11, 71, 89, 96, 134, 145
Background Contents, 
setting the, 27, 30, 37, 78, 87, 118, 164
Background layer
duplicating the, 57
filling the, 126
turning off the, 26, 54, 64, 94, 
112, 118, 152
beveled text, 170
Blend If, 28, 61
blend modes
Color, 35
Color Burn, 47, 61
Color Dodge, 70
Difference, 9, 81, 125, 132, 148, 155
Hard Light, 59, 61, 86
Linear Burn, 76, 109, 152, 154
Linear Dodge (Add), 91, 117
Linear Light, 109
Multiply,  5, 45, 60, 66, 70, 76, 85, 88,  
90, 94, 107, 128, 135, 139
Normal, 147
Overlay, 5, 7, 12, 21, 23, 24, 27, 30, 33, 38, 40,  
49, 54, 55, 95, 106, 145, 153, 154, 160
Screen, 71, 98, 110, 112, 160, 173
Soft Light, 41, 125
blend photos, 20, 78
blend textures, 11
Blending Options, 27, 28, 61, 91
Blur filter, 50, 70, 87, 111, 160
bokeh effect, 106
book’s companion webpage, 12, 79, 114, 144,  
150, 156, 167, 170
book’s downloads page, 4, 6, 28, 56, 64, 68, 87, 
93, 100, 109, 118, 126, 135
brush effects
cinematic flare brush, 114
custom brush, 48
painting color using photos, 134

177
Index
Brush options panel
Brush Tip Shape, 3, 49, 101, 106, 134
Color Dynamics, 134
Pen Pressure, 119
Scattering, 106
Shape Dynamics, 3, 106, 119, 134, 152
Size Jitter Control, 119
Transfer, 66, 106, 124, 134
Brush Picker, 3, 24, 49, 66, 124, 152
Brush tool, 3, 11, 12, 24, 49, 66, 75, 101, 106, 
114, 116, 119, 124, 134, 152, 160
brushes
defining, 48, 114, 134
saving, 108
downloading, 11
Brushes library, 99
Brushes list, 99
C
channels
inverting, 24
loading as selection, 33, 94, 112
making a duplicate of, 24
return to color image with, 25
Channels panel, 12, 30, 33, 51, 53, 94,  
100, 112, 127, 144, 150
Character panel
adjusting text in the, 2, 27
clipping mask, 15, 38, 74, 80, 119, 139, 146
color blend effect, 134
color effects, 123
Color Picker, 7, 8, 48, 107, 130, 135, 164
Colorize checkbox, 65, 69
commercial effects, 129
compositing, 87, 136, 114
Convert to Smart Object, 17, 79
copy to clipboard, 172
Create a New Layer icon, 7, 26, 37, 48, 49, 54,  
78, 84, 98, 101, 106, 114, 119, 127,  
135, 138, 148, 154, 160, 165
Create New Adjustment Layer icon, 57, 76, 80,  
95, 102, 138, 147, 159, 174
Create New Channel icon, 150
create new document, 6, 10, 25, 30, 37, 48, 54,  
59, 64, 73, 78, 84, 87, 96, 106, 126,  
129, 136, 145, 151, 156, 164
Create New Tool Preset icon, 108, 135
Creative Cloud, 99
Custom Shape tool, 109
D
Define Brush Preset, 48, 114, 134
Define Pattern, 2, 10, 20, 26, 37, 54, 78, 97
defining a texture, 37
Defringe, 89, 132, 144, 158
desaturate
command, 35, 37, 64, 73, 75, 137, 146
deselect
command, 31, 71, 100, 127, 154, 156
design elements, 118
Direct Selection tool, 22, 131
Distort filter, 116
double exposure effect, 73
duotone effect, 126
duplicate image, 139
duplicate, layer or selection
command, 69, 79, 87, 90, 156, 157, 167, 173
E
Edge Detection Radius slider, 136
Edit menu, see specific menu options
Ellipse shape tool, 78
Elliptical Marquee tool
making ovals with the, 154
Eraser tool, 112
Expand
selection, 14
extracting
subject from background, 24
Eye icon, 64, 69, 78, 94, 112, 118, 144, 152
Eyedropper tool, 60, 140

178
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
INDEX
F
fade, 31
File menu, see specific menu options
Fill 
dialog, 12, 24, 27, 30, 33, 50, 71, 119, 139
layer or selection, 48, 84, 101, 127, 156
opacity, 98
open command,  27, 37, 78, 129, 148, 154, 156
Filter Gallery, 59, 66, 153
Filter menu, see specific menu options
Find Edges filter, 64
flares, 116
Flatten Image, 139, 173
Flip Horizontal, 34, 74, 118, 132
Flip Vertical, 158
Foreground and Background colors
setting to defaults, 89, 96, 100, 124, 134
Foreground color
setting, 11, 30, 48, 49, 58, 60, 67, 71, 74, 95, 101, 
107, 116, 126, 135, 140, 145, 152, 158
FOV (Field of View) setting, 165
Free Transform
activating,  6, 23, 27, 30, 31, 38, 45, 46, 
 51, 54, 59, 87, 93, 102, 110, 
 118, 127, 130, 137, 154, 158
flip horizontal using, 34, 74, 118
resizing and scaling with, 6, 23, 64, 69, 73, 79,  
89, 94, 145, 151, 154, 156
scaling and rotating with, 90
G
Gaussian Blur filter, 50, 70, 96, 111, 141, 160
Google, 114
Gradient Editor, 76, 80
Gradient Map
removing color with, 53, 89, 100, 126, 134
Gradient Picker,  5, 28, 31, 50, 58, 60, 74, 90, 95, 
138, 145
Gradient tool, 28, 31, 35, 50, 58, 61, 71, 74,  
90, 95, 138, 147, 158, 159
gradients
Black, White, 41
Foreground to Background, 5
Foreground to Transparent, 58, 74, 95, 138,  
140, 145, 158, 160
linear, 71, 138, 158
radial, 28, 31, 50, 58, 74, 91, 95, 140, 145
Grain filter, 35, 59, 66
graphic effects, 43
grouping layers, 10, 70
grunge style effects, 150
guides, 129, 156
H
HDR Toning adjustment, 139
High Pass filter, 6
highlights (white) eyedropper, 93
Hollywood effects, 30, 136, 143
Horizontal Type tool, 2, 8, 10, 14, 16, 22, 27, 35, 41,  
47, 52, 55, 58, 60, 86, 91, 95, 128, 133, 164, 167
HUD graphic elements, 53, 148
Hue/Saturation
adjustment, 35, 46, 60, 90, 102, 140, 159
open command, 65, 69, 153
I
IBL (Image Based Light), 166, 168, 171
Image menu, see specific menu options
Image Rotation, 87
Infinite Light, 174
Input Levels, 45, 94, 96, 100
Inverse, 69, 75, 131, 144
Invert, 13, 24, 30, 51, 69, 88, 100, 114, 146, 150, 157
iPhone, 128
J
Jurassic World movie, 2

179
Index
L
Lasso tool, 34
layer masks
add, 3, 15, 31, 51, 57, 60, 66, 69, 74, 90,  
94, 101, 147, 152, 154, 157, 158
add black (Hide All), 33, 57, 152
inverting, 13
Layer menu, see specific menu options
Layer Style dialog, 2, 3, 5, 9, 21
Advanced Blending section, 55
Blend If options, 46, 86, 91
Pattern Picker, 84
Reverse checkbox, 76
Underlying Layer slider, 91
using the, 2
layer styles
add, 2, 10, 38, 40, 46, 49, 54, 61, 76, 
84, 86, 98, 107, 120, 148, 153
Bevel & Emboss, 11, 22
Blending Options, 27, 55, 86, 148, 154
Color Overlay, 5
Drop Shadow, 5, 9, 22, 41, 109, 128
Gradient Overlay, 5, 40, 49, 76, 85, 120
Outer Glow, 109, 114, 117, 120
Pattern Overlay, 2, 10, 21, 27, 38, 54,  
61, 84, 98, 148
Stroke, 55, 107
layers
blending options, 46
clipping, 15, 38, 74, 80, 119, 139, 146
convert to Smart Object, 17, 79
create new, 4, 7, 10, 26, 30, 37, 48, 54, 
61, 78, 84, 98, 101, 106, 114, 119,  
127, 135, 138, 148, 154, 160, 165
create new below, 101
drag-and-drop, 27, 45, 93, 110
duplicating, 64, 69, 79, 87, 90, 157, 167, 173
fill with 50% gray, 54
grouping, 10, 70
load as a selection, 15
merge down, 167
merge visible, 34, 69, 144
shape, 20, 21, 22, 23, 39, 56, 129
unlock, 97
Levels adjustment, 13, 46, 53, 64, 74, 75, 93, 96,  
100, 114, 125, 126, 133, 138 150
Levels dialog
highlights (white) eyedropper, 93
Input Levels sliders, 45, 93, 94, 96, 97, 100
Libraries panel, 99
light effects, 105
light flare, 114, 140
light rings, 114
light streak effect, 118
Line tool, 26
Linear Gradient icon, 71, 138, 158
lines, drawing, 26
Link icon, 51
Load Selection, 13, 25
Lock icon, 97
Lock Transparent Pixels icon, 145, 160
Lorem Ipsum, 164
luminosity, 75, 94
M
macro effects, 3D, 164
Magic Wand tool, 136, 158
Matting, 89, 112, 144, 158
Maximum filter, 65
Merge Visible, 34, 69, 144
motion blur effect, 112
Move to View icon, 166, 168, 174
Move tool, 6, 13, 17, 27, 30, 31, 33, 38, 41, 45,  
50, 59, 64, 73, 87, 93, 102, 110, 118,  
127, 132, 137, 157, 159, 165, 167
movie posters, 136
N
New
document, 6, 10, 25, 30, 37, 48, 54, 59, 64,  
73, 78, 84, 87, 96, 106, 116, 118,  
126, 129, 136, 145, 151, 156, 164
New 3D Extrusion from Selected Layer, 167, 170
New Guide Layout, 8, 37
New Mesh from Layer, 16, 165, 167
New Point Light, 166

180
Photoshop Tricks for Designers
INDEX
O
Offset filter, 84, 97
Open
image,  6, 10, 12, 20, 54, 56, 59, 64, 68, 
73, 79, 87, 131, 151, 156, 167, 170
Options Bar, 3, 8
Output To menu, 73, 136
P
paint, 114
painted color effects, 134
panels, see specific panels
paste command, 172
Paste Lorem Ipsum, 164
Patch tool, 97
Path Operations icon, 20, 26, 39
Path Selection tool, 39, 120
paths,
transform, 22, 39, 40
Paths panel, 56, 119, 120
Pattern Picker, 21, 27, 38, 61
Pen Pressure, 3, 66
Pen tool
creating path with the, 119
photo effects, 63
Photographic Toning presets, 76, 80
Photoshop, 99
Photoshop Libraries panel, 99
Pinterest, 78
Polar Coordinates filter, 116
Polygon tool, 48
Postcard, 165, 167
Poster Edges filter, 153
pressure-sensitive tablet, 66
Properties panel, 3D
camera setting for FOV, 16
Cap settings, 171
Edit Texture, 172
Edit UV Properties, 173
Extrusion Depth, 170
Ground Plane section, 171
IBL (Image Based Light) checkbox, 166
IBL Intensity slider, 168
Infinite Light, 174
Move to View icon, 166, 168, 174
New Texture, 172, 173
Point, 168, 174
Reflection, 171
Shine, 171
Puppet Warp, 110
Q
Quick Mask
mode, 50
options, 49
Quick Selection tool, 14, 56, 68, 73, 88, 131
R
Radial Gradient icon, 28, 39, 50, 74, 91, 95, 140
Rectangle tool, 20, 39, 56, 129
Rectangular Marquee tool, 37, 69, 119, 156, 159
Refine Edge
dialog, 13, 14, 25, 68, 73, 89, 131, 136
Edge Detection Radius, 136
Output To menu, 73, 136
Refine Radius tool, 73, 68, 131, 136
Remove Black Matte, 112
removing color, 30, 35, 37, 44, 50, 53, 
59, 114, 118, 132, 173
Render 3D Layer, 17, 166, 174
reveal color, 124
Reverse checkbox, 5, 41, 76
rotate image 180°, 75
rulers, 25, 68, 129, 156
S
Save, 25
Select All
command, 26, 108, 172
select image command, 74
Select menu, see specific menu options

181
Index
selections
add areas to, 136
click-and-drag out, 37
copy to a new layer, 13, 25, 53, 70, 112, 
118, 144, 151, 158, 159
duplicate, 167, 173
expand, 14
fill, 30, 33
inverse, 131, 136
load, 13, 25
load channel as, 112
load image brightness as, 100
load light areas as, 53, 127
load luminosity as, 75, 94
load shape as, 30
shape
layers, 20, 21, 22, 23, 30, 39, 56, 129
subtract from existing, 40
Shape Dynamics, 3, 106, 119, 134
shape tools, 48
Show, 170
Show Mesh checkbox, 110
silhouettes, 144
Simulate Pressure checkbox, 119
Skew, 22, 27, 39, 120, 130
Smart Objects
convert to, 17, 79
smart phone, 99
Snap, 130
Snap To Guides, 68
spark elements, 109
sports-ad-inspired effect, 20
stroke, 20, 26
stroke path, 119, 120
Stylize filter, 64
T
text
adjust tracking and leading, 27
beveled, 170
duplicate layer, 23
set layer, 14, 16, 27
text effects
stone age, 2
texture effects, 83
Texture filter, 35, 66
tool modes, 12, 48, 56, 78, 129
tool preset, 108, 135
tools, see specific tools
Transform, 22, 23, 27, 28, 30, 31, 
34, 38, 39, 40, 112, 120
Trash icon, 97
type effects, 1
U
Underlying Layer slider, 91
unlock layer, 97
V
vector elements, 37
View menu, see specific menu options
vignette effect, 76
W
Warp
grid, 112
remove pin, 110
transform using, 34, 40, 75, 112
vector path, 40
Wind filter, 96

This is your friendly reminder from the world around you. You can make something 
today that didn’t exist yesterday. You can try something that’s never been done before
or just try something that you’ve never done before. But just doing something is the 
first step towards doing something great. Fuel your creativity.
Easy online training from the best in Photoshop, Lightroom & Photography                     kelbyone.com

