
Physics for Animators
Achieving believable motion in animation requires an understanding of 
physics that most of us missed out on in art school. Although animators 
often break the laws of physics for comedic or dramatic eff ect, you need to 
know which laws you’re breaking in order to make it work. And while large 
studios might be able to spend a lot of time and money testing diff erent 
approaches or hiring a physics consultant, smaller studios and independent 
animators have no such luxury. This book takes the mystery out of physics 
tasks like character motion, light and shadow placement, explosions, ocean 
movement, and outer space scenes, making it easy to apply realistic physics 
to your work.
• 
Physics concepts are explained in animator’s terms, relating concepts 
specifi cally to animation movement and appearance.
• 
Complex mathematical concepts are broken down into clear steps you 
can follow to solve animation problems quickly and eff ectively.
• 
Bonus companion website at www.physicsforanimators.com off ers 
additional resources, including examples in movies and games, links to 
resources, and tips on using physics in your work.
Uniting theory and practice, author Michele Bousquet teaches animators 
how to swiftly and effi  ciently create scientifi cally accurate scenes and fi x 
problem spots, and how and when to break the laws of physics. Ideal for 
everything from classical 2D animation to advanced CG special eff ects, this 
book provides animators with solutions that are simple, quick, and powerful.
Michele Bousquet is a longtime animator and instructor, and the author of 
more than 20 books on computer animation. Her freelance animation work 
has served clients like Autodesk and the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, 
and she has taught university-level animation classes at countless locations, 
including several art institutes. After years of answering questions about 
physics from animation students, Michele took on the task of formulating the 
answers into this book. Michele holds a Bachelor’s degree in Mathematics 
and Computer Science from McGill University.

This page intentionally left blank

Physics for Animators
Michele Bousquet
with Alejandro Garcia
Boca Raton  London  New York
CRC Press is an imprint of the
Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
A FOCAL PRESS BOOK

CRC Press 
Taylor & Francis Group 
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300 
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2016 Taylor & Francis
CRC Press is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business 
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. 
Reasonable eff orts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the 
author and publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or 
the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace 
the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize 
to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If 
any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know 
so we may rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, 
reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, 
or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, 
microfi lming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without 
written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please 
access www.copyright.com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright 
Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. 
CCC is a not-for-profi t organization that provides licenses and registration for a variety 
of users. For organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a 
separate system of payment has been arranged.
 Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered 
trademarks, and are used only for identifi cation and explanation without intent to 
infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
A catalog record for this book has been requested.
ISBN: 978-0-415-84298-3 (hbk) 
ISBN: 978-0-415-84297-6 (pbk) 
ISBN: 978-0-203-75825-0 (ebk)
Typeset in Myriad 
by Apex CoVantage, LLC
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at http://www.taylorandfrancis.com and the CRC 
Press Web site at http://www.crcpress.com 

Contents
Acknowledgements 
xv
Foreword 
xvii
Introduction 
1
SECTION 1 
CLASSICAL PHYSICS 
5
 1 Matter and Masses 
7
Matter 
7
Composition of Matter 
9
Atoms and Binding 
11
Nuclear Fusion 
13
Masses 
14
Mass vs. Weight 
14
Center of Mass 
15
 2 Motion and Timing 
17
Motion Lines and Paths 
17
Linear Motion 
18
Circular Motion 
19
Types of Circular Motion 
19
Rotational Motion 
20
Rotation and Distance 
20
Calculating the Number of Times a Wheel Turns 
21
Spinning, Tumbling, and Wobbling 
21
Centripetal Motion 
24
When Centripetal Force Stops 
26
Circular Speed 
26
Centrifugal Force 
28
Centripetal Force and Vehicles 
30
Pendulum Motion 
32
Wave Motion 
34

vi 
C O N T E N T S
 
What Waves Do 
34
Visibility of Waves 
34
Types of Waves 
34
Transverse Waves 
35
Longitudinal Waves 
36
Wave Properties 
37
Wave Relations 
40
Wave Phase 
40
Wave Addition and Cancellation 
41
Standing Waves 
42
Common Sound Eff ects 
43
Resonance 
43
Doppler Eff ect 
44
Sonic Boom 
45
Timing 
46
Timing Tools 
46
Uniform Motion Timing 
46
Slow In and Slow Out 
48
Acceleration Timing 
48
Constant Forces 
49
Forces Exerted by Characters 
49
Constant Force and Acceleration 
50
The Odd Rule 
50
Odd Rule Multipliers 
51
Odd Rule Scenarios 
52
Motion Graphs 
55
Constant Speed 
55
Acceleration 
55
Acceleration of Gravity 
56
Swinging 
56
 3 Forces 
57
Components of Force 
60
Familiar and Unfamiliar Forces 
60
Familiar, Non-Random Forces 
61
Unfamiliar Forces 
61
Variable Forces 
62
Gravity 
62
Gravitational Acceleration 
62
Common Misconceptions about Gravity 
63
Timing for Gravity 
64
Calculating Total Time and Distance 
64
Physics-Based Calculations 
64
Visual Calculation Methods 
65
The Odd Rule 
65
Fourth Down at Half Time 
66

C O N T E N T S     vii
Falling à la Chai 
67
Moving and Falling 
67
Ascending Against Gravity 
68
Projectile Velocity 
68
Center of Gravity 
70
Line of Gravity 
71
Tipping and Center of Gravity 
71
Lowering and Raising the CG 
73
Friction 
74
Static and Kinetic Friction 
74
Friction on Flat Surfaces 
76
Frictionless Surfaces 
76
Coeffi  cient of Friction 
76
Eff ects of Friction 
77
Pressure and Gases 
78
Pressure Increase from Heat 
79
Heated Gas in a Container 
80
Heated Air in Atmosphere 
80
Chemical Reaction 
82
Force from Pressure Decrease 
84
Atmospheric Pressure 
84
Air Resistance 
85
Aerodynamic Lift 
86
Pressure Diff erences in Action 
86
Torque 
87
Torque Basics 
88
Torque Terminology 
88
Maximizing Torque 
88
Visualizing Torque 
89
Calculating Torque 
89
Lever Systems 
90
Effi  ciency vs. Speed 
91
Neutral Effi  ciency 
93
Lever System Classes 
93
First Class Systems 
93
Second Class Levers 
93
Third Class Levers 
94
Balancing Torque in a Lever System 
95
Increasing Leverage 
95
Torque in Animation 
96
Rotational Inertia 
96
Action/Reaction 
98
Action/Reaction and Balanced Forces 
98
Action/Reaction with Two Mobile Objects 
98
Action/Reaction and Weight 
99
Action/Reaction and Fixed Objects 
100

viii 
C O N T E N T S
 
Electricity and Magnetism 
101
Electricity 
101
Electrical Charge 
102
Static Electricity 
102
Flowing Electricity 
103
Electric Shock 
106
Sparks and Lightning 
107
Magnetism 
107
Magnetic Fields 
107
Visualizing Electricity and Magnetism 
111
Electric Shock 
111
Electric Current 
111
Magnetism 
112
EMPs 
113
 4 Light and Color 
115
Light Basics 
116
Light as Rays 
116
Light and Refl ection 
117
Seeing in a Mirror 
118
Bouncing Light Rays 
119
Attenuation 
121
Physically Based Lights 
122
Shadows 
123
Cast Shadows 
124
Umbra and Penumbra 
125
Sharp and Fuzzy Shadows 
127
Shadow Angle 
128
Light Source Shapes 
130
Shadow Intensity 
131
Form and Occlusion Shadows 
132
Refl ection 
134
Specular Refl ection 
135
Diff use Refl ection 
136
Diff use Refl ection and Light Intensity 
137
Detecting Shape and Color 
139
Diff use vs. Specular Refl ections 
139
Diff use Interrefl ection 
141
Partial Refl ections 
142
Refraction 
145
Caustics 
148
Gamma Correction 
151
Linear vs. Curved Light Intensity 
152
Gamma Correction for Real-World Perception 
153
Gamma Correction and Cameras 
154
Gamma Correction on Digital Files 
156

C O N T E N T S     ix
Gamma Calculations 
156
Monitor Gamma Adjustment 
157
RGB Gamma Curves 
158
Linear Workfl ow 
158
SECTION 2 
CHARACTER DESIGN AND ANIMATION 
161
 5 Character Design 
163
Size and Scale 
163
Proportion and Scale 
165
Weight and Strength 
167
Physical Characteristics and Size 
169
Posture 
169
Deformability 
170
Wing Size and Shape 
170
Climate 
171
Longevity 
172
Sound 
173
Babyness 
173
Joints 
175
Types of Joints 
176
Animal Joints 
178
Joints as Levers 
179
Elbow 
179
Foot 
180
Neck 
180
Muscles for Joints 
180
Weight Distribution 
181
Character Center of Gravity 
182
Balance 
183
Improving Balance 
185
 6 Character Animation 
189
Jumping 
189
Parts of a Jump 
190
Calculating Jump Actions 
192
Calculating Jump Timing 
192
Jump Magnifi cation 
193
Push Time 
195
Push Key Spacing 
196
Motion Arc and Jump Timing 
197
Landing 
198
Stop Time 
198
Very High Jumps 
199

x 
C O N T E N T S
 
Walking 
201
Poses 
201
Strides and Steps 
202
Walk Timing 
202
Walking and Energy Effi  ciency 
203
Hip Rotation 
204
Shoulder Rotation 
205
Dancing and Gymnastics 
205
Torque and Turning 
205
Balance with Multiple Characters 
206
Gymnastics Lever Systems 
206
Lifting Weight 
208
Shifting Body Weight 
209
Sitting and Standing 
209
Getting Hit 
210
Fight Scenes 
210
Momentum and Force of Impact 
211
Changing Momentum 
211
Force and Changing Momentum 
212
Action/Reaction and Changing Momentum 
213
Recoil 
214
Tipping Over 
215
Rotational Inertia and Tipping 
216
Tipping and Friction 
217
Drag and Follow Through 
217
Drag 
218
Follow Through 
218
Overlapping Action 
219
Length and Motion 
219
Surface Area and Motion 
221
SECTION 3 
VISUAL EFFECTS 
223
 7 Environment 
225
Clouds 
225
What’s in a Cloud 
226
Types of Clouds 
226
Cloud Altitudes 
227
Inside a Cloud 
228
Movement of Clouds 
229
Cloud Eff ects 
229
Cloud Combinations 
229
God Rays 
230
Backlit Clouds 
230

C O N T E N T S     xi
Rain 
232
Rain Formation 
232
Types of Rain Clouds 
233
More about Rain Clouds 
237
Wind and Rain 
237
Where Rain Forms 
237
Predicting Rain 
237
Weather from the West 
238
Raindrops 
238
Falling Raindrops 
238
Invisible Raindrops: Puddle Eff ects 
241
Slow-Moving Raindrops: Windowpane 
241
Lightning 
243
How Lightning Forms 
243
Cloud-to-Cloud Lightning 
244
Lightning Formation and Appearance 
245
Eff ects from Lightning 
247
Thunder 
247
 8 Fire and Explosions 
249
Fire 
249
Flames 
249
Flame Appearance 
250
Creating Flames 
251
Smoldering Solid Matter 
252
Fireball 
252
Mushroom Clouds 
253
Mushroom Clouds in Animation 
254
Smoke 
255
Smoke Appearance 
256
Puff y Smoke 
256
Tendril Smoke 
256
Campfi re Smoke 
257
Explosions 
257
Types of Explosions 
257
Life of an Explosion 
258
Before the Explosion 
259
After the Explosion 
259
Role of Containers 
260
Timing for Explosions 
260
Shockwaves 
260
Shockwaves through Air 
261
Shockwaves through the Ground 
261
Breakage and Fracture 
261
Anatomy of Fracture 
262
Crack Patterns 
262

xii 
C O N T E N T S
 
Inherent Weak Points 
263
Internal Cracks 
263
Animating Breakage 
264
How Physics Engines Determine Fracture 
264
Flying Pieces 
265
 9 Liquid Eff ects 
267
Properties of Liquids 
268
Cohesion 
268
Adhesion 
268
Viscosity 
269
Newtonian and Non-Newtonian Fluids 
271
Solid/Liquid Behavior of Non-Newtonian Fluids 
272
Surface Tension 
273
Buoyancy 
275
Liquid Appearance 
276
Meniscus 
276
Pouring Shapes 
277
Oceans and Lakes 
278
Waves 
278
Wave Terminology 
278
How Ocean Waves Form 
279
Movement of Waves 
280
Breaking Waves 
281
Floating on a Wave 
284
Ocean and Lake Appearance 
286
Water Refl ection 
286
Color of the Ocean 
289
Spray, Mist, and Foam 
289
Shadows on Water 
290
10 Earth and Outer Space 
291
Earth Today 
291
Earth’s Layers 
291
Atmosphere 
293
Atmospheric Levels 
294
Height of Vehicles in Atmosphere 
295
Formation of Earth 
296
Gaseous Earth 
296
Supercontinents 
296
Formation of Modern Landscape 
300
Tectonic Shifts 
300
Volcanism 
302
Bombardment 
303

C O N T E N T S     xiii
Erosion 
303
Glaciers 
304
Earth’s Crust 
304
What’s a Rock? 
305
How Rock Forms 
305
Rock Composition 
306
Rock Classifi cation 
307
Causes of Geology 
307
Geology from Magma 
307
Geology from Compression 
308
Geology from Heat and Pressure 
309
Geology from Buoyancy 
309
Geology from Weathering and Erosion 
309
Designing a Landscape 
310
Usual Rock Colors 
310
Unusual Rock Colors 
311
Life on Earth 
312
Fossils 
313
Meteorites and Life on Earth 
313
Evolution and Diversity 
314
Outer Space 
316
Origin of the Universe 
317
Stars 
318
Galaxies 
320
Properties of Galaxies 
321
Nebulas 
322
The Vacuum of Outer Space 
325
Temperature in a Vacuum 
327
Sound in a Vacuum 
327
Radiation 
328
Index 
331

This page intentionally left blank

Acknowledgements
Many people assisted me in bringing this book to completion. 
The person who gets the bulk of my thanks is Alejandro Garcia, who was 
with me every step of the way. Alejandro supplied not only the basis 
for much of the content via his videos, but also helped me work out the 
best way to accurately explain topics without getting confusing or overly 
technical. 
I enlisted many other experts to help me with the specifi cs of physics as it 
pertains to animation. Jinyu Liu and Zifu Zhu, two Ph.D. candidates in Physics 
at Tulane University, looked over many of the topics in the book to review 
them for accuracy and understandability. Jinyu in particular got what we 
were going for, and eventually became a devotee of the concept of science-
for-art. 
A couple of other experts checked specifi c topics and gave some great 
input for making the text more accurate. Michael Roney, B.A. in Geography, 
a double major B.S. in Resource Conservation, and a Master of Science in 
Forestry from the University of Montana, looked over the Earth geology 
sections. Melissa E. Cheatwood, B.S. Soil, Atmospheric, and Environmental 
Science, University of Columbia, checked out the Environment sections and 
helped me gain a better understanding of the many and varied outcomes 
of weather phenomena. Tamil Periasamy, B.S. Aerospace Engineering with a 
focus on Fluid Dynamics, checked out the Liquid Eff ects chapter. A bonus of 
having these experts on board to answer my questions was that I can now 
determine a landscape’s history just from looking at it, predict whether a 
storm is likely to produce lightning, and get ketchup out of a bottle much 
faster.
A number of animation professionals also looked at the book from the 
standpoint of usefulness for animators. Noted VFX animator Wayne Robson 
read through much of the text for accuracy, and John Howard contributed 
to and edited the Outer Space chapter. Longtime CG and VFX artist Kim Lee 
looked over various chapters, and in particular helped me explain Gamma 
Correction in a way that made sense. David Drew, a traditional artist and 
amateur geologist, contributed a signifi cant portion of the Earth chapter 
and pointed me toward some important concepts, such as why an Earth 
mountain can be gray but not blue or green.

xvi 
A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T S
I’d also like to thank my editor at Focal Press, Haley Swan, for her unending 
patience with me. We went through some ups and downs getting this book 
to press, and I thank her for believing in me and giving me the chance to 
make this book as informative, accurate, and useful as possible to animators 
around the world.

Foreword
Why would animators need physics? This is a question I was asked many 
times over the course of the last few years, whenever I told a non-animator 
I was working on this book. But whenever I mentioned the book’s title to an 
animator, or any kind of artist for that matter, I got smiles, laughs, and the 
occasional hug.
In formal studies of animation, such as university courses, science is often 
given short shrift. In the same way that students of nude drawing and 
sculpture are encouraged to study anatomy, animators, with the need to 
represent motion convincingly, should be well grounded in the basics of 
physics. However, university courses and physics books are aimed at future 
engineers and scientists—they include a lot of information that artists don’t 
need, and leave out vital points that an artist does need.
When seeking the assistance of physics professionals for this book, I had to 
explain over and over that an animator wants to know how it is going to look 
and how will it move. Should it be blue or red, light or dark? Is it big or small, 
and what is its shape? Does it move fast or slow? Physicists aren’t accustomed 
to thinking this way, and more than one asked why artists don’t just read 
physics books to get what they need. But college-level books are heavy on 
equations and require knowledge of advanced mathematics, and science 
books aimed at middle school or high school don’t address the questions 
most important to artists in a way they can easily understand.
I’ve taught computer graphics for over 20 years, and questions about physics 
have frequently come up from both traditional animators and visual eff ects 
artists creating photoreal animation. My degree is in Computer Science, and 
while I’ve taken a few university-level physics courses, I found that I couldn’t 
answer all the students’ questions. So I looked for a book on the subject, 
and there wasn’t one. Realizing that such a book would be greatly useful 
to animators (including me), I decided to undertake the task of researching 
the answers to all the questions I’ve heard, plus a whole lot more. And here 
we are now.
Working on this book required sifting through volumes of information on 
the physics of common animation scenarios. Early on I enlisted the help of 
Alejandro Garcia, a longtime teacher of Animation Physics at San Jose State 
University, and both a Ph.D. in Physics and an accomplished artist. Alejandro 
is also a frequent consultant on physics for animated fi lms at the big studios. 

xviii 
F O R E W O R D
He has a series of videos for his students which he has made freely available 
at http://animationphysics.com. Alejandro graciously allowed me to use the 
information in his videos as the basis of the Character Design and Animation 
section of this book and many other chapters. He also read through the entire 
book and helped me explain many of the fi ner points of physics in a way 
that’s both accurate and helpful to artists.
I’d love to hear from you at the book’s website: http://www.physicsforanimators.
com. On the website are some interesting physics tidbits that aren’t in the 
book, as well as a way to tell me about your own experiences with physics in 
animation and even ask further questions. 
I hope you fi nd this book as useful as I intended it to be, and that you’re able 
to use your newfound knowledge to create more convincing animation and 
keep your audience engaged in your story.
Michele Bousquet

Animation is inherently fake. It’s not real actors on real sets—it’s entirely out 
of someone’s pen, or more commonly these days, from a computer.
In the early days of animation, Disney animators asked themselves an 
important question: “How do we convey the essence of this character/
motion without having to portray every single detail?” A simpler way to ask 
this question is, “How do we fake this?”
While it’s not too hard to copy a drawing of Bambi, the adorable deer that 
stars in the animated fi lm of the same name, arriving at that particular 
representation of a young deer took Disney character designers weeks of 
studying live deer to arrive at a simple, appealing representation. Eff ects 
like water and fi re weren’t practical to animate with complete detail, as 
each drawing would take far too long to complete. Conveying these eff ects 
convincingly while keeping drawing times reasonable was a big challenge 
for early animators. Artists who specialized in these eff ects studied them 
endlessly in real life, and learned the science behind them.
Nowadays we have software to help with the science and produce renderings, 
but no software can do all the work for you. Like animators before you, you’ll 
need to understand what goes on in real life so you can make decisions about 
how to convey motion and eff ects in your work.
Animation, Physics, and Suspension 
of Disbelief
The representation of any story, be it through live theater, fi lm, animation, or 
even a grisly tale told around a campfi re, succeeds only because of the 
audience’s willingness to ignore the fact that it’s just a story. Have you ever 
cried at the end of a movie, or perhaps were moved by an actor’s performance 
to the point where you thought about it for days? You are aware, in your 
logical mind, that the emotional scene you were watching was fake, and that 
out of view there was probably some sound technician yawning and thinking 
about what he was going to serve his kid for dinner. But you got so involved 
in the story that you forgot all that for a period of time.
Introduction

 
2 
I N T R O D U C T I O N
This suspension of disbelief is what every storyteller strives for. The viewer 
forgets for a time that it’s only a story. It’s what keeps you glued to the screen 
to see what happens next. It’s what makes you say, “Wow, that was great!”
Action fi lms in particular walk a very broad line between reality and fi ction 
while still maintaining suspension of belief. The hero gets in a gunfi ght in a 
public place, and somehow manages to avoid all the unpleasant repercussions 
(injured civilians, lawsuits, police investigation, etc.) that would ensue in 
reality. And a few laws of physics are violated when the bad guy, when hit by 
a bullet, is projected backward and off  a rooftop. But if the gunfi ght looks real 
enough, we get caught up in the action and respond emotionally when the 
hero fi nally gets the bad guy.
To keep suspension of disbelief going, the artist has to avoid introducing 
too many elements that will distract viewers and remind them that it’s just a 
story. You have probably been at the receiving end of this type of distraction 
a few times. The scene is supposed to be happening at night, but it kind of 
looks like it’s daytime. The giant boulder is falling and everyone is terrifi ed, 
but when it fi nally lands it looks like a sponge. The character is supposed to 
be struggling to carry a heavy box, but the box somehow doesn’t seem very 
heavy. You were enjoying the story until you got distracted by these errors. 
Too many errors, and you lose interest.
Slapstick comedy doesn’t strive for suspension of disbelief in the same way, 
but even a comedic story with unbelievable action needs motion that’s 
recognizable for what it’s supposed to be. The animated Road Runner series is 
a great example of this. Wile E. Coyote’s inventions disobey the laws of physics 
on a regular basis, but there’s still enough real physics for you to understand 
what’s happening.
At fi rst glance, a science like physics might not seem like a natural partner 
for the emotional concept of suspension of disbelief. However, the two have 
been walking hand in hand since the early days of fi lmmaking. “How do I make 
this convincing?” is a question asked by the fi rst directors of dramatic stories, 
whether live action or animation. As audiences become more sophisticated 
and new software tools are introduced, the bar for faking reality continues 
to inch up.
With a fi rm grasp of physics for animation, you’ll be in a good position to 
make your scenes convincing enough to keep your audience interested and 
achieve suspension of disbelief.
About Physics for Animators
This book contains physics concepts for animators. It is not tutorial based or 
software specifi c. It’s designed for animators who work with traditional 
media, computer graphics, or both. Principles of physics are universal in that 
they can be applied to cartoon-style drawings as well as photoreal CG 
renderings. Where the occasional concept or technique is specifi c to 
Tom Hanks and Tim Allen, the voices of 
Woody and Buzz in Pixar’s Toy Story ﬁ lms, 
both wept while watching the scene in 
Toy Story II where the Jessie doll gets left 
in a donation bin. They were involved in 
its production, and still they cried! That is 
suspension of disbelief at its ﬁ nest.

I N T R O D U C T I O N     3
traditional or CG animation, it is denoted as such. However, by and large the 
concepts in this book can be applied to any animation regardless of style.
Both beginners and advanced animators will fi nd information they can use 
to improve their work. The concepts described here can be used to animate 
in any media from hand-drawn fl ipbooks to games to movie-resolution 
photoreal backdrops and scene enhancement.
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
This book is divided into three sections:
Section 1—Classical Physics includes the laws and rules about things we 
observe and experience every day like gravity and color. Much of classical 
physics was developed by familiar names like Galileo and Newton before 
we had a means for looking at objects at the atomic level. In this book, the 
Classical Physics section covers the building blocks for later topics, such as 
Newton’s Laws of Motion and basic atomic theory. 
Section 2—Character Design and Animation looks at the physics of character 
scale and balance, and common character motion like jumping and fi ghting. 
Many of these topics are covered in great detail in other animation texts, but 
strictly from a visual standpoint. When a character’s motion or balance is a 
bit off  in a way that’s hard to pinpoint, the culprit is often a law of physics 
that’s been violated. This section is designed to complement visual texts by 
helping you make informed decisions about character design and animation, 
and thus keep your audience focused on the story rather than distracting 
them with bad physics.
Section 3—Visual Eff ects covers common VFX needs like animated weather 
and oceans, explosions, drawn or generated landscapes, and trips through 
outer space. You, like visual eff ects artists before you, can certainly take 
liberties with reality; we are all accustomed to seeing movies and games 
where the weather, explosions, or space scenes are technically unrealistic 
but still compelling. The key to such scenes is to have enough real physics to 
make it convincing, and make the story and visuals interesting enough that 
your audience will happily ignore any departures from reality. Understanding 
the physics behind these phenomena will not only help you fi gure out how 
to animate them, but also where to draw the line between reality and fantasy 
to keep your audience engaged. 
If you have some knowledge of physics and you’re interested in animating 
a specifi c type of scene, you can skip right to the topic in Section 2 or 3. In 
these sections, if a topic requires particular concepts from Section 1, these 
topics are outlined at the start of the section or chapter. 
If your knowledge of science is limited, you should start with Section 1 and 
work your way through those topics fi rst. Along the way, you’ll probably 

4 
I N T R O D U C T I O N
fi gure out some ways you can apply them to your animation work 
immediately. Then move on to the topics of specifi c interest in Sections 2 
and 3.
WEBSITE
This book is not software specifi c and does not use tutorial fi les. However, you 
can fi nd lots of great information at our companion website: http://www.
physicsforanimators.com
On the website, you’ll fi nd:
• 
Examples of physics in movies and games, and discussions of what’s 
wrong and what’s right
• 
Links to helpful sites with gravity calculators, images and videos, easy-to-
understand physics explanations, and everyday physics studies
• 
Useful physics tidbits that aren’t in the book.
You can also ask a question about physics in animation, and we’ll answer it 
on the blog if we can. We’re also interested in hearing about how you applied 
the concepts in this book, and will feature selected submissions in our blog. 
Stay Focused and Carry On
Two physicists and a ditchdigger walk into a busy bar, order some beers, and 
sit together at a table. The fi rst physicist sees a waitress coming toward them, 
holding a large tray with several glass mugs of beer above her head. He 
exclaims, “Look at her, balancing that tray! What an excellent example of 
balanced forces.”
The second physicist shakes his head as the waitress reaches their table. “Her 
muscle strength is insuffi  cient. She can’t counter the downward force from 
the weight of the beers, so the forces are unbalanced. Look, she’s lowering 
the tray now! That proves it.”
While the two argue, the ditchdigger is busy taking beers off  the tray and 
drinking them. By the time the physicists are done with their argument, all 
the beer is gone.
This silly joke illustrates an important point about physics, and about science 
in general. There are often several ways to look how things work, leading to 
various formulas or diagrams or theories about what’s going on. But if you 
spend too much time getting mired down in technical details, you’ll miss the 
party. 
Go with the simplest and most direct approach, the one that will get you the 
best animation with the least amount of work. In this book we strive to do 
just that, but you might fi nd even simpler ways to work with physics in your 
animation’s motion and timing. Does your animation convey the story, and 
does it engage your audience without distracting them with bad physics? 
These are the important questions.

S E C T I O N 1 
Classical Physics
In this section, we’ll go over basic physics concepts that apply to animation. 
Any motion in animation generally calls upon more than one physics concept 
at a time. But in order to use these concepts in concert with one another, 
you’ll need to understand the individual concepts and the terminology that 
goes with each one. If there are previously discussed topics that pertain 
directly to the subject, these are listed at the start of the section. This will 
enable you to review any topics necessary before you dive in.
Some concepts relate directly to the “Twelve Basic Principles of Animation” 
put forth by Disney animators Ollie Johnston and Frank Thomas in their 1981 
book The Illusion of Life: Disney Animation. These relationships will be noted 
as they come up.

This page intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 1
Matter and Masses
Matter is a loose scientifi c term that refers to an object or substance. Anything 
you can see or touch is considered matter. How the substance behaves is 
determined, to a large degree, by the type of matter. 
In plain English, the term mass means a blob or hunk of something, as in “A 
giant mass fell from the sky and hit the shed.” In physics, the term mass has a 
diff erent meaning.
In this chapter, we explore matter and masses. Understanding these terms 
and how they relate to physics will help you understand later chapters.
Matter
There are, for the purposes of animation, three types of matter:
Solids—Anything that holds together on its own to form a particular mass 
or shape. Bowling balls, ice, and skin are all considered solids. Solids always 
retain the same volume, and don’t change shape unless a force is applied to 
them.
Solids.

8 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Liquids—A substance that takes the shape of its container, changes shape 
easily, and fl ows when moving. Liquids generally retain the same volume 
regardless of the container. Water, syrup, melted chocolate, and lava are all 
considered liquids.
Liquids.
Gases—A substance that expands and spreads out to take the shape of 
its container and fi ll it up as much as possible, and changes volume as the 
container changes volume. Examples of gases are steam, oxygen, air, and 
propane gas.

 
M A T T E R  A N D  M A S S E S  
9
COMPOSITION OF MATTER
Physics tells us that all matter, whether solid, liquid, or gas, is made up of 
basic units called atoms. An atom is, theoretically, a tiny blob of matter 
surrounded by other blobs of matter that fl oat around it. All the blobs have a 
sort of electrical charge associated with them that binds them together and 
keeps them from fl ying apart.
Gases.
Because atoms are so tiny, we can’t see 
them the way we normally see objects, 
where light reﬂ ects oﬀ  the object and 
into our eyes. Only recently have we 
found ways to “see” atoms by using 
electric current to detect their movement 
patterns.

10 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
To start off  understanding atoms, you can think of an atom as a balloon 
with foam packing peanuts stuck to it. If you rub a balloon on your clothes, 
you cause a little bit of electrical charge to form on the balloon. If you move 
the balloon near some packing peanuts, the peanuts will lightly stick to the 
balloon due to electrical attraction. 
Each basic element on Earth has a unique blob confi guration. Hydrogen, for 
example, has just one inner and outer blob. Oxygen has eight inner and outer 
blobs.
No one really understands why electrical 
attraction works the way it does. We only 
know that it works. While the quantum 
physicists are hard at work trying to 
ﬁ gure this out, no one knows for sure. But 
electrical attraction explains a bunch of 
other stuﬀ  that scientists study, so they 
roll with it.
When two or more atoms join together 
in a stable state, this is called a molecule. 
Two hydrogen atoms combine with an 
oxygen atom to form a water molecule.
Conﬁ guration of hydrogen (left) and oxygen (right).
All substances are made up of diff erent combinations of atoms. When the 
atoms get close together they share their outer blobs, which binds them 
together. For example, if you throw together one oxygen atom and two 
hydrogen atoms, you get pure liquid water, or H2O.
H2 means two hydrogen atoms, single O means one oxygen.

 
M A T T E R  A N D  M A S S E S  
11
Now for some terminology. In an atom, the central blob is called a nucleus. 
The blobs fl oating around it are negatively charged electrons. The nucleus 
contains of a bunch of positively charged blobs called protons, which attract 
the negatively charged electrons. The nucleus also contains neutrons, which 
have no charge at all, but which work as a sort of atomic glue to keep the 
protons stuck to the nucleus. 
It’s not vital to memorize these terms, as long as you have an overall 
understanding of this most basic level of matter (and you know which page 
in this book to come back to should you need to refresh your memory). 
Electrons in particular are at the root of a lot of visually interesting phenomena 
like lightning and electricity. In this book, we go over electrons’ roles in more 
detail in pertinent chapters.
A toms and Binding
Atoms like to have their electrons arranged a certain way. In the innermost 
ring around the nucleus, they like to have two electrons. More electrons after 
that are arranged in another ring or shell outside the fi rst, with at most eight 
electrons. The third level has at most eight electrons. Any levels outside that 
like to have at most 18 electrons.

12 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Most atoms are neutral, meaning they have the same number of protons 
as electrons. The number of neutrons can vary in neutral atoms, and is not 
always the same as the number of protons. 
Two hydrogen atoms, each sharing an electron, makes H2.
The Periodic Table of Elements organizes 
the elements in our universe according 
to how many protons each one has, and 
how many shells it has.
Periodic Table of Elements.
If an atom’s outermost shell isn’t fi lled with the number of electrons it likes to 
have, it likes to fi nd other atoms and hook up with them in such a way that the 
shell gets fi lled. This is why hydrogen, with its single electron, is reactive all 
by itself; it desperately wants another electron to fi ll its outer shell to capacity 
with two electrons. So two hydrogen atoms will often hang out together and 
share their single electrons, giving them each the feeling of being complete.

 
M A T T E R  A N D  M A S S E S  
13
Atoms also like to have the same number of electrons as protons, but this 
isn’t always the case. When the number of electrons no longer matches the 
number of protons, such an atom is called an ion. Ions are inherently reactive 
and are always looking for a fi x to become less reactive. 
In short, atoms are always looking to stabilize themselves by fi lling their 
shells with electrons. This quest accounts for much that happens structurally 
in our universe. 
Nucl ear Fusion
You might wonder why the two hydrogen atoms hanging out together don’t 
just spontaneously become helium, the next element on the Periodic Table of 
Elements, which has two protons and two electrons. But such a reaction isn’t 
likely to happen on its own. Sharing electrons requires very little energy, so 
atoms do it all the time. However, rearranging protons and neutrons requires 
a huge amount of heat or pressure. 
The most common form of hydrogen actually doesn’t even have a neutron, 
and helium has two neutrons. To turn into helium, fi rst the hydrogen has to 
acquire a neutron from somewhere, which takes energy. Then there’s the 
process of fusing everything together, which takes more energy. Hydrogen 
atoms either need to be shoved together very hard or heated to high 
temperatures to shake things up enough to regroup into a single nucleus 
with two protons and two neutrons (helium). 
But if two hydrogen atoms do fi nally make it into becoming helium, the fact 
that they are now in a cozy, non-reactive state causes the atoms to release all 
that pent-up energy that they had been using to hold things together before. 
The energy release can be quite enormous. This process, called nuclear fusion, 
is the basis for the formation of stars in the galaxy (and nuclear bombs).
An element whose outermost shell is not 
completely ﬁ lled, meaning it is constantly 
seeking other atoms to hook up with and 
complete its shell, is called reactive. An 
atom whose outermost shell is ﬁ lled is 
called non-reactive. The elements down 
the right side of the Periodic Table have 
full shells, making them non-reactive.
Two hydrogen atoms jam together to become helium.
You can learn more about atomic fusion and its role in the formation of the 
universe in the Outer Space chapter.
That’s atomic theory in a nutshell, and about all you need to know about atoms to 
use physics in your animation. You’ll need this general understanding of atoms, 
electrons, and elements when you read the Electricity and Magnetism section of 
the Forces chapter, and the chapters Environment and Earth and Outer Space.

14 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Masses
The more an object weighs, the more force it takes to lift it, regardless of its 
size or what it’s made of. It takes more force to lift a pool ball than a beach ball 
because the pool ball weighs more. In physics, we could also say that the pool 
ball has more mass. In physics, mass is the measurement of a solid object’s 
resistance to force, which has to do with how densely its atoms are packed 
within its size. 
MASS VS. WEIGHT
In physics, weight isn’t the same as mass. When you get on an ordinary 
bathroom scale, it shows you a number that you consider to be your weight. 
If the scale is in kilograms then the number is actually an estimate of your 
mass based on weight, which the scale calculates from the force you exert on 
the scale at that moment.
To illustrate the diff erence between mass and weight, consider what happens 
if you jump up and down on the scale. When you land on the scale at the end 
of the jump, after acceleration due to gravity has given your body a little bit of 
falling speed, your body exerts more force than it does when you’re standing 
still, causing the scale to register a higher number. If you stand on the scale in 
an elevator accelerating upward, the scale would also register a higher number. 
Conversely, in an environment with lower gravity, such as the moon’s surface, 
the scale would register a lower number. In a zero-gravity space capsule, the 
number would register as zero (provided you could get on a scale at all in a zero-
gravity environment, but that’s beside the point). In each of these scenarios, the 
registered weight is diff erent even though the body mass hasn’t changed.
We are accustomed to measuring weight in kilograms or pounds, but 
technically, kilograms is a unit of mass and pounds is a unit of force. In physics, 
mass is measured in kilograms while weight is measured in diff erent units 
that take gravity into account. In other words, it is technically incorrect to 
say “I weigh 75 kg” because weight is not measured in kilograms. But after 
a lifetime of talking about how much things weigh, we don’t expect you to 
start saying mass instead of weight when you talk about how heavy or light 
an object or character is.
Under everyday conditions on Earth, where gravity is the pretty much the same 
everywhere, the terms weight (as measured in kilograms or pounds, when an 
object is sitting still on a scale) and mass can be considered synonymous. 
WEIGHT is interchangeable with MASS 
(for most practical purposes)
WEIGHT = MASS * ACCELERATION of GRAVITY 
(in physics)
Because mass and weight imply the same thing almost all the time, we’re 
going to keep things simple. In this book, we use the term weight whenever 
possible to discuss heaviness or lightness of mass, as this is the most familiar 

 
M A T T E R  A N D  M A S S E S  
15
term in everyday language. However, some physics terms themselves include 
the word mass, so we use that term when appropriate. There are also some 
physics formulas that require you to think in terms of mass rather than weight, 
and we discuss these as they come up. But in general, unless otherwise noted, 
mass and weight are used interchangeably in this book.
CENTER OF MASS
The center of mass is the average position of an object’s weight distribution. 
For simple, uniform objects, the center of mass is located at the geometric 
center. The center of mass can also be located outside an object.
The terms center of mass and center of gravity are interchangeable except 
when talking about large masses in space, such as planets.
The center of mass, or center of gravity, is a key concept in working with 
balance and gravity in characters and objects. You’ll learn more about this 
concept in the Weight Distribution section of the Character Design chapter, 
and the Center of Gravity section of the Forces chapter.

This page intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 2
Motion and Timing
 When animating a scene, there are several types of motion to consider. These 
are the most common types of motion: 
• 
Linear
• 
Parabolic
• 
Circular
• 
Wave
Motion and timing go hand in hand in animation.
Motion Lines and Paths
Individual drawings or poses have a line of action, which indicates the visual 
fl ow of action at that single image. Motion has a path of action, which 
indicates the path along which the object or character moves.
Line of action.

18 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
The path of action refers to the object’s motion in space. While it can help 
show timing, its primary function is to see the direction and path of the 
motion, and not necessarily its timing.
Your software’s motion graph shows the object’s motion in time. The path of 
action and the motion graph can look very diff erent.
Path of action.
In physics, an object’s path of action is 
called its trajectory.
Path of action and motion graph.
Linear Motion
Linear motion refers to motion in a straight line, always in the same direction. 
A heavy ball rolling on a table is an example of linear motion.

 
M O T I O N  A N D  T I M I N G  
19
Newton’s First Law tells us that an object in motion will keep doing what it’s 
doing unless a force comes along to aff ect it. In this way, linear motion is the 
default state of all moving objects in the universe. When considering how 
objects in your animation will move, you can consider that linear motion 
is what the object will do unless something makes it do something else. This 
consideration will help you visualize motion and timing due to forces such 
as changed timing due to gravity, or circular motion du e to forces acting on 
the object.
Circular Motion
In life, objects and people never move in a perfectly straight line. If they did, 
how boring life would be! Circular motion and its components can add a lot 
of zing to your animation.
TYPES OF CIRCULAR MOTION
Circular motion, by nature, has to do with a circle. One form of circular motion 
is rotation, where an object simply spins around an axis. 
An object moving along a circular path gives us another form of circular 
motion. The forces involved in this type of motion are more complex (and 
more interesting, especially from an animation point of view) and are 
discussed at length in this chapter.
When a person or object moves in an arc, this is also circular motion. In this 
case, the person or object is simply moving along a very small part of a large 
circle. A batter swinging a baseball bat moves with circular motion.
Other types of circular motion are wobbling and tumbling, which are 
explored later in this chapter.
For the purposes of looking at how these diff erent types of motion work, we 
separate rotation (spinning) from moving around the edge of a circle, and 
Linear motion.
Faster linear motion.
If the object is moving toward or away from 
the camera, it can appear to be moving 
faster or slower even if it’s moving uniformly.
Uniform motion is a type of linear motion with constant speed and no 
acceleration or deceleration. The distance the object moves between frames 
is the same over a period of time. The longer the distance between frames, 
the higher the speed. 
Arcs are one of the Twelve Principles of 
Animation.

20 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
from other types of motion like linear movement. Rotation, or spinning, can 
be looked at as “turning around on a stationary axis”, but in reality nothing 
really stays put while rotating—as the top spins it moves around the surface 
it’s spinning on, taking the center axis along with it; a rotating wheel on a 
car moves forward linearly as the car drives along; and so on. But if we’re 
going to make useful decisions about circular motion in animation, we can’t 
consider these motions all at once. When fi guring out the forces and motion 
for movement on a circular path, it helps to consider these separately from all 
the other types of motion, even if the object (like a car’s wheel) is also moving 
on a linear path at the same time. 
ROTATIONAL MOTION
Rotational motion is probably the most familiar type of circular motion. CG 
software usually includes tools for animating a rotating object, making it easy 
to animate spinning wheels and tops.
Here, we’ll explore some of the fi ner points of rotational motion, and discuss 
how to fi gure out how many rotations an object should have.
Rotation and Distance
When trying to fi gure out how much an object should rotate, you’ll sometimes 
need to know the distance the outer edge of the object travels as it rotates. 
To learn the distance, you will need to calculate the distance around the circle 
that defi nes the motion.
The distance around a circle is called its circumference, which can be calculated 
with a simple formula:
C = 2пR
Where C is the circumference, п is pi or roughly 3.14, and R is the radius of the 
circle. The diameter of a circle is 2 times the radius, so you can also use the 
calculation C = pi times diameter.
LIFE OF PI
Early mathematicians wanted to fi gure out how to relate circles to squares 
in order to make calculations with circles easier. So they took a square and 
laid its edges out fl at, and then wrapped them around a circle with the same 
diameter as a single square edge.
They found that you need just over three of these edges to form the circle. 
This is true no matter the size of the square and circle, so long as the circle’s 
diameter equals one side of the square.
The exact number of edges is actually 3.1415926535897932384626433832
795. . . with decimal places that go on infi nitely. This number is too long to be 
useful, and you can get by just fi ne using 3.14. We call this number pi, usually 
represented by the Greek letter pi (п). 

 
M O T I O N  A N D  T I M I N G  
21
Calculating the Number of Times a Wheel Turns
Suppose you’re working on an animation sequence that includes a car moving 
at a steady speed. You know the radius of the wheels and the distance the car 
travels. How many times should you spin the wheels over the course of the 
sequence?
To fi gure this out, let’s fi rst fi gure out how far one rotation of the tire goes. 
Pretend that the tire has just gotten a coat of red paint. When we move the 
car forward just enough to make the wheel rotate exactly one time, the tire 
leaves a streak of red paint on the road. How long is the streak? The length of 
the streak is equal to exactly the wheel’s circumference.
To fi nd out how many times the wheel would turn, you just have to divide the 
total distance the car travels by the circumference (length of one wheel turn).
Number of Turns = Total Distance/Circumference
You know what pi (п) is, you know the radius R, so you can always calculate 
the circumference by multiplying it all together. 
Let’s try out this formula with an example. You have a car with wheels of 
radius 0.25m. If the car travels 24m at a steady speed, how many times do 
the wheels turn?
Calculate circumference (one turn of the wheel):
C = 2пR
C = 2 * pi * 0.25m 
C = 1.6m = One Turn of the Wheel
Calculate number of turns: 
Number of Turns = Total Distance/Circumference
24/1.6 = 15 turns 
Spinning, Tumbling, and Wobbling
Objects can rotate around one or more axes as they fall or fl y through the air. 
These axes always pass through the object’s center of gravity. There are three 
distinct types of motion related to turning around axes: spinning, tumbling, 
and wobbling.
In mathematical notation, you don’t 
use an x or * to indicate multiplication. 
You just jam it all together, one number 
after the other. So 2пR means 2 times pi 
times R. You might also see it with dots in 
between, like 2 ● п ● R.

22 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Wobbling—A slight eff ect from another axis while spinning around a single 
axis. Footballs often wobble when thrown.
Tumbling—Rotating with an axis of rotation that’s constantly changing 
direction. A falling brick can turn by a complicated motion where the brick’s 
center of gravity follows the same path of any falling object, but where the 
axis of rotation is constantly changing. Tumbling is not cyclic, and there’s no 
simple way to describe the motion.
Wobbling.
Tumbling.
Spinning—Turning around an axis that doesn’t change direction. A hammer, 
when thrown, spins around an unchanging axis throughout its fl ight. In the 
image shown, the spin axis points straight out from this page on each frame.
Spinning.

 
M O T I O N  A N D  T I M I N G  
23
Tennis Racquet Theorem
If you take any object and imagine three perpendicular axes going through 
its center of gravity, you can make predictions about whether the object will 
spin, wobble, or tumble when thrown in the air. This is called the Tennis 
Racquet Theorem because it most commonly uses a tennis racquet to explain 
how it works.
With the Tennis Racquet Theorem, each axis has diff erent properties, and 
diff erent parts of the racquet behave diff erently depending on which axis they 
lie upon. On the tennis racquet, the axis that runs vertically down through the 
racquet’s face and handle is called the long axis. This is the axis that is closest 
to the most of the object’s mass. In objects where the mass is distributed more 
or less evenly throughout the object, the long axis runs through the longest 
part of the object.
The axis that runs from the front to back is the short axis. Here, there’s no 
other straight line through the center of gravity for which the averaged mass 
is farther away—a tennis racquet is very narrow at this point, less than an 
inch wide, and has little or no mass near that point.
Once the long and short axes are determined, the axis that’s perpendicular to 
both of them is the intermediate axis. 
Axes and Rotational Inertia
Inertia, in general, is resistance to motion, while rotational inertia is specifi cally 
resistance to turning. This topic is covered in more detail in the Torque 
chapter, but to understand spinning, tumbling, and wobbling, we need to 
talk about it a little bit here.
Rotational inertia increases by squares as the distance from the turning axis 
increases. This means that distance from an axis plays a big part in rotational 
inertia. The farther a point on an object is from an axis, the more rotational 
inertia it will have. For instance, doubling the distance increases the inertia 
by a factor of four. 
Back to the tennis racquet. The long axis is, by defi nition, the axis that is 
closest to most of the object’s mass. This means the distance to the axis is less 
than for other axes, giving this axis a lower rotational inertia than other axes. 
This makes it easier to start the racquet spinning around the long axis than 
around others. It also means that when spinning on this axis, due to the low 
rotational inertia, it’s easier for the racquet to just keep on spinning about 
that axis.
The short axis has a higher rotational inertia than the other axes, making it 
hard to start spinning the racquet around that axis. However, once it starts, 
the rotational inertia of this axis resists change, and thus is not prone to 
tumbling.
Because the rotational inertia of the intermediate axis is between the other 
two, along this axis the racquet doesn’t strongly resist spinning, but neither 
A theorem is a math or physics theory 
that seems true based on observation, 
and which no one has ever disproved. 
A theorem might one day grow up 
and join other theorems to form a law, 
a generalized statement about many 
theorems and observations that have not 
been disproved for a long period of time. 
For the purposes of animation, you can 
consider theorems to be as true as laws.
Rotational inertia is covered in more detail 
in the Torque chapter.

24 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
does it tend to keep spinning once it starts. Around this axis, the motion 
can be quite random. Any spinning around this axis is unstable, and will 
eventually turn into tumbling.
If you throw a symmetric object with a spin, it won’t tumble but will wobble. 
The more the object spins, the more it will wobble.
JUGGLING
Jugglers use the Tennis Racquet Theorem when choosing what to juggle and 
how to spin it. 
Juggling balls are spherical, so all axes are the same and there is no axis better 
than another for spinning. Juggling pins are cylindrical in shape, which means 
the short and intermediate axes are the same. In eff ect, juggling pins have a 
long axis, two stable short axes, and no unstable intermediate axis. The pins 
are weighted at one end so the center of gravity is closer to the end of the pin.
Spinning on the short axis makes an object spin relatively slowly and evenly. 
With the entire end of the pin consisting of short axes, a juggler can throw a 
pin with a controlled spin and predict where the pin’s handle will land during 
the catch. 
CENTRIPETAL MOTION
Newton’s First Law (the Law of Inertia), as discussed in the Linear Motion 
chapter, tells us that unless a force acts on a moving object it will keep 

 
M O T I O N  A N D  T I M I N G  
25
traveling in a straight line. This means that in order to have circular motion, 
forces need to be continually acting on the object to keep it moving around 
in a circle.
Circular motion is achieved by applying force in a direction perpendicular to 
the linear motion, toward the center of the circle.
An unbalanced force toward the center of the circle that causes circular 
motion is called a centripetal force. Faster motion around a circle of the same 
radius would require a proportionally greater centripetal force. To keep the 
same speed around a circle with a smaller radius would also require a greater 
centripetal force.
When considering this rule, think of the forces you use to spin a ball on the 
end of a string. To keep the ball moving in a circle, you have to continually 
pull the string toward the center of the circle.
The arrow pointing toward the boy represents the force being exerted on the 
string to make the ball move along a circular path.
The term centripetal comes from the Latin 
words centrum (center) and petere (to 
seek).

26 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
When Centripetal Force Stops
When an object is no longer being pulled toward the center, it is once again 
free of unbalanced forces and will move with linear motion again. For 
example, if you are swinging a ball on a string above your head and the string 
breaks, the ball will fl y off  in a straight line.
A common misconception is that the ball will fl y off  on a curved path. Even 
though this motion is not technically accurate, the idea is common enough that 
you might be able to animate a scene in this way without jarring your viewers. 
On the other hand, if you are swinging a ball on a string in front of you in 
a circle that goes around from your head to your toes, and you release the 
string while the ball is near the top of the arc, it will travel in a curved path 
because of gravity acting on the released ball.
When a solid object is rotating, its mass is subject to centripetal forces. The 
outsides of the object are held to the center by molecular adhesion, nails and 
screws, nuts and bolts, glue, or whatever it is that makes the object move as 
one piece. If a piece of a solid object comes loose while the object is rotating, 
the loose piece is subject to the same rules of centripetal force—it will go 
fl ying off  in a linear path.
This is the principle behind a wet dog shaking water off  its head, which rotates 
back and forth at a rate of about fi ve shakes per second. Before the dog 
shakes, water droplets are held to a dog’s fur by a not-so-strong molecular 
bond. When the dog shakes its head back and forth in an arc, the motion is 
enough to break the bond. The loose droplets, being no longer attached to 
the dog’s fur, are fl ung off  on linear paths.
Properties of liquids and how they aﬀ ect 
liquid movement are covered in more 
detail in the Liquid Eﬀ ects chapter.
Circular Speed
Speed around a circle is expressed the same way linear speed is expressed: in 
distance per time. For example, a race car traveling at 100mph around a 

 
M O T I O N  A N D  T I M I N G  
27
circular track still goes 100 miles in an hour, even though the distance traveled 
is around a circle.
Such speeds are easy enough to calculate if you know the radius of the track 
and how long it takes to make one lap. Suppose the track has a radius of 
0.15 miles and it takes the car one minute to make a lap. You can use the 
circumference formula to calculate the length of the track. 
Circumference = 2пR = 2 * 3.14 * 0.15mi = 1mi
Since it takes the car one minute to travel the 1-mile track, the car’s speed is 
1 mile per minute, or 60 miles per hour.
You can also use this formula to calculate the speed of an object that’s being 
fl ung off  a rotating object. When an object is released from centripetal force 
and goes off  in a straight line, it travels at the same speed at which it was 
traveling when it was released. 
Radius, Speed, and Centripetal Force
When two objects are traveling side by side on the same circular path, they 
will experience diff erent speeds and/or centripetal forces. 
Suppose there are two cars going around a track. If both cars drive with the 
same turning radius but one goes faster than the other, the faster car is under 
a greater centripetal force.
If both cars move at the same speed but one is heavier than the other, the 
heavier car will be under a greater centripetal force.
Comparing Centripetal Forces
Suppose two similar cars are traveling at diff erent speeds on diff erent-sized 
tracks. Which one is under more centripetal force? With the formula for 
centripetal force, you can predict which of two cars will experience the most 
of this force. 
The formula for centripetal force is:
Centripetal force = m(v2/r)
With m as mass, v as velocity (speed), and r as the turning radius.
From this formula you can see that as you increase speed, the centripetal force 
increases. As you increase radius, the centripetal force decreases. Because the 
velocity is squared in the equation, diff erences in speed infl uence diff erences 
in centripetal force much more than diff erences in radius do.
You can use this formula to predict whether one centripetal force will be 
greater than another. Back on the race track, suppose both cars are moving 
at the same speed, and the outside track has twice the radius of the inside 
track. By looking at the formula, we can see the reduced radius reduces the 
centripetal force on the outside car to half the force on the inside car. 
But if the two cars stay together all the way around the track, the outside car 
will be traveling at twice the velocity of the inside car. By looking at the formula, 
we can see that the centripetal force increases by squares when the velocity 
The term radii, pronounced RAY-dee-eye, 
is the plural form of radius. One radius, 
two radii.

28 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
increases. This means the outside car will be under a greater centripetal 
force than the inside car. The increase in centripetal force by squares due to 
increased velocity trumps the decrease due to the larger radius.
Knowing this, you can see how the centripetal force on a point near the outside 
of a wheel is greater than the force on a point closer to its center. The radius 
at the outside of the wheel is greater, which reduces centripetal force, but the 
velocity is also greater, which increases the centripetal force by squares. 
Centrifugal Force
When an object is turning, the entire body of the object turns due to 
centripetal forces. But other things contained within that object, which aren’t 
nailed down, such as people, clothing, bags in the back seat of your car, etc., 
aren’t under the same forces. They just happen to be there, contained within 
the turning object. 
Newton’s First Law tells us that a body in motion tends to stay in motion 
unless acted on by a force. This means that anything that isn’t fi rmly nailed 
down to a turning object is going to try and keep going in a straight line 
(uniform motion). As it does so, it crashes into the turning object, which 
exerts force on it and pushes it into following a circular path.
This is why your washing machine’s spin cycle removes water from your 
clothes, and leaves the clothes themselves stuck to the sides of the tub. The 
clothes (and the water in them) keep trying to move in a straight line as the 
tub turns. But the clothes keep hitting the sides of the tub, which exerts a 
force back on them to keep them inside. The water moves in a straight line 
and falls through the holes on the sides of the tub to drain away, while the 
clothes just keep banging into the sides of the tub. 
Outside car moving at double the speed of 
inside car. Centripetal force on outside car is 
greater.
Cars at same speed. Centripetal force on 
inside car is greater.
During the spin cycle, clothes are continually banging into the sides of 
the tub as they try to move in a straight line.
Outside of wheel is under greater centripetal 
force due to increased radius.

 
M O T I O N  A N D  T I M I N G  
29
This is also why taking a sharp turn with your car makes your body feel as 
though it’s being thrown in the direction opposite the turn. This happens not 
because of a mysterious force, but because your body expects to keep going 
straight and is prevented from doing so by the door of the turning car.
So what’s the force that keeps the clothes in the tub and you in the car? 
When your body hits the car door, the door exerts a simple, straight-line 
action–reaction force to keep you inside. However, because the force keeps 
being exerted moment after moment as the car turns, it feels like a force is 
pushing your body away from the center of the circular path and into the 
car door.
The feeling of this force is so common that even though the force itself 
doesn’t exist, it has its own name: centrifugal force.
Anything sitting on, or riding on, or only partially attached to a turning object 
will fall off  if it doesn’t hang on, due to the same tendency to keep going in 
a straight line. If you’ve ever played on a roundabout on a playground, you 
know this feeling. Once it gets going, if you don’t hang on tight you’ll fall 
off . Here, where you exert force through your hands toward the center, you 
actually become part of the mass the centripetal force is acting on. 
The term centrifugal comes from the 
Latin centrum and fugere (to ﬂ ee). The 
ﬁ ctitious force makes you feel as though 
you are continually “ﬂ eeing” the center of 
the circle.
In general, the object doing the turning gets the centripetal force, while 
anything that’s just along for the ride feels a centrifugal force. 
Perhaps you have seen the trick where a person swings a bucket full of water 
overhead, and no water drops out. This is another example of the apparency 
of centrifugal force, which seems to be pushing the water into the bucket as 
it moves around the circle.

30 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
The concept of centrifugal force can be 
used to simulate gravity in a rotating 
space station with a large radius. With 
the right rotation, a person standing on 
the outer rim with his/her head pointing 
toward the center would feel as if they 
were walking in Earth gravity.
Early space station design. Image courtesy 
of NASA.
Actually, at each moment the water is trying to move in a straight line 
perpendicular to the center of the circle, but is prevented from doing so by 
the bucket. If the swing is fast enough, the water’s tendency to try and follow 
the straight line is greater than the eff ects of gravity, and the water won’t fall 
out of the bucket.
If you say the words “centrifugal force” to a physicist, you’re likely to get an 
earful about how this force doesn’t exist. But in animation, it can be helpful to 
use the concept of centrifugal force to plan characters’ and objects’ reactions 
to being inside or attached to rotating or turning objects.
Centripetal Force and Vehicles
When you swing an object on the end of a string, you provide the centripetal 
force through tension on the string. However, a turning car has no such string 
to keep it going around. With a car, the centripetal force comes from the 
wheels’ contact with the ground. You can think of the wheels as “gripping” the 
ground and pulling the car toward the center of the turn to provide the 
centripetal force. 

 
M O T I O N  A N D  T I M I N G  
31
The concept of centripetal force coming from tire grip is key to understanding 
how cars respond and react to turning. On a tight turn, because the radius 
of the circle is smaller, the tires need to grip harder to generate enough 
centripetal force. This is why cars skid on wet pavement, or when they’re 
going too fast around a tight turn—the tires can’t get enough of a grip to 
create the centripetal force necessary to make the turn. 
Race car drivers sometimes use this principle intentionally to reduce the 
time it takes to make a turn. Instead of slowing down on a sharp bend, 
the driver makes a sharp turn just before the bend from the outside of 
the track to the inside, quickly reducing the radius of the turn to the 
point where the wheels can’t provide the necessary centripetal force for 
that tighter radius. This sends the car into a skid in the desired direction 
of movement. At the end of the skid, the driver resumes normal driving 
along the outside track. The overall time for such a turn is less than if the 
driver had stuck to the larger radius. Such a move is dangerous and prone 
to miscalculations, which is why only trained drivers (or animated drivers) 
should attempt this.

32 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
A car driver or passenger isn’t in danger during ordinary driving and turn 
speeds—there’s a big metal box to keep them from fl ying off  during a turn. 
With a motorcycle or bicycle, however, there is no such safety. With these 
vehicles, if the rider doesn’t do something to counteract the centripetal force, 
he will be fl ung off  the bike in the direction away from the center. To prevent 
this from happening, the rider leans in toward the center of the turn, tilting 
his center of gravity toward the center of the turn. This balances the forces in 
such a way that he can stay on the bike.
Another way to look at this is to consider that a rider leaning in such a way 
while the bike is not moving would tip over in response to gravity. If he doesn’t 
tip over, it’s as if there is another force pulling in the opposite direction.
These visible signs of centripetal force can be used in animation to 
communicate speed and turning radius, especially in visual eff ects. You can 
also exaggerate them for comic eff ect.
PENDULUM MOTION
Any back-and-forth swinging motion in your animation follows the arc of 
pendulum motion. A pendulum slows in and out as it swings back and forth, 
like a ball in a half-pipe. The centripetal force is provided by the tension in 
the string, which continually “pulls” the ball toward the apex to counteract 
gravity.
The timing around the center is somewhat uniform, with a strong slow-in and 
slow-out at the apexes.

 
M O T I O N  A N D  T I M I N G  
33
The time required to make one round trip back and forth is called the period. 
The period of a pendulum depends only on its length, not on its weight or 
other factors. The greater the length, the longer the period.
The motion curve for a pendulum is an S-curve, with a strong slow at 
each end.
You can approximate the speed of the ball at the bottom of the swing by 
fi guring out how far the ball drops vertically from the start of the swing 
to the lowest part of the swing. The combination of centripetal force 
from the string and vertical force from gravity causes a horizontal speed 
that’s around the same as the vertical speed the ball would reach if it was 
dropped vertically without a string. See the Gravity section in the Forces 
chapter for how to fi gure out the speed of a falling object based on the 
distance it falls.

34 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
A medium is a substance capable of 
transferring energy over a distance. Air 
is a great medium for sound, while the 
vacuum of outer space is not.
Wave Motion
Waves are a common natural phenomenon. We see wave motion in the open 
seas, and even in everyday fl exible objects. In character animation, wave 
motion appears in hair, fabric, and soft fl esh when they react to wind or 
motion.
WHAT WAVES DO
A wave can be defi ned as a repetitive disturbance that travels through a 
medium like air, water, or a fl exible object like a rope. The disturbance can 
travel long distances, but the medium itself doesn’t travel—it just moves 
back and forth a little bit as part of the wave motion.
As an example, consider a long rope. You grab one end and start moving it up 
and down. A few minutes later you are still holding the end of the rope; the 
rope itself has only moved up and down, up and down. But the wave itself 
has traveled a long way down the rope, transferring the energy from your 
movements over a long distance.
VISIBILITY OF WAVES
A wave itself can be visible or invisible, but at some point matter is aff ected in 
a visible way.
Some waves, like water waves, a rippling fl ag, and the rope example above, 
are visible as themselves. Waves like sound waves are invisible, but the object 
that creates them (such as a speaker) might have visible motion. In addition, 
the invisible waves pass along energy that can aff ect other matter. Sound 
waves, for example, pass sound to you via your eardrums, which vibrate 
when a sound wave hits them.
TYPES OF WAVES
There are two types of waves: transverse and longitudinal. To understand the 
diff erence between the two, consider the types of motions you can make 
with a Slinky®, a helical spring toy. Both types of waves can travel down a 
Slinky.
A helical object is shaped like a helix, a 
continuous coil or spring.

 
M O T I O N  A N D  T I M I N G  
35
If you lay the Slinky down, hold one end, and shake it up and down, you’ll 
create a transverse wave, where the wave travels along the medium in an 
S-curve shape. If you repeatedly push the Slinky away from you and release 
it, you’ll create a longitudinal wave traveling in a straight line, bunching 
up and expanding the material to create a pulse that travels along the 
medium.
Transverse Waves
With a transverse wave, the medium moves perpendicular to the wave, up 
and down or side to side. 
Transverse wave (top) and longitudinal wave (bottom) with a Slinky.
An example is a stadium wave, a synchronized standing and sitting by 
a crowd—the crowd doesn’t move down the wave. Ripples in cloth are 
also transverse waves—the cloth doesn’t move down the wave, but the 
ripple does.
Transverse waves have a cyclic back-and-forth vibration to them. A transverse 
wave can be represented by a cyclic graph.
Transverse wave cyclic graph.

36 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Pressure waves impacting eardrum.
Longitudinal Waves
With a longitudinal wave, the wave motion and material motion are 
parallel, and the material itself clumps together and moves apart to create 
a pulse. 
Sound waves are longitudinal waves. A speaker head or drum head vibrates 
back and forth, pushing the atoms of the air so they clump together and 
move apart. Those atoms push other atoms in the same pattern, creating a 
pulse. The pulse reaches your eardrums, vibrating them and giving your brain 
a signal telling it that a sound has arrived. This type of wave is also called a 
pressure wave.
A longitudinal wave doesn’t have the up-and-down cycles of a transverse 
wave, but we often visualize longitudinal waves with peaks and valleys to 
make them easier to understand and work with. 

 
M O T I O N  A N D  T I M I N G  
37
WAVE VS. FLOW
Waves fl ow through a medium such as air or water. With a wave, the wave 
shape itself moves through the air, but the air at the originating point moves 
very little. With a fl ow, the air moves.
You can get a good idea of the diff erence between a wave and a fl ow by 
considering the diff erence between talking and blowing air out of your 
mouth. When you speak, the air coming out of your mouth doesn’t actually 
get to the other person’s ears; the air traveling out of your mouth merely 
creates a pulse (pressure wave) in the air. Conversely, when you blow out a 
candle the air coming out of your mouth actually reaches the candle, making 
a fl ow.
Blowing air is a ﬂ ow.
A common use for this type of representation is in sound-editing software. 
Even though sound is a pressure wave, the software displays the sound as 
cyclic waveforms.
WAVE PROPERTIES
All waves have these properties:
• 
Amplitude
• 
Wavelength
• 
Frequency
• 
Wave velocity (speed)
The last three properties are closely related.
Amplitude for transverse wave.
Amplitude
The magnitude of a wave is called its amplitude. For transverse waves, the 
amplitude is easy to measure as the height of the waveform. 

38 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
The top of the wave is called the crest, 
while the bottom is called the trough.
Amplitude for a longitudinal wave.
The decibel (dB) is the unit used to 
measure the intensity or power of 
a sound, which translates in human 
experience to how loud the sound 
seems to us. Because the human ear is 
so sensitive, decibels are measured on a 
logarithmic scale, where values increase 
by multiples rather than linearly: 0dB 
is near silence, 10dB is 10 times louder 
than 0dB, 20dB is 100 times louder 
than 0dB, and so on. This allows us to 
measure sounds from a whisper (15dB) 
to a ﬁ recracker (140dB) on a single scale. 
140dB is 1014 more powerful than 0dB.
Wavelength.
A longitudinal wave’s amplitude is the average distance that particles move from 
their normal, middle position. If you visualize a longitudinal wave as a waveform, 
you can more easily get the idea of the amplitude for a longitudinal wave. 
Loudness of a sound wave depends on the degree of “clumping” that 
takes place due to pressure variations. Tighter clumps mean louder sound, 
which is represented visually in sound-editing software as a high peak. The 
measurement of decibels indicates the amplitude level.
Wavelength
Wavelength is the distance between two consecutive wave crests or troughs, 
which gives you the length of one single wave. With a longitudinal wave, the 
areas of clumping are the crests.
Wavelength is measured in distance. Light waves have tiny wavelengths 
measured in nanometers (nm) or one one-billionth of a meter. Compare 

 
M O T I O N  A N D  T I M I N G  
39
A movement of one full wavelength is 
called a cycle.
The Hertz unit expresses cycles per 
second. For example, a wave with a 
frequency of 3 Hertz makes three full 
cycles in one second. The abbreviation for 
Hertz is Hz.
A tuning fork always vibrates at a speciﬁ c  frequency, 
making it useful for tuning musical instruments.
with the width of a human hair, which is about 100,000 nanometers. 
Sound waves have much longer wavelengths, ranging within our audible 
range from centimeters for high-pitched sounds to meters for low-pitched 
sounds.
Frequency
Frequency is the number of times a single wavelength moves by one full 
cycle within a second. It is often expressed as “cycles per second.” Frequency 
is closely related to wavelength; if two waves are traveling at the same speed, 
the one with a shorter wavelength naturally means the wave completes its 
cycles more frequently.
With sound waves, diff erent musical notes have diff erent frequencies. We detect 
these diff erences as various musical pitches. The higher the frequency, the 
higher the pitch. Two notes are one octave apart when one note is twice the 
frequency of the other.
The strings on a guitar are tightened to make them vibrate at a rate that 
will produce the frequency for the desired pitch. By placing a fi nger on a 
string, the string is eff ectively shortened, thus increasing the frequency 
and pitch. 
The sound coming from a guitar is actually made up of several waves with 
diff erent frequencies. The string vibrates at a single frequency which excites 

40 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
various frequencies within the guitar’s body, combining to give the guitar its 
distinctive sound.
Wave Velocity
The velocity, or speed, of a wave is measured by how long it takes a single 
cycle to move a certain distance. 
• 
The wave speed of ocean waves near the beach is a few miles per hour. 
• 
Sound waves move at 0.2 miles (343 meters) per second.
• 
Light waves move at 186,000 miles (300,000 km) per second.
The diff erence in speed between sound and light waves is why you see 
distant lightning before you hear the thunder that goes with it. Light waves 
travel so fast that we can consider any light that occurs on Earth to reach us 
instantaneously. Sound waves from a distance actually take a noticeable time 
to get to you.
Wave Relations
There is a mathematical relationship between the speed, frequency, and 
wavelength of a wave.  This relationship is expressed by the wave equation
Wave speed = Frequency * Wavelength
v = f * w
Knowing one of the values means you can calculate the other two. Even if you 
don’t know the exact number, you can use this equation to fi gure out what 
happens to the other values when one value goes up or down. 
Hold Fixed
Change
Result
Wave speed
Frequency ↑
Wavelength ↓
Wave speed
Wavelength ↑
Frequency ↓
Wavelength
Wave speed ↑
Frequency ↑
Frequency
Wave speed ↑
Wavelength ↑
Table of relationships between wavelength, wave speed, and frequency. All 
Change directions are up (increasing). For Change in the opposite direction, ﬂ ip 
the Result direction.
This equation is less important than consequences: basically how do wave 
speed, length, and frequency change if we change one or the other?
Wave Phase
As a wave passes through a single cycle, its progress through the cycle can be 
measured. This measurement can be expressed as a number from 0.0 to 1.0, 
or as a range of degrees from 0 to 360.
In physics, wavelength is often expressed 
in equations as the Greek letter lambda 
(λ), so you might see this equation 
expressed as v = f * λ.

 
M O T I O N  A N D  T I M I N G  
41
Two waves with corresponding phases are said to be “in phase.” If you shift 
one of the waves, the waves are “out of phase.”
Animation software often gives you an option to set a Phase value from 0.0 to 
1.0 for wave-based animation. The value of 1.0 corresponds to 360 degrees, 
so adding 0.5 to a Phase value shifts the wave by 180 degrees. 
Wave Addition and Cancellation
When two waves meet, their amplitudes add up to produce a higher or lower 
amplitude. The amplitude below the middle line is a negative amplitude, 
which negates or reduces any positive amplitude on the other wave.

42 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Waves can also cancel each other out completely. Two waves that are out of 
phase with each other by 0.5 (180 degrees, or half a wavelength) will “add up” 
to a zero amplitude, which is essentially no wave at all.
The two gray waves add up to form the black wave.
This principle is used in the design of noise-canceling headphones. A small 
microphone in the ear cup catches external sounds, and the electronics 
generate a wave exactly 180 degrees out of phase to eff ectively silence the 
external sound waves.
Standing Waves
Two waves moving in opposite directions can sometimes aff ect each other 
with more than simple addition. If the waves are of exactly equal amplitude 
and wavelength, the net addition will cause standing wave. With this type of 
wave, the crests and troughs move up and down but the points where the 
wave crosses the center line stay in the same location.

 
M O T I O N  A N D  T I M I N G  
43
Standing waves are also called stationary 
waves.
COMMON SOUND EFFECTS
When sound waves add up, interesting things can happen. Here are a few 
notable eff ects that sound can cause with its wave properties.
Resonance
Every object has a natural frequency, a speed at which it likes to vibrate. You 
can hear this for yourself when you drop an object on a hard surface, where it 
will vibrate with its natural frequency and thus make a sound specifi c to that 
object’s material and shape. For example, the sounds made by wooden and 
aluminum baseball bats dropped on a hard surface are quite distinct from 
one another because they have diff erent frequencies.
Within the object, there is always a small degree of vibration going on, even 
when the object appears to be sitting still. When external forces vibrate the 
object at its natural frequency, the result is an addition of amplitude to the 
existing vibration wave within the object. More vibration causes an even 
higher amplitude, magnifying each time the object is vibrated at its natural 
frequency. 
Standing waves occur when waves moving in one direction are defl ected 
back in the opposite direction. You can create a standing wave by tying one 
end of a rope to a stationary object. Hold the other end of the rope, and 
send waves down the rope by moving your arm up and down. The waves 
will defl ect back down the rope at the point where it’s tied up. At the right 
frequency, you will create standing waves in the rope.

44 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
When the pattern of external vibrations is in sync with an object’s natural 
frequency, it’s called resonance. A sound wave with a frequency that’s a 
multiple of an object’s natural frequency will cause resonance.
Smaller waves at resonant frequencies, adding up to the larger wave.
A vibrating object usually makes a 
noticeable noise only if it’s vibrating very 
fast. If you want to make something in 
your animation appear to vibrate very fast, 
give it a sound! The faster the motion, the 
higher the pitch.
An example is acoustic resonance, where resonant sound waves can shatter 
a wine glass. Another is mechanical resonance, where physical vibrations 
resonate with the object’s natural frequency. For example, bridges have been 
known to shake and even collapse when the frequency of strong external 
vibrations, such as hundreds of soldiers marching in step, resonates with the 
bridge’s construction material.
Doppler Effect
A moving object making a particular sound, such as an ambulance with a 
blaring siren, can seem to be making sounds with two diff erent pitches. If the 
ambulance is approaching you, the sound of the ambulance siren has a 
higher pitch than if the ambulance is moving away from you. 
Doppler effect from a passing ambulance. Arrow shows direction of ambulance 
motion.

 
M O T I O N  A N D  T I M I N G  
45
As the ambulance drives forward and emits more sound waves, the waves 
compress in front of the ambulance, producing waves with a shorter wavelength 
and higher frequency (higher pitched). Conversely, as the ambulance moves 
away from you, the sound waves are stretched out and have a longer wavelength 
and lower frequency (lower pitched). This eff ect of seemingly higher and lower 
pitches from the same sound is called the Doppler Eff ect.
Sonic Boom
When the sound source travels at the speed of sound, the wavelength goes 
to zero and the waves pile up to the point where a shockwave is formed. This 
situation produces a sonic boom, basically all the sound waves compressed 
into one very loud sound. Airplanes are the most common source of sonic 
booms. Commercial airlines don’t exceed the speed of sound, but military 
aircraft sometimes do.
Diagram of sound waves emitted from an object moving to the right. If the speed 
is fast enough, sound waves pile up at the tip of the cone shape and produce a 
sonic boom.
Another example of a sonic boom is the sharp sound when a whip is cracked. 
The tip of the whip can exceed the speed of sound, creating a mini sonic boom.
The crack of the whip is a sonic boom.

46 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Timing
Dictionary defi nitions of timing say things like “the choice of when something 
should be done; the regulation of occurrence and pace to achieve a desired 
eff ect.” As animators, we have the ability to move forward and backward in 
time to place objects when and where we want them to be. 
Everyone, even people who have never done animation, has a sense of 
what realistic timing should look like, in the sense that they can tell when 
it’s wrong. However, actually knowing what the timing should be is another 
matter altogether.
Fortunately, physics has some tried-and-true laws that can help us fi gure 
out accurate timing. Even if you plan to exaggerate your motion for eff ect, it 
helps to start with reality and work from there.
This chapter discusses timing for motion in general. For timing of specifi c types 
of motion discussed in this book, see that chapter. For example, timing for 
falling due to gravity is discussed in the Gravity section of the Forces chapter.
TIMING TOOLS
In animation, timing of action consists of placing objects or characters in 
particular locations at specifi c frames to give the illusion of motion. We work 
with very small intervals of time; most motion sequences can be measured in 
seconds or fractions of seconds. Frame intervals between keys are usually 
smaller than one second. For VFX work that needs to closely match live 
action, VFX artists work at the sub-frame level.
Timing is such an integral part of motion that it’s impossible to completely 
separate the two. However, when planning your animation it can be helpful 
to try and work with motion and timing separately. It is a common practice, 
for example, to set up key poses and set timing for them afterward. Others 
like to nail down the timing fi rst and animate the motion afterward.
UNIFORM MOTION TIMING
Linear motion refers to motion in a straight line, always in the same direction. 
An object moving with linear motion might speed up or slow down as it 
follows a linear path. 
A heavy ball rolling on a table or incline is an example of linear motion. The 
ball is rotating, but its center of gravity follows a linear path.
Timing is one of the Twelve Basic 
Principles of Animation.
Timing in animation is measured in 
diﬀ erent ways:
• Frames (intervals of 1/24, 1/25, or 1/30 
of a second)
• Keys (number of frames between poses)
• Clocks (seconds)
In certain animation software it’s possible 
to measure time in ticks, which are 
intervals shorter than a frame. With 
software set up for 160 ticks per frame, 
for example, you could break down the 
motion into increments of 1/160 of a 
frame. The number of ticks per frame can 
vary depending on the software, frame 
rate, or method being used.

 
M O T I O N  A N D  T I M I N G  
47
Uniform motion is a type of linear motion with constant speed and no acceleration 
or deceleration. The object moves the same distance between consecutive 
frames. The longer the distance between frames, the higher the speed.
Linear motion.
Uniform motion.
Physicists don’t use the term deceleration 
when they talk about things slowing 
down; they use the direction and 
magnitude of acceleration. For example, 
if an object is moving uniformly and 
the direction of acceleration is opposite 
the direction of its movement, the 
object will slow down. If we used this 
convention in this book, things could get 
very complicated, so instead we use the 
terms acceleration for “speeding up” and 
deceleration for “slowing down.”

48 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
When uniform motion occurs, the net force on the object is zero. Net force is 
the total of all forces added up. There might be several forces acting on the 
object, but when both the magnitude and direction of the forces are added 
up, they add up to zero. 
Uniform motion is the easiest to animate because the distance the object 
travels between frames is always the same. 
SLOW IN AND SLOW OUT
When motion is accelerating or decelerating, we refer to this type of motion 
as a slow in or slow out. This type of motion is sometimes called ease in or ease 
out. In this book, we use the hyphenated forms slow-in and slow-out for easier 
understanding.
• 
Slow in, ease in—The object is slowing down, often in preparation for 
stopping. 
• 
Slow out, ease out—The object is speeding up, often from a still position. 
The term slow out can be confusing, since it essentially means “speed up.” You 
can think of slow out as the same as ease out, as in easing out of a still position 
and speeding up to full speed.
For example, a ball rolling down an incline or dropping straight down is 
slowing out, as it goes from a still position or slow speed to a fast speed. A 
ball rolling up an incline is slowing in.
Linear motion is not always uniform; an 
object can speed up or slow down as it 
moves in a straight line. Uniform motion, 
on the other hand, is always linear.
 “Slow In and Slow Out” is one of the 
Twelve Basic Principles of Animation.
Slowing out: speeding up.
Slowing in: slowing down.
ACCELERATION TIMING
Timing for acceleration can be calculated very accurately when the net force 
being exerted is constant. Let’s take a look at these forces and how you can 
use them to calculate your animation’s timing.

 
M O T I O N  A N D  T I M I N G  
49
Constant Forces
A constant force is a force that doesn’t vary over time. Examples of constant 
forces include:
• 
Gravity pulling an object to the ground
• 
Friction bringing an object to a stop
Directions of net force (dotted arrow) and motion (solid arrow).
Forces Exerted by Characters
Forces exerted by people’s bodies are rarely constant throughout an entire 
motion. For the purposes of animation, however, you can break the character 
motion into short time segments and consider each of these segments to be 
responding to constant net force. This will make it easier for you to calculate 
the timing for each individual segment.
As an example, let’s look at the push for a jump. The force a character exerts 
during the push is somewhat constant, and the timing is very short (less than 
half a second). In such a case the timing for a constant force is an excellent 
starting point, and in most cases will do the job as is.
A character walking and pushing a rock is not exerting a constant force 
throughout the entire sequence, but during each short part of the walk cycle 
the net force could be considered to be a diff erent constant value.
Arrows show relative force and speed between different parts of walk cycle.

50 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Constant Force and Acceleration
Constant forces result in constant acceleration. Because the acceleration is 
constant, we can fi gure out the timing for such sequences using a few 
principles of physics.
The resulting acceleration depends on the direction of the force and motion, 
if there is any motion at all to begin with.
• 
When constant net force is applied to an unmoving object, the result is 
acceleration. 
• 
When constant net force is applied to a moving object in the same 
direction as the motion, the result is acceleration.
• 
When constant net force is applied in the direction opposite the existing 
motion, the result is deceleration (acceleration in the opposite direction).
Note that constant acceleration doesn’t mean constant speed. It’s quite the 
opposite! Constant acceleration means the object is changing speed constantly.
THE ODD RULE
When acceleration is constant, you can use the Odd Rule to time your frames. 
With this method, you calculate the distance the object moves between 
frames using a simple pattern of odd numbers. 
Between consecutive frames, the distance the object moves is a multiple of 
an odd number. For acceleration, the distance between frames increases by 
multiples of 1, 3, 5, 7, etc. 
Because gravity is a constant force, the 
Odd Rule can be used to animate falling 
due to gravity. This use is described in 
greater detail in the Gravity section of the 
Forces chapter.
Rocket speeding up using the Odd Rule.
For deceleration, the multiples start at a higher odd number and decrease, 
for example 7, 5, 3, 1.
Sled coming to a stop using the Odd Rule.

 
M O T I O N  A N D  T I M I N G  
51
The Odd Rule is a multiplying system based on the smallest distance 
traveled between two frames in the sequence. For a slow-out, this is 
the distance between the fi rst two frames; for a slow-in, it’s the distance 
between the last two frames. This distance, the base distance, is used in all 
Odd Rule calculations.
Odd Rule Multipliers
The Odd Rule in its simplest form, as described above, is just one way to use 
it. For example, you can instead calculate the distance from the fi rst frame to 
the current frame and use these distances to place your object on specifi c 
frames.
Multiply by base distance to get distance between:
Frame #
Consecutive frames
First frame and this frame
1
n/a
0
2
1
1
3
3
4
4
5
9
5
7
16
6
9
25
7
11
36
8
13
49
9
15
64
10
17
81
If you add up all the consecutive frame multipliers up to a particular frame, 
you get the multiple for the entire distance. For example, on frame 4, the 
consecutive multiples thus far are 1, 3, and 5. If you add up these numbers 
you get 9, which is the multiplier for the entire distance up to frame 4.
Multiply by base distance to get distance between:
Frame #
Consecutive frames
First frame and this frame 
1
n/a
0
2
1
1
3
3
4
4
5
9
5
7
16
6
9
25
7
11
36

52 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
If you’re calculating the distance for a large number of frames and a chart 
like this isn’t practical, you can fi gure out the odd number multiplier for 
consecutive frames with this formula:
Odd number multiplier for consecutive frames = ((frame # – 1) * 2) – 1
In the charts above, note that the distances in the last column are squared 
numbers: 4 = 22, 9 = 32, 16 = 42, and so on. One of the benefi ts of the Odd Rule 
is you can calculate the total distance traveled from the start point to the 
current frame with the following formula:
Multiplier for distance from fi rst frame to current frame = (current frame # – 1)2
When setting your keys, you can use either the consecutive key multipliers 
or total distance multipliers. Choose the one that’s easiest for you to use for 
your animated sequence. 
Odd Rule Scenarios
Here are a few diff erent scenarios for calculating the distance an object 
travels between keys in a slow-in or slow-out.
Base Distance Known, Speeding Up
If the object is speeding up, the fi rst frame distance is the base distance. If you 
know the base distance, fi guring out the distance the object travels at each 
frame is pretty straightforward. Just multiply the base distance by 3, 5, 7, etc. 
to get the distances between consecutive frames, or use squares to multiply 
the base distance to get the total distance traveled on each frame.
Base Distance Known, Slowing Down
Suppose you want an object to slow down, and you know the distance 
between the last two frames before it stops. For slow-ins, the base distance is 
the distance between the last two frames. The solution is to work backward, 
as if the object were speeding up in the opposite direction. Working 
backward, multiply the base distance by 3, 5, 7, etc. to get the distances 
between each previous frame in the sequence. 
Total Distance and Number of Frames Known, 
Speeding Up
If you know the total distance and the total number of frames, you can fi nd 
the base distance with this formula:
Base distance = Total distance/(Last frame number – 1)2
Suppose you have a jump push (takeoff ) with constant acceleration over 5 
frames, and the total distance traveled is 0.4m. Using the formula above, we 
fi nd the base distance.
Base distance = 0.4m/(5 – 1) 2 = 0.4m/16 = 0.025m
Because the last column shows squared 
numbers, we will refer to these numbers 
as the “squares” when talking about 
methods for calculation later in this 
chapter.
Jump takeoﬀ s and landings involve 
constant acceleration or deceleration, 
so animation of these actions can use 
the Odd Rule. When using the method 
described in the Jumping section of the 
Character Animation chapter, you will 
know the number of frames and total 
distance but not the base distance.

 
M O T I O N  A N D  T I M I N G  
53
Using the base distance, you can calculate the distances between each 
frame. 
Frame #
Consecutive frame multiplier
Distance from previous frame
1
n/a
0
2
1
1 * 0.025m = 0.025m
3
3
3 * 0.025m = 0.075m
4
5
5 * 0.025m = 0.125m
5
7
7 * 0.025m = 0.175m
If you add up the distances traveled, you will fi nd that they add up to 
exactly 0.4m.
First Key Distance Known, Slowing Down
Suppose you have a moving object that you want to slow down, and you’ve 
set the fi rst frame of the slow-in to give an idea of the pacing for the 
sequence. In this case, you can consider that the distance the object moved 
between the last two frames before the slow-in is part of the calculation—
the distance between them becomes the fi rst frame distance, and your fi rst 
slow-in frame becomes the second frame in the sequence.

54 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
One feature of the Odd Rule is that the base distance is always half the 
diff erence between any two adjacent distances. To fi nd the base distance, 
you can simply calculate:
(0.5m – 0.35m)/2 = 0.07m
To fi gure out how many frames are in the slow-in, divide the fi rst distance by 
the base distance to fi nd out which odd number it corresponds to.
0.5/0.07 = 7
This means the fi rst distance corresponds to 7 in the 7, 5, 3, 1 sequence, 
making the sequence four frames long. Now you can work back the other 
way, multiplying your base distance by odd numbers to get the distances for 
the rest of the slow-in frames.
Frame #
Consecutive frame 
multiplier
Distance from previous 
frame
1
7
7 * 0.07m = 0.5m
2
5
5 * 0.07m = 0.35m
3
3
3 * 0.07m = 0.21m
4
1
1 * 0.07m = 0.07m

 
M O T I O N  A N D  T I M I N G  
55
MOTION GRAPHS
A motion graph plots an object’s position against time. If you’re using animation 
software, understanding and using motion graphs is a key skill in animating 
anything beyond the simplest of motions. If you’re drawing your animation, 
drawing motion graphs before animating can help you visualize the motion.
On a motion graph, the time goes from left to right across the bottom of the 
graph, while the object’s position is plotted vertically against the time. Each axis 
in 3D space (X, Y, Z) has its own line showing the object’s position along that axis. 
At the very least, you will need to understand the types of lines in a motion 
graph and what they represent in terms of visible motion. You can also look at 
motion graphs to get a better understanding of any diffi  culties you’re having 
with your timing or action.
Constant Speed
With constant speed on any axis, the motion graph is always a straight line. 
The greater the speed, the greater the slope of the line.
Typical motion graph in CG software.
Constant speed graph, with distance (vertical) plotted against time (horizontal).
Acceleration
Graphs of accelerating motion always show a curve. The more the curve 
bends, the more the object is accelerating.

56 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Note that the Z-axis motion graph is not 
the arc of the object’s motion. Even if the 
object is thrown straight up in the air and 
comes straight down, the motion graph 
still shows a parabola.
Acceleration of Gravity
The motion graph for the Z axis of an object thrown in the air shows a 
parabola, a U-shaped curve. 
Swinging
For swinging back and forth, as with a pendulum, the repetitive motion curve 
follows a wave pattern. Each part of the wave has a shape similar to the curve 
for falling due to gravity. The object goes up and down repeatedly against 
and with gravity.
Acceleration graph, with distance (vertical) plotted against time (horizontal).

C H A P T E R 3
Forces
As an animator, you probably already think about motion a great deal. “The 
character moves to the left,” or “The boulder falls off  the cliff  and hits the 
ground,” are the types of notes you might fi nd in a storyboard or script, and 
then it’s up to you to make the motion happen visually.
Storyboard with lots of motion. Where does the force come from?

58 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Animators and fi lmmakers are accustomed to planning motion without 
thinking too much about the forces behind the motions. A fi lm director 
instructing an actor to jump up and down isn’t thinking about gravity; he 
just wants to see the motion. A scene might call for an old, noisy factory 
machine to be modeled and rendered, which the director simply hands off  to 
the CG Supervisor to make happen. The director might have a strong idea of 
what the fi nal result should look like, but isn’t necessarily thinking in terms of 
forces when he describes his vision. 
But without forces all motion would be uniform, with no change of speed or 
direction (and pretty boring to watch). While many forces in life are barely 
visible, or even invisible, some aspect of forces is present whenever something 
changes speed or direction. A few examples:
• 
Gravity is an invisible force that causes objects to accelerate as they fall, or 
decelerate when they are thrown into the air. 
• 
When a person or animal moves in real life, muscles contract under the 
skin to create forces that move the body and limbs. Even in traditional 
animation of loose or lithe characters, these forces can become visible as 
anticipatory motion, slow-ins and slow-outs, or squash and stretch.

 
F O R C E S  
59
• 
With heavy machinery, a motor provides the force. The motor is most 
likely hidden inside the machine, but even though the forces aren’t visible 
you can see the results. The parts don’t start up all at once—there’s an 
initial jerk of motion, a lot of noise as pieces grind against each other, and 
even dust and smoke.
• 
Forces within clouds can cause a lightning fl ash, which itself causes a force 
that can damage or burn.
Even with situations with no visible motion, the staging involves forces: 
• 
A heavy bag hangs from a chain, causing tension on the chain. Even 
though there’s no motion, forces cause the tension.
• 
A character is sitting or standing still. Gravity is acting on the character, 
and he’s exerting a force with his muscles to stay upright. If he leans too 
far to one side, gravity will cause him to tip over.
Motion as simple as a character pushing a boulder involves multiple forces. 
The speed and direction in which the character can move the boulder (and 
even whether she can move it at all) are directly related to the strength of the 
character’s muscles, friction between her feet and the ground, gravity acting 
on the boulder, and so on.
As an animator, you have control over how much the boulder weighs, 
whether the character can actually stand up, how heavy that hanging bag 
is, and how old and creaky that factory machine is. Understanding the 
forces behind the motion and staging will help you make a more 
compelling and believable animated sequence that represents the 
decisions you’ve made.

60 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Components of Force
Every force has a direction that aff ects the object’s direction of motion, and a 
magnitude that aff ects the motion’s timing. Gravity, for example, has a 
direction toward the center of the Earth. Its magnitude is visible as a specifi c 
degree of acceleration, where it causes an object to speed up as it falls. 
Pretty much all motion results from multiple forces. To illustrate this, let’s look 
at an example of a cat falling through the air on a windy day.
Several forces are acting on the cat:
• 
Gravity pulls the cat toward the ground, increasing its speed with each frame.
• 
Air resistance pushes up at the cat, but with not nearly as much force as 
gravity pulls down on it. 
• 
The wind pushes the cat in the direction of the wind.
Adding up these forces, you can make an accurate prediction of the cat’s 
motion and timing during the fall. All these forces are described and 
discussed in this chapter.
This is a very simple scenario, not even taking into account the cat’s takeoff  
from wherever it came from, its landing on the ground, or the contortions a 
cat goes through while falling to enable it to land on its feet. Each portion 
of such an animated sequence involves a diff erent set of forces, and thus 
requires its own consideration for motion and timing.
FAMILIAR AND UNFAMILIAR FORCES
Many forces you represent in your animation will be familiar to your 
audience, while others won’t be. Some forces, like wind, create random, 

 
F O R C E S  
61
variable eff ects, while other forces (like gravity) aff ect objects in the same 
way all the time.
With all the types of forces that will be going on in your animation, you will 
need to understand the underlying forces. This will enable you to animate 
the motion well enough to convey the underlying forces to your audience. 
Familiar, Non-Random Forces
Earth’s gravity is fi xed, predictable, and familiar. Your audience have been 
living with gravity all their lives, and they have an idea of what its eff ects 
should look like. Centuries of research into gravity have given us the tools to 
accurately calculate motion and timing due to gravity. 
Everyday human-touch forces like those for turning a wrench, pushing a car, 
and kicking a ball are also familiar to audiences. Your viewers will have an 
idea of the amount of force they themselves have had to exert under similar 
circumstances. While the forces involved can vary according to the person’s 
strength, size, ability to balance, etc. these forces always fall within a certain 
range as limited by the human body. 
Unfamiliar Forces
Some forces are completely unfamiliar, opening up their eff ects to artistic 
interpretation. Outer space forces fall into this category. While scientists do 
know a fair bit about how motion (including sound) occurs in outer space, 
anything the average viewer thinks he knows about such motion generally 
comes from scientifi cally inaccurate movies. 
We forgive fi lmmakers for messing up the physics of outer space, because 
the truth is usually very dull; outer space is a big, quiet place with pockets of 
violent activity like stars and galaxies forming over millions of years. Getting 
some entertaining action to happen in outer space usually requires the 
bending of a few laws of physics.
Straddling the line between “technically correct” and “entertaining” has 
been a challenge for VFX artists since space operas were invented. The most 
entertaining fi lms include enough accurate physics to keep the audience 
from losing their suspension of belief while keeping the action going with 
a few violations of the laws of physics that the average viewer won’t catch.
If the climactic explosion of the Death Star at the end of the original Star Wars 
movie were technically accurate, Luke Skywalker’s valiant eff orts would have 
produced a silent explosion without any huge fi reballs. But that wouldn’t 
have been much fun, would it? In the more recent fi lm Gravity, huge hunks 
of space junk hurtle around Earth every 90 minutes in exactly the same orbit 
as a working space station, and so much of this junk hits the station that it 
smashes it up. This premise is impossible—satellites and space stations 
don’t use the same orbits, for one thing—but who cares? The fi lmmakers 
got enough stuff  right that the movie is convincing, compelling, and very 
entertaining.

62 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Variable Forces
A lot of forces are familiar but highly variable. Environmental and exterior 
eff ects fall into this category. Most likely you’ve seen ocean waves, lightning, 
and fi reworks, and maybe you’ve seen a tornado on the news. Or maybe the 
only tornado you’ve ever seen is in The Wizard of Oz. In any case, you have an 
idea of the motion such forces can produce, even though the results are 
somewhat random and variable.
While there is scientifi c data available on the types of forces involved in these 
eff ects, there is such a broad range of possibilities that you can pick and choose, 
exaggerate, extend, lessen, or otherwise mess with the forces to make it look 
the way you want it to. Knowing about the forces behind such things will help 
you make them recognizable to your audience despite these variations.
Gravity
The most common force you’ll need to represent in animation is gravity. We all 
interact with gravity daily and have an intuitive sense of how it aff ects objects, 
so your audience will know if your visual eff ects don’t look realistic. And while 
the eff ects of gravity can be warped for entertainment value, you should know 
how to do it right so you can use it as it is, or alter it intelligently when needed. 
GRAVITATIONAL ACCELERATION
Gravity causes acceleration toward the center of the Earth. You can see this in 
action when you drop an object from a height. The object speeds up as it falls.
Acceleration is expressed as distance per 
time per time, or distance/time2. 

 
F O R C E S  
63
A common example is a beach ball, which is very light. The beach ball, after 
being tossed in the air, falls at a slower speed than a heavier ball would. This 
slower falling speed isn’t due to lower eff ects of gravity on the ball—it is 
entirely due to air resistance.
Another example is a sky diver with an open parachute. A parachute is able to 
“catch” more air resistance than a sky diver alone, slowing down the sky diver 
to the point where landing on the ground is safe.
Air resistance is covered in more detail in the Pressure section of this chapter.
Gravity on Earth is about 9.8m/sec2 or 32ft/sec2. Rounding 9.8m to 10m gives 
us accurate enough calculations for most animation. Since 10 is a lot easier to 
calculate with than 32, we use 10m/sec2 in this book. 
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS ABOUT GRAVITY
Take a look at these statements. They are all true!
• 
Close to the Earth’s surface, acceleration due to gravity is always the same. 
• 
Acceleration due to gravity does not depend on the object’s size or how 
much it weighs.
• 
Eff ects of gravity do not depend on the height from which the object is 
dropped.
Misconceptions about gravity can come from observations of falling 
objects being aff ected by air resistance. As an object falls, air resistance 
develops and pushes in the direction opposite the motion. The falling 
speed of a relatively wide, lightweight object can be aff ected a great deal 
by air resistance.
Acceleration due to gravity actually varies 
slightly at diﬀ erent altitudes, with higher 
altitudes experiencing less acceleration. 
But the diﬀ erence is so slight that it’s 
usually not worth considering for the 
purposes of animation.

64 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
TIMING FOR GRAVITY
There are a few diff erent methods you can use to calculate timing for a fall. 
Some are based on physics, while others are more a shorthand developed 
over the years to assist artists drawing frames by hand. These same principles 
can be used for keyframing the motion in animation software.
CALCULATING TOTAL TIME AND DISTANCE
In order to fi gure out the timing and keyframing for a fall, you fi rst need to 
determine the following: 
• 
Frame rate of your animation (30, 25, or 24 frames per second) 
• 
Size of the falling object in your unit scale
• 
How long the object will take to fall, or the distance the object will fall in 
terms of your unit scale 
PHYSICS-BASED CALCULATIONS
If you know either how long the object will fall or the distance it will fall, you 
can calculate the other value with the tables below. You can also use these 
tables to rough out the animation for a fall.
Frame Rate 24fps
Time (seconds)
Frame #
Distance fallen from apex
1/24
1
0.33in
0.85cm
1/12
2
1.33in
3.4cm
1/8
3
3in
7.6cm
1/6
4
5.4in
13.6cm
1/4
6
12in
30.6cm
1/3
8
21in
54cm
1/2
12
4ft
1.2m
2/3
16
7ft
2.2m
3/4
18
9ft
2.8m
1
24
16ft
4.9m
Frame Rate 25fps
Time (seconds)
Frame #
Distance fallen
1/25
1
0.3in
0.78cm
2/25
2
1.2in
3cm
3/25
3
2.8in
7cm
1/5
5
7.7in
20cm
2/5
10
2.6ft
79cm
3/5
15
5.8ft
1.8m
4/5
20
10.3ft
3.1m
1
25
16ft
4.9m
When talking about animation keys for 
falling animation, the point from which 
the object is dropped is referred to as 
the apex of the motion. Apex means “the 
top or highest part of something.” If the 
object is thrown in the air, the apex is the 
highest point the object reaches before 
beginning to fall.

 
F O R C E S  
65
Frame Rate 30fps
Time (seconds)
Frame #
Distance fallen
1/30
1
0.21in
0.54cm
1/15
2
0.88in
2.2cm
1/10
3
1.9in
4.9cm
2/15
4
3.4in
8.7cm
1/6
5
5.4in
13.6cm
1/5
6
7.7in
20cm
1/3
10
21in
54cm
1/2
15
4ft
1.2m
2/3
20
7ft
2.2m
5/6
25
11ft
3.4m
1
30
16ft
4.9m
The formula used to calculate these distances uses the distance on the fi rst 
frame, which is based on offi  cial physics calculations:
Total Distance = (Distance on First Frame) * (Number of Frames)2
You can use these tables to calculate the number of frames you’ll need to 
show your object falling. If the total distance or number of frames is more than 
the highest number shown on the table for your frame rate, or the distance 
you wish to use isn’t shown on the table, use the formula to calculate the total 
distance or number of frames.
Note that the amount of time it takes for an object to fall a particular distance is 
the same no matter which frame rate is used. The only thing that changes is the 
number of frames taken to travel that distance. For example, the distance fallen 
after 1/5 of a second is always 7.7in or 20cm. If your fps is 25, the object will have 
traveled 7.7in on frame 5; if your fps is 30, it will have traveled 7.7in on frame 6.
VISUAL CALCULATION METHODS
While you can use these physics-based calculations to work out motion and 
timing of falling, you can also use some of these more visually based tricks 
developed by traditional animators over the years.
The Odd Rule
With this method, an animator can start with the apex key’s distance and 
animate straight ahead using a simple pattern based on odd numbers. This 
method is called the Odd Rule.
With the Odd Rule, the distance between keys increases in the ratios 1:3:5:7:9, 
etc., starting with the distance between the apex and the fi rst key, which is 
considered to have a ratio of 1.
For each subsequent key, multiply the distance for the fi rst key to get a new 
distance, and move the object that distance from the previous key. 
In traditional animation, falling motion is 
often animated as being faster than reality 
to make the action a little snappier. Use 
these values as a guide, then adjust to taste.
You can use any number of online tools to 
calculate distance or time for gravity falls, 
such as www.gravitycalc.com.

66 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
The following table shows how far to move the object from the apex if you 
assume the fi rst key distance is 1 unit. 
Frame #
Multiply by fi rst key distance
Unit distance from apex
1
n/a
0
2
1
1
3
3
4
4
5
9
5
7
16
6
9
25
7
11
36
The Odd Rule also works for calculating slow-ins and slow-outs for horizontal 
motion. This use of the Odd Rule is discussed in more detail in the Linear 
Motion section of the Motion and Timing chapter.
When drawing by hand a straight-on perspective of a falling object, you can 
also use the Odd Rule to estimate the size reduction of the object as it falls.
Note that the distances from the apex are 
squares: 4 = 22, 9 = 32, 16 = 42, and so on. 
If it’s easier for you to work with the total 
distances by recalling them as square 
numbers, then you can certainly do so.
Fourth Down at Half Time
This method starts with the total distance and time of the fall, and calculates 
the in-betweens. A key in the middle of two other keys occurs at the halfway 
point in time between them, but at one fourth the distance.

 
F O R C E S  
67
Physically accurate falling on left, falling à la 
Chai on right.
The Fourth Down at Half Time rule is easy to visualize in a graph editor.
Falling à la Chai
Prof. Dave Chai developed this extension of Fourth Down at Half Time that 
isn’t as accurate, but is a decent approximation and very easy to use.
1. Draw an interval from fi rst and last keys.
2. Divide the interval in half. Mark a key.
3. Divide fi rst interval in half. Mark a key.
4. Divide fi rst interval in half. Skip.
5. Divide fi rst interval in half. Mark a key.
MOVING AND FALLING
Consider a ball rolling off  a table. As soon as the ball leaves the table it is 
subject to gravity, but the ball also has some forward motion that causes it to 
fall away from the table.
To fi gure out how the ball will fall, you can combine the forward motion and 
the falling motion to fi gure out the keyframes. At the moment the ball leaves 
the table, its horizontal motion can be considered uniform motion.
The ball’s motion due to gravity is always the same, so you can easily fi gure 
out its vertical motion. Combine the horizontal and vertical motion, and you 
have the correct path of action for the ball’s motion.
Key positions for falling ball, incorporating both vertical motion due to gravity 
and uniform horizontal motion.

68 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Examples of parabolas.
Water ejected from a water fountain follows a parabolic 
arc as it ascends against gravity and falls due to gravity.
An object on which the only force is 
gravity is called a projectile in physics.
The height and width of the arc depend on the initial horizontal and vertical 
velocity, which are determined by the degree of force used to get the object 
into the air and the angle at which the force is applied.
Projectile Velocity
For the purpose of understanding how a projectile’s speed is aff ected by 
gravity, we divide the projectile’s velocity into two separate parts: horizontal 
and vertical. The angle at which the projectile is projected into the air 
determines how much of the initial velocity is vertical and how much is 
horizontal. The vertical component of the velocity is slowed by the force of 
gravity until it reaches the apex, and then it speeds up as the object falls. 
Compare with the horizontal component, which could be considered to be 
unopposed by any noticeable forces. In other words, the vertical velocity 
changes over time while the horizontal velocity does not.
ASCENDING AGAINST GRAVITY
When an object is thrown or ejected up in the air, it is aff ected by gravity in 
the same way, just in reverse. The object decelerates until it reaches the 
apex, then descends with the exactly the same pattern of motion.
The motion of ascending against gravity then falling due to gravity follows 
the line of a parabola, or parabolic arc. The arc can be wide or narrow, short 
or tall, depending on a few diff erent factors.
A parabola, in mathematics, is a symmetric 
and somewhat U-shaped curve.

 
F O R C E S  
69
Changes in vertical velocity follow the same rules as an object thrown straight 
up in the air. The vertical velocity decreases due to gravity and reaches 0 at 
the apex of the parabola, then increases due to gravity as the projectile falls. 
For this motion, you would use the Odd Rule or other method for determining 
the vertical spacings between keys or frames.
The horizontal velocity of the projectile is unopposed by any force (except 
maybe a little wind or air resistance), and theoretically could keep going 
infi nitely in the horizontal direction if gravity didn’t pull the projectile to the 
ground.
The speed and motion on each side of the arc are symmetric. Exactly opposite 
where the projectile was fi red, the projectile’s speed is exactly the same as it 
was when fi red. 
To fi gure out the keyframes for any parabolic motion, you can start with the 
parabola and simply draw vertical lines, evenly spaced, to determine the 
object’s location at various frames. You can also start with the timing and key 
positions to sketch the arc.
In your software’s curve editor the 
horizontal motion will be a straight line, 
while the vertical motion will follow a 
parabolic arc.

70 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
CENTER OF GRAVITY
The center of gravity is the average position of an object’s weight distribution. For 
simple, uniform objects, the center of gravity is located at the geometric center.
For objects with more weight on one end than the other, the center of gravity 
will be closer to the heavier end.
Most objects are irregular, so the exact center of gravity might be hard 
to discern. But you can fi nd a reasonably accurate center of gravity by 
considering the weight of diff erent parts of the object.
Consider a hammer where the head is four times heavier than the handle. 
In this case, the center of gravity is four times closer to the head than to the 
center of the handle.
The center of gravity is also sometimes 
called the center of mass. Technically the 
center of mass and the center of gravity 
are diﬀ erent, but as long as the force of 
gravity is constant (as it generally is, close 
to the Earth’s surface), the two are at the 
same location.
Such a calculation will give you a center of gravity that’s close enough to be 
accurate to work for animation.
The center of gravity can also be located outside an object.
An object will balance if pivoted exactly above or below its center of gravity. 
If the center of gravity is below the pivot, the balance will be stable, meaning 
it can withstand a bit of shifting and still stay balanced.
Stable and unstable balances. All are unstable except the last one, which is stable 
because the CG is below the pivot.

 
F O R C E S  
71
You can fi nd an object’s center of gravity by hanging it by a string a couple 
of diff erent ways. Follow a line through the string each time you hang it. The 
place where the two lines cross is the center of gravity.
The center of gravity always seeks to respond to gravity. In other words, it is 
always trying to go as close to the ground as possible. This means that when 
you shift or move a suspended object, it will always try to settle again with 
the center of gravity as close to the ground as it can get.
Line of Gravity
The line of gravity is an imaginary line that goes through an object’s center of 
gravity, toward the center of the Earth.
For an object sitting on the ground, the object’s center of pressure is the point 
where the line of gravity intersects the ground.
Tipping and Center of Gravity
An object’s base of support is the area of the object that touches the ground it 
is sitting on. When an object has more than one area of contact, the base of 
support includes the area between the contact points. 
In physics, the Center of Pressure is also 
sometimes called the Zero Moment Point 
(ZMP). The term moment can have many 
diﬀ erent meanings in physics, none of 
them meaning “a brief instant of time.” The 
physics deﬁ nitions have more to do with 
distance from a reference point.

72 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
If the center of pressure is within the base of support, the object is 
balanced. If the center of pressure is outside the base of support, the 
object will tip in the direction of the center of pressure.
Balanced and unbalanced objects. The object on the right is unbalanced and will 
tip over.
When trying to work out whether an object will tip over, you can also 
think of it in terms of the center of gravity not wanting to shift away 
from the ground. If tipping would cause the center of gravity to move 
up away from the ground, the object will not tip on its own. If the center 

 
F O R C E S  
73
of gravity doesn’t have to go up in order for the object to tip over, the 
object will tip.
A wobbly toy with an egg-shaped bottom is a familiar example. This bottom-
heavy toy wobbles but doesn’t fall over because its CG is placed in such a way 
that the CG would rise if the toy tipped over.
Lowering and Raising the CG
An object can be made more stable by lowering its center of gravity. This can 
be accomplished by placing weights in specifi c parts of the object.
The box on the left is unstable and will tip, while the box on the right is stable 
due to a lower CG.

74 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Friction
Friction is a force that resists motion when surfaces in contact move relative 
to one another. You experience friction every time you push or roll something 
across a surface.
At a molecular level, friction results from the reaction of charged particles 
between the two surfaces. Because there are so many surfaces that can come 
into contact with one another, there is a large variety of friction forces that 
can be generated, and exact calculations of friction are diffi  cult to make. 
However, there are a few basic rules that you can use when planning your 
animation.
STATIC AND KINETIC FRICTION
Friction can prevent motion altogether. If you try to push something that isn’t 
bolted down and it won’t move, friction is what’s keeping it in place. When 
you walk across the fl oor, it’s friction that keeps your foot from sliding. Your 
foot pushes backward, and the friction between the fl oor and your shoe 
keeps the shoe from sliding and allows you to propel your body forward.
Static friction is the type of friction that keeps objects from moving altogether 
at the point of contact. Note that other parts of the object might be moving, 
but if the point of contact isn’t moving, it’s static friction. The friction between 
the fl oor and your shoe during walking is static friction. 
Static friction is a big part of everyday life. It’s the reason why stuff  doesn’t just 
slide all over the place all the time. When you’re eating dinner, for example, a 
little bump to the table doesn’t usually cause all the dishes and silverware to 
slide all over the place. There’s enough static friction between the table and 
the dinnerware to keep things from moving very much.
One way to understand the static friction 
is to imagine a world without it. What if 
everything you touched was covered in 
slippery oil, and the ground was made of 
ice? It would be hard to pick up or move 
objects, climb ladders and stairs, walk or 
ride anywhere, or even sit in a chair. Every 
time you shifted a little in your chair, you’d 
be in danger of sliding oﬀ  it.

 
F O R C E S  
75
Static friction plays an important role in action scenes. A character must push 
at the fl oor or other solid objects with his feet to jump, run, fi ght, push or 
pull other characters, etc. Without static friction, these motions wouldn’t be 
possible.
There would be no martial arts without static friction, and without martial arts 
there would be no Jackie Chan movies. Let us be thankful that static friction 
exists on our planet.
Static friction makes it possible for wheels to roll. When force is applied to a 
wheel to move it forward, the part of the wheel in contact with the ground 
resists sliding, and the wheel “tips over” continually to produce a rolling 
motion.
When you push a box, it might not slide but instead will tip. A tall box is more 
likely to tip than a fl at box because it’s easier to push its center of gravity off  
its base of support. See the Torque section for more about tipping.

76 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
While an object is sliding, the force resisting the sliding during motion is 
called kinetic friction. Kinetic friction is usually lower than static friction. This 
means that once you get that box sliding across the fl oor, it usually takes less 
force to keep it moving. Kinetic friction is sometimes called sliding friction.
FRICTION ON FLAT SURFACES
When the two contacting surfaces are relatively fl at, friction is related to both 
the heaviness of the object and the roughness of the surface. Pushing a 
heavy box across a rough surface is harder than pushing a small stone across 
a smooth surface. 
Note that the amount of friction is not related to the amount of surface 
contact. A tall box resists your pushing with exactly the same amount of static 
friction when standing up as it does when it’s lying down. If surface contact 
is very small, the object is more likely to tip, but it still resists moving with the 
same amount of static friction.
FRICTIONLESS SURFACES
There is no such thing as a frictionless surface, but a few things come close. 
Here are some examples of object/surface pairs with very little friction 
between them:
• 
Puck on air hockey table
• 
Ice skates on ice
It’s more likely that an animation task will involve ice than air hockey pucks. In 
life, there is always friction between any two objects, so objects in motion will 
always slow down eventually if no additional force is applied. However, the 
idea of ice being frictionless makes for great action in animation.
COEFFICIENT OF FRICTION
In physics, we measure the amount of friction generated between pairs of 
surfaces and get a number called the coeffi  cient of friction. A higher coeffi  cient 
of friction means more friction between the surfaces. 

 
F O R C E S  
77
A coeﬃ  cient is just a number you can 
use in multiplication to help you make 
calculations, or to help you understand the 
relative qualities of diﬀ erent things. In this 
chart, a pair of materials with a coeﬃ  cient 
of friction of 0.25 is twice as slippery as 
materials with a value of 0.5. You can 
think of a coeﬃ  cient as a fancy word for “a 
number you multiply by other numbers, or 
compare with other numbers, to help you 
ﬁ gure stuﬀ  out.”
The coeffi  cient of friction is just a number on a scale. The number is useful 
mostly for comparison’s sake—for diff erent pairs of materials in your scene, 
you can look up the coeffi  cient of friction for each one and compare them. 
The pair with the lower coeffi  cient of friction is more slippery, and your 
animation should refl ect this.
Note Tefl on’s low coeffi  cient of friction with other materials, including itself. 
Also note that wet pavement is more slippery than dry pavement.
EFFECTS OF FRICTION
Another result of friction is wear and tear on an object. Each time an object 
comes in contact with something, bits and pieces of it wear off . After repeated 
encounters with another object, it will show visible wear in that spot.
A common side eff ect of friction is heat, sometimes a great deal of it. Rubbing 
two sticks together can set them on fi re; tires skidding on the road can 
generate enough heat to melt some of the rubber off  the tires.
Rolling resistance, a force related to friction, will bring any vehicle to a stop 
eventually. As a tire rolls, any given spot on the tire will squash slightly 
when it reaches the contact point between the tire and the road. Then the 
wheel turns and the tire recovers its volume in that spot, then the wheel 
goes around and the cycle begins again. Each time the tire squashes or 
regains its shape, energy is lost in the form of heat. If the car is coasting 
Material #1
Material #2
Coeffi  cient of Friction
Aluminum
Aluminum
1.4
Copper
Cast Iron
0.29
Leather
Wood
0.5
Rubber
Dry asphalt
0.5–0.8
Rubber
Wet asphalt
0.25–0.75
Rubber
Dry concrete
0.6–0.85
Rubber
Wet concrete
0.45–0.75
Steel
Cast Iron
0.23
Steel
Lead
0.95
Hard Steel
Hard Steel
0.42
Steel
Zinc (Plated on steel)
0.45
Tefl on
Steel
0.04
Wood
Wood
0.25–0.5
Wood
Wet Metal
0.2
Wood
Brick
0.6
Wood
Concrete
0.62

78 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
and no additional force is applied, the vehicle will eventually come to a stop 
because of this energy loss. 
The amount of rolling resistance a vehicle experiences is strongly related 
to how squashy the wheels or road are. Even metal and hard plastic have a 
degree of squashiness, albeit very small. You might have noticed that roller 
skates on a smooth, fl at surface can go quite a way without any force, while a 
bicycle with a fl at tire is very hard to pedal. A train with steel wheels on a steel 
track can coast for quite a while, but a car with low air pressure in its tires will 
stop of its own accord after a very short distance. 
Pressure and Gases
In physics, the three phases of matter are solid, liquid, and gas. If something 
isn’t a solid or liquid, then it’s a gas. 
The most common gas you encounter in everyday life is air, which is actually 
a composite of many elemental gases such as oxygen and nitrogen. Other 
gases that are part of our experience are:
• 
Steam, which is water in gas form
• 
Carbon dioxide, which forms the bubbles in soda pop. Also, your body 
expels carbon dioxide when you breathe
• 
Helium inside balloons
The hallmark of a gas is that it can easily be compressed, unlike solids and 
liquids. An example is air in a bicycle inner tube, where air is compressed by 
forceful blowing of a large amount of air into a small space. The air inside the 
inner tube is highly compressed compared to the air outside the tube.
Gases can be compressed inside an elastic casing such as a balloon, tire, or 
raft, or inside a rigid casing such as an oxygen tank or helium tank. Air in the 
atmosphere can also be made to compress and expand. In nature, other types 
of gases can become compressed underground or inside plants or animals. 
Man-made chemical reactions can also cause gases to form and expand. 
Compressed gas naturally seeks to expand. If there’s a way out of the 
container, the gas will escape in an eff ort to reach the same pressure as the 
air on the outside of the container. 
An elemental gas is a gas that appears on 
the Periodic Table of Elements (see the 
chapter on Matter and Masses). If it’s not 
on this table, the gas is a composite of 
elemental gases.

 
F O R C E S  
79
When gas is under pressure inside a container that’s designed to withstand a 
certain amount of pressure, the gas exerts a force on the container walls. The 
container, in turn, pushes back with an equal and opposite force, keeping 
the container closed and solid to keep the gas inside the container. In the 
case of an elastic container, the container is designed to expand but still hold 
the compressed gas inside.
In animation, pressurized gas just sitting around in a container or in the 
atmosphere isn’t very exciting to watch because there’s no visible action or 
motion. The real action happens when the gas pressure changes. A change to 
gas pressure can cause some pretty spectacular motion such as:
• 
Bomb explosion
• 
Rocket launch
• 
Strong wind
• 
Character sucked out of a fl ying airplane
Pressure is measured as force (weight) 
per area of the container. An example is 
pounds per square inch (psi), a measure 
commonly used to measure air pressure 
inside tires.
Boyle’s Law states that the pressure in a 
gas increases when the gas is compressed. 
When a gas is allowed to expand into 
a larger volume of space, the pressure 
decreases.
Each of these reactions is due to a sudden increase or decrease in gas 
pressure. 
Increases in pressure are generally due to one of two causes: heat or chemical 
reaction. 
PRESSURE INCREASE FROM HEAT
When a gas heats up, its molecules move around a lot more, causing the gas 
as a whole to expand. This causes the gas’s pressure to change, either 
increasing or decreasing in pressure depending on whether it’s in a container.

80 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Heated Gas in a Container
If a gas heats up when it’s trapped inside a container, its volume can’t change, 
so its pressure goes up. With enough pressure, the container can blow apart. 
An example is an unbroken egg heated up in the microwave. The heat causes 
the embryo inside to give off  steam, which puts enough pressure on the shell 
to blow it apart. This is one of the basic principles of explosions, which are 
covered in more detail in the Fire and Explosions chapter.
Normal pressure on container (left) and 
increased pressure due to increased 
molecular movement from heat (right).
Egg exploding due to increased heat and pressure.
Heated Air in Atmosphere
When a heated gas isn’t in a container, it has lots of room to spread out. Its 
volume increases, and its pressure decreases.
If a small amount of air gets heated, such as the air above your stove when 
cooking, the heat will simply expand and mix with the cooler air around it, and 
over a short time all the air in the house is again the same temperature and 
density. But in our atmosphere, large swaths of air can become “contained” 
within a region, preventing it from spreading out and mixing with other air 
around it. In the same way that a gas that is heated in a container increases 
the air pressure in that container, air in our atmosphere that is heated in a 
contained region can become a zone of high pressure as well. 
Air in our atmosphere expands from heat, but it can only expand so much 
before it encounters an obstacle, such as another region of air or a mountain 
range, that prevents its expansion. If it can expand into enough space, its 
pressure goes down. But if it is contained by adjacent areas, its pressure 
goes up. 
Another feature of heated gases is that if they expand enough, they become 
lighter than the gases around them and rise up. In a very simple weather 
Gas expanding into a larger area, resulting in 
decreased pressure.

 
F O R C E S  
81
scenario, the Sun heats the ground, and then heat from the ground heats the 
air above it. The heated air expands enough to make it less dense. The heated 
air then rises, and cooler air around it moves in to replace it. The resultant 
diff erence in air pressure causes wind as the cool air rushes in.
The air in our atmosphere heats up not 
directly from the Sun’s heat, but from heat 
given oﬀ  by the ground below it.
Since not all parts of the Earth heat up at the same rate, there are diff erences 
in the amount of heat coming off  the ground, which leads to large regions of 
heated air that are trying to expand. Cooler air tends to be denser than hot, 
expanding air, which makes it sink toward the ground and cause additional 
changes in pressure and air movement.
Formation of sea breeze.
Pressure changes cause a sea breeze, a light wind that often blows from the 
sea toward land in the late afternoon. Sea breezes happen because land 
heats up more than water on a sunny day. Warm air above the hot land rises 
and expands over the cooler water, leaving behind a low-pressure region. 
Because the air is moist near a body of water, a cloud is also likely to form. 

82 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
The air over the water cools and sinks, creating a high-pressure region 
near the water’s surface. Because high pressure always seeks to move into 
low pressure, the cool air over the water moves toward the hot air on land, 
creating the sea breeze.
Predicting weather is not always straightforward. Both hot and cold air 
pockets can develop and move in many diff erent ways depending on time 
of day, temperature, lay of land, position on the Earth, time of year, behavior 
of regional winds, and so on. Weather moves and changes constantly; high- 
and low-pressure systems can move into and out of any area at any time, 
and there are as many variations on what can happen when air is heated and 
cooled as there are geographical regions.
The divisions of these areas are often 
shown in weather reports as “high-pressure” 
and “low-pressure” systems. 
The variations on warm/cool and high/low pressure are many and often 
unpredictable, which is why the weather report isn’t always accurate. 
Unless you’re planning a career as a meteorologist, you don’t need to know 
all these variations. The only thing you really need to know is that when a 
high-pressure and low-pressure system meet, with the boundary between 
these two systems forming either a cold front or a warm front, something is 
going to happen. The eff ects of these meetings can be quite large and can 
be felt not only as wind, but can cause sudden drops in temperature, intense 
precipitation, thunderstorms, and tornadoes.
CHEMICAL REACTION
A chemical reaction can also cause gases to form and expand. Burning wood 
is a chemical reaction that forms smoke; mixing baking soda and vinegar 
In weather terminology, a front is a 
boundary between air masses of diﬀ erent 
temperatures.

 
F O R C E S  
83
produces carbon dioxide gas; a combustion engine works by repeatedly 
mixing air with a mist of fuel and sparking it up for a small explosion.
If the creation of gases takes place in open air and not inside a container, the 
gases expand into the air and thus are not under excessive pressure. Even so, 
the gases might be visible and would need to be animated in any scene that 
includes these types of reactions.

84 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
FORCE FROM PRESSURE DECREASE
If a container of pressurized gas is suddenly released, the compressed gas 
rushes out, creating a force in the direction opposite the rush.
Propellants work with this principle. A propellant is a liquid or solid that turns 
to gas easily and generates a large amount of gas in relation to the original 
volume of propellant. The gas is generated in a small space and is allowed to 
escape through a nozzle or other small opening. The gas, in rushing out very 
fast, can cause the object to move in the opposite direction. Propellants are 
used in rockets, guns, and aerosol sprays.
A puncture in a scuba tank creates the same eff ect—as the pressurized 
air quickly and forcefully expands out of the hole, it throws the tank in the 
opposite direction. This type of reaction is discussed in the Fire and Explosions 
chapter.
ATMOSPHERIC PRESSURE
The air around the Earth, called the atmosphere, is held to the Earth by 
gravity. The atmosphere fades away gradually the farther it is from the 
Earth’s surface. Our weather is contained within an area about 50km/30 miles 
thick.
Aerosol spray works by using a 
pressurized gas to push out a ﬁ ne mist of 
liquid particles.
The atmosphere is constantly being pulled toward the center of the Earth 
by the force of gravity. Because of this force, the air at the Earth’s surface is 
under pressure from all the air all the way up to the farthest reaches of the 
atmosphere. This makes the air at the Earth’s surface denser than air higher 
up. You can think of it as the air weighing more the closer you get to the 
Earth’s surface.

 
F O R C E S  
85
You can read more about the Earth’s 
atmosphere in the Earth and Outer Space 
chapter.
Skydiving positions for free fall.
Since the force from air pressure is pretty constant for objects near the surface of 
the Earth, it doesn’t cause any visible motion to stationary objects. But if an object 
moves very far up in the air, it experiences a force due to changes in pressure.
A classic example is an airplane at fl ying altitudes, where the air pressure is 
much lower than on the surface of the Earth. The airplane’s cabin is closed up 
tight before it takes off , creating a container for the normal air pressure on 
the ground. While the airplane is in the air, the air pressure inside the cabin is 
much greater than outside the cabin.
If an airplane door is opened at high altitudes, the pressurized air rushes 
out to equalize with the low-pressure air outside. This rush of air is short but 
quite violent—any loose objects close to the door, including the unfortunate 
person who opened it, might be pulled outside with the air. After a few 
moments the pressure inside and outside are equal, and the force is gone.
Air Resistance
When an object falls, it pushes the air underneath it, creating greater pressure 
under the falling object. This pressure then pushes back up at the object, 
slowing the fall. The pressure pushing back up is called air resistance.
A skydiver’s parachute catches extra air resistance, causing the diver to slow 
down enough to make a safe landing.
The amount of air resistance depends on the object’s velocity and surface 
area. A skydiver can change the amount of air resistance on his or her body by 
assuming diff erent positions while free falling, thus increasing or decreasing 
the speed of descent.
As an object falls, air resistance builds up. 
At some point, the resistance reaches a 
level of force that keeps the object from 
accelerating any more. The speed at 
which this happens is called the terminal 
velocity for the object. Large raindrops, for 
example, have a terminal velocity of about 
10m/sec, or 20mph.

86 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Aerodynamic Lift
Air pressure is also why airplanes can fl y. When air fl ows over an airplane 
wing, the air over the top of the wing moves faster due to the wing’s shape. 
When air has to move faster, the pressure is less than when the air moves 
slower. Thus the pressure under the wing is comparatively greater, pushing 
up the airplane. This process is called aerodynamic lift. 
Air at atmospheric pressure approaches the wing, and separates into low and 
high pressure air.
An airfoil on a race car pushes it down for better friction. In this case, the 
“aerodynamic lift” is downward.
Air resistance can also aff ect objects thrown through the air, such as a 
baseball. If the baseball spins, its spin provides a force that goes against air 
resistance on one side, and complements air resistance on the other. This 
causes the ball to rise or dip depending on the direction of the spin.
Pressure Differences in Action
Diff erences in air pressure are responsible for forces in a variety of animation 
situations.

 
F O R C E S  
87
A vacuum cleaner operates from the principle of diff erences in air pressure. 
The vacuum creates a low-pressure area at one end of the hose, causing air 
at normal atmospheric pressure to rush toward the low pressure and suck up 
any objects in the air’s path along with it.
With a tornado, high-speed winds create large pressure diff erences which 
cause strong forces that pull objects into the center of the tornado. Outside 
the tornado, air pressure is normal; inside the tornado, pressure is low. This 
pressure diff erence causes air from outside the tornado to rush to its center, 
pulling dust and debris with it.
Aerodynamic lift and air resistance defl ect a leaf’s path of action. If there’s 
no wind, the leaf slows when it rises and speeds up as it falls. The forces vary 
with the speed and angle of the moving leaf. The timing, spacing, and path 
of action are complex and unpredictable, but you can create a believable 
animation by interpreting the forces over the many instances of time.
Torque
Review:
• 
Classical Physics > Motion and Timing > Circular Motion
When a force on a hinged or jointed object causes rotation or a tendency to 
rotate, we identify this eff ect as torque. 
Torque is the circular thrust or action that results when a force is applied to 
the object. Doors, scissors, wrenches, seesaws, crowbars, and even human 
limbs all operate with torque. 
Motion of a door on a hinge.

88 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
TORQUE BASICS
In the Circular Motion section in the Motion and Timing chapter, you learned 
that starting an object moving with circular motion requires two forces to be 
applied perpendicular to one another. 
Consider a hinged door, where the hinge can be considered to be at the 
center of the circle and the edge of the door is at the outside of the circle. 
When you push the outside of the door to start it moving, the hinges exert a 
force to hold one end of the door while you push the other end. The resulting 
eff ect is circular motion of the door, and torque.
TORQUE TERMINOLOGY
Talking about torque is made easier by learning a few key terms. Here, we’ll 
look at these terms as they apply to a hinged door.
• 
The hinge provides an axis of rotation for the object, also called the pivot 
or fulcrum.
• 
The door itself acts as a lever, which is defi ned as a rigid object connected 
to a pivot of some kind. 
• 
The distance from the fulcrum to the point where the force is applied is 
called the lever arm.
MAXIMIZING TORQUE
When learning to push open doors, you probably fi gured out early on that 
pushing the door at the edge farthest from the hinge requires less force than 
pushing in the middle. This is because the farther from the pivot that you 
push, the more torque is produced with the same amount of force.
Torque is the result of forces, but is not 
itself considered a force.

 
F O R C E S  
89
You’ve also probably noticed that pushing directly perpendicular to the door 
produces the most motion, while an angled push doesn’t work as well.
From these observations, you can see that the degree of torque depends on:
• 
The magnitude of the force, or how hard the lever is pushed or pulled
• 
The direction of the force, with a force perpendicular to the lever arm 
giving the most torque
• 
The distance from the pivot at which the force is applied, which might be 
less than the length of the lever itself
Pushing toward the hinge produces zero torque. In order to have torque, the 
force must be at an angle to the lever.
Visualizing Torque
To visualize the magnitude of the torque, you can draw a trapezoid, using the 
lever arm and force. The larger the trapezoid, the larger the torque.
A lever, by deﬁ nition, is a rigid beam 
attached to a pivot. The beam can be any 
solid object that resists bending. A lever’s 
axis of rotation is called the fulcrum.
Large torque.
Small torque.
Torque is largest when the lever arm is long, the force is large, and the two 
are perpendicular.
Calculating Torque
When the force being applied is perpendicular to the lever, the formula for 
torque is expressed as the radius times the force being applied. 

90 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
T = rF
Here, radius means the length of the arm or lever being used. It’s called radius 
because it’s actually the radius of the big circle around which the force is 
being applied as the object moves in a circular pattern.
From this formula, you can see that if you increase the radius, the torque 
goes up. This means that if you get a longer wrench, you can apply less force 
and get the same torque. Or, you could apply the same force with the longer 
wrench and get a greater torque. If you apply force closer to the center of the 
circle, you’ll get less torque.
Torque is affected by radius of circle of movement. With the same force applied 
to all three wrenches, the torque produced on the middle and right wrenches is 
less than the torque produced on the left wrench.
LEVER SYSTEMS
Levers are important in engineering because they provide a way to convert a 
small force into a larger force in the same direction, or into a force in the 
opposite direction. 
The force pushing on the lever is called eff ort. The object or weight being 
moved by the lever is the load. Each provides torque in opposite directions. 
If the eff ort torque is greater than the load torque, the lever will start rotating 
in the direction given by the eff ort. 
The distance from the fulcrum (pivot) to the place where the force is applied 
is called the lever arm or eff ort arm. The distance from the fulcrum to the load 
is called the load arm.

 
F O R C E S  
91
In physics, the term simple machine 
means a construction that converts a 
force into another force, changing the 
direction or magnitude of a force. A 
lever system is considered to be a simple 
machine, classiﬁ ed in the same grouping 
with wheels, pulleys, and other basic 
devices. Lever systems have been in use 
ever since our ancestors discovered they 
could move a heavy boulder by prying 
underneath it with a solid, heavy stick 
(lever) resting on a small rock (fulcrum).
The term lever can mean more than just the rigid bar, beam, or board being 
moved. If you do additional research on levers outside this book, you will 
sometimes fi nd the term lever being used to refer to a lever system that 
includes both the rigid bar and the fulcrum. In this text, to avoid confusion, we 
refer to the rigid bar as the lever, and the lever-and-fulcrum set as a lever system.
Efficiency vs. Speed
There are many ways to construct a lever system, each with unique 
advantages and disadvantages. In general, the farther the eff ort is from the 
fulcrum, the less force you have to apply to make the lever move. 
Efficient/Slow Lever Systems
When the fulcrum is closer to the load than to the eff ort, the lever system is 
said to be effi  cient but slow. A small force is needed to move the lever, but the 
lever moves the load by a smaller distance than the eff ort does. 
With lever systems, the term effi  ciency 
refers to force eﬃ  ciency. A more eﬃ  cient 
lever requires less force to move the load 
than an ineﬃ  cient lever.
Efﬁ cient but slow lever systems.
Effi  cient/slow lever systems provide a larger mechanical advantage, putting 
out more force at the load end than is exerted at the eff ort end. Such lever 
systems are ideal for everyday tools that convert normal human force to a 
larger force that can perform tasks you can’t do with your hands alone. A set 
of pliers is an example of such a lever system, converting the force from 
normal human strength to a big enough force to unscrew tight bolts.
Inefficient/Fast Lever Systems
When the eff ort is closer to the fulcrum than the load is, the lever is said to be 
ineffi  cient but fast. A large force is needed to move the lever, but the load 
moves very quickly relative to the movement of the eff ort. 

92 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Inefﬁ cient but fast lever systems.
Ineffi  cient/fast lever systems have a smaller mechanical advantage, where 
the force you get back is smaller than the force you put in. Still, such levers are 
useful in everyday tools where it’s advantageous to sacrifi ce force for speed. 
A broom is an example of a lever system of this type. When you use a broom, 
you want the sweeping end of the broom to move faster than your arms. 
A broom doesn’t weigh much, so the force required from your arms to make 
this happen is easy enough to provide. 
The term mechanical advantage is used 
to talk about the amount of return you get 
on your investment of force with a lever 
system. A larger mechanical advantage 
means you can produce a bigger force 
on the load end than you expend on the 
eﬀ ort end. This term is also used when 
talking about other types of machines like 
gear systems and pulleys.

 
F O R C E S  
93
Second Class Levers
In a second class lever, the fulcrum is on one end, the eff ort force is on the 
other end, and the load is in between. Because the load always moves less 
than the eff ort force, second class levers are always effi  cient and slow.
Examples of second class levers are a wheelbarrow and a hole punch.
A seesaw rocks when the forces on each 
side alternately change. With two children 
of equal weight, one child temporarily 
lowers the force from her weight by 
pushing oﬀ  the ground. At the same time 
the full weight of the other child pushes 
down on her end of the seesaw, causing 
her side to lower to the ground. Then 
the child on the ground pushes oﬀ , the 
opposite side experiences more force 
than the pushing side and lowers to the 
ground, and the cycle continues.
Neutral Efficiency
If the load and eff ort arms are the same length, the lever system has neutral 
effi  ciency. A playground seesaw has neutral effi  ciency because the fulcrum is 
in the center of the lever, making the load arm and eff ort arm the same 
length.
LEVER SYSTEM CLASSES
Lever systems can also be classifi ed according to the relative locations of the 
eff ort, load, and fulcrum. 
First Class Systems
With a fi rst class lever system, the fulcrum is between eff ort force and load. 
They can be either effi  cient/slow or ineffi  cient/fast, depending on whether 
the fulcrum is closer to the load or the eff ort force.
Scissors and crowbars are examples of fi rst class levers.

94 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Third Class Levers
In a third class lever, the eff ort force is located between the load and the 
fulcrum. Because the load always moves more than the eff ort force, third 
class levers are always ineffi  cient but fast.
Examples of third class lever systems are a broom, tweezers, the human 
elbow, and the human jaw. 
In your elbow, the eff ort arm, which extends between your elbow and where 
the upper forearm attaches to the muscle, is quite small. The eff ort force can 
move the load (your forearm, wrist, and hand) a long distance. When you pick 
up a heavy item, you add even more to the load. 
In the human jaw, strong muscles in your cheeks pull at the jawbone so you 
can open and close your mouth quickly. The fulcrum is located where the 
jawbone meets the skull.

 
F O R C E S  
95
BALANCING TORQUE IN A LEVER SYSTEM
Suppose the load and eff ort forces are unequal, and you want the lever to 
balance. This means you need equal torques on both sides of the fulcrum. 
Recall that the formula for torque is:
T = rF
Torque = Radius * Force
Here, the radius refers to the distance from the fulcrum. In order to balance a 
lever system where one force is larger than the other, the radius on the larger-
force side of the fulcrum needs to be cut down to a proportional fraction of 
the radius on the side with the smaller force. 
For example, suppose you have a 10-pound cat and a 20-pound dog on a 
balanced seesaw. The 20-pound dog exerts twice as much force on the 
seesaw as the 10-pound cat. In order to have both animals create the same 
amount of torque and thus balance the seesaw, the dog’s radius (distance 
from the fulcrum) would have to be half the cat’s radius. 
If you have characters interacting with a lever system in your animation work, 
keeping in mind the relationship between force (weight) and radius (distance 
from fulcrum) will help you convey a sense of the weight of your characters 
and objects.
INCREASING LEVERAGE
Leverage is defi ned as the action of a lever, or the increase in force gained by 
using a lever. Increasing leverage results in an increase in mechanical 
advantage. 
You can increase leverage in a couple of diff erent ways:
• 
Move the load closer to the fulcrum
• 
Move the eff ort farther from the fulcrum
An example of increasing leverage can be seen in the action of removing a 
nail with a crowbar. Less force is required to remove the nail if you can get the 
nail (the load) closer to the fulcrum.

96 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Torque in Animation
A tipping action can be viewed as torque in action. On a tipping object, 
suppose the only force acting on it is gravity. As the angle changes, the 
amount of torque changes. At a shallow angle, there is less torque acting on 
the object. As the angle deepens, the torque increases and the tipping 
motion speeds up.
Moving the load closer to the fulcrum increases leverage.
Wheels slow-out when rolling downhill (and slow-in rolling uphill) due to the 
torque produced by the force of gravity. Unlike tipping motion, the torque on 
a wheel rolling downhill is constant, so the acceleration is constant.
ROTATIONAL INERTIA
The Law of Inertia (Newton’s First Law) tells us that an object tends to keep on 
doing what it’s doing unless a force acts upon it. Rotational inertia is an 
object’s resistance to turning. The greater an object’s rotational inertia, the 
more it resists acceleration from torque. A heavier object has greater 
rotational inertia.
Rotational inertia is determined not only by an object’s weight, but also by 
how the weight is distributed within the object. For the same torque, an object 

 
F O R C E S  
97
with more weight at its center rotates faster than a similar object with its 
weight far from its center. For example, a wheel with most of its weight at 
its center rolls downhill faster than a wheel with its weight shifted to its 
edges.
Two metal pipes with the same overall mass can be made to have diff erent 
rotational inertia by placing more of the weight at the pipe’s ends. The 
weighted pipe will have a greater rotational inertia and will resist rotation 
more than the pipe with an even weight distribution.
Tightrope walkers use this physics property to help them balance. A long 
pole with weights at the ends is more resistant to rotating, and slows the 
tightrope walker’s rotation when he goes off  balance.

98 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Action/Reaction
Newton’s Third Law states that for every action, there is an equal and opposite 
reaction. We can clarify Newton’s Third Law a little further:
• 
For every action force, there is an equal and opposite force. 
• 
Action–reaction forces always occur in pairs, with the same magnitude 
but opposite direction. 
• 
The action and reaction always occur simultaneously on diff erent objects 
or characters. 
If you’ve ever punched a wall, you have a sense of action/reaction. Punching 
a wall hurts! The wall exerts an equal and opposite force back at your hand, 
causing pain and possibly injury.
ACTION/REACTION AND BALANCED FORCES
Recall that when forces are balanced, an object is either unmoving, or moving 
at a constant speed. A pair of forces balance when they are:
• 
Equal in magnitude
• 
Opposite in direction
• 
Acting on the same object
In order for acceleration to occur, unbalanced forces must be present. The 
two forces of an action/reaction pair never balance each other because they 
always act on diff erent objects or characters. This means that an action/
reaction pair of forces can cause acceleration.
ACTION/REACTION WITH TWO MOBILE OBJECTS
Suppose you have two characters who weigh about the same, standing on 
skateboards next to each other. They each hold up a hand and push against 
In older movies, you would sometimes 
see people punching each other out with 
bare ﬁ sts and walking away without any 
apparent injury to their hands. Modern 
shows and movies are getting better with 
this, often showing the hitter cradling his 
hand after a punch while exclaiming how 
much it hurts.

 
F O R C E S  
99
the other, causing them to roll away from one another in opposite directions. 
If each character pushes with the same amount of force each time, who will 
roll the farthest if:
1. The fi rst character pushes while the second character holds his hand 
still?
2. The second character pushes while the fi rst character holds his hand 
still?
3. They both push with the same force?
In the fi rst two scenarios, the characters will roll apart by the same distance. 
Because of the action/reaction principle, both characters experience an 
equal amount of force each time. In the last scenario, they’ll move twice as far 
apart because double the force is being applied. 
ACTION/REACTION AND WEIGHT
So far, we have looked at characters with similar weight. In the last scenario, 
each character rolls about the same distance from the center point. The 
distance they roll will be diff erent if one character is heavier than the other.
Recall that the Law of Acceleration, Newton’s Second Law, states that force 
equals mass times acceleration.
F = ma
This means that if the same amount of force is applied to two objects with 
diff erent weights, the heavier object will accelerate less. 
In the example of the skateboard characters, if one character is heavier than 
the other, the heavier one will move slower than the lighter one. Even though 
the force is the same on the two characters, the acceleration is less on the 
heavier character.

100 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Fight scenes are a common example of the action/reaction with two mobile 
objects in both live action and animation. You can learn more about how 
to animate these types of scenes in the Getting Hit section of the Character 
Animation chapter.
ACTION/REACTION AND FIXED OBJECTS
The objects involved in a pair of action/reaction forces can include a fi xed 
object such as the ground, a fl oor, or a wall. Such action/reaction forces make 
dynamic character motion possible. As the character pushes against the fi xed 
object, the fi xed object “pushes back” and causes the character to move.
For example, if you bend your knees and push against the ground, the equal 
and opposite reaction will cause your body to jump in the air.
While it might seem strange to think of a 
ﬁ xed object pushing back at you, thinking 
of it in this way will help you understand 
the forces at play in character motion.
Note that an action/reaction force is not 
always straight up and down.
When a character walking exerts a force on the fl oor during a step, the 
immediate reaction is force exerted from the fl oor to the character’s foot. 
If the character is unable to exert the force (due to a slippery fl oor, weak 
muscles, or other factors), then the character cannot walk.
If a character is going to push or pull an object with any noticeable weight, 
there must be a fi xed object the character can brace against with enough 
friction, such as the fl oor or ground. Only then can the character get enough 
reaction force from the fl oor or ground to counteract the reaction force from 
the object being pushed or pulled. 

 
F O R C E S  
101
Electricity and Magnetism
Electricity and magnetism are closely related. Let’s take a look at how they 
work, and how understanding them can help you make better visual eff ects 
and animation.
ELECTRICITY
What do you think of when you visualize electricity? Perhaps you see long, 
jagged streaks of light passing through the air like mini lightning fl ashes. Let’s 
take a look at what electricity is really made of, so we can look at ways to 
represent it visually.
In animation, this use of action/reaction is key to animating any kind of 
character action. As an example, in a rescue scene where one character pulls 
another to safety, the character doing the pulling needs a solid surface to 
brace against when pulling the other character. Only then will the forces be 
right to allow one character to pull another.

102 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Electrical Charge
There are two types of electrical charges: negative and positive charges. Like 
charges repel, while opposite charges attract each other. In other words, two 
negative charges will repel each other, as will two positive charges. 
Conversely, negative and positive charges are attracted to one another.
Electrons carry negative charge, while protons carry positive charge. Electrons 
are loosely bound to atoms and have some freedom to move around, while 
protons are tightly locked within the nucleus. Atoms like to be neutral with 
an equal number of protons and electrons, but with relatively little force 
atoms can gain electrons to become negatively charged, or lose electrons to 
become positively charged. Protons, on the other hand, never go anywhere 
unless a huge amount of force is applied.
Atom becoming negatively charged (left) and positively charged (right).
Static Electricity
When an object is simply gathering electrical charge and electricity isn’t 
fl owing, this is static electricity. The electricity is there, waiting to do 
something, but nothing is happening externally (or visually). You see the 
eff ects of this electrical charge only when a positively charged object touches 
or comes close to a negatively charged object, making the electrons jump to 
the positive side. When this happens, it creates a fl ow of electricity. This is 
called a discharge. A discharge results in a neutralization of the negative and 
positive sides, and the electrical fl ow ceases. 
You can generate static electricity on some household objects with friction. 
Polyester clothing tends to build up static electricity in a dryer, causing 
the clothes to stick to one another. You can rub a balloon on your shirt to 
generate enough charge on the balloon’s surface to make it stick to a wall for 
a short time. If you shuffl  e across a carpet, you might get a shock when you 
touch a metal doorknob due to the electrical discharge.

 
F O R C E S  
103
Everyday discharges from static electricity are generally quick and weak, 
generating perhaps a faint spark and a light popping noise. You can 
sometimes see this spark in the dark, but it’s so faint as to be invisible in 
daylight.
Flowing Electricity
Electrons fl ow by jumping from one atom to another within a medium. 
Household electricity is basically electrons being drawn or pushed through a 
wire in this fashion.
To understand how this works, let’s look at a metal wire. Suppose there’s a 
lot of negative charge at one end of the wire and a lot of positive charge 
at the other end. Since opposites attract, the electrons are attracted to the 
positive end, and they start to jump from one atom to the next in a fl ow 
toward the positive end.
Electrical flow can also occur from positively charged atoms moving 
to seek electrons. Either type of flow, whether it’s negatively charged 
electrons or positively charged atoms that are moving, creates electrical 
current.
In order for electricity to keep fl owing, there needs to be a steady supply 
of positive charge at one end and negative charge at the other end. This is 
the principle behind a battery, which has positive charge at one end and 
negative at the other. As soon as some kind of circuit is set up between the 
positive and negative sides, electrons start to fl ow toward the positive end, 
generating electricity. 
In the early days of harnessing electricity for use, it was made to fl ow only 
one way. But today, most electricity in everyday use, such as the electricity 
in household appliances, actually works with electricity continually being 
pushed and pulled back and forth. You don’t have to understand the 
mechanism behind this to represent electricity in animation—the visual 
results of electricity are the pretty much the same regardless of the direction 
of fl ow, or whether it goes one way or both ways.
Flow of electrons through battery circuit.

104 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Conductors vs. Insulators 
Electricity moves well through some substances like metal wiring and salt 
water, so these substances are called conductors. Electricity doesn’t move 
well through substances like rubber, paper, plastic, and styrofoam. These 
substances are called insulators.
Certain metals make good conductors because they have loose electrons. 
Copper atoms, for example, have an extra electron that hangs out outside 
the rest of the atom, only loosely attached. This electron is able to easily jump 
from one atom to the next.
Recall from the Matter and Masses chapter that atoms like to have a certain 
confi guration of electrons, with diff erent numbers of electrons arranged in a 
“shell” around the nucleus. Atoms like to have two electrons arranged closest 
to the nucleus, then eight electrons in the next one or two levels, then 18 in 
the outermost levels.
If one of the shells isn’t “fi lled” (i.e., it doesn’t have the maximum number of 
electrons), the electrons are a bit loose and can move easily from one atom 
to the next. Elements with unfi lled outer shells are great candidates for 
conductors. (There is a lot more to this subject, such as sublevels within the 
shells and so on, but this basic explanation is enough for you to understand 
conductors and insulators.)
Copper, for example, has an atomic number of 29, so it has 29 protons and 
29 electrons. If you do the electron arrangement for copper by the shells, 
you fi nd that it has an outermost shell with just one electron. This electron 
is relatively far from the nucleus and isn’t bound very tightly to it, making it 
easy to dislodge. It is believed that this loose electron is what makes copper 
such a great conductor. 

 
F O R C E S  
105
Knowing about this property of elements with loose electrons, you can make 
basic predictions about the conductivity of various elements that appear in 
your animation.
With a conductor, electrons not only fl ow along the conductor but also move 
quickly to the surface of the object. With an insulator, electrons transferred to 
the object stay stuck inside the object. If a conductive substance is used for 
electricity, it is common for an insulator to be wrapped around or attached to 
it to make it easy for human handling without electrical shock. An example 
is electrical wiring for a household appliance, which is usually covered with a 
plastic or rubbery tube.
Electric Current
Voltage is the measurement of the diff erence between the amount of positive 
and negative charge at each end of the electrical fl ow. You can think of voltage 
as the amount of “push” the electrical current gets through the conductor. 
Every medium that electricity passes through off ers some resistance to the 
fl ow. Electrons are always moving around randomly, but this doesn’t make 
electricity. The electrons in the outer shell need a push to get moving in the 
direction that will cause electricity to fl ow, and they resist moving in that 
direction to some degree. Copper electrons resist this push very little, but 
there is some resistance nonetheless.
The amount of eff ective fl ow that occurs despite the resistance is measured 
as current, expressed as amperes or amps. Resistance is measured in ohms. 
The ohm measurement is named after George Ohm, who also came up with 
Ohm’s Law for calculating voltage, resistance, and current:
Electrical Current = Voltage/Resistance
This formula means that you can fi gure out if the current, resistance, and 
voltage are going up or down when one of these components changes. In 
general, current moves in the same direction as voltage, and the opposite 
direction to resistance. 
You might wonder how copper can 
continue to be copper while electrons are 
continually coming and going. Remember 
that an element is what it is because of 
its number of protons, not the number 
of electrons. An element can lose and 
gain electrons all day and still be what 
it is. If a copper atom ﬁ nds itself missing 
its loose electron when the electricity 
stops ﬂ owing, it will just grab whatever 
electrons are around in the air and settle 
into its usual 29-electron state.

106 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
If electrons are fl owing in one direction, the current is shown on electrical 
diagrams as fl owing in the opposite direction. This is because in our earliest 
understanding of electricity, back in the Ben Franklin days, it was thought that 
all fl ow was positive to negative, and the notation has stuck. If you think about 
it, it still makes sense—in the same way that multiplying two negative numbers 
gives you a positive number, negatively charged electrons moving to the left 
creates a net positive result to the right. We just wanted you to know this in 
case you ever have to look at an electrical diagram in the course of your work.
Electric Shock
If you touch a conductor, you can introduce electricity into your body. If the 
electrical current is suffi  cient to cause injury, this contact is called electric shock.
Human skin is a pretty good conductor, especially when it’s sweaty. The salty 
water in sweat provides additional conductivity. The conductivity of our skin 
is the reason we can get electric shocks.
Human bodies, and most animal bodies, have nervous systems that utilize 
electricity to pass signals through the body. The electrical fl ow is generated 
from a chemical reaction within the body.
Electric shock can range from getting a tiny ping from a car door to being 
zapped by an open wire, struck by lightning, or electrocuted (death by 
electric shock). The electricity that moves through the body follows the path 
of least resistance, which unfortunately is sometimes through the nervous 
system’s existing pathways.
The most serious damage to a body from electric shock is primarily from 
its eff ect on the nervous system, not heat from the electricity. If the electric 
shock disrupts the signal that contracts and relaxes the heart muscle, it stops 
fl ow of blood to the brain and causes death in minutes.
In medicine, the term nervous means 
having to do with nerves, not the everyday 
deﬁ nition of jumpy or jittery.
Human nervous system.
Current (amperes)
Eff ect
0.001
Can be felt
0.005
Painful
0.010
Involuntary muscle spasms
0.015
Loss of muscle control
0.070
Fatal if more than one second long
Effects of electric shock on human body.
Hold Fixed
Change
Result
Voltage
Resistance ↑
Current ↓
Voltage
Resistance ↓
Current ↑
Resistance
Voltage ↑
Current ↑
Resistance
Voltage ↓
Current ↓
The eﬀ ects of a lightning strike on the 
human body are covered in more detail in 
the Lightning section of the Environment 
chapter.

 
F O R C E S  
107
Because electric shock causes muscles to contract, it can be used to fool 
dead muscles into moving. For example, you can zap the leg of a dead 
frog and make the leg muscles contract, which makes the leg itself twitch. 
Even though the frog is defi nitely dead, the nervous system still reacts to 
electricity.
When a storm is brewing, air pressure drops and the air has more electricity 
in it. These subtle changes can often be felt by animals long before human 
beings detect them, which is one reason why dogs get a little crazy before a 
storm. Dogs can also hear thunder before we do.
Sparks and Lightning
When an object is charged, the charge leaches out into the air over time. 
If a positively charged object is near a negatively charged one, the charge 
escaping from the objects can meet up somewhere between them, 
causing a flow of electricity through the air. This flow is visible as a jagged 
line of light (a spark). The air around the spark briefly heats up and 
expands faster than the speed of sound, making a popping or cracking 
sound. 
In the case of everyday sparks like the one you get from putting your hand 
near a doorknob, the difference in charge is neutralized (discharged) 
and you can touch the doorknob a few seconds later without incident. 
But if both objects are continually being charged, sparks will continue 
to fly.
MAGNETISM
A magnet is an object that attracts or repels certain other objects with an 
invisible force. Magnets and electricity are often found together, and can 
work in tandem to produce a variety of forces.
Magnetic Fields
A magnet is surrounded by a magnetic fi eld. A magnetic fi eld has circular 
contours that indicate the directions along which objects are attracted or 
repelled, but it doesn’t really have a “fl ow” associated with it in the way 
electric current does. It’s just a region where objects can be aff ected by the 
magnetism.
With magnets, we label the ends of the fl ow North and South to diff erentiate 
them. Each end is called a pole. The North pole of an object is attracted to the 
South pole of another object. Conversely, the North pole of one object repels 
the North pole of another object.
A household magnet is often U-shaped to create a stronger magnetic force 
between the North and South poles. The fi elds generated by each pole cross 
and magnify one another, creating a larger force than a single end of a bar 
magnet.
Lightning is basically a large spark going 
from a cloud to the ground. Lightning is 
covered in more detail in the Environment 
chapter.
In physics, a fi eld is a region or area 
aﬀ ected by a force. For example, we are all 
aﬀ ected by Earth’s gravitational fi eld.

108 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
A magnetic fi eld can be produced by electricity. Current fl owing through a 
wire produces a magnetic fi eld that loops around the wire. 
Making a Magnet
Magnetism can also be locked into an object so it continues to attract or repel 
other objects after the electrical current is gone. This is only possible with 
certain substances like iron. This is how permanent magnets are produced, 
and how a magnetized nail stays magnetized for a while. 
At an atomic level, electrons are held close to a nucleus because of an 
electrical charge. In any object, these atoms spin and produce a small 
magnetic fi eld, but the fi elds are so randomized that they cancel each other 
out. But in some substances like iron, the electrons like to form groupings 
where all the electrons point the same way, and each group produces a small 
magnetic fi eld fl owing in the same direction. 
If all the groupings are then made to start pointing the same way, the 
magnetic fi elds produced by the alignment multiply and amplify until 
the fi eld is strong enough to attract or repel entire objects. At this point, you 
have a magnet.
Unaligned electron grouping found in most 
elements (left) and aligned electron group-
ing in certain elements like iron (right).
Aligned groupings.
Note that an electrically charged object 
just sitting there without any current 
ﬂ owing through it does not produce a 
magnetic ﬁ eld. It’s the fl owing current that 
produces the magnetic ﬁ eld.

 
F O R C E S  
109
A ferromagnetic substance has electrons that like to form domains and thus 
make it possible to create a magnet. Iron, cobalt, and nickel are ferromagnetic. 
You can make a ferromagnetic object into a permanent magnet by putting 
it close to another magnet for a long period of time. You can also create a 
magnet using electricity, by putting the ferromagnetic object near the 
magnetic fi eld generated by the electricity.
Electromagnets
An electromagnet is a magnet that is constantly being created by a running 
current. Running a current through a coil creates a strong magnetic fi eld 
around the coil. 
Nail being turned into a magnet by being 
placed close to electric current.
Electromagnet.
Many kitchen appliances use a combination of electricity and magnets to 
generate the force that runs the appliance. In one type of simple motor, a 
rectangular wire attached to a spindle sits between two magnets. When 
current runs through the wire, the magnetic fi eld generated by each side of 
the wire is either attracted to or repelled by the magnet, causing the wire 
to turn. After the wire turns 180 degrees, the side that was being attracted 
is now repelled, and vice versa. In this way, the spindle is made to turn. The 
turning spindle can be attached to a hub with spinning blades, as in a blender 
or coff ee grinder. 
For the purposes of scientiﬁ c discussion, 
physicists call these aligned groups 
domains.

110 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
While an electrical current can produce a magnetic fi eld, the reverse is also 
true: a moving magnetic fi eld can create an electrical current, or aff ect an 
existing current. This is called induction.
When a current is induced by an oscillating magnetic fi eld, that current in 
turn produces another magnetic fi eld opposite the fi rst one. This eff ect is 
called self-induction. 
In a power generator, a moving magnet generates electricity. This is the 
opposite of a motor, where electricity moves magnets.
Demagnetization
Heating a magnet randomizes the domains, reducing the magnetic fi eld. 
You can also demagnetize a magnet to some degree by dropping it onto a 
hard fl oor. The shock of impact will randomize some of the aligned 
electrons and thus reduce the magnetic fi eld. If you let the object sit 
undisturbed for a while, it will sometimes reorder its electrons and get 
magnetic again.
Computer hard disks store information by magnetizing (or demagnetiz-
ing) a tiny portion of the media (a byte). Each byte is a 0 or 1 (“off” or 
“on”). A string of many thousands or millions of bytes uniquely define 
a document, picture, or any other kind of file. A strong magnet near a 
storage device can scramble the saved data without physically affecting 
the drive.
To oscillate is to move back and forth in 
a repeating motion. Oscillating electric 
and magnetic ﬁ elds produce familiar 
electromagnetic waves such as radio 
waves, microwaves, and visible light.
Videotape also stores information with magnetization. A videotape can be 
erased quickly by putting it near a strong magnet.

 
F O R C E S  
111
VISUALIZING ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
Electricity and magnetism remain somewhat mysterious to the general 
public, making them great fodder for action in animation and fi lms.
Electric Shock
Getting a strong electric shock doesn’t actually cause a person to light up or 
give off  sparks, but this doesn’t stop fi lmmakers and animators from 
representing electric shock with wild jagged lines of light and even a 
glowing skeleton. A more likely result from electric shock is rapid shaking or 
twitching and hair standing on end, but that’s not nearly as interesting to 
watch.
If you believe the Frankenstein stories, electric shock can even bring a 
patchwork of dead human parts to life.
Electric Current
In the fi lm Iron Man 3, after 13 people are pushed out of a fl ying airplane, Tony 
Stark rescues them by having them grab onto each other and create a human 
chain. To keep them hanging on until they reach a safe landing, he sends 
electricity through them so they won’t be able to open their hands. 
Electricity is magic! It even brings the dead 
to life.

112 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
While a current could cause a muscle contraction in a hand, in reality the 
exact current needed for each person would vary based on gender, skin 
conductivity, muscle mass, and so on. Not enough current and their hands 
wouldn’t clench; too much current and they could suff er heart attacks, burns, 
and organ damage. Stark would have had to control the electrical current 
through 13 people at once, a feat that is highly unlikely to be successful. But 
since we’ve already bought into the idea of a man with an iron fl ying suit, we 
can certainly believe, if only for a few minutes, that Tony Stark can control 
electricity like this. This rescue is often cited as the best scene in the movie.
Magnetism
Since magnetism is invisible and can go through walls, it’s a great tool for 
messing with objects locked up in police storage rooms. Evidence from crime 
scenes is kept under heavy guard, but if you have a strong magnet you can 
destroy it! Well, at least you can in Entertainment Land.
In the TV series Breaking Bad, the characters wish to destroy a computer hard 
drive being stored in an evidence storage room, so they park a truck housing 
a strong magnet outside the police station. As they crank up the magnet’s 
power, small, light objects like paper clips and hanging light fi xtures start to 

 
F O R C E S  
113
respond. Next, entire boxes of evidence fl y at the wall and stick to it. Finally, 
the metal shelves nearest the wall fall over. When the characters shut off  the 
magnet, everything stuck to the wall falls to the fl oor. Needless to say, the 
mission was successful.
In the fi lm The Big Easy, a magnet is used in a clever way to destroy videotape 
evidence. A police offi  cer knows of a videotape in the police station’s 
evidence room that will prove him guilty of a crime. To solve this problem, 
he disguises himself as a thug and throws a strong, heavy magnet through 
a local business’s window. When the police investigate the vandalism, the 
magnet is stored in the evidence room next to the videotape, wiping it out.
EMPs
A strong, rapidly fl uctuating magnetic pulse induces high voltage, causing 
strong electrical currents. An electromagnetic pulse (EMP) like this is a plot 
device frequently found in fi lms. Nuclear bombs, lightning, meteors breaking 
up in the atmosphere, and power line surges can all cause EMPs. Less dramatic 
EMPs are caused by ordinary motors and engines.

This page intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 4
Light and Color
Light and color, along with gravity, are perhaps the most important 
physics subjects for your animation toolbox. As students of art, we spend a 
considerable amount of time pondering how light and color can be portrayed 
to communicate time of day, environment, and physical temperature, and 
subtler concepts like depth and mood. Our lighting and color decisions 
develop from these factors, not from the laws of physics. 
There are plenty of real-life light and color variations to choose from to 
communicate a mood or location artistically. Light/color that follows the laws 
of physics enhances a story and keeps viewers engaged, while unrealistic 
setups can distract your audience and keep them from following the story. 
Understanding the physics of light and color can help you choose the right 
setup that will deliver your artistic vision while still ringing true to your 
audience as physically possible. 
The frost on the windows and the light pattern produced by the lantern on the 
wall tell us about time of day and environment while obeying the laws of physics.

116 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Light and color are important in all the visual arts, from painting to 
cinematography. In animation, light can not only illuminate your scenes, but 
along with color it can be a factor in storytelling. In this chapter, we discuss 
the physics of light and color as they pertain to visual representation.
Light Basics
In physics, Optics is the study of the behavior of light, including how light 
works with sight. The study of optics includes these topics:
• 
Light sources—Things that produce light, such as the Sun or a lamp
• 
Shadows—Dark areas of objects that receive less light than neighboring 
areas
• 
Refl ection—Light bouncing off  an object. Specular refl ection bounces off  
an object at the same angle it hits it, as with a mirror. Diff use refl ection 
bounces at random angles, as with a rough surface such as the Moon
• 
Refraction—Light changing direction when it passes through a transparent 
material, as through water
• 
Scattering—Light bouncing off  an object and scattering in various 
directions, as with fog
• 
Color—Light at diff erent wavelengths, perceived by the brain as diff erent colors
LIGHT AS RAYS
Light acts like rays. Light bounces off  a surface and into your eye. When you 
see an object, you are actually seeing the light refl ected (bounced) off  of it.
Light ray from the lamp bounces off the bowl and into the viewer’s eye.
For the purpose of art and animation, thinking of light as rays helps us a great 
deal in fi guring out where to place light sources in the scene to convey the 
story we want to tell. Light rays behave very predictably, giving us a solid 
basis for working with light in animation.

 
L I G H T  A N D  C O L O R  
117
LIGHT AND REFLECTION
Many optics concepts are based on the behavior of light rays when refl ecting 
off  a smooth, shiny surface such as a mirror. The refl ection of a light ray always 
behaves in exactly the same way when hitting a mirror, and these rules of 
refl ection can be used to predict many other behaviors of light. 
You can predict what a light ray will do when hitting a mirror with the 
following exercise:
1. Draw a line for the mirror surface, and draw the light ray that hits the 
mirror.
2. Draw a line perpendicular to the mirror where the light ray hits it.
3. Look at the angle at which the light ray hits the mirror in relationship to 
this line. The light ray will bounce off  the mirror at exactly the same angle 
to the normal, on the other side of the normal. 
When working with an art director or technical director, you might hear 
specifi c terminology for these angles:
• 
Incident ray—Light ray hitting the mirror
• 
Refl ected ray—Light ray leaving the mirror
• 
Normal line—Perpendicular line dividing the rays
• 
Angle of incidence—Angle between normal and incident ray
• 
Angle of refl ection—Angle between normal and refl ected ray
A normal or surface normal is 
an imaginary line that points out 
perpendicular to the surface. Normals are 
used for calculations of light and color.
A few rules about specular refl ection:
• 
The angle of incidence is always equal to the angle of refl ection.
• 
The incident ray and refl ected ray do not have to be the same length.
• 
There is no particular name for the angle between the incident ray and the 
mirror, but it can always be calculated as 90 degrees minus the angle of 
incidence. It is the same angle on both sides.

118 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
SEEING IN A MIRROR
When you look in a mirror, you are seeing refl ected rays that originated from the 
objects you see in the mirror. The objects you view in the mirror can be much 
farther away from, or closer to, the mirror than you are. As long as the incident 
and refl ection angles are the same, distance from the mirror doesn’t matter.
Seeing a reﬂ ection depends not on distance, but on the incident and reﬂ ection angles being the same.
Because of the way the rays are refl ected back at you, the area you see in the 
mirror is much larger than the mirror itself. It is similar to looking through 
a window, where you see an area much larger than the window itself. To 
determine the range of the area that you can see in front of a mirror, sketch 
out a diagram with a line going from the eye to each edge of the mirror. Then 
draw a line bouncing back off  the mirror at an angle that is at the same angle 
to the perpendicular as the line from each eye. These angles can be diff erent 
for the top and bottom of the mirror. Next, extend out the original lines from 
the eye to the other side of the mirror.

 
L I G H T  A N D  C O L O R  
119
BOUNCING LIGHT RAYS
When light rays bounce off  any object, they are actually behaving exactly as 
they do when bouncing off  a mirror. But because most objects are not as 
smooth and shiny as a mirror, the light rays bounce off  in varying directions 
depending on the normal at the exact spot where the ray hits. 
On any object that isn’t fl at and shiny, some of the rays from a light source 
will bounce off  in another direction and away from your eyes. However, 
these rays will then bounce off  other objects, and continue to bounce 
until their energy is exhausted. Some of these bounced rays reach your 
eyes before they peter out, allowing you to see the parts of the object 
not directly lit by the light source. Because these bounced rays have less 
The ceiling fan blades are higher than the top of the mirror, and the ﬂ oor beneath 
the bed is lower than the bottom of the mirror, but both are visible in the mirror’s 
reﬂ ection. In this image, light rays from these areas bounce off the mirror and into 
the camera’s lens.

120 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
energy, the parts of the object they illuminate are not as bright as the parts 
lit by direct light.
This is why, when you’re outdoors on a bright, sunny day, you can usually see 
everything including objects not directly lit by the Sun. With the Sun as the only 
light source, some areas are bound to be in shadow, not receiving any direct 
light from the Sun. But the sunlight bounces off  the ground, off  water, off  other 
objects, and even off  clouds to illuminate these shadow areas to some degree.
RECIPROCITY AND RAY TRACING
The path of a light ray is always reversible—you can switch the light source 
and viewer and the light ray will follow exactly the same path. This symmetry 
for light rays is called reciprocity.
Even though all the rays in any scene are going in varying directions, 
reciprocity applies for each individual light ray. For this reason, reciprocity 
has a practical application in computer graphics. When calculating light with 
ray tracing, only the light rays that reach the camera need to be calculated. 
Because of reciprocity, the program can calculate only the light rays that go 
from the camera to the light source, rather than calculating every single light 
ray coming from the light source to see if it reaches the camera at some point.

 
L I G H T  A N D  C O L O R  
121
Attenuation means “reduction of strength” 
or “lessening.”
 ATTENUATION
Light rays over a particular area spread out as they get farther from the light 
source, which results in objects farther from the light source receiving less 
light than objects close to the light source. The eff ect of light seeming to 
gradually dim as it travels over a distance is called attenuation.
 As light emanates from a particular point on a light source, its intensity 
reduces by squares. Suppose you consider that the light is at normal intensity 
1 foot from the light source. When the light moves 2 feet away, it is 22 less 
intense (1/4 of normal intensity). When the light moves 3 feet away, it is 32 less 
intense (1/9 of normal intensity).
Intensity = 1/(distance2)
Light reduces in intensity faster when moving through fog or damp air, as the 
water in the air scatters and absorbs the light. Thus, the 1x distance is shorter 
for wet air than for dry, clear air.

122 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Representing attenuation in animated scenes is essential to realism and 
appeal. Many software packages give you an automatic option for calculating 
light attenuation, or for manually attenuating light. 
 PHYSICALLY BASED LIGHTS
Software programs sometimes give you the option of using light sources 
based on lights in real life. Such lights are especially useful for creating 
photoreal renderings to match a known real-life lighting setup, as with 
architectural designs or live action plates. 
The brightness and intensity of physically based lights are measured with a 
few standard terms. The defi nitions below are simplifi ed and generalized, but 
will give you a start in understanding physically based lights.
• 
Candela—Measurement of the brightness of light emitted from a light 
source 
• 
Lumen—Measurement of a light’s brightness in relation to the angle over 
which the light is projected 
• 
Lux—Measurement of light striking a surface
In life, diff erent lights emit diff erent light patterns. For example, a long, tubular 
fl uorescent light emits in a pattern diff erent from an ordinary light bulb. If 
you’re using software to generate physically based lights, you can choose 
an emission shape for your light source that most accurately represents the 
shape of its light pattern.
Physically based lights are sometimes 
called photometric lights.
Emission patterns for different lights.

 
L I G H T  A N D  C O L O R  
123
Diff erent types of lights also shine with faint tints such as yellow or blue. You 
can learn more about this in the Color section.
SHADOWS
A shadow is an area that strong, direct light can’t reach due to obstruction by 
an object. Perhaps because we’ve all been looking at shadows since we were 
children, audiences have some degree of instinct when it comes to how 
shadows should look. This makes it all the more important to create 
reasonably accurate shadows in your scenes. By understanding the physics 
behind shadows, you can make sure your shadows work with your scenes 
and even enhance them.
IES FORMAT
The IES fi le format is used to communicate the many aspects of a physical 
light source such as lumens, candelas, and the shape of light emitted. Light 
manufacturers commonly supply IES fi les on their websites for engineers and 
architects to use when designing structures. IES fi les can also be represented 
visually to show you how the light source will behave. Between the IES fi le for 
a photometric light and a free IES viewer (of which there are several online), 
you can get a pretty good idea of how to represent a physically accurate light 
in your scene.
IES graphs and the shapes of the light emissions they produce (insets).

124 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Which ball is on the table? The distances between the ball and shadow in each 
image tell us the answer.
CAST SHADOWS
A cast shadow is a shadow that appears on a surface when one object blocks 
light to another object’s surface. In animation, we use cast shadows to give 
cues about the distances between objects. Shadows can also tell the viewer 
about the relative sizes and strengths of light sources, the distances between 
light sources and objects themselves.
For simplicity, in this chapter we call the object casting the shadow the caster 
and the object receiving the shadow the receiver.

 
L I G H T  A N D  C O L O R  
125
Umbra and Penumbra
The darkest part of a cast shadow, the part completely blocked by the caster, 
is called the umbra. The lighter part of the shadow is called the penumbra. 
When a single light source casts the shadow, the penumbra fades gradually 
from the umbra to full light. The larger the penumbra, the softer and fuzzier 
the edges of the shadow are.
The sizes of the umbra and penumbra give strong cues about the relative 
sizes of the light source and object, and the distances between the light 
source, caster, and receiver. 
To see how this works, let’s take a look at a square light shining on a ball in 
front of a wall. For the light rays going in the direction of the ball, some light 
rays make it to the wall, while others are blocked by the ball. By sketching lines 
from each end of the light source past the caster to the receiver, we can fi nd 
out where the light is blocked. The area of completely blocked light forms the 
umbra, while the areas that receive some light but not all form penumbras.

126 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Moving the ball closer to or farther from the light source changes the sizes of 
the umbra and penumbra. Changing the size or position of the light source 
relative to the objects also changes the sizes and shapes of the shadow areas.
By sketching out the lines from a light source to casters and receivers, you can 
determine the shapes and sizes of shadows that could appear in your scene. 

 
L I G H T  A N D  C O L O R  
127
The leaf’s stem casts a sharp shadow that touches the object, indicating that the 
stem is sitting on the table. The frond casts a fuzzy shadow from the same light 
source, indicating that the frond curls up off the table.
Sharp and Fuzzy Shadows
In life, all lights produce a penumbra. When the penumbra is small enough to 
be negligible, the shadow’s edge is sharp. A sharp shadow is possible only 
when the caster is very close to the receiver. Diff erences in shadow sharpness 
and fuzziness can give your audience cues as to how far the caster is from the 
receiver.
The size of the penumbra cast by an object can be reduced by:
• 
Moving the caster and receiver closer together
• 
Moving the light source farther away from the caster
• 
Reducing the size of the light source
Conversely, the penumbra can be made larger (and thus softer) by:
• 
Moving the caster and receiver farther apart
• 
Moving the light source closer to the caster
• 
Increasing the size of the light source
These methods can be used to convey motion in animation. For example, 
if a cast shadow’s penumbra is becoming smaller over a number of 
frames, this tells the audience that the caster and receiver are moving 
closer together.
When a light source is very far from the objects in the scene, the light rays 
become almost parallel. This reduces the penumbra to nearly zero when the 
caster is touching the receiver. 

128 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
The Sun, being very far away, delivers such near-parallel light rays 
to Earth and produces a negligible penumbra for objects close to the 
ground. The Sun does produce a visible penumbra for casters far from 
the ground, such as tall trees or lamp posts. The width of the penumbra 
for a shadow cast by the Sun equals about 1% of the distance from the 
object to its shadow. For example, if an object is 9 feet (108in = 2.7m) 
from the ground, the penumbra will be a little more than an inch wide, 
or around 2.7cm wide.
A complete lack of penumbra is possible only with a point light source, where 
the light rays spread out from a single point. In a light ray sketch of a point 
source, the umbra and penumbra lines converge and there is no penumbra. 
While there is no such thing as a point light source in life, a light source that 
is much smaller than the objects it illuminates approximates a point light 
source, producing a smaller penumbra than a larger light source under the 
same circumstances.
Penumbra from sunlight on the ends of 
shadows of tall objects.
Umbra from point light source (left) and small penumbra from small light source 
(right).
Shadow Angle
With a light source that is smaller in diameter than the caster, the shadow is 
always larger than the object. 
When a light source is not very far from a sequence of like objects, the object’s 
shadows are angled in the direction of the light. Such shadows give a subtle 
cue that the objects are lit by a nearby light source.
Shadows from light source smaller than caster

 
L I G H T  A N D  C O L O R  
129
When the light source is far away, as with the Sun, the near-parallel rays cast 
near-parallel shadows from objects near one another.
Angled shadows from a light source close to objects.
Near-parallel shadows from sunlight.
Because we have all been looking at shadows since childhood, viewers 
of your animation will instinctively compare the angles of shadows in 
your scene and deduce the approximate distance and angle of the light 
source. If you’re creating an outdoor scene lit by sunlight or moonlight, 

130 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
any cast shadows should be parallel or near-parallel. If the shadows are 
angled away from one another your audience will know, without really 
knowing why they know, that the light source is closer than the Sun or 
Moon.
Light Source Shapes
Technically speaking, every light source emanates light rays in all directions. 
However, an open enclosure around a light source can cause the light rays to 
bounce around and come only out of the opening, creating a light source 
that shines only in a particular direction. In such a case, the enclosure itself 
causes an umbra and penumbra. 
The rays that have bounced before coming out of the enclosure have lost 
energy, so the light coming from the sides of the light source is less bright 
than the light directly from the light source. This means that the brightness 
of the light varies across the entire light source.
Don’t confuse the umbra and penumbra 
from a light source with the umbra and 
penumbra of a cast shadow. The size of a 
lamp’s penumbra can be very diﬀ erent from 
the size of the penumbra that it produces 
in a cast shadow. The size of the enclosure 
determines the size of the light source for the 
sketch you make for rays of cast shadows.
While a light bulb can act nearly like a point source when it illuminates large 
objects, a lampshade placed over such a bulb blocks the light and causes rays 
to bounce around inside the shade. This produces an emission pattern out of 
the top and bottom of the lamp, which emulates a larger light source. Very 
little light comes through the lampshade itself. In fact, the lampshade acts to 
produce an umbra and penumbra for the light source.

 
L I G H T  A N D  C O L O R  
131
A diff user is a translucent sheet of material that scatters light. A diff user basically 
turns a small, powerful light source into a large, weak light source. The weakening 
of the light source reduces the intensity of the umbra, while the larger size 
increases the size of the penumbra for fuzzier shadows. Clouds on an overcast 
day act as a diff user by turning the strong, direct light from the Sun into a sheet 
of softer light, lightening shadows and sometimes eliminating them altogether.
Shadow Intensity
Because light bounces around, a completely black umbra is unlikely to form 
under everyday conditions. If your scene includes bright lights and a lot of 
smooth surfaces, the light rays will bounce around a great deal, lightening 
the shadow areas. If the light is diff used over a large area, shadows can also 
lighten a great deal or disappear altogether.
Cast shadows from two or more lights can cross, creating interesting umbra 
and penumbra patterns. You can determine these patterns with the same 
method, by drawing lines between the light source, casters, and receivers.
Remember that a near-point light source creates a sharp shadow, with almost 
no penumbra. If such a light is enclosed and the opening is very small, the 
An overcast day often produces no visible shadows.
Diffuser panels.
Diﬀ user panels are commonly used by 
photographers and lighting directors to 
“soften” the light on actors, which lightens 
up distracting shadows cast by noses and 
softens highlights on shiny foreheads.

132 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
umbra produced by the enclosure will be sharp and dark. Where two such 
sources cross, the combined umbras will be dark with a sharp edge, creating 
strange shapes in the scene that can distract or confuse your audience. To avoid 
sharp, dark crossing umbras, use larger light sources with softer penumbras.
FORM AND OCCLUSION SHADOWS
To make an animation scene convincing, you will likely need to include two 
other types of shadows in your scenes: form shadows and occlusion shadows.
A form shadow is a darker area on an object itself, where the darkness is due 
to the object’s surface being angled away from the light source. The dark side 
of the Moon has a form shadow. Compare with a cast shadow, which is due to 
an object blocking light to the receiver.
Scene with interesting mood lighting (left) and scene with confusing lighting from 
the sharp overlapping umbras of two spotlights (right). What are those triangle 
shapes on the right? Maybe they’re supposed to be bats or something. Wait, is 
this a vampire movie? I can’t follow the plot. Let’s change the channel.
Form shadow on the Moon.
Form shadow on left side of vase.

 
L I G H T  A N D  C O L O R  
133
Form shadows help communicate the shape, volume, and depth of objects in 
the scene, the materials that make up the object, the intensity and position 
of various light sources, and in particular, the angles of the edges that make 
up the object. Sharper form shadow edges indicate a sharp object edge and 
a directed light, while a fuzzy form shadow edge indicates a curved surface 
or soft material and more ambient light.
Form shadows are perhaps the trickiest to accurately fi gure out and depict, 
but if well done they can contribute a great deal to your imagery’s realism. 
Illustrations of cloth bag (left) and ring box (right). Form shadows tell us about the 
cloth bag’s overall shape and the softness of its individual folds, and about the 
ring box lid’s shape. These illustrations can pass for photographs largely because 
of their careful use of form shadows.
Occlusion shadows are really just cast 
shadows and form shadows, but they’re 
important enough to warrant their own 
name.
Occlusion shadows in sidewalk cracks.
Occlusion shadows where pieces 
of a walkie talkie ﬁ t together.
An occlusion shadow is a shadow that forms anyplace where the caster and 
receiver are so close together that little or no light can get in. 
Occlusion shadows are most obvious in cracks, crevices, or folds, but can 
form anyplace where light is blocked. You see occlusion shadows in cracks 
in the sidewalk and building materials, or where two pieces of an object 
have been fi tted together. Occlusion shadows also appear in the interior of 
leafy plants, between soft objects such as cushions. Light bounces around 
everywhere but in these cracks and crevices, illuminating the rest of the 
world as comparatively bright. 
Occlusion shadows where seat cushion 
meets the chair.

134 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
No cast shadows under the people, but an occlusion shadow 
appears under the car.
An occlusion shadow can also occur under large objects that block light 
from all directions regardless of lighting conditions. For example, even 
though there might be no cast shadows on an overcast day, there will still be 
occlusion shadows in places that the light can’t get to. 
Reflection
In everyday language, we are accustomed to using the term refl ection to refer 
to an image seen in a mirror or other shiny object. In physics, the term 
refl ection refers to bounced light of any kind. 

 
L I G H T  A N D  C O L O R  
135
Recall that refl ection takes place around a surface normal, where a light ray 
bounces off  the surface at exactly the same angle to the normal of the ray 
that hit the object.
Pattern of surface normals + grouping of light rays bouncing toward camera = 
specular reﬂ ection.
For clarity, in this chapter we refer to the 
bouncing of light rays as refl ection, and 
any image seen on an object’s surface due 
to reﬂ ection as a refl ected image.
In physics (and in computer graphics), we look at all refl ection as being divisible 
into two diff erent types called specular and diff use. Both types of refl ection 
are extreme and idealized—in reality, most objects exhibit some of both types 
of refl ection. We study these two types of refl ections by considering how small 
groupings of light rays behave when they strike a surface.
SPECULAR REFLECTION
Specular refl ection occurs on smooth surfaces where a grouping of normals 
follow an even or regular pattern, as on a smoothly curved surface. If a 
grouping of light rays bounces off  a small area of a surface and directly into 
your eyes, you see a sharp highlight on the object’s surface as a result of 
specular refl ection.

136 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Pure specular reflection produces a bright, sharp highlight on a surface. 
The highlight color is usually the color of the light source being 
reflected. 
Specular refl ection can also produce a refl ected image under the right 
circumstances. For solid objects, a refl ected image is possible only with 
glass and non-porous polished surfaces like metal, ceramic, and enamel. A 
mirror, for example, is a piece of glass or plastic covered in a thin, smooth 
coating of metal such as aluminum or silver. If light rays bounce from the 
environment to a pair of mirrored sunglasses at such an angle that they 
land in your eye, you can see a refl ected image of the environment on the 
sunglasses. 
The ﬂ at surface of pressed facial powder 
has near-uniform color with no specular 
reﬂ ections.
DIFFUSE REFLECTION
Diff use refl ection occurs on a surface where the normals point in random 
directions, causing the light grouping to spread out or “diff use” when it hits 
the surface. Visually, the surface appears to have a matte fi nish. Fine powder, 
plaster, and rough wood are surfaces that exhibit nearly perfect diff use 
refl ection with no specular highlights. The color and brightness of the surface 
doesn’t change as we change our viewing angle, provided the light sources 
remain the same.
With diff use refl ection, light bounces off  the surface at all angles. Some of 
these light rays reach our eyes or the camera, making it possible for us to see 
any illuminated spot on the object from any viewing angle. 

 
L I G H T  A N D  C O L O R  
137
Because the light rays are refl ected in all directions by the same amount, any 
one spot illuminated by diff use refl ection appears to be the same brightness 
no matter what the viewing angle is, provided the light source doesn’t change. 
Compare with specular refl ection, where you have to be looking at the object 
from a specifi c angle to see the bright refl ection in a particular spot. 
 Diffuse Reflection and Light Intensity
With diff use refl ection, the brightness of the surface at a particular spot 
depends entirely on the angle at which the light rays hit it, and has nothing 
to do with the viewing angle. Suppose you have a single light source shining 
on a surface. When the light source is angled to be perpendicular to the 
surface, the light rays hit head-on, and the surface refl ects the maximum 
possible amount of the light’s intensity; the object appears brightest at that 
spot. Where the light source is angled to the surface, the light ray is spread 
out over more area, lessening the percentage of the light’s intensity that is 
refl ected; the object appears less bright at that spot. 

138 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Diagram showing diffuse reﬂ ection percentages of maximum reﬂ ection at various angles.
After the light rays hit the object, the rays are scattered in all directions, 
allowing us to see that spot on the object. The angle at which the light rays 
hit the object determines the intensity (brightness) of the light that refl ects. 
This might seem pretty obvious—we can all guess that a desk lamp pointing 
straight down onto your desk provides more light than a lamp pointing at a deep 
sideways angle. But by how much is the light reduced when it hits the surface 
at an angle? When the light points perpendicular to the surface (at an angle of 
zero degrees off  the surface normal), you get the maximum intensity that can 
defl ect off  that particular surface. When the light points parallel to the surface 
(90 degrees off  the normal) you get zero intensity. So this means that if the light 
is at a 45 degree angle, you get 50% of the maximum intensity, right? Nope. The 
percentages don’t follow a simple linear formula, as you can see in the diagram.
The concepts of diﬀ use reﬂ ection were 
largely brought to us by physicist Johann 
Heinrich Lambert, who introduced 
them in his 1760 book Photometria. The 
Lambert shader oﬀ ered by many CG 
packages produces a matte surface that 
diﬀ uses light evenly.

 
L I G H T  A N D  C O L O R  
139
The percentages follow a progression that has to do with the vertical 
component of the light ray’s angle as it moves around a circle. Suppose you 
draw a circle, then draw a line horizontally through its center to represent the 
surface. Now draw a vertical line through the center of the circle to represent 
the surface normal. Next, we draw the radius of the circle going right down 
the normal line to represent a light ray. Since a light ray pointing down the 
normal is at zero degrees off  the normal, and because the light ray is diff usely 
refl ected at the maximum intensity possible for that surface, we label this 
radius zero degrees and 100%. 
As you move the radius (light ray) around the circle at diff erent angles off  
the normal, the vertical height of the radius line, calculated as a percentage 
of the radius along the normal, gives you the percentage of the maximum 
intensity that’s refl ected with diff use refl ection at that angle. The size of the 
circle doesn’t matter because we’re looking at percentages, which are the 
same no matter the size of the circle. 
 Detecting Shape and Color
Diff use refl ection doesn’t produce a highlight—it refl ects the color of the 
object itself. The refl ected light rays carry the color with them, refl ecting the 
color at a brightness that corresponds to the percentage for the angle. 
If a diff usely refl ecting object is fl at, it will appear to have the same color all 
the way across the surface. If the object isn’t fl at, the directions of the normals 
relative to the light source change over the surface of the object, meaning that 
the percentage of light intensity changes. The diff erences in brightness give 
you cues about the object’s shape. Areas with normals that point right at the 
light source appear brighter than areas with normals that point away from it.
DIFFUSE VS. SPECULAR REFLECTIONS
Diff use refl ection shows us light that has bounced off  any part of the surface 
where light hits. Compare with specular refl ection, which shows us light only 
where the incident and refl ection angles are just right for the light to reach 
our eyes.
If you’re familiar with trigonometry, you’ll 
recognize the percentage of the radius as 
the cosine of the angle between the normal 
and light ray, giving rise to the name for this 
concept: Lambert’s Cosine Law. If you’re 
not familiar with trigonometry, you can use 
the diagrams here as a rough guide to light 
intensity percentages at diﬀ erent angles oﬀ  
the normal.
A soft paint roller is visible due to diffuse 
reﬂ ection. We discern the curvature of the 
paint roller at the top and bottom of the 
roller due to its darker color in those areas.

140 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Diff use refl ection tells us about the shape and color of the object. Specular 
refl ections tell us how smooth the surface is, and where the light source is 
located. Most of the objects you will represent in your animation will exhibit 
some of each type of refl ection. 
Most natural materials, and many man-made materials, are somewhat 
translucent or porous. In these materials light can get under the surface and 
bounce around, producing diff use refl ection. If the surface of the material is 
smooth, it will also have a specular refl ection where light rays bounce into 
the camera.
For many types of objects, the only way to tell the diff erence between the 
materials that comprise the object is to look at the highlights that form on 
them. On two like objects made of plastic and metal, the highlights will be 
very diff erent. Metals, being opaque, can produce an almost perfect specular 
highlight when smooth. Compare with hard plastic, which is usually slightly 
translucent and thus prone to a lot of diff use refl ection.

 
L I G H T  A N D  C O L O R  
141
Metal button (left) and plastic button (right) of similar shape and size under 
similar lighting conditions. The color and shape of the plastic button is easy to 
discern due to the diffuse reﬂ ections over most of the surface.
Tea kettle with anisotropic highlights.
Anisotropy is the property of something 
having diﬀ erent characteristics in 
diﬀ erent directions, such as being longer 
on one side than the other. Compare 
with isotropy, which implies the same 
characteristics in all directions. While most 
highlights are isotropic, highlights on 
metal are often anisotropic.
DIFFUSE INTERREFLECTION
Everything you see is, to some degree, refl ecting everything else around it. 
How well you can discern these refl ections on a surface depends on how 
much specular refl ection the surface has, and how close it is to other 
objects.
Specular highlights are usually in the shape of the light source, but on highly 
refl ective surfaces like glass, metal, hard enamel, and hair, the highlights are 
sometimes elongated.
SHADERS
In computer graphics, the properties of a surface are collected together into 
a single defi nition called a shader. A shader can include information like:
• 
Overall color (diff use color)
• 
Highlight color (color of specular refl ections)
• 
Highlight shape
• 
Form shadow color (sometimes called ambient color)
• 
Specular or diff usion level (how shiny/diff use the object is)
• 
Transparency and translucency
By setting these various parameters, you can control how much diff use and 
specular refl ection the surface exhibits.

142 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Because of attenuation (the lessening of light’s intensity over a distance), 
the proximity of objects plays a big part in the visibility of reflections. 
If two objects placed near each other have rough surfaces, most of the 
bounced light rays will be lost to attenuation long before they come back 
again. But if the objects are placed close together, enough of the diffuse 
rays hit each of the objects to create a fuzzy, vague reflection of each 
object in the other one. 
For example, if a bright red ribbon is near a white box, the box will be a little bit 
redder where the two are close together, and the ribbon will be whiter. These 
interrefl ective eff ects are most noticeable when one of the objects is white 
and at least a little glossy, as with a white wall in a room with a colorful lamp or 
statue near it. The eff ect is subtle, but we are accustomed to seeing this eff ect 
in life, and we unconsciously (or consciously) miss it when it’s not there. 
PARTIAL REFLECTIONS
Some smooth, translucent/transparent surfaces produce a less-than-perfect 
refl ected image. An example is the screen on a cell phone or tablet. While you 
can use such a screen as a makeshift mirror when you can’t fi nd a real one, the 
refl ection is quite dark and not nearly as good as a real mirror.
Every surface has a refl ection coeffi  cient that tells us what percentage of 
the light striking it will be refl ected (as opposed to passing through it or 
being absorbed by it). The table below shows the refl ection coeffi  cient for 
common medium/surface pairs when light strikes the surface at an angle 
perpendicular to the surface. 
Medium
Surface
Refl ection coeffi  cient
Air
Water
2%
Air
Silver
90%
Air
Glass
4%
Water
Glass
0.5%
Spots of diffuse interreﬂ ection on a white box.
Many animation software programs come 
with a global illumination (GI) feature, 
which renders a scene using both direct 
illumination (from light sources) and the 
light that is reﬂ ected by surfaces (indirect 
illumination). Indirect illumination can 
include any and all light eﬀ ects not due 
to direct illumination such as reﬂ ection, 
refraction, caustics, occlusion shadows, 
and diﬀ use interreﬂ ection, all of which are 
discussed in this chapter.
Partial reﬂ ected image in tablet screen.
In physics, the substance something is 
traveling through is called its medium. 
For light striking a house’s window, the 
medium is air.

 
L I G H T  A N D  C O L O R  
143
With glass, at an angle of incidence of zero degrees (perpendicular to the 
surface), 4% of the light refl ects while the rest (96%) passes through. While 
4% is enough to form a refl ected image, this doesn’t mean you always see 
a refl ected image in window glass. Let’s take a look at a couple of common 
window scenarios to see how this works.
Suppose it’s nighttime, and indoors near a window, a table lamp with a 
40-watt bulb is turned on. Such a bulb produces about 400 lumens. Outside, a 
streetlamp some distance away provides enough light so there’s about 1 lumen 
just outside the window. Since glass refl ects 4% of the light, the intensity of the 
refl ected light from the lamp is 16 lumens, while the remaining 384 lumens 
pass to the outside. In the meantime, 0.04 lumens are refl ected from the 
outside of the window, while only 0.96 lumens pass from outdoors to indoors. 
For a viewer outside looking directly into the window, the 384 lumens coming 
from indoors is so much stronger than the 0.04 lumens of refl ected light that 
it trumps any refl ected image. Conversely, the 16 lumens of refl ected light 
indoors is competing with only 0.96 lumens of light coming from outdoors, 
and thus is able to create a visible partial refl ection on the glass indoors.
Reﬂ ected image of lamp visible in window at night.

144 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
In such a scenario, a viewer indoors who looks out a window will see 
mostly reflected images in the windowpane and will have a hard time 
making out any of the objects out on the street. If the indoor lamp is 
turned off, the reflected images will go away, and the viewer can see the 
street again.
The reflection coefficients shown in the table are for an angle of 
incidence of zero degrees. The reflection coefficient actually increases 
as the incident angle increases. This means that the farther you get 
from the perpendicular angle to the window glass, the more light that 
reaches you will have reflected from your side of the glass to show you 
a reflected image. However, if there’s a great deal more light coming 
from the other side of the window, even the higher reflection coefficient 
won’t make much of a visible difference in the amount of reflected 
image you can see. 
In daylight, the situation is reversed. Viewers outside see strong refl ected 
images in windows, while people indoors don’t see refl ected images on the 
windows if the light is strong.
Reflected images in windows are not visible from the dark outdoors when 
lights are on inside, even from a viewing angle several degrees off the 
perpendicular.
The increase in the reﬂ ection coeﬃ  cient 
at larger angles is due to the Fresnel Eff ect, 
which is described in more detail in the 
Oceans and Lakes section of the Liquid 
Eﬀ ects chapter.

 
L I G H T  A N D  C O L O R  
145
In general, the side of the window that gets hit by the highest intensity of 
light will show the strongest refl ected images. The stronger the refl ected 
image, the harder it is to see through the window. If you want to see a 
refl ected image and see through the window at the same time, you can 
balance the two by considering the light sources on each side of the window. 
REFRACTION
When light passes through a transparent medium such as water, it bends. You 
can see the eff ects of bent light by placing an object in a glass of water. The 
object appears to shear or bend where it meets the water. This eff ect is called 
refraction.
Reﬂ ected images on windows in daylight.
Refraction in water.

146 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Every medium has an index of refraction (IOR), which indicates how severely 
it bends light. A vacuum (no air) has an index of refraction of 1.0, which 
is considered “no refraction.” Air itself has an index of 1.00029, which for 
most practical purposes can be considered 1.0. The level of distortion from 
refraction is determined by how much the IOR diff ers from 1.0. 
Material
IOR
Air
1.00
Ice
1.309
Water
1.333
Olive oil
1.47
Window glass
1.52
Diamond
2.42
Chart of common IOR values.
The amount of refraction you see is also dependent on the angle at which 
the light hits the object, the indices of refraction of the medium that light 
goes through, and how thick the medium is. For example, although window 
glass has a high IOR, window panes are so fl at and thin that the refraction is 
negligible. With thicker or irregular glass, you see more refraction.
Refraction through thick, irregular glass.
In life, it is rare to ﬁ nd a substance with an 
index of refraction below 1.0.

 
L I G H T  A N D  C O L O R  
147
Gemstones are very refractive, which accounts for their appearance and 
appeal.
Refraction is also responsible for rainbows. Sunlight is actually comprised of 
light rays with varying wavelengths in all the colors of the rainbow, which 
ordinarily combine to appear to us as white. The raindrops in wet air refract 
the strong, white light of the Sun into diff erent colors. This happens because 
of dispersion, the tendency of some media to refract light rays of diff erent 
wavelengths by diff erent indices of refraction. A prism is another example of 
dispersion.
Prism refracting colors from white light.
CREATING REFRACTION WITH CG SOFTWARE
While CG software often comes with shader options for making an object 
appear refractive, in practice these tools are not straightforward to use. Keep in 
mind that software does the best it can, but doesn’t always consider every factor 
involved in refraction, such as color shifts. In addition, calculating refraction with 
software can be very time consuming. As an extreme example, it would be silly 
to make a rainbow by trying to refract the light from a light source.
continued on the next page

148 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Taking an IOR value from the real-life table and setting it as the IOR value in 
your software does not guarantee the object will look realistic. You’ll need to 
experiment with diff erent values, even values below 1.0, to match the result 
with reference images. 
If you need to represent refraction in your animation, consider using a 
simpler method than calculation to set up the refraction. For a magnifying 
glass, consider rendering the image that the glass sees separately, then 
mapping it onto the surface of the glass. For an object immersed in water, 
consider creating a distorted copy of the object and placing it inside the 
water volume.
Refraction study of a pencil in a glass rendered with CG software. The ﬁ rst image is a photo while the rest are renderings with 
software-generated refraction. Even though the IOR for glass is around 1.5, the most realistic result from the software is an IOR 
gradient from 0.8 to 1.2 going from the top of the glass to the bottom.
CAUSTICS
Caustics are bright, wavy patches of light due to refl ection and refraction 
from a curved surface. Examples of caustics are light patterns cast by a glass, 
water, and gems. When caustics create bright spots, there are always dark 
areas from which the light has been defl ected.
The term caustic comes from the Greek 
word for “burnt,” referring to the very 
bright areas in caustic patterns where 
light is the most concentrated. These areas 
resemble bright sunlight, which is known 
to burn.

 
L I G H T  A N D  C O L O R  
149
Caustics from turbulent water.
With a drinking glass, caustics occur because of varying degrees of 
refraction across the curved surface. The light waves bend at different 
angles as they pass through the object, causing them to criss-cross and 
add or subtract from one another. The swirling patterns produced by 
these caustic effects resemble the patterns of resonant and canceling 
waves.

150 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
In a room with an indoor pool, caustics are visible at the bottom of the pool, 
or as refl ections on walls as bright swirl patterns.
Caustics at the bottom of a swimming pool.
Caustic patterns on walls reﬂ ected from a swimming pool.
Under the ocean, caustics can be caused by the way light refl ects off  surface 
waves and refracts through the water. The eff ect is a projection of strong light 

 
L I G H T  A N D  C O L O R  
151
Caustics under the ocean’s surface.
If you’re using software for your animation, 
you’re often better oﬀ  ﬁ nding a solution 
other than the “Generate Caustics” button 
to create convincing caustics. It’s much 
faster to use an animated map or gobo 
light projected over a character. Such 
methods are also easier to control than 
software-generated solutions.
passing down through the water to produce bright wavy patterns in constant 
motion.
While your animation might include a glass of water or shiny gems, chances 
are you won’t have to worry too much about representing caustics on a 
tabletop unless the glass or gem is the focus of your scene. The most common 
need for caustics in animation arises when you have a scene that takes place 
near or under the sea. 
Gamma Correction
While you might think that creating realistic imagery is just a matter of 
“making it look real,” any photoreal renderings have to take into account 
peculiarities in the way our eyes perceive light intensities, the way cameras 
capture them, the way software alters them, and the way monitors and 
televisions display them. 
The human eye is adapted to seeing details within shadows and darker 
areas. This has served us well throughout the ages, where we can make out 
details of plants and trees for gathering food, or spot a predator hiding in the 
bushes. Conversely, seeing fi ne details in the sky has not been so important 
to us, and our eyes have evolved to ignore these details. The sky, even on an 
overcast day, contains many more variations than we are able to perceive, 
and is actually extremely bright—so bright, in fact, that we can’t see stars 
during the day. 

152 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
Now, suppose you make a second chart, this time with values that are not so 
evenly spaced. Let’s have more dark values at the start of the chart, with just a 
few of the lighter values at the end. Note that the pure black and white colors 
at the start and end of the graph remain the same. 
If you graph this new list of color values against evenly spaced values from 0.0 
to 1.0, the result is a curve.
Conversely, mechanized methods of capturing and displaying light, such 
as cameras and monitors, treat all light intensities equally. A large part of 
making realistic imagery is to use gamma correction to make up for this 
diff erence and produce images that look more like what our own eyes 
would perceive. The guiding principle of gamma correction is that to our 
eyes, darker areas appear to have far more variations in intensity than lighter 
areas.
LINEAR VS. CURVED LIGHT INTENSITY
Suppose you made a chart of nine colors moving gradiently between black 
and white, with equal steps between each color. If black is considered to have 
a value of 0.0 and white has 1.0, you could assign a value between 0.0 and 1.0 
to each color on the chart. 
If you made a graph of these colors plotted against the numbers 0.0 to 1.0, 
the graph would follow a straight line because the steps between each value 
are equal. We call this a linear progression.

 
L I G H T  A N D  C O L O R  
153
Gamma Correction for Real-World Perception
In real life, the intensity of light refl ecting off  of objects is like the linear 
progression. Any and all light intensities between pure black and pure white 
are present, with no particular leaning toward lighter or darker shades. When 
a camera takes a photo, it captures all the intensities, including fi ne shadings 
of lighter colors that the human eye can’t discern. 
What we perceive when looking at the real world is more like the curved 
progression. We discern many more fi ne shadings in the darker range than 
we do in the lighter range. To compensate for this, a digital camera maps the 
linear range to a curved range before displaying the image to you.

154 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
The adjusted version of the image, displayed with a wider range of darker 
colors than light colors, looks more “real” to us than the original image with 
its linear progression.
The image a camera captures, with linear 
light intensities.
What our eyes would see, with darker areas appearing 
brighter and with more discernible detail. A digital 
camera converts linear intensities to curved intensities 
to show you this image.
This process of mapping a linear progression of shades to a curved progression 
of shades is called gamma correction.
 Gamma Correction and Cameras
A camera, whether digital or analog, has light sensors that respond linearly—
lighter shades are just as important as darker ones, and all light intensities 
that go through the lens are processed in some fashion. 
With traditional analog photography, light intensities are stored on fi lm as 
grayscale values on the linear scale. To get a great printed image that makes 
use of the curved intensity graph, an analog photographer has to not only 
control the light coming into the camera (via exposure time, shutter opening 
size, etc.), but also use fi lm development techniques like dodging and burning. 
Digital cameras also capture light intensities as linear values, but don’t always 
store all the values. As a service to the photographer, JPG and PNG images 
stored by a camera have been corrected by the time the image is saved. 
This is done to save space and make the image look better. Saving all linear 
intensities would make the fi le quite large, and would also make the photo 
look wrong when printed or viewed. The conversion process uses gamma 
correction so you get a nice image right out of the camera. 
Some digital cameras have the capability to store images in the RAW fi le 
format, which stores all the light intensities linearly, keeping the same 
Gamma is the Greek letter G, represented 
by the symbol γ. This symbol is used in the 
mathematical formula for corrections to 
the linear light intensity graph. Essentially, 
gamma is just a number in a formula used to 
give a better color range for human viewing.
Dodging is a technique for covering up an 
area of a photographic negative during 
development to decrease its exposure 
time, making the area lighter. Burning is 
the opposite, which increases exposure 
to make a darker area. These tools are 
mimicked in image-editing programs like 
Photoshop.

 
L I G H T  A N D  C O L O R  
155
amount of information as a traditional photographic negative. The advantage 
of the RAW format is that the photographer can set and control any gamma 
correction on the image afterward to get exactly the result wanted, rather 
than relying on the camera to do it for him. As a rule, any image fi le format 
being output by a camera (other than the RAW format) has been gamma-
corrected by the time it’s saved. 
HDRI images can come close to having all the linear data stored. A series of 
photographs of the same scene, each taken with a diff erent exposure, can be 
combined to give a wide range of intensities.
A series of photographs taken with different settings, then combined to form the 
ﬁ nal image at the bottom. Image courtesy of Klaus Hermann, HDR Cookbook.

156 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
 Gamma Correction on Digital Files
In the digital world, gamma correction happens all the time. All electronic 
displays such as televisions and monitors perform gamma correction on 
images.
If your camera has an LCD screen for immediate viewing of the image, the 
image is gamma-corrected on its way to the display so it looks better to 
you. If you copy the images to your computer and display them on your 
screen, the images are gamma-corrected by the display before it shows 
them to you.
Many software renderers perform gamma correction on rendered images as 
it stores them.
 GAMMA CALCULATIONS
To map linear intensity to gamma intensity values, you need to know the 
value coming in and the gamma number to calculate the value that will come 
out from the conversion. The formula for mapping linear intensity to gamma 
intensity is:
ValueOut = ValueIngamma
As an example, a digital camera that saves images in JPG format 
performs gamma correction on the images before saving them. Let’s say 
the camera is using a gamma of 2.2 for correction. Let’s make a chart of 
these values so we can get a graph of the correction curve for this gamma 
number.  
Linear value (ValueIn)
Calculation
Gamma result (ValueOut)
0.0
0.02.2
0.00
0.1
0.12.2
0.01
0.2
0.22.2
0.03
0.3
0.32.2
0.07
0.4
0.42.2
0.13
0.5
0.52.2
0.22
0.6
0.62.2
0.33
0.7
0.72.2
0.46
0.8
0.82.2
0.61
0.9
0.92.2
0.79
1.0
1.02.2
1.00
A monitor also performs gamma correction so an image will look nice on 
the screen. When a monitor displays pixels, it has the capability of making 
each pixel on the screen as bright or dark as it wants to. A monitor wants to 
A gamma value of 1.0, which produces 
the same set of values as the linear graph, 
is called a linear gamma.

 
L I G H T  A N D  C O L O R  
157
0.45 is 1/2.2. You can get the same reverse 
exponent for any gamma value by 
dividing 1 by the original gamma value.
start from linear gamma and map the colors to the monitor so it will look 
good to you, but it also assumes that images have already been gamma-
corrected. So the monitor fi rst does a reverse conversion to get the linear 
values back, then gamma-corrects them again based on the monitor’s (or 
user’s) setting. 
A gamma value of 0.45, when used on an image that has already been 
gamma-corrected to 2.2, gives you back the original linear values. This allows 
the monitor to apply its own gamma, and for users to calibrate a monitor by 
adjusting its gamma value manually.
Linear value Calculation Gamma result Reverse gamma 
calculation
Gamma result
0.0
0.02.2
0.00
0.000.45
0.0
0.1
0.12.2
0.01
0.010.45
0.1
0.2
0.22.2
0.03
0.030.45
0.2
0.3
0.32.2
0.07
0.070.45
0.3
0.4
0.42.2
0.13
0.130.45
0.4
0.5
0.52.2
0.22
0.220.45
0.5
0.6
0.62.2
0.33
0.330.45
0.6
0.7
0.72.2
0.46
0.460.45
0.7
0.8
0.82.2
0.61
0.610.45
0.8
0.9
0.92.2
0.79
0.790.45
0.9
1.0
1.02.2
1.00
1.000.45
1.0
Note that all such back-and-forth conversions result in information loss. 
Large parts of the original color range are discarded during the initial 
gamma conversion, and additional colors are discarded during the reverse 
conversion, then even more is discarded for the last conversion. For casual 
viewing of web pages this loss isn’t that important, but for photorealistic VFX 
work it can be problematic.
 Monitor Gamma Adjustment
Most computer monitors have a built-in tool for visually adjusting the gamma 
setting. The tool displays a grouping of gray boxes or dots to be matched to a 
gray control color. You adjust the monitor’s gamma setting until the grayish 
appearance of the boxes or dots approximates the brightness of the control 
color.
Supposedly, this adjustment gives you the “right” gamma setting for your 
monitor. But beware—if your animation is going to be viewed on a completely 
diff erent type of monitor, it might look very diff erent depending on that 
display’s gamma setting, type of display, etc. If you know your animation will 
The PNG ﬁ le format can store the gamma 
value used, but this value has limited use. 
Diﬀ erent types of displays and browsers 
can use it to determine how to display the 
image, and that’s about it. Converting the 
image back to a linear gamma still does 
not get all the information back.
Typical gamma correction tool for computer 
monitor.

158 
C L A S S I C A L  P H Y S I C S
be viewed on a specifi c type of monitor or television, you should test it on 
that type of display to be sure it looks right.
 RGB Gamma Curves
So far, we’ve talked about gamma as if it’s a single value for an entire image. 
Actually, there can be three diff erent gamma values, one for each of the red, 
green, and blue channels of an image.
Diﬀ erent digital cameras use diﬀ erent RGB 
curves to correct images. A photographer 
might choose one camera over another 
based on his/her preference of RGB 
gamma correction.
The three curved lines in the graph represent red, green, and blue. The 
diff erences between these curves approximate the diff erences in the way 
our eyes perceive red, green, and blue. When looking at dark areas our eyes 
respond more to blue than to green and even less to red, and they naturally 
discern more detail in blue areas. For this reason, the blue curve is usually the 
deepest and red is the shallowest.
In many digital processes such as compositing, the fact that black is zero 
causes calculation problems, so a value slightly above 0.0 is used for black, 
and the rest of the curve follows the gamma 2.2 curve. This method of setting 
gamma values is called sRGB.
 LINEAR WORKFLOW
So if cameras and monitors automatically do gamma correction on images, 
what’s the big deal? Gamma correction really only becomes a concern when 
using several images from diff erent sources to create your fi nal images. You’ll 
need to look at your pipeline to determine whether gamma correction could 
be a problem. 

 
L I G H T  A N D  C O L O R  
159
A simple example is a texture map used in a 3D scene. If a gamma-corrected 
texture map is used in a gamma-corrected rendering, the texture map’s 
colors have been adjusted and reduced twice by the time you see the 
rendered image. While you can adjust your lighting and other settings to 
compensate for the texture already being gamma-corrected, you can achieve 
richer renderings by using texture maps with a linear gamma (1.0) and using 
gamma correction only on your fi nal output. 
Additionally, if various textures used within a scene have diff erent gamma 
settings, you will have to spend unnecessary time adjusting the lighting and 
texture settings to make the scene work.
VFX compositing in particular benefi ts from images produced with a linear 
gamma. It is much easier for a compositor to work with images when as much 
information is present as possible, and the gamma values of all the incoming 
images match.
Most animation software and image-editing packages give you options for 
what to do with the gamma setting for various images coming in and out of 
the software. The safest bet is to use a linear workfl ow with a gamma of 1.0 on 
all your images except the fi nal output (the images the audience will view). 
If your project consists only of photographs being composited together, as 
long as all the images have the same gamma setting (2.2, for example), this 
can also work.
The most important thing is to know the gamma settings of your images so 
you can make intelligent decisions about what to do with the settings, and 
how to proceed with your workfl ow.

This page intentionally left blank

S E C T I O N 2
Character Design 
and Animation
Character design and animation must, to some degree, use the laws of 
physics. While you can dream up all kinds of characters to do fantastical 
motion, if the character’s size, weight, and motions aren’t at least somewhat 
familiar to your audience, they won’t be able to follow the story.
In this section of the book, we look at character design and animation from a 
physics standpoint. If there are Classical Physics subjects that pertain directly 
to the subject, these are listed at the start of the section. This will enable you 
to review any topics necessary before you dive in.

This page intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 5
Character Design
Long before the animation process begins, character design shapes the 
personalities that will perform your motions. When you use physics concepts 
to inform your design decisions, you can increase a character’s ability to 
perform the motions called for, and also improve its believability and appeal.
Size and Scale
The size and scale of characters often play a central role in a story’s plot. What 
would Superman be without his height and bulging biceps? Some characters, 
like the Incredible Hulk, are even named after their body types.
We often equate large characters with weight and strength, and smaller characters 
with agility and speed. There is a reason for this. In real life, larger people and 
animals do have a larger capacity for strength, while smaller critters can move and 
maneuver faster than their large counterparts.
When designing characters, you can run into diff erent situations having to do 
with size and scale, such as:
• 
Human or animal-based characters that are much larger than we 
see in our everyday experience. Superheroes, Greek gods, monsters, 

164 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D  A N I M A T I O N
ogres, and giants are traditionally represented as superhuman in both 
size and strength. Big prehistoric creatures like dinosaurs fall into this 
category, as do large mythical creatures like dragons or giant mutant 
cockroaches.
• 
Human or animal-based characters that are much smaller than we are 
accustomed to, such as fairies and elves.
• 
Characters that need to be noticeably larger, smaller, older, heavier, 
lighter, or more energetic than other characters.
• 
Characters that are child versions of older characters. An example would 
be an animation featuring a mother cat and her kittens. If the kittens 
are created and animated with the same proportions and timing as the 
mother cat, they won’t look like kittens; they’ll just look like very small 
adult cats.
Human and animal bodies have evolved over time to work with certain 
proportions between height, weight, skeletal size, heart rate, speed 
of movement, and so on. Messing with these proportions without 
considering the consequences will lead to characters that seem comical 
or creepy to your audience. If that’s what you’re going for, then great. If 
not, then you’ll need to understand how to make your characters look 
like actual living beings and not just uniformly scaled versions of the real 
thing.

 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  
165
Classic example of scaling human proportions without regard for realism. 
We instinctively know that such a creature is impossible.
 The study of the relationship of body 
size to shape, anatomy, physiology, and 
behavior is called allometry. Yes, there is 
an entire science devoted to this!
In this section, you’ll learn about various cues for physical size so you can 
use them to design characters that will read to your audience at the size you 
intend them to be.
PROPORTION AND SCALE
Creating a larger or smaller character isn’t just a matter of scaling everything 
about the character uniformly. To understand this, let’s look at a simple cube. 
When you scale a cube, its volume changes much more dramatically than its 
surface area. 
Let’s say each edge of the cube is 1 unit tall. The area of one side of the cube 
is 1 square unit, and the volume of the cube is 1 cubed unit.

166 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D  A N I M A T I O N
The term area, in geometry, means the 
extent of a two-dimensional shape. To 
ﬁ gure out the surface area of a character 
or object, we imagine the surface to be 
ﬂ attened out. For the purposes of learning 
about scaling and proportion in character 
design, you can consider the terms area 
and surface area to be interchangeable.
When you square or cube a fraction, the 
result is always smaller than the original 
fraction.
If you double the size of the cube along each dimension, its height increases 
by 2 times, the surface area increases by 4 times, and its volume increases by 
8 times.
While the area increases by squares as you scale the object, the volume 
changes by cubes.
Height 
multiple
Area in sq units
multiple
Volume in cube units
multiple
1
 12 = 1
 13 = 1
2
 22 = 4
 23 = 8
3
 32 = 9
 33 = 27
4
 42 = 16
 43 = 64
5
 52 = 25
 53 = 125
6
 62 = 36
 63 = 216
7
 72 = 49
 73 = 343
8
 82 = 64
 83 = 512
9
 92 = 81
 93 = 729
10
102 = 100
103 = 1000
11
112 = 121
113 = 1331
12
122 = 144
123 = 1728
You can also use this rule to fi gure out how an object will scale down.  
Height 
multiple
Area in sq units
multiple
Volume in cube units
multiple
1 
   12 = 1.00
   13 = 1.000
3/4 
0.752 = 0.56
0.753 = 0.422 
2/3 
0.672 = 0.44
0.673 = 0.296 
1/2 
0.502 = 0.25
0.503 = 0.125 
1/3 
0.332 = 0.11
0.333 = 0.037 
1/4 
0.252 = 0.06
0.253 = 0.016 
1/5 
0.202 = 0.04
0.203 = 0.008 
1/8 
0.132 = 0.02
0.133 = 0.002 
1/10
0.102 = 0.01
0.103 = 0.001 

 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  
167
The proportions of scaled area and volume hold for any three-dimensional 
character or object regardless of its size or shape. When you scale a character 
uniformly, various aspects of its body will scale as area (squares), while other 
aspects will scale as volume (cubes).
Weight and Strength
Body weight is proportional to volume. The abilities of your muscles and 
bones, however, increase by area because their abilities depend more on 
cross-sectional area than volume.
To increase a muscle or bone’s strength, you need to increase its cross-
sectional area. To double a muscle’s strength, for example, you would multiply 
its width by √2. To triple the strength, multiply the width by √3.
In this book, the symbol √ denotes a 
square root.
Since strength increases by squares and weight increases by cubes, the 
proportion of a character’s weight that it can lift doesn’t scale proportionally 
to its size. Let’s look at an example of a somewhat average human man. At 
6 feet tall, he weighs 180 pounds and can lift 90 pounds. In other words, he 
can lift half his body weight. 
If you scale up the body size by a factor of 2, the weight increases by a factor 
of 23, or 8. Such a character could then lift 22 more weight, or 4 times more. 
But since he weighs more than 8 times more than he did before, he can’t lift 
his arms and legs as easily as a normal man. Such a giant gains strength, but 
loses agility.

168 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D  A N I M A T I O N
If we triple a normal man’s size, he is now 18 feet tall (3 times taller), weighs 
4900 pounds (33 or 27 times more), and can lift 810 pounds (32 or 9 times 
more than normal). He can now lift only about 17% of his body weight, which 
is about the weight of one of his legs.
Height 
multiplier 
Height
Weight 
multiplier 
(* 180)
Weight
Lift 
multiplier 
(* 90)
Can 
lift
% of Body 
weight 
can lift
0.33
2ft
(0.33)3
7lb
(0.33)2
10lb
150%
1.0 (normal)
6ft
1
180lb
1
90lb
50%
3.0
18ft
33
4900lb
32
810lb
17%
If you want the man who’s 3 times the normal height to be able to lift the 
same percentage of his body weight as a normal-sized man, you will have to 
scale up his bones and muscles to be 27 times stronger. 

 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  
169
Recall that bones and muscles scale in strength by cross-sectional area. In 
order to make a man with muscles and bones 27 times stronger, you need to 
multiply the normal muscle and bone widths by √27, or by about 5 times. The 
result is 5x muscles in a 3x body.
PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS AND SIZE
Aside from the visible height, weight, and strength of a character, there are 
other physical characteristics related to size. Some are proportional to volume 
(cubes) while others are proportional to area (squares).
Here we’ll look at some of the physical cues in nature that relate to size. These 
cues can be useful for subtly suggesting a character’s size to your audience, 
for both real and imaginary creatures.
Posture
Crouching puts a strain on the bones and muscles. Animals that are low to 
the ground can crouch on their back legs as a normal posture without a great 
deal of strain. This includes small animals like mice and cats as well as low 

170 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D  A N I M A T I O N
walkers like crocodiles. Taller animals like horses and elephants keep their 
legs relatively straight. 
When designing a character, you can make it seem lower to the ground by 
putting it into a crouch in its rest position, or make it seem larger by making 
its legs straight.
Deformability
Relative stiff ness is a cue for size. As an example, thread, string, and rope are 
made of similar materials, but have diff erent stiff ness factors due to their 
diff erent volumes; thread is much stiff er than rope. Stiff ness changes as a 
square while weight changes as a cube.
At the same time, a longer object bends more relative to its size than a short 
object does, due to the larger object bending under its own weight. Animal 
tails, hair, ears, and other body parts can bend under gravity, as can the entire 
body of a skinny character. Bending increases by squares as the volume 
increases by cubes.
Surface forces vary with area. Larger, heavier characters tend to squash more 
relative to their sizes than lighter, smaller characters.
A chubby bird provides more opportunity for deformation than a skinny bird.
Wing Size and Shape
Wing size and shape are physical cues for bird size. Birds that specialize in 
high-speed fl ight need longer, narrower wings. Short, stubby wings with a 
tapering point provide less lift but are more maneuverable, which is 
appropriate for smaller birds that dart around in close quarters such as trees.

 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  
171
Sparrows.
Falcon.
Climate
Climate is a physical cue for size. In the Arctic, a small animal would freeze to 
death. The Arctic is populated only by medium-sized to large animals. The 
food sources available in a given climate also determine what kind of animals 
you can fi nd there. Elephants, though large, can’t survive in the Arctic because 
there are no plants.
Furriness is related to size. Heat production is related to an animal’s volume, 
while heat loss is related to its surface area. Due to their small volumes, small 
animals can only generate so much heat before the heat is lost, so they have 
trouble staying warm without a coat of fur. 
Large animals generate a lot of heat and need to be able to vent it, so they 
have less fur, if any at all. Large animals in a hot climate adapt by living in 
water (hippo) or venting (elephant ears).

172 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D  A N I M A T I O N
Longevity
Longevity is related to physical size. We intuitively know that smaller animals 
don’t live as long as larger animals. If your animation calls for an old mouse of 
normal size, it would have to be no more than two or three years old. If the 
mouse is 50 years old, this is a subtle cue that the mouse is about as big as a 
horse. Either that, or it’s a normal-sized walking zombie mouse.
CHART OF ANIMAL CHARACTERISTICS
 Here is a list of animals in order of weight, with body-related statistics for each 
one. The numbers here are averages or mid-range numbers for each animal. 
There are actually large variances within most species (such as large dogs vs. 
small dogs) but this chart gives an idea of the correlation between weight 
and other statistics for an animal of that weight.
In general, longevity is related to heart rate; smaller animals have faster heart 
rates. A rule of thumb is that the heart of any mammal has about 1 billion 
heartbeats before failure, so a faster heart gives out sooner. 
Note that lifespan increases pretty uniformly with size, with the exception 
of monkeys and humans. There is some evidence that higher intelligence 
leads to a longer lifespan, which might account for this discrepancy. Modern 
medicine has also increased the lifespan of humans—our ancestors could 
expect to live until only about 30 years of age.  
Weight (kg)
Lifespan (years)
Heart rate
Blood pressure
Gestation (days)
Housefl y
0.000012
 0.08
300
—
1
Mouse
0.02
 3
600
110
20
Frog
0.05
10
20
24
7
Snake
0.1
10
45
55
45
Duck
2
10
240
152
28
Rabbit
1
10
205
120
31
Cat (domestic)
2
15
150
129
66
Dog
5
13
90
150
60
Monkey
5
20
192
140
165
Human
90
75
60
120
270
Lion
190
12
70
190
110
Cow
800
22
65
157
275
Giraff e
900
25
65
300
430
Horse
1200
40
44
120
340
Elephant
5000
70
30
145
640
Whale
120000
85
20
25
365

 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  
173
Sound 
The sound (pitch) an animal makes is a physical cue for size. Small animals 
have higher-pitched sounds; larger animals have lower-pitched voices or 
sounds. When the vocal cord length increases by 2 times, this changes the 
pitch by an octave.
Loudness is another cue for size. A small animal does not have enough 
volume to produce a loud sound.
Which chicken is louder?
Kittens, compared with adult cats, have oversized paws, and facial features 
clustered close together.
Babyness
Babyness is a term that describes baby-like physical traits that come across as 
“cute.” Babyness is why everyone loves kittens, puppies, and baby seals—they 
are not simply scaled-down versions of adult animals, but have specifi c 
characteristics that make them adorable. 

174 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D  A N I M A T I O N
As compared to adult traits, babyness traits include:
• 
Large head
• 
Large eyes
• 
Small or large nose
• 
Short chin
• 
Eyes, nose, mouth close together, high forehead
• 
Small or large ears
• 
Soft, round body features
• 
Fluff y (shorter fur that sticks out straight)
• 
Small or large hands, feet, paws, hooves
• 
Ability to crouch
• 
Physically agile
Teenagers are something of a special case for babyness. The character might 
be nearly the height of an adult, but with disproportionate features in other 
areas. A teenaged animal or person usually has a mix of baby-sized and adult-
sized features, giving an awkward appearance that can be appealing in its 
own way.
Teenaged cat.
Artists often exaggerate babyness even in adult characters to make them 
more appealing. You can, for example, give all your characters larger-than-life 
eyes to make them more appealing, but children should always have more 
babyness than the adults.

 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  
175
Joints
In computer animation, characters are animated much in the way you would 
animate a jointed toy. An animatable bone structure is called a rig, and the 
practice of setting up a bone structure is called rigging. Rigging includes 
setting up joints and limits on their movements, associating the bone 
structure with a character’s skin, and the creation of various buttons, sliders, 
and other user interface controls for the rig. 
Before reading about joints, you should 
read the Levers section in the Forces 
chapter.
Making a complete rig is an art and a 
science in itself, with several software-
speciﬁ c books devoted to it already. In 
this chapter, we discuss the joints in a rig 
and how they relate to real-world physics. 
The Character Animation chapter includes 
several sections on animating a character, 
which generally means animating the rig.

176 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D  A N I M A T I O N
If the character consists of a smooth skin, a bone structure is defined 
underneath the skin, and the bone structure is animated to make the 
character’s skin move. The skeletal structure usually doesn’t look like an 
actual skeleton, but rather is made up of objects whose size and shape 
is determined by the software you’re using. The “bones” in the skeleton 
might be box shaped or cylinder shaped, or have some other shape 
altogether. The bones are linked together with a hierarchical structure.
The challenge for animators is to move the limbs and torso so the motion 
looks believable. A big part of achieving believable motion is having the 
right kind of joints in the rig. The character designer defi nes the type, 
direction, and degree of rotation for joints, and the rigger sets up these 
joints as designed.
TYPES OF JOINTS
Joints in human and animal bodies are revolute joints. Revolute joints have 
either a single axis of rotation or multiple axes. The three types of revolute 
joints most common in the human body are hinge, pivot, and ball and socket 
joints.  
Ninja Girl character’s skin and skeleton.

 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  
177
Name
Axes of Rotation
Usage
Body parts
Hinge
Single
Bend
Elbow, knee
Pivot
Single
Swivel
Neck, forearm
Ball and socket
Multiple
Free rotation in 
all directions
Hip, shoulder
Hinge joint, elbow.
Pivot joint, neck.
Ball and socket joint, hip.

178 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D  A N I M A T I O N
Sliding joints.
Robots and machines also have revolute joints, but might also have sliding 
joints. A prismatic or cylindrical joint consists of one cylinder sliding inside 
another, as with the telescoping legs on a tripod. A prismatic joint can only 
slide in and out (one axis of movement), while a cylindrical joint can both 
slide and rotate (two axes of movement).
On a robot or machine, a sliding joint that 
pulls or pushes a jointed part performs 
the same job as a muscle contraction on 
an animal or human being. The sliding 
joint that controls a backhoe arm is an 
example of this type of joint.
Legendary animator Chuck Jones used 
to dress his animals in ankle-high tennis 
shoes and knee-high striped socks as a 
visual assist to remembering where the 
ankles and knees are.
Location of knee joint in crocodile, cat, dog, horse, elephant, giraffe.
Animal Joints
Joints in mammals tend to be similar, but have diff erent lengths and degrees 
of rotation. Joints that look like knees on a dog or cat actually work more like 
an elbow or an ankle. The actual knee of many quadrupeds, such as cats and 
dogs, is up inside the skin of the hip area.

 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  
179
JOINTS AS LEVERS
All joints in human and animal bodies operate as part of a lever system. The 
eff ort is provided by muscle contractions. In general, the levers in human and 
animal bodies sacrifi ce effi  ciency for speed.
Elbow
An elbow rotates due to contraction of the bicep and tricep muscles. The 
forearm limb acts as a lever, with the force exerted by the muscle as an eff ort 
force and the joint as the fulcrum. The force is not applied right at the joint, 
but at a point on the forearm very near the joint.
This muscle/joint combination is a third class lever, where the eff ort arm is 
shorter than the load arm. 
Elbow rotation with fulcrum at the joint, 
force applied near the joint, and direction 
of motion.
Third class lever.
The eff ort and load arm lengths of a lever are always measured from the 
fulcrum. You might think that the eff ort arm is the length of the entire bicep 
muscle, but it is actually the distance between the elbow joint (fulcrum) and 
the place where the bicep pulls on the forearm. 
The load arm is the distance from the fulcrum to the center of gravity of the 
forearm. If the hand is holding an object, then the load arm is from the fulcrum 
to the combined center of gravity of the forearm and the object, which could 
be close to the hand if the object is heavy. In this case, the eff ort arm is quite 
a great deal shorter than the load arm. Recall that third class levers are always 
ineffi  cient but fast. This means human beings can make quick movements 
with their arms.
The tricep is also a third class lever, but it pulls in the opposite direction. 
Because muscles can only contract, they 
are often found in pairs so the limbs can 
move back and forth. The bicep and tricep 
muscles are one such pair.

180 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D  A N I M A T I O N
Foot
To raise your foot off  the ground, you use a number of muscles. The bulk of 
the work is done by the calf muscle, which contracts to lift the heel.
The fulcrum of the foot lever is at the ball of the foot. The calf muscle provides 
the eff ort, while the load is the body’s entire weight along the center of 
gravity line.
The foot is a second class lever, where the load arm is shorter than the eff ort 
arm. Leaning forward shortens the load arm, reducing the eff ort required to 
raise the heel.
Neck
The neck is the body’s only fi rst class lever, where the eff ort and load are on 
diff erent sides of the fulcrum. The eff ort arm is shorter than the load arm, 
making the lever ineffi  cient.
Muscles for Joints
It’s helpful for an animator to know the locations and names of the major 
muscles that control the joints. Knowing about these muscles will make it 
easier for you to study animals and locate corresponding muscles on their 
bodies.
The gastrocnemius (upper calf muscle) is 
one of the strongest in the body because 
it lifts the entire body.

 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  
181
Weight Distribution
Review:
• 
Classical Physics > Forces > Gravity > Center of Gravity
Part of character design is making sure the character can perform the 
movements called for in the animation without jarring departures from 
the laws of physics. While the animator is responsible for giving props and 
characters a consistent sense of weight during the motion, this is possible 
only with a character designed to do the movements without appearing to 
suddenly gain or lose weight in various parts of its body. 
This doesn’t mean you can’t design characters with abnormally heavy 
or light body parts—with animation, anything is possible!—but the 
character’s weight distribution should stay the same throughout. 

182 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D  A N I M A T I O N
Understanding weight distribution and balance is essential for creating 
character design, poses, and movement that work together consistently 
throughout the animation.
CHARACTER CENTER OF GRAVITY
Balance is based on the location of the center of gravity (CG), which is the 
average position of an object’s weight distribution. Figuring out your 
character’s CG is essential to setting up poses and motion that don’t distract 
your audience by violating the laws of physics. 
For any two-legged character, a good starting point is the human center 
of gravity. When a human being is standing up straight on both legs, the 
human CG is at about 55% of the person’s height, in the vicinity of the belly 
button.
The CG can move around as the body changes poses. For example, when you 
bend backward or forward, the CG also moves and can even shift outside 
your body. The CG moves up when you raise one or both arms, since more of 
your weight is distributed up higher.

 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  
183
The CG for a bottom-heavy character will be lower to the ground, while a top-
heavy character’s CG will be higher.
BALANCE
After you fi gure out the character’s CG, you will need to check that the 
character can actually balance in all the poses called for in the animation with 
such a CG. 

184 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D  A N I M A T I O N
For any given pose, the character’s line of gravity goes through the CG to the 
fl oor, and hits the fl oor at the center of pressure. A pose is in balance when 
the character’s center of pressure is within its base of support. Otherwise, 
the character will tip over. Drawing lines of gravity for a character in various 
poses will help you determine whether the character can actually balance in 
that pose.
For a quadruped the base of support is quite large, making it easier for it to 
balance than a biped can. If the character has a cane or places a hand on the 
ground, this acts as an extra leg or two to create a larger base of support.
To ﬁ gure out your character’s center 
of gravity, line of gravity, and center of 
pressure, it can be helpful to work with 
the character’s poses in silhouette.

 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  
185
When two people are leaning or holding on to one another, the CG is at the 
point of average distribution for their total weight, and the base of support 
spans the area between the contact each of them has with the ground or 
fl oor. 
Utilizing the CG, line of gravity, and base of support when designing your 
poses will help you determine whether a character is in balance for any kind 
of pose. These tools will also help you keep the weight distribution consistent 
in poses and animation. If you draw a character as balanced when its CG isn’t 
over the base of support, the character will appear to gain and lose weight in 
various parts of its body as it moves. 
Improving Balance
If your character’s CG isn’t over the base of support in poses where it’s 
supposed to be balanced, as an animator or character designer you have the 
freedom to alter the CG or base of support to improve the situation.
A top-heavy character generally has no trouble balancing when standing 
upright, but is easily thrown off  balance by a small shift to the side, such as 
normal bending movements. While it’s fairly common to see an animated 

186 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D  A N I M A T I O N
character with an oversized head, the CG in such characters is usually placed 
lower than is really physically accurate, as if the character’s head were light for 
its size. This puts the CG near the belly button, allowing the character to do 
normal movements without tipping over. 
A character standing on one leg can stretch out his arms and legs to move 
the CG over the standing leg and help maintain balance.
To increase the base of support, you can place a character’s feet farther apart. 
The larger the base of support, the easier it is to keep the character’s center 
of pressure inside it. 
Character with large head and two CGs for each pose: CG for head of proportionate weight (gray) and 
CG placed in humanoid location near belly button (white). While the difference in CG placement isn’t a 
problem for the character while standing upright, the CG and line of gravity for the heavy-headed version 
falls outside the base of support when the character bends down, which would make him tip over. 
Toddlers walk with their legs wide apart to 
increase the base of support and decrease 
their chances of falling over.

 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  
187
In a defensive pose, where the character is preparing for attack, the feet are 
often spread wide to increase the base of support. Crouching lowers the CG, 
and holding the arms out allows for rapid shifts of the CG. These elements 
add stability to the stance.

This page intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 6
Character Animation
Believable movement of characters has very likely been a big part of your 
animation studies. While you can learn a lot by observing real life and 
studying others’ work, your character animation skills can get a big boost by 
learning a few key physics concepts.
Jumping
A jump is an action where the character’s entire body is in the air, and both 
the character’s feet leave the ground at roughly the same time. A jump action 
includes a takeoff , free movement through the air, and a landing.

190 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D   A N I M A T I O N
Review:
• 
Classical Physics > Motion and Timing > Timing
• 
Classical Physics > Forces > Gravity
• 
Classical Physics > Forces > Action/Reaction
Other topics that pertain to animating a jump:
• 
Character Design and Animation > Character Design > Weight 
Distribution > Balance
• 
Character Design and Animation > Character Design > Size and Scale > 
Proportion and Scale > Weight and Strength
• 
Classical Physics > Forces > Friction
• 
Classical Physics > Motion and Timing > Motion Lines and Paths
PARTS OF A JUMP
A jump can be divided into several distinct parts:
Crouch—A squatting pose taken as preparation for jumping. 
Takeoff —Character pushes up fast and straightens legs with feet still on the 
ground. The distance from the character’s center of gravity (CG) in the crouch 
to the CG when the character’s feet are just about to leave the ground is 
called the push height. The amount of time (or number of frames) needed for 
the push is called the push time. 
In the air—Both the character’s feet are off  the ground, and the character’s 
center of gravity (CG) moves in a parabolic arc as any free-falling body would. 
First it reaches an apex, and then falls back to the ground at the same rate at 
which it rose. The height to which the character jumps, called the jump height, 
is measured from the CG at takeoff  to the CG at the apex of the jump. The 
amount of time the character is in the air from takeoff  to apex is called the 
Crouch.
Push height.
Jump height.
The action of going from a standing 
position to a crouch isn’t discussed in 
this chapter. Technically speaking, the 
crouch isn’t part of the jump. It might 
take a character a long time to settle into 
a crouch, or the motion could be very 
quick; the crouch timing is informed 
more by the story than by physics. The 
only consideration is that the time for the 
crouch should be at least as long as the 
push time.

 
C H A R A C T E R  A N I M A T I O N  
191
jump time. If the takeoff  pose and the landing pose are similar, then the jump 
height and jump time are about the same going up as they are going down. 
Landing—Character touches the ground and bends knees to return to a 
crouch. The distance from the character’s CG when her feet hit to the ground 
to the point where the character stops crouching is called the stop height. The 
stop height is not always exactly the same as the push height.
Stop height.
Path of action for a jump.
Path of action—The trajectory along which the character jumps, which can 
be straight up in the air or over a horizontal distance.

192 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D   A N I M A T I O N
CALCULATING JUMP ACTIONS
When working out the timing for a jump, you will need to fi rst decide on:
• 
Jump height or jump time
• 
Push height 
• 
Stop height
• 
Horizontal distance the character will travel during the jump
From these factors, you can calculate the timing for the jump sequence.
CALCULATING JUMP TIMING
When planning your jump animation, the most likely scenario is that you 
know the jump height, expressed in the units you are using for your animation 
(e.g., inches or cm). 
Placement and timing for frames while the character is in the air follow the 
same rules as any object thrown into the air against gravity. Using the tables 
in the Gravity chapter (or an online calculator), you can fi gure out the jump 
time for each frame. Look up the amount of time it takes an object to fall that 
distance due to gravity, and express the jump time in frames based on the 
fps you’re using.
Example:
Jump height = 1.2m
Jump time for 1.2m = 0. 5 seconds
Jump time at 30fps = 0. 5 * 30 = 15 frames
It’s certainly possible for you to decide on 
the jump time ﬁ rst, and then use that to 
ﬁ gure out the jump height. In any case, 
before proceeding, you will need to have 
both jump height and jump time in hand.

 
C H A R A C T E R  A N I M A T I O N  
193
Jump Magnification
When calculating the remainder of the timing for the entire jump action, you 
can use a factor called jump magnifi cation (JM). The JM can be used to 
calculate the push timing and stop timing. 
The JM is the ratio of the jump height to the push height. 
JM = Jump Height/Push Height
Since you already know the jump height and push height, you can calculate 
the JM. Then you can use the JM to calculate other aspects of the jump.
Example:
Jump Height = 1m
Push Height = 0.33m
JM = Jump Height/Push Height = 3
In life, a normal human being has a JM of 
about 0.5. In general, the JM increases for 
smaller animals and decreases for larger 
animals. A cat can easily have a JM of 4.0, 
while a cow would be lucky to have a JM 
of 0.1.
A jump height of 1.2m is higher than 
any human being can jump without the 
assistance of a trampoline or springboard. 
For a ninja, though, it’s just another day 
at work.
JUMP MAGNIFICATION AND ACCELERATION
You might think that jump magnifi cation is just a trick for estimating push 
timing. In fact, it’s an exact ratio that tells you how much the character has to 
accelerate against gravity to get into the air.
The JM, besides being the ratio of jump-to-push vertical height and time, 
is also the ratio of push-to-jump vertical acceleration. Note that this is 
continued on the next page

194 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D   A N I M A T I O N
opposite the other ratios: while a longer jump time means a shorter 
push time, a higher jump acceleration means a much, much higher push 
acceleration. 
Knowing about this can help you make more informed decisions about your 
push timing. To see how this works, let’s look at the formula for JM and relate 
it to acceleration:
JM = Jump Time
Push Time  = Jump Height
Push Height  = Push Acceleration
Jump Acceleration
The magnitude of jump acceleration is always equal to gravitational 
acceleration, with deceleration as the character rises and acceleration as it 
falls.
JH = Push Acceleration
Jump Acceleration
 = 
Push Acceleration
Gravitational Acceleration
To get a closer look, let’s look at a jump straight up in the air, with no horizontal 
motion. When you push out of a crouch into a takeoff  position, you accelerate 
your body to a certain speed and then you leave the ground. After that, this 
speed is slowed by gravity until it reaches a stop at the apex, and then you 
accelerate as you come back to the ground.
Provided you land on even ground at the same height at which you took off , 
the landing speed (the speed you’re traveling when you reach the ground) is 
the same as your takeoff  speed. 
When takeoff and landing height are the same, velocity at those times is the same.
Your landing speed is the same as the velocity of any falling object, which 
you can easily calculate from the freefall time. Since acceleration due to 
gravity is 10m/sec2, this means that after one second a falling object is 
traveling at 10m/sec, after two seconds at 20m/sec, after three seconds at 
30m/sec, and so on.
Since takeoff  speed is the same as landing speed, you need to get up to that 
same speed when taking off  for a jump. If your landing speed is 10m/sec, 
then during your takeoff  you need to get up to a speed of 10m/sec in that 
little bit of push time.

 
C H A R A C T E R  A N I M A T I O N  
195
The general formula for calculating the velocity of an accelerating object is:
Velocity = Acceleration * Time 
Physics shorthand:
v = at
Let’s relate this back to our jump. If the landing velocity is the same as the 
push velocity, we know that:
v = Jump Acceleration * Jump Time
So . . .
Jump Acceleration * Jump Time = Push Acceleration * Push Time
Moving things around with a bit of algebra, we arrive at this equation:
Jump Time
Push Time
 = 
Push Acceleration
Jump Acceleration (Gravity)
Look, it’s the JM! And it’s equal to the ratio of the push acceleration to gravity. 
Increase your jump time, and the push acceleration goes up. Decrease your 
push time, and the push acceleration goes up.
Distance (or in this case, jump or push height) is also related to velocity:
Distance = Average Velocity * Time
Physics shorthand:
d = vt
With some algebra, we make this into yet another formula for the average 
velocity:
v = d/t
Because the average velocity is the same for both the push and jump, we can 
say that d/t is the same for both jump and push:
Jump Height/Jump Time = Push Height/Push Time 
And with a little more algebra:
Jump Height
Jump Time
 = Push Height
Push Time
And once again, we have the JM.
Rather than make you go through all these calculations, we just provided 
you with an easy way to fi nd the JM. Use it to calculate the heights and 
times for the jump and push with full confi dence that it’s scientifi cally 
accurate.
PUSH TIME
The JM also gives you the ratio of the jump time to the push time.
JM = Jump Time/Push Time

196 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D   A N I M A T I O N
Working a little algebra, we can express the equation in a way that directly 
calculates the push time:
Push Time = Jump Time/JM
Example:
JM  = 3
Jump Time: 15 frames
Push Time = 15/3 = 5 frames
PUSH KEY SPACING
During the push, the character accelerates upward from a zero velocity 
(in the crouch) to a velocity suffi  cient to throw herself into the air. This means 
that the keys for the push are not evenly spaced throughout the push, but 
rather are closer together at the start of the push (for slower motion) and 
spaced wider apart toward the end of the push (for faster motion).
For the purpose of setting the push timing, start by assuming the character is 
exerting a constant force during the push (rather than a variable force) which 
results in a constant acceleration. To space the keys for constant acceleration, 
use the Odd Rule described in the Motion and Timing chapter. 
From this basis you can vary the key spacing for emphasis or comic eff ect, 
keeping in mind that the end of the push is always faster than the start.

 
C H A R A C T E R  A N I M A T I O N  
197
MOTION ARC AND JUMP TIMING
A fundamental part of a good jump is having a correct or believable path of 
action. When rising and falling due to gravity, the path of action for the center 
of gravity is always a parabolic arc.
While the CG always follows this arc, a jumping character can appear to 
defy this rule by raising the arms or legs while jumping. Raising these 
limbs shifts the CG higher in the body, causing the torso to follow a more 
fl attened arc. 
 Arc for CG differs from arc for pelvis.
When a character jumps like this, if you follow the arc for a specifi c area of 
the torso such as the pelvis, you will fi nd that its arc fl attens at the top. This 
gives the character the appearance of fl oating for an instant at the apex of 
the jump.

198 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D   A N I M A T I O N
The vertical timing for the jump is determined by the distance between 
frames due to gravity, which you can calculate using the tables in 
the Gravity section of the Forces chapter. The horizontal motion of 
the  character’s CG is uniform; the character’s CG will move the same 
distance horizontally on each frame, provided there are no other forces 
at play, like wind and air pressure. The head and limbs will most likely not 
move uniformly, but the CG itself does. In other words, the motion of the 
CG is unaffected by flailing limbs and any other motions your character 
might perform while in the air.
LANDING
The forces on landing are similar to takeoff . If the landing has faster timing, 
the forces will be larger than for a longer timing. 
STOP TIME
The stop height is often a bit larger than the push height, but the timing of 
the push and stop are the same in the sense that the CG moves the same 
distance per frame in the push and stop. If the stop height is larger than the 
push height, you’ll just need more frames for the stop than the push.
Push Height/Push Frames = Stop Height/Stop Frames
This can also be expressed as:
Push Height/Push Time = Stop Distance/Stop Time
You can also fl ip everything over and express it as:
Push Time/Push Height = Stop Time/Stop Distance
Ballet dancers raise their arms and legs while 
jumping to raise the CG and cause the pelvis to 
ﬂ oat, giving the impression of graceful ﬂ oating.

 
C H A R A C T E R  A N I M A T I O N  
199
Using algebra, we can get the following equation for stop time:
Stop Time = (Push Time * Stop Distance)/Push Height
Example:
Push Time: 5 frames
Push Height: 0.4m
Stop Height: 0.5m
Stop Time = (5 * 0.5) / 0.4 = 6 frames
VERY HIGH JUMPS
Some jumps you animate might be very high, resulting in a large JM and a 
very short push time or a very long push height. Examples of such motion 
include:
• 
Being blown out from a cannon
• 
Bouncing off  a gymnastics springboard
• 
Bouncing on a trampoline
• 
Superhero leaping over tall buildings
In the case of a character being pushed by some other mechanism such as a 
cannon or trampoline, the push height is the height the mechanism moves 
to push the character. The same rules apply for push time and key spacing.
Use whichever equation works best for 
you. In any case, if the stop height is larger 
than the push height, the stop time will 
be longer than the push height; if the stop 
height is smaller than the push height, the 
stop time will be shorter.
Stop height.

200 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D   A N I M A T I O N
For a superhero leap to a very high height, the push height is the same as for 
any jumping character. Because the height is large, the JM is very large, which 
means the push time is extremely short.
Let’s suppose you’re calculating a jump for a superhero, and his time in the air 
is four seconds; two seconds to go up, and two to come down. Using an online 
calculator for the freefall height for two seconds, we fi nd that a physically 
accurate jump with this timing would have to be to a height of about 20m. 
Let’s assume the superhero is around human sized. Let’s use the normal push 
height for a human being, which is around 0.4m.
Jump Height: 20m
Push Height: 0.4m
JM = Jump Height/Push Height = 50
Now we can calculate the push time.
Push Time = Jump Time/JM
Push Time = 2sec/50 = 0.04sec
No matter what fps you’re using, this timing translates to about one frame. 
Even if your character is very large and has a push height of 1m, the push time 
will be only two frames or so.
Push height for seesaw jump.
For fast pushes on exceptional jumps, 
use motion blur to suggest the degree of 
speed and acceleration.
While you might be tempted to use 
a longer push time so your audience 
can really see the action, this will be 
unrealistic to the point of distracting 
your audience. Instead of being amazed 
at your superhero’s skills, they’ll make 
pinched-lemon faces because “something 
just looks wrong.” Don’t be that guy who 
causes pinched-lemon faces! Use realistic 
push times on your superhero jumps.

 
C H A R A C T E R  A N I M A T I O N  
201
Walking
Walks feature all the basics of mechanics while including personality. The 
ability to animate walk cycles is one of the most important skills a character 
animator needs to master.
Much about walk cycles has been rigorously documented in other texts. In 
this book, we will study the mechanics of walking as they relate to physics, 
and how you can use these concepts to improve your walk cycles.
POSES
Walking consists of a series of poses. The four basic poses for a single step are 
passing, step, contact, and lift. In the passing pose, the free foot is passing by 
the opposite leg, and the body is at its most upright. In the contact pose, the 
free foot has come forward just enough to make contact with the ground. 
Various animation texts use diﬀ erent 
names for poses in walking. In The 
Animator’s Survival Kit, Richard Williams 
calls the poses contact, down, pass, and 
up. Williams uses the term up where we 
use step, and draws the up pose with the 
body at its straightest and the head rising 
above all other poses. In a realistic walk, 
the body is usually straightest and the 
head highest in the passing position.
Passing and contact are the two that are the most important to get right, as 
these poses include the most dynamic shifts for center of gravity, limbs, and 
secondary motion. 

202 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D   A N I M A T I O N
Strides and Steps
A step is one step with one foot. A stride is two steps, one with each foot. 
Stride length is the distance the character travels in a stride, measured from 
the same part of the foot. Step and stride length indicate lengthwise spacing 
for the feet during a walk.
Gait is the timing of the motion for each foot, including how long each foot 
is on the ground or in the air. During a walk, the number of feet the character 
has on the ground changes from one foot (single support) to two feet (double 
support) and then back to one foot. You can plot the time each foot is on the 
ground to see the single and double support times over time.
In a normal walk, each foot is on the ground about 60% of the time. Both feet 
are on the ground about 20% of the time. In the contact pose, both feet are 
in contact with the ground.
A normal walking gait ranges from 1
3 to 2
3 of a second per step, with 1
2 second 
being average. 
Walk Timing
Walking is sometimes called “controlled falling.” Right after you move past the 
passing position, your body’s center of gravity is no longer over your base of 
support, and you begin to tip. Your passing leg moves forward to stop the fall, 
creating your next step. Then the cycle begins again.
The horizontal timing for between the four walk poses is not uniform. The 
CG slows in going from the contact to passing position, then slows out from 
passing to contact. The CG also rises and falls, rising to the highest position 
during pass ing and the lowest during contact. The head is in the highest 
position during passing.
Parade march music is set to 120 beats 
per minute, giving a beat every 1
2 second.

 
C H A R A C T E R  A N I M A T I O N  
203
To walk faster, you naturally increase both stride length and rate, and decrease 
the time of double support. A fast walk has a stride rate of about 4 feet/sec. At 
6–7 feet per second, the movement transitions into a run. 
Walking and Energy Efficiency
When walking, we naturally use the motions that expend the least amount of 
energy. It takes energy to shift the center of gravity, so we tend toward 
motions that keep the CG as stable as possible. 
Horizontal CG Shift
During passing, the base of support is just one foot. To keep from tipping 
over, the hips shift to the side to keep your CG over the leg. 
A character with a lot of energy doesn’t 
necessarily need to follow the rules for 
saving energy while walking.
A slow walk played fast doesn’t look 
natural because it has a diﬀ erent rhythm 
than a fast walk.
Try walking in a funny way, and you will 
ﬁ nd that you use much more energy than 
normal walking!
Minimizing the shift makes the walk more effi  cient. Naturally, with a wider or 
heavier character, the CG will need to shift more to keep the character from 
tipping over.
Vertical CG Shift
The larger the vertical shift in the CG during walking, the more energy needs 
to be expended. During a walk, the fl exing of the heels, toes, and knees 
combine to minimize these vertical shifts. 
In the contact position, you are shorter in height than in the passing 
position, which shifts the CG downward vertically. To minimize this shift, 
you naturally extend the heels and toes to make the eff ective leg length 
longer. 

204 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D   A N I M A T I O N
We bend both legs when walking, including the standing leg. The knee fl exes 
about 15 degrees just after the heel strike and remains fl exed until the center 
of gravity passes over the weight-bearing leg. This fl exing minimizes the 
amount by which the center of gravity rises during passing.
HIP ROTATION
The hips rotate constantly during a walk, following the swinging leg. Hip 
rotation keeps the center of gravity as high as possible in the contact and lift 
poses, saving energy. 
When the right leg is about to come off  the ground in a lift position, the hips 
are rotated with the left leg extending forward as much as possible and the 
right leg extending back as much as possible.
Effective increase and decrease in leg length during contact period over the 
course of a walk, and the cause behind the increase/decrease.

 
C H A R A C T E R  A N I M A T I O N  
205
When the right leg reaches the ground in the contact position, the hips are 
rotated in the other direction, with the right hip rotated forward to extend 
the leg as much as possible. 
SHOULDER ROTATION
Hip rotation requires a rotational force (torque) on your hips. It takes less 
eff ort if you balance the rotation of your lower body with the opposite 
rotation of the upper body. Shoulder rotation going opposite pelvis rotation 
helps you keep your balance. The arms swing with the shoulders.
Dancing and Gymnastics
Review:
• 
Classical Physics > Forces > Torque
• 
Classical Physics > Forces > Gravity > Center of Gravity
Athletes can do motions that seem to defy the laws of physics. In reality, 
they’re taking advantage of various laws of physics to perform feats that 
most of us can’t do.
TORQUE AND TURNING
A character can turn in the air by generating torque before leaving the 
ground, pushing forward with one foot and backward with the other.
A dancer can start a turn on one leg with both feet on the ground. One leg 
pushes off  the fl oor, creating a lever arm between the two feet. When the feet 
are farther apart, the “lever arm” is longer and it is easier to turn.
The arrows from the feet indicate the forces 
exerted by the person pushing on the 
ground; the resulting reaction forces create 
the torque that produces the body’s rotation.

206 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D   A N I M A T I O N
BALANCE WITH MULTIPLE CHARACTERS
When two characters are holding on to one another, the center of gravity for 
the entire system is somewhere between the two characters’ individual CGs. 
If one character weighs more than the other, the line of gravity is closer to the 
heavier character than the lighter one. The base of support extends over the 
standing feet of both characters. This system allows characters to lean toward 
or away from each other in a way that would cause tipping if either character 
were standing alone.
GYMNASTICS LEVER SYSTEMS
A classic gymnast trick has one gymnast jumping on to the end of a seesaw, 
which throws a gymnast at the other end into the air. When representing a 
trick like this in your animation, it can be helpful to understand the class of 
lever system you’re using. While viewers won’t necessarily know (or care) 
whether your physics are accurate, they will often have a concept of how the 
load should react to the eff ort in your lever system. 
In the gymnast–seesaw example, the eff ort comes from the jumping person’s 
weight plus additional force due to momentum (mass * velocity) that the 
jumper acquires during the falling part of the jump. Because of the additional 
momentum from the fall, even a light person could presumably produce 
enough force to move a heavy load.
If you’ve ever tried experiments like this with a seesaw, you’ll know that even 
with a heavy eff ort and light load, the load fl ies up to only a small degree, 
if at all. But in animation, it’s a lot more fun to show the load fl ying off  into 
the air. 
Suppose you move the fulcrum so it’s closer to the load. Now the lever system 
is effi  cient but slow, meaning the eff ort moves a longer distance than the 
load. A slow lever system isn’t going to give you this fast kind of push on the 
load that you need to make it fl y off  into the air.
If the fulcrum is closer to the effort, the system is inefficient but fast. 
This means that the load will move faster than the effort, making it a 
Gymnasts on seesaw-type lever.
Efﬁ cient but slow seesaw lever.

 
C H A R A C T E R  A N I M A T I O N  
207
Inefﬁ cient but fast seesaw lever.
Motion path for gymnast ﬂ ung from seesaw 
lever.
Time lapse of vault athlete at London 2012 Summer Olympics. Image courtesy of Wikimedia Commons.
more desirable choice for if you want the load to gain enough speed go 
flying off.
Another consideration is the load’s trajectory when it fl ies into the air. Physics 
tells us that once the load leaves the lever, it will continue to move in the 
direction in which it was traveling at the moment it left the lever. Per the laws 
of physics, the load travels in a slight circular motion while sitting on the 
seesaw. At the time the load leaves the lever, the motion is angled slightly 
toward the fulcrum. When the load leaves the seesaw, the load’s CG continues 
in a straight line in the same direction in which it was moving when it left the 
seesaw. Once the load is in the air, it is of course subject to the force of gravity, 
and the path of action is a parabolic arc.
In this type of animation we sometimes see artistic license being taken with 
the trajectory, with the load fl ying off  backward away from the lever. If this 
is the kind of motion you want to animate, you’re in luck. Springboards used 
by gymnasts and acrobats have served to confuse the average viewer about 
the direction in which a person would fl y off  a lever system, and how high 
they would fl y. 

208 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D   A N I M A T I O N
A springboard and seesaw are quite diff erent, from a physics perspective, 
but your viewers most likely aren’t thinking about this. All they know is that 
when a board pushes a person up fast, the person goes fl ying into the air. 
Since viewers watch gymnastics far more than they watch people jumping 
on seesaws, you can get away with borrowing the springboard motion for 
your seesaw animation.
Lifting Weight
Review:
• 
Classical Physics > Gravity > Center of Gravity
• 
Character Design and Animation > Character Design > Weight Distribution
Picking up an object requires a number of shifts in the center of gravity. When 
you squat to lift an object, you shift your backside backward to keep the 
center of pressure inside the base of support.
You can tell how heavy an object is by the shift in the center of gravity when 
a character holds or lifts it. The character and the object have their own 
combined CG, the average distribution of the character’s weight and the 
object’s weight together. In animation, the more the CG is shifted toward the 
carried object, the heavier it will appear.
CG shifts toward the object being carried.
Carrying a heavy box.
A gymnast’s springboard is like a third class 
lever, with the spring pushing back up (eﬀ ort) 
at the gymnast (load). The gymnast ﬂ ies 
upward because he or she converts energy 
from forward motion to upward motion, a 
trick that requires superior body strength 
and rigorous training. When reaching the 
vault, the gymnast also uses his or her body 
as a lever with the hands as a fulcrum, yet 
another feat that requires strength and 
training. In other words, ordinary people 
wouldn’t bounce oﬀ  a springboard and vault 
over that way; they would simply continue 
the forward motion oﬀ  the springboard and 
smack face-ﬁ rst into the vault.
To hold a heavy object, the character has to lean over to keep the combined 
CG over the base of support so the character can stay upright. 

 
C H A R A C T E R  A N I M A T I O N  
209
Carrying a light object shifts the overall CG to such a small degree as to be 
negligible, and the character’s posture and CG are almost the same as if no 
object were being lifted or held. 
SHIFTING BODY WEIGHT
A character’s CG can shift in a number of ways during animation due to body 
shape changing. If the character bends forward, backward, or sideways, or 
stretches out the limbs, the CG will shift. As long as the CG stays over the base 
of support, the character can balance.
For example, if you reach forward, your CG shifts forward. When reaching 
forward while standing on one leg, you naturally put your arms and legs out 
to shift your CG back over your standing leg.
Knowing that a character can balance only if the CG is over the base of 
support, you can work out any number of poses for a character. 
SITTING AND STANDING
Sitting and standing are largely a matter of shifting balance while always 
keeping your CG over the base of support.
To sit in a chair, you need to bend your knees and lean forward to bring your 
center of gravity over your feet. Then you bend over further so you can bend 
your knees even more and still keep your CG over your feet. Finally, your 
backside hits the chair and rests on the seat. The chair forms a large base of 
support for your body.
Holding lightweight boxes.
To stand, you reverse the process. You lean forward to shift the CG over 
your legs, and move your feet apart to increase your base of support. If 
the chair has arms, you can extend your base of support to include your 
hands.

210 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D   A N I M A T I O N
Getting Hit
Review:
• 
Classical Physics > Forces > Action/Reaction
If you’ve ever kicked a tire, punched a wall, or otherwise hit a solid, immovable 
object, you know something about the forces involved in action/reaction. 
The object being hit experiences a force, and the person doing the hitting 
also experiences some pushback from whatever he’s hitting. The immovable 
object usually wins that particular fi ght!
In animation that involves hitting or getting hit, action/reaction comes into 
play. When both objects involved are mobile, as with two characters fi ghting, 
both are visibly aff ected by the action/reaction forces. 
FIGHT SCENES
Fight scenes are realistic when the action forces in punches and kicks have 
believable reaction forces. The person being hit experiences a force, and the 
person doing the hitting also experiences some pushback from whatever 
he’s hitting. The rules of action/reaction with mobile objects apply because 
the characters can tip, fall over, or fl y backward due to the action or reaction 
force. In other words, the characters are not fi xed objects like a wall or fl oor.
When one character kicks another in the head, for example, there are equal 
and opposite forces going from the foot to the head, and from the head back 
to the foot.

 
C H A R A C T E R  A N I M A T I O N  
211
MOMENTUM AND FORCE OF IMPACT
You’re probably familiar with the term momentum in common language as 
meaning the amount of thrust or “oomph” that a moving object has. 
Intuitively, you know that getting hit by a lightweight, slow-moving object 
(like a soccer ball) is a very diff erent experience than getting hit by a heavy, 
fast-moving object (like a boulder that just fell off  a cliff ). The momentum of 
these two objects is very diff erent.
In physics, the exact defi nition of momentum is the mass times the velocity. 
p = mv
Momentum = Mass * Velocity
From this equation, it’s easy to see that a heavy moving object has more 
momentum than a light object moving at the same speed. In the same way, 
if two objects weigh the same, the one moving at higher speed has more 
momentum.
CHANGING MOMENTUM
Understanding momentum becomes important when animating interactions 
where the momentum is changed in some way. Usually this means something 
In the examples in this chapter, we 
substitute weight for mass. Although a 
physicist will be quick to point out that 
these aren’t always the same thing, they’re 
close enough to the same thing near the 
surface of Planet Earth for us to use weight 
for our calculations.
In live action and animation, the action force in fi ght scenes is sometimes 
represented as much greater than the reaction force, to enhance the 
entertainment value. In traditional animation, this is done for comic eff ect. 
In martial arts fi lms, action fi lms, and comics, action force is exaggerated to 
emphasize the strength or prowess of the fi ghter. Plus it’s just plain fun to see 
the villain go fl ying when the hero gives him a good smack.

212 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D   A N I M A T I O N
is stopping the object, bringing its velocity to zero and thus changing its 
momentum to zero.
The degree of force involved in changing an object’s momentum is directly 
related to the time interval, which is sometimes strongly related to the 
materials and surface area involved. 
Suppose you toss an egg about three feet into the air and catch it gently 
with your hand in such a way that the eggshell doesn’t break. Your fl eshy 
hand provides a cushion to slow the fall with gentle forces, stopping the 
egg’s fall over a fraction of a second or so. You’ll also lower your hand while 
slowing the egg, increasing the time interval even more. You have changed 
the egg’s velocity (and thus its momentum) to zero over this interval of time 
by gradually exerting an opposing force against the egg’s fall.
Next, hold the egg about three feet above a hard fl oor, and drop the egg. 
The egg isn’t moving that much faster when it hits the fl oor than it was 
when it hit your hands, but because the time of impact is so short, the egg 
breaks.
The nearly instantaneous change in velocity (and thus momentum) means 
the force of impact on the egg is very large. The egg pushes on the fl oor with 
an equal and opposite force but that won’t do much to the fl oor. If you drop 
an iron cannonball on a wooden fl oor, then the physics is similar but the roles 
are reversed; the falling cannonball can break the wood. 
Force and Changing Momentum
Even though the time to slow the egg with your hands is only a fraction of a 
second, this time is enough to make an enormous diff erence in the amount 
of force exerted back on the eggshell at any given moment.
At each consecutive moment during the time interval where your hands are 
stopping the egg, the egg is exerting an opposing force on the surface of 
your palms, and you are pushing back. Because there’s a time interval and 
surface area involved, the egg’s momentum change is “spread out” over that 
time and area rather than occurring all at once in one spot at the time of 
impact.

 
C H A R A C T E R  A N I M A T I O N  
213
This is the idea behind seat belts and air bags in cars to prevent injury during 
crashes. These mechanisms cause the force of impact to be “spread out” over 
a fraction of a second on a larger part of your body. This creates a series of 
consecutive instants of spread-out pressure which your body can easily 
withstand, rather than one single instant of high pressure in one place. 
Action/Reaction and Changing Momentum
A bullet striking a character’s body is another example of changing 
momentum. If the bullet is stopped when it hits the character, the bullet’s 
momentum is changed to zero. With regards to time/force/materials, let’s 
look at a couple of diff erent ways the bullet could be stopped by the 
character:
• 
The bullet hits soft fl esh, and the fl esh exerts a force that stops the bullet 
over a short time interval.
• 
The bullet hits metal armor and stops instantly.
The law of action/reaction tells us that whatever the bullet hits will exert 
an equal and opposite force against the bullet to stop it. If the stop is 
instantaneous, as with the armor, a large force is exerted at the moment of 
impact, causing a reaction in the armor that throws it (and thus the character) 
backward away from the motion of the bullet. 
The momentum from the bullet is eff ectively transferred directly to the 
armor. But remember that momentum is mass * velocity.
So the bullet’s momentum = bullet’s mass * bullet’s velocity = man’s mass * 
man’s velocity.
If the bullet’s momentum is transferred to a character who weighs 1000 
times more than a bullet, the velocity imparted to the character will be 
1000  times less than the bullet’s velocity. This means that the velocity 
imparted is quite small.
Whether the bullet is stopped by soft fl esh or hard armor, the man’s velocity 
after stopping the bullet is the same. The diff erence is the force of impact is 
larger with the armor. With the armor the acceleration of the man is large but 
the time interval for that acceleration is small. When the bullet is stopped by 
fl esh, it’s a lot like when you catch an egg with your hands; the force (and 
acceleration) is smaller but the time interval is longer.
A bullet hurts a person through damage 
to internal organs, bleeding, and other 
injury-related factors, not by throwing 
him backward. A character is more likely 
to double over in shock or pain than to 
be physically moved by the force of the 
bullet itself.

214 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D   A N I M A T I O N
A scenario somewhere in the middle is a character being shot while wearing 
a bulletproof vest. The vest repels the bullet by stopping it over a short 
interval within the vest itself. Because of the shorter stop time the moment-
by-moment force is greater than if the bullet were stopped by fl esh. 
Despite all these factors, audiences seem willing to accept that a bullet 
hitting fl esh can throw a person backward. In the movies, we sometimes 
see a character propelled backward through a plate glass window (or other 
impressive obstacle) by a bullet shot into his chest, then the poor victim falls 
to a spectacular death 30 stories below. This backward thrust is impossible 
unless the person has an impervious plate embedded in his chest and the 
bullet is extremely heavy. It’s more likely that the person would simply 
stumble backward in shock, but that isn’t nearly as dramatic as a good shoot-
smash-fall sequence.
Feel free to design the character’s reaction to getting hit as you like, but with 
full knowledge of the actual physics involved!
Recoil
Recoil from a gun is another example of action/reaction with two mobile 
objects. Because the bullet and gun are both hard metal, neither absorbs the 
force gradually—the transfer of momentum is nearly instantaneous, and the 
action force that accelerates the bullet results in a matched reaction force in 
the opposite direction. The bullet’s momentum is matched by the gun’s 
momentum in the opposite direction, creating recoil. 
Bullet Weight * Bullet Speed = Gun Weight * Gun Recoil Speed
Because the gun weighs a lot more than the bullet, the recoil speed is a lot less 
than the bullet’s speed. The gun’s momentum is then passed to the character, 
where the character’s muscles push back in an eff ort to stop the gun.

 
C H A R A C T E R  A N I M A T I O N  
215
If the character’s muscle strength isn’t great enough, the character might be 
thrown back. In animation, unexpectedly large recoil is sometimes used for 
comic eff ect.
Tipping Over
Review:
• 
Classical Physics > Forces > Gravity > Center of Gravity > Tipping and 
Center of Gravity
• 
Classical Physics > Forces > Torque > Torque in Animation
• 
Classical Physics > Forces > Friction
As you learned in the Gravity section, tipping occurs when the object’s center 
of gravity moves over in such a way that the center of pressure is no longer 
over the base of support.

216 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D   A N I M A T I O N
ROTATIONAL INERTIA AND TIPPING
Rotational inertia plays a part in the speed of tipping objects. If you have two 
objects made of the same material with diff erent lengths, the longer object 
has a center of gravity that is farther from the axis of rotation. Thus the longer 
object has a larger rotational inertia, so it falls more slowly. 
You can use these principles in character animation. For example, an adult 
falls slower than a child.
In the section on Torque, you also saw that tipping can be viewed as increasing 
torque as the tipping angle increases.
You can also use this principle to make a character appear top heavy. A 
top-heavy character will have greater rotational inertia than his bottom-
heavy friend, so the top-heavy character will tip, bend, and rotate slower in 
animation.

 
C H A R A C T E R  A N I M A T I O N  
217
TIPPING AND FRICTION
Tipping sometimes works hand-in-hand with friction. If your character is 
pushing a box across a fl oor, the box might tip rather than slide, based on a 
variety of factors:
• 
If the box is taller than it is wide, it is more likely to tip. A taller box has a 
longer torque arm, making it easier to move the box’s center of gravity 
past the base of support. But since the box is tall, it will fall slower than a 
short box once it starts tipping.
• 
The lighter the box, the more likely it is to tip if it is pushed near the top. 
Very little torque is needed to move the center of gravity past the base of 
support. On the other hand, a light box has less friction than a heavy box, 
so it might also slide when pushed.
• 
The higher up the force is applied, the larger the torque arm and the more 
likely the box is to tip.
• 
The higher the center of gravity, the more likely it is to tip. Once it tips, the 
box will fall slower than a box with a lower center of gravity.
• 
On a rougher surface, static friction keeps the box from sliding, making 
the box more likely to tip than slide.
Drag and Follow Through
Review:
• 
Classical Physics > Motion and Timing > Circular Motion
Drag and follow through are eff ects that occur when something soft or 
jointed is attached or tied down at one end to a parent object. When the 
parent object starts to move, the unattached part of the child object tries 
to stay where it was just before the motion. This causes the child object to 
trail behind or in front of the parent in the direction opposite the parent’s 
motion. 
In animation, the terms parent and child 
refer to systems where one or more 
objects (children) are linked to a main 
object (parent). In the images here, the 
robot’s torso/head is the parent object, 
and the antennae and limbs are child 
objects.

218 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D   A N I M A T I O N
Drag and follow through are entirely due to the Law of Inertia. The Law 
of Inertia, also called Newton’s First Law, states that an object at rest 
stays at rest and an object in motion stays in motion with the same 
speed and in the same direction unless acted upon by unbalanced 
force. The child object’s center of gravity attempts to keep doing what 
it was doing as long as possible until forces from the parent object pull 
it along.
Examples of the types of objects that experience drag and follow through 
are:
• 
Hair
• 
Cloth
• 
Ribbons and streamers
• 
Soft fl esh
• 
Hinged objects, including limbs
While drag and follow through can happen with any kind of object 
regardless of weight, the most visible effects happen with soft, light 
substances like hair and cloth. Because they are pliable and subject to a 
great deal of air resistance, hair and cloth appear to float and flow as they 
trail and settle.
DRAG
Drag occurs when the parent object accelerates forward. The tied-down 
part of the child object moves along with its parent, while the rest trails 
behind. 
Consider a long-haired character sitting on a bus that starts moving forward. 
When the bus accelerates, the part of the hair attached to the head moves 
with the head, but parts of the hair not attached to the head fl ow behind 
the head.
Drag can also occur with circular motion, as when a character turns 
her head. If the parent object turns in a circular motion, the child 
objects will experience a centrifugal force. In reality, the child objects 
are just trying to continue moving in a straight line but are being 
pulled inward by the parent object. This is another example of inertia 
at work.
FOLLOW THROUGH
Follow through occurs when the parent object comes to a stop. In eff ect, the 
parent object experiences deceleration—the acceleration is in the direction 
opposite the motion. The child object’s center of gravity keeps moving until 
Hair in neutral position, and hair during 
acceleration.
Hair in neutral position, and hair during 
deceleration (negative acceleration).

 
C H A R A C T E R  A N I M A T I O N  
219
it is stopped by other forces, such as the head exerting a force on the hair at 
the point where it’s attached to the head.
Overlapping Action
Review: 
• 
Classical Physics > Motion and Timing > Circular Motion > Pendulum Motion
If a parent has more than one child object, these objects will most likely 
accelerate or decelerate at diff erent speeds when the parent starts or stops. 
This principle is known as overlapping action. 
LENGTH AND MOTION
Objects respond diff erently to follow through and drag primarily because of 
diff erences in length from the attachment point to the parent object. To 
illustrate these diff erences in motion, consider the motion experienced by a 
horse’s mane and tail as the horse runs. 
Eadweard Muybridge photography of a horse in motion. The mane repeatedly 
moves away from and toward the neck while the tail stays out from the body.
• 
The underside of a horse’s tail doesn’t move as much as the top because of 
the weight of the upper portion of the hairs bearing down on it. The upper 
part of the tail is more susceptible to motion. 

220 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D   A N I M A T I O N
• 
If two child objects are made of the same material but have diff erent 
lengths (as with a horse’s mane and tail), the shorter object will move from 
its previous position faster than the longer object does. There are two 
eff ects in play here: larger objects have more inertia since they have more 
mass, and longer objects have larger rotational inertia so their rotational 
acceleration is slower. The mane hairs, being shorter, are susceptible to 
more rotational acceleration than the tail.
Angular motion of tail and mane hairs from original position to drag position.
• 
While the ends of longer hairs move slower than shorter hairs, they travel 
a longer distance. You can think of this as a pendulum, where the end of a 
long pendulum swinging to a 30 degree angle moves farther than a short 
pendulum going to the same angle.  

 
C H A R A C T E R  A N I M A T I O N  
221
• 
A running horse, or any running animal or character, doesn’t have a 
constant horizontal velocity. The body slows down as the feet hit the 
ground, then speeds up as the feet push off  the ground. These changes 
in velocity cause any trailing objects, such as a mane or tail, to contract 
and extend like a fl exible spring. You can see this eff ect in the Muybridge 
photo series.
SURFACE AREA AND MOTION
Another diff erence in drag or follow through can come from the object’s 
weight vs. surface area. Although the acceleration of gravity is the same 
on all objects, lighter objects with a large surface area (such as a kite) are 
more subject to air resistance, and thus will seem to resist gravity more 
than heavy objects. A kite’s streamers, being child objects of the kite itself, 
have a lot of dynamic motion due to follow-through, drag, wind, and air 
resistance.
When animating overlapping motion, consider all objects in the scene which 
are soft or jointed, and which are not completely tied down. Then consider 
the length, weight, and fl exibility of each object, and how long it is from the 
tied-down point to the end.
Although it can be hard to accurately predict the exact eff ects of inertia and 
air resistance, you can at least cause diff erent objects in your animation to 
respond diff erently to inertia, and thus make a more dynamic, realistic, and 
compelling sequence.
If a long tail hair rotates over the same angle as a short mane hair, the end of the 
long hair will travel farther than the end of the short hair.
Pony tails, kite tails, and other long, 
ﬂ exible objects stretch and contract 
similar to the way springs do. In physics, 
Hooke’s Law tells us that the force 
needed to compress or stretch a spring 
is proportional to the change in the 
length of the spring—the greater the 
change in the length of the spring, the 
more force is needed. Hooke’s Law can be 
applied to any long, thin object made of 
ﬂ exible material, including a tall building 
shaken by the wind or the string of a 
musical instrument being plucked.

222 
C H A R A C T E R  D E S I G N  A N D   A N I M A T I O N
PONYTAIL SWING
A ponytail is like a fl exible pendulum that can swing when a character’s 
head moves. When a character makes a repetitive up-and-down motion 
like running, the body’s up-and-down motion makes the ponytail move up 
and down. Under some circumstances, the ponytail can also swing wildly 
from side to side when a character runs. Let’s take a look at how these 
circumstances happen.
Recall that a pendulum of a specifi c length always has the same period, the 
length of time for a full back-and-forth swing. As long as the length of the 
pendulum stays the same, the period stays the same, regardless of whether 
the swing is tight or wide. The same is true for the frequency, which is simply 
1 divided by the period. 
There are many online calculators to help you 
calculate the period or frequency of a rigid 
pendulum. Multiply the rigid pendulum’s 
frequency by 1.15 to get the frequency 
for the ﬂ exible version. The frequency of a 
ﬂ exible pendulum is about 15% longer than 
the period of a rigid pendulum. For example, 
the frequency of a 14 inch rigid pendulum is 
1.275 seconds, so the frequency of a 14 inch 
ponytail is 1.5 seconds.
The magnifying eﬀ ect of resonating 
frequencies is called parametric 
resonance.
The slight left–right motion of the body while running is responsible for the 
ponytail moving side-to-side, but only to a small degree. A big, wide ponytail 
swing happens when the frequency of a character’s run is twice the ponytail’s 
pendulum period, causing the frequencies to resonate and magnify. This 
makes the ponytail swing much higher to the left and right than it would 
if the ponytail were a diff erent length, or if the run cycle had a diff erent 
frequency.
For example, suppose your character is running at a rate of 3 steps per second, 
which causes the entire body to move up and down at a rate (frequency) 
of 3 up–down cycles per second. As mentioned earlier, the frequency of a 
14 inch fl exible pendulum is 1.5 cycles per second. In this case, the run 
frequency is twice the ponytail’s natural swinging frequency. This means a 
14 inch ponytail will resonate and fl y high on the left and right sides when 
the character runs at 3 cycles per second.

S E C T I O N 3
Visual Effects
Visual eff ects are any images or imagery that are created or manipulated 
outside a live action shot. Some visual eff ects are created to enhance a live 
scene, while others stand on their own without any live action in the scene at 
all. Visual eff ects are sometimes called VFX or SFX (short for special eff ects).
In general, visual eff ects are intended to appear to be live action, or to blend 
in with any live action so as to appear real. Knowing the physics concepts 
behind the environment, explosions, and other common VFX needs can 
help you make more realistic imagery. The same physics concepts can also 
be applied to traditional animation to enhance realism in a scene. If there 
are previously discussed topics that pertain directly to the subject, these are 
listed at the start of the section. This will enable you to review any topics 
necessary before you dive in. 
Stealing home plate in a baseball game, with enhanced dust.
Surﬁ ng in a simple, elegant ocean.

This page intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 7
Environment
In your animation work, you will very likely need to represent our external 
environment in some fashion. Understanding the basics of weather eff ects 
like clouds, rain, and lightning will help you make your weather-based 
animation eff ects more realistic and compelling.
Changes in air pressure cause a lot of the changes we see in our environment 
such as clouds and rain. To get the most from the Environment chapter, be 
sure to read the Pressure section of the Forces chapter.
Clouds
 Clouds in the sky are part of everyone’s experience from the earliest age. 
Many of us have memories of lying on the ground on a summer day and 
picking out shapes in the fl uff y clouds above. 

226 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
 Scientists have succeeded in identifying diff erent types of clouds and 
predicting their behavior to a great degree. Knowing how, why, and when 
clouds form will help you depict them in a more realistic way.
WHAT’S IN A CLOUD
Clouds are composed of water or ice droplets clinging to microscopic dust 
particles. The droplets are so small that they are easily suspended in the air.
A water droplet in a cloud is about 100 times 
smaller than an ordinary raindrop.
Clouds form as a result of water evaporation. Water evaporates from the 
Earth’s surface and rises into the air above. There, it cools and condenses onto 
dust particles, forming water droplets or ice particles. Water and ice refl ect 
and scatter all colors, so they appear to us as white. Large groupings of these 
particles appear to us as clouds.
Evaporated water usually doesn’t travel straight up and form clouds, but gets 
blown around a bit fi rst. Diff erences in temperature over adjacent regions 
cause diff erences in air pressure, which produces winds that blow from 
warmer to cooler regions. When the water vapor reaches the cooler region, 
the water condenses and clouds form.
Once clouds form they are subject to winds and changing temperatures, 
which cause them to move across the sky, change shape, and grow or 
disperse.
 TYPES OF CLOUDS
In order to discuss clouds, we group them into categories with names derived 
from Latin.
• 
Cumulus clouds are light, fl uff y clouds with distinct outlines, commonly 
referred to as “fair weather” clouds. This is the type of cloud most often 
depicted in cartoons. Cumulus clouds are dense and opaque, blocking 
out the Sun as they move past it. With thick cumulus clouds, areas facing 
Cumulus cloud.

 
E N V I R O N M E N T  
227
away from the Sun have shadows, making the clouds appear almost solid. 
Cumulus means pile in Latin.
• 
Cirrus clouds are long, wispy clouds that occur at high altitudes. Such 
clouds are thin and fl at, and don’t block the Sun to any great degree. 
Cirrus means lock of hair in Latin.
• 
Stratus clouds are nearly uniform sheets of cloud material. Stratus means 
layer in Latin. Fog is actually a stratus cloud at ground level.
• 
Nimbus clouds are any clouds that produce precipitation (rain, snow, hail). 
Nimbus means cloud in Latin. 
 CLOUD ALTITUDES
Diff erent types of clouds form at diff erent altitudes above Earth. We can 
divide the altitudes into three areas:
• 
Low—Below 6500ft/2000m
• 
Alto—6500–23,000ft/2000–7000m
• 
High—Above 23,000ft/7000m
Within these altitudes, there can be various categories of clouds. The names 
of clouds are combined together or with the name of the altitude range to 
describe the cloud.
Altitude
Name
Appearance
High
Cirrus
Long, wispy
Cirrostratus
Transparent sheet
Cirrocumulus
Speckle fl uff 
Alto
Altostratus
Translucent sheet
Altocumulus
Dotted fl uff 
Low
Stratus
Opaque sheet
Cumulus
Fluff y, individual
Stratocumulus
Fluff y sheet
Nimbostratus
Rain-producing sheet
All
Cumulonimbus
Tall, anvil shaped, rain producing
At high altitudes, all clouds are considered cirrus clouds of one kind or 
another. The air at this altitude is quite cold, so these clouds are made of ice 
crystals. The clouds are a brilliant white due to their icy composition, and are 
relatively thin and fl at; they don’t have shadow areas the way fl uff y cumulus 
clouds do at lower altitudes. 
Cumulus and stratus clouds can also occur at high altitudes, named with the 
prefi x cirro-. Cirrocumulus clouds are dotted versions of cirrus clouds, while 
cirrostratus clouds at this level are transparent enough to reveal the Sun as 
a hazy ball. 
Cirrus cloud.
Stratus cloud.
Cirrostratus cloud.
Cirrocumulus cloud.

228 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
Alto clouds can be cumulus or stratus clouds, which are made from ice 
crystals at higher levels and water droplets at lower levels. At this level 
clouds are translucent, allowing you to see the Sun through them dimly. 
Altocumulus clouds are puffi  er than cirrocumulus clouds, but not as puff y 
as low clouds. 
Low clouds, which are made of water droplets, can be either stratus or 
cumulus clouds, and can also be nimbus clouds. A low stratus cloud blocks 
out the Sun itself and disperses the Sun’s light somewhat evenly, making 
it diffi  cult to tell where the Sun is. Nimbus clouds are low clouds, or clouds 
which start low and extend up into higher altitudes.
Most clouds aren’t tall enough to extend over multiple altitudes, with one 
notable exception. Cumulonimbus is a tall, anvil-shaped cumulus cloud 
that extends from very low to very high altitudes. Such clouds can produce 
lightning in addition to rain.
Stratus clouds can exist at any altitude. You can sometimes estimate the 
altitude of a stratus cloud by how well you can see the Sun through it. 
Through a cirrostratus cloud, the Sun is visible as a hazy ball. With a stratus 
cloud at a low altitude, the Sun is barely visible or not visible at all.
Altocumulus cloud.
Cumulonimbus cloud.
Cirrostratus cloud.
 INSIDE A CLOUD
You can get an idea of what a cloud looks like up close by observing fog on 
the ground. Fog is actually a very low stratus cloud. When there’s fog on the 
ground, the sky is always overcast.
When approaching a cloud from the outside, as in an airplane, clouds look 
similar to the way they do from the ground. However, when you’re actually 
inside a cloud, it looks a lot like fog. You can see only a short distance in front 
of you, and as you move, your visibility is limited to the same distance at all 
times. 

 
E N V I R O N M E N T  
229
 MOVEMENT OF CLOUDS
Clouds are prone to being blown by a wind of some kind, which means they 
are constantly moving and changing shape. When you consider that clouds 
form from diff erences in air pressure, and that wind results from diff erences 
in air pressure, it’s easy to see that clouds and wind often go together.
If you glance up at the sky for just a moment, clouds can appear motionless. 
But if you watch for several minutes or record a time-lapse video of the sky, 
you’ll see the movement and changes in cloud shapes. 
It’s not unusual to see clouds at diff erent altitudes moving at diff erent speeds. 
Cirrus clouds can be subject to winds from a jet stream, which can blow at 
speeds up to 180mph/300kmh.
Clouds also change shape as they move. They are constantly condensing 
more water to become larger, or evaporating more water to become smaller. 
Clouds are extremely large and far away, so these diff erences are subtle. In 
general, wispier or smaller chunks of clouds at the outer edges of the cloud 
move and change shape more visibly than the main cloud mass. 
 CLOUD EFFECTS
Clouds can create some pretty spectacular lighting eff ects in life. These 
eff ects can be used in your animation to set a mood for your story.
 Cloud Combinations
Combinations of clouds at diff erent altitudes can make some of the most 
visually spectacular formations. For example, a thin cirrostratus cloud at high 
altitude coupled with low cumulus clouds create a slightly hazy sun and 
contrast in shadow areas of the lower clouds.
A jet stream is a fast wind that occurs at 
25 to 40,000 feet (6–9 miles, 10–15km) 
above the Earth’s surface. Jet streams form 
when the surface temperatures of two 
adjacent regions are very diﬀ erent, which 
means the two areas have very diﬀ erent 
air pressures. Most jet streams ﬂ ow from 
west to east.
A hazy sun through altocumulus clouds coupled with mist over water gives 
a lot of opportunities for lighting eff ects. For example, if a cloud is opaque it 
will cast a shadow on the ground.

230 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
God Rays
Rays of light that appear to radiate out from the Sun are called God rays. 
Although the light rays are actually parallel, they appear to converge at the 
Sun due to a perspective eff ect. The light rays stream through gaps in clouds 
(usually stratocumulus) or between objects, creating the eff ect of separate 
rays coming down from the Sun.
In CG software, God rays can be simulated with a volumetric light.
 Backlit Clouds
Cirrus clouds are bright white and don’t have shadow areas. Thick 
cumulus clouds, on the other hand, have shadow areas at the bottom 
and the front surface opposite the Sun, which can be quite dark especially 
at dawn or dusk. The strong contrast between the two can make a 
compelling image. 
God rays.
 God rays are also called crepuscular rays. 
Crepuscular means “pertaining to twilight,” 
which is the dim light at dawn or dusk. 
The most spectacular crepuscular rays 
tend to occur at sunset, but they can 
actually occur at any time of day.
Backlit clouds.

 
E N V I R O N M E N T  
231
CG APPROACHES TO CLOUDS
In the early days of computer graphics, when solids were the only types of 
objects one could easily create, clouds were hard to portray realistically due 
to their non-solid and transparent nature. Particle systems were the fi rst 
useful approach, with each particle representing a chunk of the cloud as a 
semi-transparent image on a small plane. 
Realistic cloud simulation is really only possible with a simulator designed for 
the task. Such simulators, which utilize voxel-based techniques, are needed 
only if you need to have a lot of control over your clouds’ shape or motion, or 
if your camera or subjects move through clouds.
The term voxel comes from combining the words volume and pixel. The 
technical defi nition of voxel is “a point or value on a three-dimensional grid.” 
In CG, a voxel is one cube in a 3D grid. Such a grid moves around as a single 
unit, with individual voxels holding specifi c properties such as transparency 
and color which can change over time. The voxels don’t move individually, 
but through gradual shifts of color and transparency over a series of frames, 
the eff ect can “move” across or through the voxels.
Voxels are commonly used in a group or cluster where the grid moves 
around as a single unit (as with an entire cloud moving across the sky) with 
the addition of changes of color and transparency in individual voxels over 
time (as with the edge of the cloud slowly changing shape). Voxel-based 
techniques have allowed the fi eld of CG rendering to move beyond solid 3D 
objects to wispy or changeable eff ects like fog and fi re.

232 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
Rain
Review: 
• 
Visual Eff ects > Liquid Eff ects
• 
Classical Physics > Forces > Pressure and Gases> Air Resistance
While meteorologists have a very specifi c defi nition of rain, for the purposes 
of this book we consider rain to be “water falling from the sky.” Rain typically 
occurs only under certain weather conditions, and it looks and acts diff erently 
depending on those conditions, the surrounding area, and the surface it 
strikes. 
While your audience might not be weather experts, many people have an 
intuitive sense of rain. In this book, we look at some of the diff erent properties 
of rain so you can include both obvious and subtle cues in your own work, 
cues that will make the rain a believable enhancement to your animation and 
not a distraction.
And if you’re creating a magical or fantasy world that includes rain or fog, 
understanding the geographical features of rain-producing areas can also 
help you create a more believable world.
RAIN FORMATION
In the Clouds section, you learned that clouds are collections of tiny water 
droplets or ice crystals that are light enough to be suspended above the 
Earth’s surface. An ordinary cloud becomes a rain cloud when the water in the 
cloud becomes too heavy to be suspended any more.
The formation of rain is an extension of the way clouds form. In the same 
way that cool air condenses water vapor and forms a cloud, more cooling 
water vapor leads to more water droplets and a larger or heavier cloud. 
The water droplets become so numerous that they join together to 
form larger droplets, which eventually cannot stay suspended in the air. 
Then the droplets begin to fall out of the cloud suspension, and you get 
precipitation. 
Precipitation is any form of water that 
falls from the sky and reaches the ground, 
such as rain, snow, or hail.

 
E N V I R O N M E N T  
233
Types of Rain Clouds
There are two main types of rain clouds. A quick rainfall is likely to come from 
a tall, fl uff y cumulonimbus cloud, while a rainfall of longer duration comes 
from a wide, blanket-like nimbostratus cloud. While these two types of clouds 
are formed by diff erent weather conditions, both are a result of warm, humid 
air meeting up with cool air.
With a tall cumulonimbus, the area around the cloud might be a perfect blue 
sky, or there might be other cumulonimbus nearby to fi ll in your view of the 
sky. Conversely, a nimbostratus cloud tends to form a sheet of gray overhead. 
Recall from the Clouds section that 
rain-producing clouds include the word 
“nimbus” or “nimbo” in their names.
Tall cumulonimbus cloud against blue sky.
Wide, ﬂ at nimbostratus cloud, making sky appear mostly gray.
If you look under the hood at how diff erent types of rain clouds form, it’s 
essentially the same for all of them: warm and cool air interact with each 
other, then warm air cools to form heavy water droplets. The diff erences in 
types of rain clouds come from the weather activities that precede them: 
evaporation leads to tall, fl uff y clouds, while two pockets of cool/warm air 
lead to a big slab of cloud.
In addition, distinctions between clouds can be, like the clouds themselves, 
rather fuzzy. For example, the bottom part of a cumulonimbus cloud can 
fl atten and spread, making it look and act a lot like a nimbostratus cloud. 
Realize that scientists classify these diff erent types of clouds to make them 
easier to study and discuss among themselves, not to make them easier for 
animators to understand and represent in their work.
With that in mind, we’ll look at some of the characteristics of rain and its 
clouds so you can use them intelligently in your own animation.
Nimbostratus: Frontal Rain
Frontal rain or stratiform rain comes from the meeting of two fronts, where air 
is pushed around in such a way to create heavy water droplets within a wide, 
fl at nimbostratus cloud. 

234 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
When a large warm front meets a large cold front, the warm front rises, moves 
up on top of the cool air, and sits on top of it. Then, because the temperature 
higher in the sky is cooler, the warm air cools and its water droplets condense, 
producing a wide, fl at nimbostratus cloud that often covers the entire sky. 
Rain from such a cloud is called frontal rain or stratiform rain. This type of rain 
falls steadily for a period lasting from several hours to a few days.
Cumulonimbus: Convection Rain
The evaporation of moisture from land or water masses tends to form a 
cumulonimbus cloud, which can produce heavy rainfall for a short period of 
time (a few minutes to a few hours). This type of rain is called convection rain.
In warm climates, or in areas near large water masses, water evaporates, rises 
up, and cools to form a cumulus cloud. As the water keeps evaporating, the 
cloud becomes taller and taller. The air is cooler higher up in the atmosphere, 
so the water droplets at the top of the cloud cool down, condense, and 
become heavier, causing them to drop to the bottom of the cloud. 
Recall from the Atmospheric Pressure 
section in the Forces chapter that a front is 
a mass of air with a particular characteristic 
such as temperature, moisture level, 
or pressure. Your local weather report 
might talk about a cold front clashing 
with a warm front, or a high-pressure 
front meeting a low-pressure front. The 
meeting of two opposite types of fronts 
is, by nature, a violent event, and can 
cause a wide variety of weather conditions 
including wind and thunderstorms.
Convection is a scientiﬁ c term for the 
movement and circulation of warm and 
cool air around each other.
Then the air becomes warmer and moves back up to the top of the cloud, 
leaving some of the heavy moisture behind at the base of the cloud. More 
water might evaporate and join the cloud, and the cycle goes on and on with 
warm air moving up to the top of the cloud and cool air moving down and 
dumping moisture at the bottom of the cloud. Eventually the water at the 
bottom of the cloud is too heavy, and it falls as rain. 
This movement of the cool and warm air around each other is convection. 
A cumulonimbus cloud produces heavy rain for a short time, and can also 
produce lightning between the ground and within itself. 
Formation of nimbostratus cloud and 
resulting precipitation.

 
E N V I R O N M E N T  
235
Orographic Rain
In hilly regions clouds can form on just one side of a mountain, causing 
rainfall just on that side of the mountain. This type of rain is likely to happen 
where there’s a lot of water available for evaporation, such as a seashore or 
lake near the base of a mountain. 
Water from one side of the mountain evaporates into warm air. Wind pushes 
the warm air inland and up the mountain into high, cool air, where the water 
condenses and forms a nimbostratus cloud. The cloud then expels its frontal rain.
Such a cloud can expel all its rain before passing by the top of the mountain, 
making one side of the mountain rainy while the other side stays dry. This 
type of rain is referred to as relief rain or orographic rain. The dry side of the 
mountain is referred to as a rain shadow.
Orographic rain can also form as convection rain, where fl uff y cumulous clouds 
form from the evaporation of a body of water. These clouds are then pushed 
up the mountainside to meet cooler air, where the clouds become heavy with 
rain. The clouds then expel their rain before passing over the mountaintop.
Orography is the scientiﬁ c study of 
mountains, including their eﬀ ects on 
weather and climate.

236 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
IT’S ALWAYS RAINY IN SEATTLE
By studying an area’s topographical and precipitation maps side by side, you 
can get a clear view of the reasons behind rainfall in that area. For example, 
the rainiest region in the USA is the Northwest corner, which includes the city 
of Seattle, Washington. With a study of the area’s topology and proximity to 
water, it’s easy to see why. 
The west coast of Washington borders the Pacifi c Ocean, and several rivers 
and large bays contribute to the presence of water near the coast. Water 
evaporating from the oceans and bays forms clouds, which are blown inland. 
Then the clouds get blown up against the mountains a few miles inland, 
forcing the clouds to rise and cool and produce rain. Typically, these clouds 
expel all their rain before passing by the top of the mountain.
Where relief rain continuously leaves one side of a mountain wet and the 
other dry, the dry area is called a rain shadow. On the precipitation map, you 
can see some areas of high precipitation right next to areas of low 
precipitation. Looking at the topology map of Seattle, you can see that a 
mountain range is present in the high-precipitation areas. Knowing that the 
wind near a coastal area usually blows inland, you can surmise that the 
eastward side of the each mountain range is a rain shadow area. 
Washington’s topology (left) predicts its precipitation and rain shadow (right). On the topographical map, darker regions indicate  higher-
elevation topology such as mountains. On the precipitation map, dark areas receive a lot of rainfall while light areas receive little to none.

 
E N V I R O N M E N T  
237
More about Rain Clouds
With all clouds, when the cloud is thin it lets a lot of light through, and we see 
the refl ective droplets that form the cloud as being white in color. But when 
the cloud becomes large and accumulates a lot of water, it starts to absorb 
and scatter the light and prevents it from fi ltering all the way through the 
cloud, making the bottom appear gray rather than white. For this reason, the 
bottom of a rain cloud appears to us as gray in color.
Cumulonimbus clouds can form lightning with the ground. Only cumu-
lonimbus clouds can form lightning within themselves, as they have a 
sufficient height for vertical self-lightning. Cumulonimbus clouds can 
have strong updrafts (air blowing upward) that not only help make them 
taller, but can also cool the water droplets so fast that they freeze into 
hailstones.
Note that other types of clouds can form precipitation, too. Cirrus (high-
altitude) clouds can rain ice crystals, but these crystals usually evaporate 
before they hit the ground. 
WIND AND RAIN
The meeting of two cool/warm fronts, by nature, creates wind. Frontal rain is 
caused by a front, so it’s natural that such rain would be accompanied by 
wind both before and during the rainstorm.
Even though a convection rain cloud isn’t caused by a front, it is often 
accompanied by warm/cold or moist/dry fronts. In coastal areas, for example, 
there are strong diff erences in air temperatures just above land (warm) and 
sea (cooler) on a warm, sunny day. The warmer land air and cooler sea air 
continually cause a warm/cold front where the land meets the sea, creating a 
sea breeze that blows inland. 
WHERE RAIN FORMS
By understanding the way rain clouds form, you can fi gure out which 
geographical areas are likely to get the most rain:
• 
In coastal areas, where there’s a lot of water to evaporate into convection 
rain.
• 
In tropical climates, where the ground is warm. Air near the ground soaks 
up the heat and rises, producing convection rain.
• 
Warm areas near mountains and hills. Relatively warm air near the ground 
is blown by the wind up the sides of mountains to produce orographic/
relief rain.
Predicting Rain
If your animation includes a pre-rainfall sequence, including intuitive or well-
known rain predictors can help make your scenes more believable.
The inside of a cumulonimbus cloud 
is big, busy, violent place. For an 
enlightening read, search online for 
“people stuck in cumulonimbus updrafts.” 
A handful of parachute jumpers and 
paragliders have had the experience, 
which included being thrown about for 
more than half an hour in freezing-cold 
low-pressure air while dodging lightning 
and even hailstones. Not all have lived to 
tell the tale.

238 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
Humans and animals know rain is coming when:
• 
Wind suddenly shifts direction. Remember that rain is often accompanied 
by the clash of two fronts, which also causes wind.
• 
Plants and fl owers smell stronger and earthier. The wet air involved in 
the formation of rain clouds goes hand-in-hand with a low-pressure area, 
which brings out smells more strongly.
• 
Air becomes more humid. Hair curls a little more, and perspiration forms 
more readily.
• 
Animal behavior changes. Dogs and cats hide from thunder long before 
people hear it. Cows lie down when a storm is coming. Conversely, birds 
fl ying high in the sky are an indication of fi ne weather for some hours to 
come.
• 
The sky is red at sunrise. For an explanation, see “Weather from the West” 
below.
Weather from the West
Keep in mind that weather systems on Earth tend to move from west to east. 
This means that “a storm coming our way” is more believable when it’s 
coming from the westerly direction. If such a scene takes place during the 
day, the position of the Sun will give viewers a cue to your scene’s east/west 
orientation.
Dry/high-pressure air kicks up dust, which contributes to a red sky at sunrise 
or sunset. A red sunrise means dry air has moved past you to the east, and a 
wet/low-pressure front is coming right behind it. In other words, a red sunrise 
means rainfall is coming. 
Conversely, a red sunset (in the west, naturally) means the dry air is coming 
your way, and the next day will most likely be fi ne, dry weather and blue 
skies.
RAINDROPS
Now that you’ve learned how rain forms, let’s take a closer look at the rain 
itself. 
When suspended in the air, rain droplets are spherical. Water droplets can 
join with other droplets to become larger blobs of water, which also tend 
to be spherical. When droplets land on a hard surface such as a table or 
windowpane, one side of the droplet fl attens out.
Falling Raindrops
When falling, small raindrops remain spherical, but larger raindrops become 
hamburger-shaped due to air resistance pushing up at the droplet. The air 
resistance causes the center of the droplet to fall less than its outer edges. If 
Just in case you forgot: on Earth, the Sun 
always rises in the east and sets in the 
west. The Sun is at its highest overhead 
point at noon, dipping to the north or 
south depending on your distance from 
the equator and the time of year. As an 
animator, you should have a grasp of 
these sun positions; if you haven’t done 
so already, start looking for the Sun at 
diﬀ erent times of day and noting where 
it is in relation to the horizon.
An old seaman’s saying can help you 
remember which type of red sky produces 
which weather condition: “Red sky at 
night, sailor’s delight. Red sky in the 
morning, sailor’s warning.”

 
E N V I R O N M E N T  
239
the drop falls long enough, air resistance becomes strong enough to split the 
raindrop into smaller drops, which are spherical.
Image courtesy of NASA.
Raindrop Blur
Even though raindrops are spherical or hamburger-shaped when falling, 
when looking at falling rain we don’t perceive them that way due to their 
speed. Our eyes can’t register more than half a second of motion at a time, so 
we see raindrops as long, blurry spikes. In both traditional and VFX animation, 
audience members are accustomed to seeing rain this way.
Raindrop Visibility and Color
Water is transparent, so raindrops are hard to see. The main reason we can see 
them is because they refl ect and refract light. In daylight, from a moderate 
distance, the refraction looks like generic black/white/gray streaks. Up close, 
you can actually see the colors of the environment. 

240 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
Because there’s so little light at night, raindrops are nearly invisible unless 
illuminated by lamps or other light sources. At night, what you most often 
see are the eff ects of the rain such as puddles and splashes, as opposed to 
the raindrops themselves.
Enhancing Rain
When looking to represent rain in your animation, you can ease the burden of 
making the rain look perfect by adding visual cues in addition to the rain 
itself. 
High winds tend to occur at the onset of a rainfall, when a hot and cold front 
fi rst interact, because of the sudden instability in air pressure. This is why rain 
that goes on for longer periods (like days) tends to be more of a calm and 
constant drizzle in the middle and end of the storm, with less wind than the 
start of the rain period. 
Under wind conditions, rain comes down at an angle and changes direction 
frequently. To punch up the eff ect, other objects in the scene such as 
characters, umbrellas, fl ags, and debris should also be seen to react to the 
wind.
Wind intensity changes with the time of 
day as well. During sunrise and sunset, the 
air temperature changes suddenly while 
the land temperature changes gradually. 
The large diﬀ erence in temperature 
between the land and air results in wind. 
This is most apparent at sunset (especially 
in coastal areas), when people notice a 
sudden increase in wind while the Sun is 
setting. The air is generally calm mid-day 
and mid-evening, when the land and air 
have similar temperatures.
From a distance, rain looks like slow-moving sheets of mist under storm 
clouds. Heavy rain in high winds can appear as a sheet of rain, with no distinct 
drops visible. Such rain looks more like moving puff s than raindrops. The 
eff ects are visible on objects caught out in the rain, though.
When rain bounces, it produces mist. Light, bouncing rain breaks into smaller 
droplets to form the mist. Mist also results when rain hits a hot surface 
and evaporates. You can see this eff ect around the wheels of a car moving 
in the rain. The tires kick up rain from the pavement, causing some of it to 
evaporate into mist. Thus, the area around the car’s tires is hidden in a mist 
when compared to the rest of the car.
Rain causes movement of plant life, where petals and leaves move under the 
impact of rain drops.
The appearance of rain can also be suggested with sound eff ects. Falling rain 
sounds like steaks sizzling on a grill, and the sounds of howling winds can be 

 
E N V I R O N M E N T  
241
added to enhance the feeling of a heavy storm. The sounds of wind vary with 
the environment as well. For example, wind in a city, fl owing between closely 
placed buildings, will be more high-pitched than wind over an open fi eld, 
which would sound lower and be more of a howl. Rain also sounds diff erent 
hitting shingles than if it is hitting metal or plant life.
Invisible Raindrops: Puddle Effects
If your focus is a puddle during a rainstorm, you can skip the raindrops and 
just make the puddle eff ects. In life, when you’re watching a puddle during a 
rainstorm, the drops move by your line of sight so fast that they don’t really 
register.
A raindrop produces a ripple on a puddle. For light rain, creating a few 
ripples on a puddle is enough to suggest rain. The height and speed of the 
ripple depends on the height of the rainfall and size of raindrops. In general, 
larger raindrops produce higher and wider ripples than light ones. Since no 
two raindrops are exactly the same size and weight, your ripples should vary 
in size.
Heavy rain causes small droplet splashes. These droplet splashes make 
secondary ripples as they land.
Slow-Moving Raindrops: Windowpane
A common storytelling device involves a view of raindrops on a 
windowpane. 
Kylee Love’s Rainy Day Window, oil paint on canvas. 
Image courtesy of artist.
Rendered image of coffee cup by a rainy-day window.
Raindrops stick and drip on windowpanes due to natural adhesion properties 
between water and glass.

242 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
The shape of a raindrop on a windowpane depends on the angle and 
speed at which the drop hits the windowpane in the fi rst place. A direct hit 
perpendicular to the window typically only occurs as a result of extreme 
weather such as tornado-force winds or a hurricane. During any given storm, 
various sizes of raindrops hit the window at all kinds of angles, creating a 
pattern unique to the weather conditions that day.
 To Drip or Not to Drip
Smaller raindrops stick to a windowpane, while larger ones succumb to 
gravity and stretch out downward, creating a drip pattern. 
When a raindrop hits the windowpane, it goes from being a free drop held 
together by surface tension to a drop adhering to a surface due to adhesion, 
with its outer surface (the part of the drop that touches the air) still held 
together by surface tension.
A rain droplet on a vertical windowpane is under constant stress. Right after 
the water droplet hits the pane, gravity tries to pull it toward the ground 
while forces from the droplet’s surface tension and adhesion try to keep the 
droplet stuck to the windowpane exactly where it is.
Surface tension refers to the tendency 
of water’s surface (where it meets the 
air) to be tougher and more resistant to 
change than the main body of water. See 
Properties of Liquids for more information.
A smaller raindrop is able to resist dripping because the forces from surface 
tension and adhesion to the glass are enough to balance the force from 
gravity. But with larger drops, the force of gravity is greater than the forces 
from surface tension and adhesion, so the droplet drips.
For the purposes of animation, it isn’t very useful to scientifi cally predict 
which droplets will drip and which won’t. Just know that if some droplets are 
going to drip and some aren’t, the bigger ones are the most likely drippers.

 
E N V I R O N M E N T  
243
 Drip Shape
The path and shape of the droplet’s stream are mostly determined by the 
shape of the droplet when it fi rst stuck to the window, before it starts dripping 
down the pane. This is why a droplet’s stream is never straight and uniform. 
The shape of the stream can also be aff ected by minute defects in the 
windowpane, dust particles stuck to the window, and the direction of 
blowing winds. In any case, a drip is rarely a straight line with a uniform size 
all the way down.
Lightning
Review:
• 
Classical Physics > Motion and Timing > Wave Motion (for sound waves/
pressure waves)
Lightning is a fast, bright jagged line of light from a cloud, usually occurring 
during a storm.
Lightning consists of a primary bolt (channel) and several tendrils of less 
bright lightning branching out from the primary bolt and discharging in the 
air around them. A bolt can extend in any direction, vertically or horizontally. 
The entire lightning fl ash lasts a fraction of a second.
Lightning can form between a cloud and the ground, between two clouds, or 
within a single cloud (known as intra-cloud lightning). 
HOW LIGHTNING FORMS
Lightning forms due to electrical charge that accumulates in clouds and on 
the ground. When a quantity of positive charge accumulates near a quantity 
of negative charge, the charges seek to equalize quickly with a bang. This fast 
fl ow of charge from one area to another is what creates visible lightning 
stretching from a cloud to the ground.

244 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
Let’s look at this process in more detail.
1. Within a cloud, low-pressure (cool) and high-pressure (warm) areas butt 
up against each other, causing an accumulation of negative charge at the 
bottom of the cloud and positive charge at the top.
2. As the negative charge at the bottom of the cloud seeps into the air below 
the cloud, the positive charge in the ground is drawn to its surface and 
starts to move through the air too. 
3. At some point, a suffi  cient accumulation of negative and positive charge 
meets for electricity to fl ow quickly and visibly down a narrow path in 
an attempt to discharge (balance out positive and negative charges). The 
electricity discharges, exciting the air directly around it and causing it to 
light up, making the lightning we see during a storm. 
Particles separate because heavier 
particles accumulate negative charge as 
they sink downward, while positive charge 
accumulates in the top of the cloud.
Cloud-to-Cloud Lightning
The positive charge at the top of one cloud and the negative charge at the 
bottom of another cloud can meet in the air and cause a lightning bolt 
between the clouds.

 
E N V I R O N M E N T  
245
Lightning can also form within a single tall cloud, between the positive and 
negative charge at the top and bottom of the cloud.
Lightning Formation and Appearance
Lightning tends to form from tall convection (cumulus) clouds, as these 
clouds have suffi  cient height to house the separation of positive and negative 
charge required to form lightning, along with the diff erences in temperature 
between these two regions (cool on top, warm on bottom). These types of 
clouds are more common in tropical areas than in other parts of the world, 
leading to more lightning in the tropics than in cooler climates. Florida is the 
lightning capital of the U.S and tropical Africa (Rwanda) is the lightning 
capital of the world. 
While the type of lightning we most often 
see from the ground occurs between a 
cloud and the ground, intra-cloud lightning, 
or lightning within a cloud, is actually the 
most common type of lightning.
In the U.S., the state of Florida receives 
the most lightning strikes. The tropical 
environment and the moisture in the 
atmosphere make for frequent growth of 
cumulonimbus clouds.
World map of lightning strike frequency. Image courtesy of NASA.
A lightning bolt is ordinarily several miles long and only about an inch wide. 
If only the one inch was visible, we wouldn’t be able to see a lightning strike 
from miles away. We can see the lightning because the air or atmosphere 
around the lightning strike heats up very quickly and lights up very brightly. 
When lightning strikes, it moves along the path that will allow the most 
discharge. This means it looks for the path with the most to off er in terms 
of positive–negative diff erence in charge. Lightning is most likely to form 
between the closest points between the cloud and the ground, such as tall 
trees or buildings.
A lightning bolt begins to form from the movement of electrons below the 
cloud, moving toward the ground at speeds up to 60 miles/second. The 
electrons follow zigzag patterns, branching out in unpredictable ways. At 
this point there is no bright fl ash yet, but there might be a purplish glow 
from the increased electrical activity. This movement of electrons is called 
a leader.
Leader.

246 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
This activity also serves to draw positive charge even further from the ground, 
and up through trees, buildings, and other tall structures. This movement of 
charge is called a streamer.
The streamer meets the leader fairly close to the Earth, perhaps a few 
hundred feet up. At this point, electrons fl ow freely between the two areas 
and a lightning bolt occurs. 
This initial bolt is instantly followed by several additional surges so close 
together in time that they might appear to happen simultaneously.
If you view a lightning flash in slow motion, you will find that the lightning 
flash is brightest at the base at the moment when the streamer meets 
the leader. The streamer (lower part of the flash) lights up and appears 
to travel up the leader. In this way, lightning might appear to originate 
on the ground, but in reality it’s a joint effort between clouds and the 
ground.
Streamer.
Leader meets streamer to form lightning bolt.
Multiple lightning ﬂ ashes in quick succession.

 
E N V I R O N M E N T  
247
LICHTENBURG FIGURES
Electrical discharges, whether large or small, tend to fl ow in the same type of 
jagged pattern. An electrical discharge into a clear acrylic block, for example, 
creates an artistic pattern reminiscent of lightning.
Such a pattern even has its own name: the Lichtenburg Figure, also called a 
lightning tree. Such a fi gure is a lightning-like pattern created by an electrical 
discharge into an insulator such as a clear acrylic block (or the skin of a 
lightning victim). 
Lichtenburg Figures are useful for plotting out realistic lightning patterns. 
They are also works of art in their own right. Check the Internet for numerous 
videos and “how-to”s on creating your own Lichtenburg Figures, or for 
studying existing fi gures as inspiration for lightning eff ects in your own 
animation design.
Image courtesy of Bert Hickman, http://www.
teslamania.com, via Wikimedia Commons.
EFFECTS FROM LIGHTNING
When a living creature is struck by lightning, the most common eff ect is 
interruption of the nervous system. A person or animal getting struck by lightning 
is a very quick business, with the entire strike lasting a fraction of a second. The 
lightning goes bang and the person jolts and falls down. The end. Most of the 
damage is on the inside, so there’s actually very little to see aside from the strike 
itself. Human beings and animals don’t light up or glow when struck by lightning, 
as the electricity passes through internally and not on the surface or skin.
However, most of your audience has never seen someone actually get struck 
by lightning, so you can get away with punching it up a bit. If you’re going 
for comedic eff ect you can make the skin light up, perhaps to the point of the 
character’s skeleton showing through. The lighting-up can blink on and off  a 
few times. Hair can catch on fi re. The character can develop internal lightning 
the way a large storm cloud does. And so on.
Trees, buildings, and other structures are aff ected more visibly than living 
beings, sometimes glowing or catching fi re as a result of a strike. Trees may 
even explode due to the rapid heating and boiling of water in the tree’s sap. 
Thunder
Recall that sound is essentially a pressure wave moving through the air. If the 
pressure waves accumulate on top of one another, the result is a loud boom. 
Thunder is a pressure wave created instantaneously by the super-heated air 
around the lightning bolt. The pressure wave dissipates within a few miles 
of the original boom, which is why you only hear thunder if the lightning 
is relatively close by. Because light moves faster than sound, we see the 
lightning before we hear the thunder.
A common layman’s trick for predicting 
when a storm will arrive is to count the 
seconds between a visible lightning 
strike and a thunder clap. Although exact 
predictions are complicated by wind 
and other atmospheric factors, you can 
get a decent approximation by ﬁ guring 
on a diﬀ erence of 5 seconds per mile, or 
3 seconds per kilometer.

248 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
Thunder is not one single boom but several in succession. The loudest part 
of the thunder is generated by the primary bolt, with small cracking sounds 
from lightning tendrils. Thunder sounds like a boom, while lightning itself 
makes more of a crack or clap sound.

C H A P T E R 8
Fire and Explosions
Fire and explosions, along with breakage and fl ying debris, are often enhanced 
or created altogether in live action fi lms. Understanding the physics behind 
fi re and explosions can help you create convincing visual eff ects for both live 
action enhancement and traditional animation.
Fire
Fire is a rapid chemical reaction between a fuel and another substance, 
usually oxygen. Heat, light, and gases are released during the process. When 
certain types of fuel are heated up enough around an oxidizer, they will burn.
From an artist’s point of view, there are a few distinct types of visible fi re:
• 
Flames
• 
Smoldering solid matter
• 
Fireball
FLAMES
Flames come from gases being burned up. The fuel heats up and gives off  
gases, which then burn as fl ame. For example, wood contains cellulose, a 
An oxidizer is a substance that causes fuel 
to burn. Oxygen gas is the most common 
oxidizer involved in ﬁ re, though oxygen-
rich compounds and some non-oxygen 
oxidizers like ﬂ uorine gas can react with 
fuel and cause a ﬁ re.

250 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
carbon-based substance. When you light kindling the cellulose heats up, 
giving off  gases that catch fi re. As the temperature increases from this fi re, the 
carbon left behind from the initial reaction burns and give off  more gases, 
which then burn and create more heat which creates more gases, and so on 
until all the fuel is gone. The solid fuel itself burns to ash.
A candle works the same way. Wax itself, in its solid form, is very diffi  cult 
to burn, but the gases that wax emits when heated burn nicely to create a 
candle fl ame. Wax gas burns at a lower temperature than a candle wick. This 
is why a candle’s wick needs to extend only a short way above the candle; 
you’re not really lighting the wick, but rather you’re lighting the wax gases 
around it. The wick itself burns only when it gets hot enough, which only 
happens after all the wax gas around it has burned up, and only if the wick 
gets hot enough from burning for a little while.
Flame Appearance
A fl ame is basically light emitted due to the burning of both solids and gases, 
which rises due to its heat. The shapes and colors of fl ames are complex and 
depend on the substance being burned. 
The incandescent color of a fl ame is related to its temperature, with cooler 
fl ames appearing as red, hotter fl ames appearing orange and the hottest fl ames 
appearing to be white or blue. 
Flame color
Temperature range (Fahrenheit)
Blue
2700–3000ºF
White
2400–2700ºF
Orange/yellow
2000–2200ºF
Red
1000–1800ºF
Most types of fl ames include a variety of colors depending on how hot the 
fl ame burns. In general the fl ame is hottest at the base (white or blue) and at 
the tip of the fl ame (white). The interior of the fl ame is red, orange, or yellow 
depending on how hot the fl ame is.
Colors of a candle ﬂ ame.
Colors of a campﬁ re ﬂ ame.
A campﬁ re burns cooler than a candle, 
but gives oﬀ  more heat than a candle 
because it’s bigger.

 
F I R E  A N D  E X P L O S I O N S  
251
Flames are also somewhat transparent. For an artist, it’s easier to make 
convincing fl ames against a plain background than it is to try and get the 
transparency right on a patterned or multi-colored background.
Creating Flames
Before the days of computer graphics, the pyrotechnics artist on a movie 
shoot was responsible for creating explosions and fi res. Sometimes these 
fi res or explosions were real, but created in a highly controlled environment 
to keep people and property from danger. Other times, tricks with props 
were used to simulate these eff ects.
For fl ames, these artists sometimes used strips of colored cellophane 
or fabric tied down at one end, with a fan blowing the strips upward to 
simulate dancing fl ames. These days, fake-fl ame decorations are available 
for purchase at gift shops. The eff ect is convincing enough from a short 
distance away.
If you need a controlled fl ame in your animation, you can use the same 
technique in your software to create fl ames. Model a few polygon strips and 
texture them with a varying yellow-orange color, then make them randomly 
dance.
Various elements and compounds that 
emit diﬀ erent colors can also change the 
color of a ﬂ ame. For example, sodium 
gives oﬀ  a yellow ﬂ ame and copper burns 
as blue. The various colors of ﬁ reworks are 
due to these diﬀ erent compounds.
Cellophane “ﬂ ames” are blown upward by a 
small fan to simulate a burning torch.

252 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
Because fl ames are so complex, you might fi nd it easier to take a live-action 
movie of a fi re and composite it into your scene. For photoreal VFX, there are 
software packages available specifi cally for making realistic fi re.
SMOLDERING SOLID MATTER
There is a second component to fi re beyond the fl ame. When the fuel becomes 
hot enough, the fuel glows. This eff ect, called smoldering or pyrolysis, means 
the fuel is changing composition in a way that is irreversible. With wood, for 
example, pyrolysis indicates that the wood is turning into charcoal.
Smoldering can happen even without fl ames. Examples are a burning 
cigarette, embers from a fi re that has gone out, and cotton-based upholstery 
that smolders for hours after a small spark or burn has struck it.
FIREBALL
A fi reball is a ball of fi re from a mass of burning material. A fi reball has a 
roughly spherical shape.
The burning material in a fi reball is mostly either a gas or a solid. Examples of 
when a fi reball occurs:
• 
A fuel explosion causes fuel gases to be created, or a chemical explosion 
creates gases via a chemical reaction. Immediately after a fuel or chemical 
explosion, any fl ammable gases burn and expand rapidly. This type 
of fi reball burns itself out quite quickly, leaving behind smoke. See the 
Explosions section in this chapter.

 
F I R E  A N D  E X P L O S I O N S  
253
• 
Immediately after a nuclear blast, intense heat burns oxygen in the air, 
creating a fi reball with a long life relative to a fuel or chemical explosion. 
The fi reball is just one of a series of visible nuclear blast reactions 
such as a wave of thermal radiation. See the Explosions section in this 
chapter.
• 
When a meteor enters the Earth’s atmosphere, the compressed air in front 
of the meteor heats to high temperatures and causes both the meteor 
and atmospheric elements to burn. The meteor is eff ectively a fi reball with 
a trail of burning gases and melted particles. 
FIREBALLS IN SPACE
Fireballs in space have become a staple of sci-fi  movies ever since the Death 
Star exploded in the original Star Wars movie in 1977. In reality, an explosion 
in outer space would be pretty dull—just a container breaking apart quickly 
and its pieces drifting away in space at the same velocity for ever. 
Since there’s no oxygen or gravity in space, fi re can’t burn and a fi reball 
could not possibly occur, nor would a shockwave or a fl aming spaceship. But 
VFX artists take liberties with physics when designing and animating outer 
space explosions to make them more visually interesting. Nowadays, every 
audience expects a big fi reball at the end of an intergalactic showdown. 
Mushroom Clouds
Most fi reball-type explosions are over in a split second, but nuclear 
explosions and volcanoes produce fi reballs that burn a little bit longer 
than that. Recall that a fi reball is essentially a ball of hot, light air. When a 
fi reball burns for more than a second, the fi reball rises due to its buoyancy. 
There is a suction eff ect as heat and debris are drawn up through the 
column of hot air.
In a mushroom cloud, the column of hot 
air is called the stem.

254 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
Image courtesy of Wikimedia Commons.
As the fi reball rises, its top cools into smoke. Air pressure pushes the smoke 
downward and it fl ows to the sides of the fi reball. The smoke at this point is 
commonly a reddish-brown due to the burning of nitrogen in the air. The 
smoke is then sucked back toward the hot column at the center, curling 
around to create the mushroom shape. This creates a fl ow that pulls along 
even more smoke to continue the mushroom shape. 
The fi reball will continue to rise until it burns out, at which point it is much 
cooler than before. After the fi reball burns out, the smoke becomes mostly an 
ordinary cloud made up of water droplets, and it turns white. This cloud then 
dissipates into the air.
During the initial phase of the mushroom cloud, when the fi reball is rising, 
short-lived rings of vapor can form around the stem. The low-pressure, hot 
rising air will cause a reaction of high-pressure, cooler air pushing back down 
(similar to the way air pressure behind a shock front works). The high-pressure 
cool air can condense water present in the air into a steamy vapor and form a 
ring around the stem. When the pressure and temperature return to normal, 
the ring dissipates. Imagery of real mushroom clouds shows that sometimes 
one or two condensation rings form in succession. 
Mushroom Clouds in Animation
In life, mushroom clouds only occur with very hot fi reballs burning a lot of 
matter, as with volcanoes and nuclear explosions. Smaller explosions (such 
as blowing up a car, building, or computer) do not actually create mushroom 
clouds. Regardless, mushroom clouds have become the standard for 
ordinary explosions in many fi lms and games. A mushroom cloud helps to 
extend the time of the visuals and gives more opportunity for bright, 
spectacular eff ects.

 
F I R E  A N D  E X P L O S I O N S  
255
In life, a mushroom cloud fi reball can last several seconds, making it a great 
candidate for a longer animation. With a CG representation of a smaller 
explosion such as a car blowing up, the fi reball burns out within a second, but the 
mushroom cloud can remain onscreen for 3-6 seconds more before dissipating.
A small-explosion mushroom cloud also gives an opportunity for burning 
debris on the ground to continue to fuel the cloud.
Space explosions do cause rings to form, but they’re not the same as 
condensation rings formed by mushroom clouds on Earth. They’re accretion 
rings, basically a ring of debris from an explosion being pulled by gravity into 
a star or a black hole.
Smoke
Smoke forms from tiny solid, liquid, and gas particles from the fi re being 
carried up by heat. Smoke is basically stuff  that isn’t quite burning, and which 
is light enough to be carried away. 
 VFX artists consider that it’s more 
important for an explosion to read well 
than for it to be realistic. The explosion 
must also look good and be convincing, 
but it has to last long enough for the 
audience to see it.
White dwarf star exploding (left). Image 
courtesy of NASA.
It can help to think of smoke as “cool ﬁ re” 
that follows many of the motion principles 
of ﬁ re.
You get smoke from a fi re when the fi re isn’t hot enough to burn all the gases 
that form. Over the life cycle of a fi re, you get smoke at these times:
• 
Before the fi re starts, when gases are forming and evaporating prior to 
ignition.
• 
While the fi re is burning, if the fi re isn’t hot enough to burn all the carbon 
and other substances including water. If a fi re is extremely hot, the water 
will vaporize and disappear quickly. If the fi re isn’t extremely hot, the 
water will evaporate and turn into smoke.
• 
After the fi re is out, when it’s cooled down enough to vaporize some of the 
fuel into gases but not hot enough to burn. Smoldering often produces 
smoke.
Smoke can happen with fl ames or with smoldering alone. Smoldering usually 
produces more smoke than fl ames.
Like fl ames, smoke is unpredictable and can be challenging to simulate 
accurately. In VFX, the most reliable methods for creating believable smoke 
are compositing live action footage of smoke against a greenscreen, or 

256 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
watching a lot of reference footage and recreating what you see with a 
particle system.
SMOKE APPEARANCE
The color and quantity of smoke depends on the fuel being burned, the 
temperature of the fi re, and the chemicals it may contain. Hotter fi res have 
less smoke because more of the debris and particles are burned up before 
they can fl y off . Any smoke from hotter fi res rises faster initially due to its heat. 
Smoke is usually gray in color, although it can have diff erent colors if chemicals 
are present. Signal fl ares can produce yellow, orange, or red smoke due to 
their chemical compositions. Very fi ne smoke, like that from a cigarette, has 
a bluish tint. When you exhale cigarette smoke it’s white since the smoke 
particles acquire moisture in the lungs and get bigger.
Heavy smoke appears opaque, while light smoke is translucent. Visually, 
smoke can be puff y and solid looking, or light and tendril like. In general, 
large quantities of smoke look puff y, while small quantities look wispy.
Smoke doesn’t produce light, so it is visible only when a light source is present.
Puffy Smoke
Puff y smoke from a fi reball or other large area follows the motion of fl ames. 
When the fi reball cools and smoke is produced, you can animate its motion 
as a continuation of the fl ame motion.
Heavy smoke, as from a smokestack, has a solid appearance and can appear 
to move as a single mass with some random motion within the mass itself.
Tendril Smoke
When a small amount of smoke emanates from a single point, the smoke 
tends to rise in a straight column at fi rst, then splits out to somewhat parallel 
lines. Then the smoke continues to rise with a slightly swirly pattern as it is 
aff ected by light air currents.
Orange signal ﬂ are in the ocean.
At a certain height, the smoke motion is fast enough that it becomes very 
chaotic; the smoke begins to dissipate, and it no longer rises. 

 
F I R E  A N D  E X P L O S I O N S  
257
If wind is present, the smoke still follows the same pattern but at an angle.
Campfire Smoke
When fl ames are present, smoke is carried up along the fl ames and disperses 
from the tops of the fl ames. Smoke from a campfi re is usually a combination 
of tendrils and puff y smoke. 
The hotter the fi re, the less smoke there will be. Damp or green wood creates a 
lot of puff y smoke, while dry, dead wood burns hotter and creates light tendril 
smoke. A bright, hot campfi re at night might seem to have no smoke at all—as 
your eyes adjust to see the bright fi re, they lose the ability to discern the smoke.
Explosions
To explode means to expand rapidly with force. An explosion is a forceful, 
violent, rapid expansion of gases. 
In entertainment, explosions are loud, bright, and visually dramatic. They get 
audience attention and can inspire awe, fear, and excitement. Action fi lms 
often end with a spectacular and satisfying explosion where the bad guy gets 
incinerated. 
The keynote of visible explosions is the rapid expansion of gases, which 
pushes the air around it with great force. The expanding gas or air pushes at 
objects around it, breaking them apart. Explosions are often accompanied by 
fl aming fi reballs and fl ying debris.
TYPES OF EXPLOSIONS
Explosions generally fall into one of these categories: 
Pressure—Where gases already exist within a container or enclosed space, 
they can be heated and expanded to produce an explosion. Examples are a 
balloon popping when it’s blown up with too much air, or a volcano spewing 
lava. With a volcano, rocks melt under the surface of the earth, releasing 
liquid magma and gases. When the gas pressure becomes too high, the gases 
push out of the volcano’s mouth at great speed, shooting out lava with them. 
Such explosions are usually accidental or organic.

258 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
Fuel—Similar to a pressure explosion, except that fuel is involved. A fuel is 
any solid or liquid that can be burned. When fuel is heated, gases form and 
expand. If the fuel is in a container, the pressure exerted on the container 
can break it apart (as with a fuel tank or propane gas explosion) or the gases 
can escape quickly via an escape route (as with rocket fuel gases thrusting 
through a nozzle). The heat generated by the fast exit can cause the fuel 
gases to catch fi re and burn after the initial force of the thrust or explosion. 
Chemical—A type of explosion that involves chemical reactions, such as 
TNT, nitroglycerin, bombs, and other chemical mixtures that release gases 
very rapidly when stimulated. Heat or electrical impulse triggers rapid 
decomposition (rearrangement of atoms) that yields a lot of gas and heat. 
Chemical explosives are commonly used as a controlled way to blast away 
rock for mining purposes and the development of roads and railway tracks. 
In general, chemical explosions are more powerful than fuel explosions, and 
can produce vibrant colors depending on the chemicals used.
Nuclear—A nuclear explosion involves the splitting or smashing of atoms in 
such a way that they form new types of atoms, generating a massive amount 
of heat in the process (as well as radiation). When the bomb explodes, the 
air around the bomb is heated to extremely high temperatures and expands 
rapidly. In this way, a nuclear reaction uses the air at the explosion point as its 
expanding gas. Nuclear explosions are much more powerful than chemical 
explosions, and usually result in a mushroom cloud.
LIFE OF AN EXPLOSION
Every explosion follows a set sequence of events that takes place over a few 
seconds.
1. Some gases exist already, or are created rapidly.
2. The gases are excited by heat, causing them to expand. 
TNT exploding in a dark room.
Blasting rock in a quarry.
Nuclear bomb test, 1953.

 
F I R E  A N D  E X P L O S I O N S  
259
3. The gases exert pressure on the air or container around them.
4. A rush of gases pushes outward in an instant, generating wind, noise, and 
destruction to things around it.
Exploding television set. Note that frag-
ments toward the bottom are already falling 
to the ground within a fraction of a second 
after the explosion.
The initial force of an explosion is usually far greater than force from gravity, 
so the initial motion takes place directly outward from the source of the 
explosion. If the explosion takes place on Earth, after the initial force the 
fl ying pieces are subject to gravity and follow the path of projectile motion.
Before the Explosion
Before step 1, the gases that start the explosion might be generated rapidly 
from solids or liquids experiencing heat or an electrical impulse. The electrical 
impulse might be triggered by a switch (as with pushing a lever to ignite TNT) 
or by impact with the ground (as with a bomb). 
In any case, once the gases are created, it’s the gases being heated that causes 
the fast expansion that makes up the actual explosion. Gases can form and 
expand so quickly that the actions of creating the gases and heating them to 
the point of explosion seem simultaneous.
After the Explosion
If the explosion involves a fuel, the heat from the explosion can cause the fuel 
to catch on fi re, creating a fi reball that burns until the fuel runs out. Fuel 
might also be thrown far from the explosion site, causing fi res in those areas.

260 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
Explosions can also cause shockwaves (described later in this section) and 
mushroom clouds (described in the Fire section above). There also might be fl ying 
debris, which is discussed in the Breakage and Fracture section of this chapter.
ROLE OF CONTAINERS
If gases expand rapidly inside a container, when the gases rush outward the 
container can burst. 
Whether the container’s fl ying pieces are a signifi cant part of the visual 
action depends largely on whether the explosion was intentional or 
unintentional.
In an intentional explosion, the container’s role is to keep the explosive 
material intact until it’s set off . Such explosive materials are chosen for their 
capacities to generate a huge amount of energy relative to the container size. 
The container can be as simple as cardboard or plastic (as for TNT) or might 
be a metal casing (as for a bomb). Here, the damage is not caused by the 
fl ying pieces of the container, but rather by rapidly expanding gases pushing 
air and knocking over objects external to the explosion, plus any resulting 
fi res from the heat.
If the container isn’t meant to be exploded, it is likely to play a bigger role in the 
visual interest of the explosion as well as the damage. Examples are an airplane 
fuel tank, a pressurized oxygen tank, or a house full of propane gas. In such a 
case, fl ying pieces of the broken container are a big part of the action.
A few types of bombs are designed in such a way that the fragmenting 
container will cause damage. A dry ice bomb, for example, is a piece of dry 
ice placed in a sealed glass or metal container. As the dry ice (frozen carbon 
dioxide) evaporates, gas pressure builds up quickly. Most of the damage from 
the explosion comes from the fragmented container’s glass and metal shards 
rather than the exploding dry ice.
TIMING FOR EXPLOSIONS
If realistic timing were used for explosions in animation, the explosion would 
be over in about two frames. Even with a fi reball, the whole process (blast, fi re, 
debris) is over in a few seconds. People can process only 10–12 frames per 
second, so many viewers wouldn’t see the actual explosion at all! To give 
animated explosions more visual impact, artists ordinarily animate explosions 
over 24–30 frames. Even though this practice technically produces a slow-
motion explosion, it works as a representation of a real-time explosion for most 
visual media. The action can also be extended by including a lot of secondary 
fi re and damage to buildings, cars, and the ground around the explosion.
SHOCKWAVES
Some explosives are so strong that the expanding gases move faster than the 
speed of sound, which produces a shockwave. A shockwave is a wave that 
moves through air or the ground after a detonation.
Dry ice bomb exploding.
Dry ice consists of frozen carbon dioxide. 
As it warms up, dry ice goes directly from 
a solid to a gas, emitting a foggy mist. Dry 
ice is commonly used to create fog and 
smoke eﬀ ects for theater and parties.
Fire after explosion.

 
F I R E  A N D  E X P L O S I O N S  
261
Shockwaves through Air
When a bomb detonates, hot gases expand rapidly away from the explosion 
point in all directions, creating a sphere of pressure in the air. The outer edge 
of the sphere is called its blast front. To an outside observer, the blast wave 
through air has a spherical shape. 
The air being pushed by the blast front is compressed from this rapid 
expansion, putting it under high pressure. At the same time, the air behind 
the expanding gases (inside the blast front sphere) experience low pressure.
An explosion that moves faster than the 
speed of sound is said to detonate, while 
an explosion moving slower than the 
speed of sound is said to defl agrate. The 
word detonate is also commonly used to 
mean “to explode,” but in its strict physics 
deﬁ nition, it is used only for explosions 
that travel faster than sound. The term 
detonate comes from a Latin word 
meaning to thunder down.
Images of Trinity nuclear weapons test in 
1945. The shockwave is visible as a dark halo 
moving ahead of the smoke.
The blast front piles up air pressure in front of it. Recall that sound is simply 
compressed air. When this blast front reaches your ears, you hear a sonic 
boom and feel a rush of wind strong enough to blow out windows and even 
knock over buildings. 
Meanwhile, air rushes into the low-pressure area behind the blast front to 
equalize the pressure, much like a vacuum cleaner. Objects and debris are 
sucked in toward the center of the blast.
Lastly, any exploding material or expanding gases with speeds below the 
speed of sound expand outward in a second wave.
Shockwaves through the Ground
With an explosion that occurs near the ground, part of the blast front will 
travel through the ground instead of the air. Pressure waves travel faster 
through the ground than the air, so the blast front within the ground moves 
outward from the center of the blast faster than the blast front in the air.
If the shockwave is strong enough, it manifests as a ripple disturbance on the 
ground itself, traveling in a circular pattern away from the explosion point.
Such a shockwave happens very fast. In the movies, the shockwave usually 
travels somewhat slowly so viewers can see it more clearly.
Breakage and Fracture
A solid, brittle object, when hit with enough force, will develop cracks and 
shatter. Exactly how the object breaks is a matter of physics. Understanding 
exactly what happens when an object fractures in real life can help you 
keyframe your animation to simulate real breakage.

262 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
If you’re doing CG you could use a physics engine to calculate fracture for 
you, but such engines can take a long time to calculate the motion, and 
the results are never perfect—you might have to tweak the parameters a 
number of times. Understanding the physics behind fracture can help you 
keyframe the motion yourself in both CG and traditional animation, and 
also get better results from a physics engine should you choose to use one.
ANATOMY OF FRACTURE
Although an object might seem to shatter in an instant, there are actually 
several stages the object goes through between impact and the end of the 
motion. Regardless of whether you’re fracturing a dinner plate or a skyscraper, 
the object goes through the same series of events.
At the point of impact, the force from the object hitting it has to go 
somewhere. Initially, breakage and crumbling happen at the point of 
impact. If the force isn’t large enough to do any more damage, that’s the 
end of the breakage.
But if the force is strong, the stress has to go somewhere after the initial 
impact. The stress fi nds the path of least resistance through the object, 
through the largest internal cracks. Then the initial cracks branch out into 
smaller cracks along more paths of least resistance, in the general direction of 
the force. If the force is strong enough, the cracks go all the way to the edges 
of the material, breaking it into pieces.
Very dense materials are less likely to fracture, as they have fewer tiny 
cracks to begin with. Dense materials tend to be heavy, so in general we 
can consider that the heavier the object or material, the more force will be 
needed to crack it.
An object with some elasticity will bend before cracking. Brittleness is a 
measure of how likely an object is to crack or break when under stress. 
Ceramics and glass are the most brittle substances, while metals can be quite 
elastic and will bend and shear before cracking.
CRACK PATTERNS
When an object is subjected to a force strong enough to crack or fracture it, 
cracks form randomly but are more likely along the paths of least resistance. 
Every solid object has points that are weaker than others. To determine crack 
patterns, you need to fi gure out where those weak points are.

 
F I R E  A N D  E X P L O S I O N S  
263
Inherent Weak Points
With some materials, the weak points are easy to spot. In brick, for example, 
the caulk between the squares of concrete breaks before the concrete does.
Internal Cracks
Have you ever had a drinking glass break in your hands while washing it the 
same way you always do? This most likely happened after you’d used the 
glass many times over a long period. All that usage and washing and drying 
takes its toll after a while, causing invisible cracks from the manufacturing 
process to get larger and larger until one day, the glass can’t even take the 
small stress of everyday handling without cracking. 
Every object, from the table you’re sitting at to the trees outside and the 
bones in your body, is made of some kind of material packed together. But 
the material isn’t packed as densely as it could be—in between the material 
is air and sometimes or other gases or even liquid. You could say that every 
object on Earth has tiny, invisible cracks in it. 
For man-made objects, the engineers designing the manufacturing process 
strive to distribute these cracks evenly or in such a way that the object will 
last as long as possible. But some cracks are always going to be bigger than 
other cracks, even if the diff erence is very slight. 
New objects are more likely to fracture evenly, while an older material 
subjected to wear and tear has specifi c weak points. An example would be 
a building’s roofl ine that consistently drips water down a specifi c exterior 
wall after a rainfall. Over time, the running water will cause weakness 
over its path. These areas will fail fi rst if an earthquake, explosion, or other 
impact occurs.
Suppose you’ve had a heavy object sitting on a table for a long time. The 
stress of the object’s weight will increase the size of the cracks in that area. 
Even if the heavy object is removed, the table is more likely to break where 
the heavy object was sitting previously.
If a table is exposed to outdoor elements for a long time, just a light touch 
can cause it to disintegrate. Even exposure to indoor air will increase the size 
of the cracks over time. 
Cracks in a brick wall tend to form along the 
line of mortar, which is weaker than brick.
Close-up view of drinking glass reveals tiny 
ﬂ aws that will be the ﬁ rst to crack under 
pressure.
Stucco wall falling apart after cracks have 
formed from repeated water ﬂ ow.
Close-up of cracks in an outdoor wooden table.

264 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
In materials exposed to the outdoors, water is a frequent contributor to weak 
points because of the way it expands and contracts. Water can seep into a 
tiny crack, then freeze and expand to increase the size of the crack. When the 
water thaws it contracts again, but now there’s more room in the crack and 
more water gets in. The new volume of water freezes and expands the crack, 
and the cycle continues.
There is an infi nite number of ways an object could develop cracks and 
damage. When animating breakage and fracture, consider where the object’s 
natural weak points are realistically going to be, and animate the breakage 
with these weak points in mind.
ANIMATING BREAKAGE
To fi gure out the fracture pattern for your object, the best method is to fi nd 
or make slow-motion videos to see how the object is likely to break. Knowing 
the physics of crack patterns will help you interpret what you see in the video. 
If you can’t fi nd or make slow-motion video, see if you can determine the 
crack pattern based on the stresses the object has been likely to endure 
during its lifetime. 
If using computer graphics, you can model the object with the cracks already 
in it, and animate the object breaking into pieces accordingly. There are also 
physics engines available that determine the most likely crack pattern for a 
breaking object.
How Physics Engines Determine Fracture
To form cracks and fracture objects, CG physics engines use an automated 
method of determining the most likely path for cracks. The most common 
method uses tetrahedrons to fi ll out the mass of the object being struck. 
The force is calculated along the direction of impact. Based on this direction, 
the tetrahedron edges that are most aff ected by the force are split to form 
cracks, and more tetrahedrons are formed at the tip of the crack. 
Asphalt cracked due to water damage.
Tetrahedron.
Computer-generated crack formation on a surface.

 
F I R E  A N D  E X P L O S I O N S  
265
Then the mesh is split again as the stress dissipates. This continues until the 
stress is completely dissipated, or the cracks reach the end of the mesh.
Flying Pieces
After a fracture, how far the pieces fl y is based on the force used to break the 
object and brittleness of the broken material. The more brittle the material, 
the farther the pieces fl y.
When animating broken pieces, remember the law of action/reaction. If half 
the broken object fl ies 1m to the left, the other half should fl y roughly 1m to 
the right.
When pieces fl y off  after a breakage, they’re subject to the usual gravitational 
forces and follow projectile motion. Pieces tend to fl y off  horizontally, and not 
upward unless there is a strong force pushing them upward.

This page intentionally left blank

C H A P T E R 9
Liquid Effects
 Whether you’re animating wine pouring into a glass, or a sailboat on the 
ocean, understanding the properties of liquids can help you do a better 
job of representing them visually in your work. In this chapter we look at 
properties common to all liquids, and also the specifi c physics behind the 
complex movement and appearance of ocean waves.
You might be accustomed to using the words liquid and fl uid interchangeably. 
In physics, a fl uid is any material that easily changes shape when subjected to 
a force. In this regard, both liquids and gases are considered fl uids. A liquid 
is distinguished from a gas in the regard that it tends to take the shape of its 
container. This chapter is about liquids only.

268 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
Properties of Liquids
While there are many diff erent types of liquids, they all have certain properties 
in common. 
When you set out to fi gure out how a liquid will move, you will most likely 
consider its thickness. We all know that thicker liquids move slower than 
thinner liquids. But what does the term thickness really mean? In physics, this 
property is determined by a number of factors.
When physicists study liquids, they often compare their properties to those of 
water. Water is abundant and easy to study, and gives us something familiar 
to compare other liquids to.
COHESION
Cohesion is the tendency of a group of the same type of molecules to stick 
together. You can think of it in terms of how much force is needed to break 
something apart. A piece of cement, like all solids, has high cohesion; you 
need to apply a strong force (such as the force from a swinging sledge 
hammer) to break it up. Air, like all gases, has weak cohesion; a puff  of breath 
causes its molecules to fl oat away in every direction.
Liquids are somewhere in between. Liquid molecules try to stay together, 
but medium-strength forces like wind and gravity can cause them to move 
around. A puddle of water that isn’t constrained by a container is an example 
of cohesion, where water molecules cling together unless a force stronger 
than their own cohesion drives them apart. 
At the mouth of a dripping faucet, the water inside the faucet will try to hang 
on to the other water molecules as long as it can, but eventually gravity pulls 
off  a piece and creates a separate droplet.
Liquids that we think of as “thick” have strong cohesion. For example, melted 
chocolate has stronger cohesion than honey. If you pour each of these 
substances into a spoon, you can easily see this. Both liquids try to resist 
gravity and stay in a clump in the spoon as long as they can, but the honey is 
less successful. The melted chocolate is able to clump together in a pile and 
resist falling out of the spoon for a longer time. 
 ADHESION
Adhesion is the tendency of one type of substance to stick to another type of 
substance (like a solid object) despite forces like gravity acting on it. An 
example is a raindrop sticking to a windowpane, or that last bit of shampoo 
that sticks to the bottom of the bottle no matter how much you shake it. If it 
weren’t for adhesion, liquids would immediately slide off  any tilted surface 
due to the force of gravity. 
In fi guring out how a liquid interacts due to gravity or other forces, the level 
of adhesion is important only where the liquid meets a solid surface. Away 
from the solid surface, cohesion determines how the liquid behaves.
Pouring honey into a spoon (left) vs. melted 
chocolate (right).

 
L I Q U I D  E F F E C T S  
269
Adhesion properties are diff erent between diff erent liquid/solid pairs, and 
at diff erent temperatures. For example, adhesion between oil and plastic or 
glass is weaker than adhesion between oil and metal. 
How a liquid moves over a solid surface is determined by both adhesion and 
cohesion. The liquid’s level of cohesion determines how well the mass of 
liquid stays globbed together, while the level of adhesion determines how 
quickly or slowly this glob separates from the other surface. 
A honey dipper, a common household implement used for dispensing 
honey into coff ee or tea, can be made of either wood or metal. The 
advantage of a wooden honey dipper is that honey adheres more to wood, 
allowing you to pick up more honey. The advantage of a metal honey 
dipper is that honey adheres less to metal, making the honey dipper easier 
to clean. 
 VISCOSITY
The term viscosity refers to how much a liquid resists changing shape when it 
is moving, as when a liquid is poured. Viscosity is the scientifi c term that 
corresponds most closely to what we call “thickness”. Thicker liquids like olive 
oil, syrup, and paint are more viscous than water.
In the liquids we use in our everyday lives, viscosity is directly related 
to cohesion—the higher the cohesion, the more viscous the liquid. It is 
also related to adhesion, where high adhesion to the container it’s in can 
increase the liquid’s viscosity. If a bucket is full of some liquid, cohesion 
will play a bigger part in the viscosity level than adhesion because more of 
the liquid is sticking to itself than to the sides of the bucket. If the bucket is 
Adhesion between glass and water; cohesion within 
water itself.
Some solid substances have low adhesion 
with just about every liquid. Materials used 
for kitchen countertops and ﬂ oors are 
created speciﬁ cally to have low adhesion 
with liquids, making any liquid mess easy 
to wipe away.

270 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
nearly empty, adhesion will play a bigger part in determining how readily 
the liquid fl ows.
Oil and water are both less viscous at higher temperatures. The diff erence for 
oil is visually noticeable, where warm or hot cooking oil (as when heated up 
in a pan) fl ows much more easily than room-temperature oil, making it easier 
to spread around in the pan.
Molten lava is a strong example of a liquid changing viscosity with 
temperature. After the lava comes up through the Earth’s surface and cools, 
it turns to rock. Metals show a similar attribute, where high temperatures in a 
foundry are used to make the metal fl ow into the desired forms, where it then 
cools into hard shapes.
Viscosity is measured by a factor called a centipoise (cP). Water at room 
temperature has a viscosity of about 1cP. A higher centipoise means the 
substance is thicker and has a higher viscosity. The numbers in the following 
chart are rough values, mostly for comparison to the viscosity of water. The 
actual value can be higher or lower based on temperature, air pressure, and 
other factors.
Substance
Viscosity in cP
Water 
1
Mercury
1.5
Isopropyl alcohol
2
Turpentine
2
Blood, milk
3
Gasoline
8
Beer
18
Olive oil
80
Motor oil SAE 10
90
Motor oil SAE 40
320
Nail polish
450
Latex paint
750
Corn syrup
1400
Water-based paint
2400
Honey
5000
Chocolate syrup
18,000
Ketchup
75,000
Molten metal pouring into a cast.
The centipoise measurement is named 
after physicist Jean Léonard Marie 
Poiseuille.

 
L I Q U I D  E F F E C T S  
271
Molten lava
80,000
Melted chocolate
80,000
Peanut butter
250,000
By comparing the viscosity of a substance in your animation to the viscosity 
of water or another substance, you can work out how to visually represent 
pouring and fl ow for that liquid. For example, molten lava and melted 
chocolate have similar viscosity levels, so looking at fl owing chocolate can give 
you a reasonable reference for the speed and movement of molten lava. If you 
do so, keep in mind the relative weights of the liquids. Mercury, for example, 
is more than 13 times heavier than water, so it pours more easily than water.
Newtonian and Non-Newtonian Fluids
Most of the less viscous liquids retain the same viscosity regardless of the 
degree of force applied to them or the amount of time the force is applied. 
Water, for example, retains the same viscosity whether it’s shot out of a high-
pressure hose, dripping from a faucet, or sloshing around in a water bottle. 
The time it fl ows doesn’t matter either—water keeps the same viscosity 
whether it’s pushed along for a fraction of a second or several hours.
But some higher-viscosity liquids can increase or decrease in viscosity to 
a marked degree depending on the degree of force being applied, and/or 
how long the force is applied. There are several examples of this in everyday 
liquids. 
Dairy cream, for example, will thicken if you apply force in the form of stirring 
it vigorously, and will eventually become whipped cream. Honey, on the 
other hand, becomes less viscous when stirred. Many cosmetics also work 
in this way—nail polish and cosmetic gels become less viscous when shaken 
for a short time. Unlike whipped cream, these liquids will eventually return to 
their previous viscosity states if left to sit for a while.
Latex paint is designed to work with changing viscosity. When you gently dip 
the brush into the paint, there is little force and the paint has a somewhat 
high viscosity, thick enough to make a good volume of paint stick to the 
brush. When you then move the brush across a surface, this strong force 
makes the paint less viscous so it spreads easily. After the paint is laid down 
on the surface, it goes back to its original higher viscosity so it will avoid 
dripping before it dries. 
Fluids that retain the same viscosity regardless of forces are called Newtonian, 
while the ones with changeable viscosity are called non-Newtonian. Newtonian 
fl uids pour evenly and steadily, while non-Newtonian fl uids tend to change 
speed as they pour. Water and beer are Newtonian, while thicker substances 
like lava, blood, paints, and many food products (yogurt, ketchup, honey, 
chocolate syrup) are non-Newtonian.
Cream thickening when vigorously stirred.
Newtonian ﬂ uids are named for Isaac 
Newton, who ﬁ rst explored such ﬂ uid 
properties.

272 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
Type of fl uid
Substance
Newtonian
Water
Milk
Blood plasma
Oil
Beer
Non-Newtonian
Printer ink
Yogurt
Gels
Cream
Honey 
Nail polish
Ketchup
Molasses
Maple syrup
Latex paint
Blood
Toothpaste
Solid/Liquid Behavior of Non-Newtonian Fluids
Another feature of thick non-Newtonian fl uids is that they can act like solids. 
When no force is being applied, the fl uid acts nearly like a solid, pooling in a 
pile with high viscosity. A slow, gentle force causes the fl uid to act like a liquid 
with lower viscosity, but a hard, fast force causes it to act like a solid again, 
with higher viscosity.
When you apply . . .
It acts like a . . .
Viscosity
No force
Solid
Higher
Slow, gentle force
Liquid
Lower
Hard, fast force
Solid
Higher
Liquid/solid behavior of thick non-Newtonian ﬂ uids.
When we say a “hard/fast force,” we’re not talking about extreme force like 
that from an earthquake or falling meteorite. You can create a suffi  cient 
hard, fast force on a household liquid with your own two hands and see 
this behavior for yourself. Most liquid foods that come in squeezable 
bottles—ketchup, mayonnaise, mustard, just to name a few—will exhibit 
this behavior. 
When you turn a squeezable ketchup bottle upside down and shake it, this 
fast, hard force dislodges the ketchup as a solid mass and moves it near the 
squeeze hole. If you then squeeze very fast and hard, you don’t get much 
ketchup; the force causes the ketchup to act like a solid, and the squeezed 
air simply blows a hole through the middle of the mass. But if you squeeze 

 
L I Q U I D  E F F E C T S  
273
Because they’re called non-Newtonian 
fl uids, and ﬂ uids can include both 
gases and liquids, you might assume 
that there are some gases that exhibit 
non-Newtonian behavior. There are, but 
such gases are extremely rare and unlikely 
to be found in your kitchen.
gently, the ketchup starts to behave like a liquid and fl ows out of the hole. 
When the ketchup lands on the plate, it acts like a solid again, pooling in a 
peaked puddle.
Compare this with a water bottle that has a nozzle, where you’ll get a stream 
of water no matter how hard and fast you squeeze. When the water hits a 
surface, it makes a fl at, thin puddle or breaks into droplets. The water acts 
like a liquid under no force, under a slow/gentle force, and under a hard/
fast force.
While cohesion plays a part in making non-Newtonian fl uids behave the way 
they do, the laws of cohesion don’t account for these changes in viscosity due 
to force. Non-Newtonian fl uids simply operate under their own rules.
FOOD SCIENCE: KETCHUP
Non-Newtonian liquids remain a subject of much study, especially as a part of 
food science. It wasn’t so long ago that all ketchup from the supermarket came 
in glass bottles—you had to smack the bottom of the bottle to dislodge the 
ketchup, then wait a minute or more for the ketchup to fl ow. While restaurants 
have had squeezable ketchup bottles for a long time, the plastic, squeezable, 
resealable, upside-down ketchup bottle for the home is a relatively new 
innovation that resulted from the study of non-Newtonian fl uids.
While the squeezable bottle is faster than the glass bottle, hitting the bottle 
used to be part of the fun of using ketchup. It’s not unreasonable to assume 
that somewhere out there is an enterprising engineer inventing a ketchup 
bottle that limits squeezing to a gentle pressure that will be sure to move the 
ketchup out of the nozzle. This will, unfortunately, take the last of the fun out 
of ketchup.
SURFACE TENSION
When a liquid meets air, as when pooled in a puddle or sitting in a container, 
the part of the surface exposed to air is pulled a little tighter than the rest of 
the liquid, like the head of a drum. This property of liquids is called surface 
tension.
The level of surface tension has to do with how strongly the liquid’s molecules 
bind together (cohesion). Because of cohesion, all molecules in the liquid pull 
at their neighboring molecules with equal force in all directions. However, 
on the surface there are no liquid molecules to adhere to. The pulling force 
has to go somewhere, so the molecules at the surface pull even tighter on 
their neighbors, eff ectively contracting the surface and making it harder to 
penetrate. 

274 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
Surface tension is the reason why small creatures can walk across the water’s 
surface. After a liquid surface has been indented, it has a natural tendency 
to pull itself taut again and restore its fl at surface. This is why an insect’s 
“footprints” on water disappear almost immediately.
The chart shown is a guide to surface tension values for various substances. 
The values are for liquids at room temperature unless otherwise specifi ed. 
Substance
Surface tension (dyne/cm2)
Water
73
Honey
66
Water—boiling
59
Latex paint
45
Soapy water
37
Olive oil
32
Surface tension is not directly related to viscosity. Honey, for example, has a 
higher viscosity than water at room temperature, but a lower surface tension. 
Overall, household liquids (water, cleansers, oils, honey, syrup) have surface 
tension values in the 30–70 range.
At the surface (shown as gray), the force that would ordinarily bind molecules 
from above (dotted arrows) has nothing to bind to, so the force goes into the 
horizontal binding force instead.
Surface tension is expressed as force 
per area, either as Newtons per meters 
squared (N/m2) or dynes per cm2. One 
N/m2 = 1000 dyne/cm2.

 
L I Q U I D  E F F E C T S  
275
When animating a high-viscosity liquid, you don’t need to concern yourself 
much with surface tension. With high-viscosity liquids like melted chocolate 
or molten lava, surface tension doesn’t aff ect the fl ow nearly as much as the 
viscosity itself. But for low-viscosity liquids, surface tension plays a role in how 
the liquid splashes and puddles.
An object can appear to fl oat when its weight distribution allows it to sit 
on the surface due to surface tension. A paper clip, when laid on a water 
surface, will either sink or stay on the surface depending on how you place 
it on the water. If you lay it gently on the water’s surface, it won’t break the 
surface tension and will sit on the surface. However, if you dip it vertically 
into the water past the surface tension, it will sink because it weighs more 
than the water it displaces. 
 BUOYANCY
An object sitting on the surface due to surface tension is not the same as a 
large object like a boat fl oating. Floating follows diff erent rules.
An object can fl oat when it weighs less than the water it displaces. A boat 
fl oats because it displaces a large amount of water, enough to support a 
heavy object that is mostly hollow on top.
Some substances alter surface tension 
when added to a liquid. An example 
would be paint thinner added to paint, 
which lowers both viscosity and surface 
tension. Soap added to water reduces 
surface tension without aﬀ ecting viscosity. 
A substance that reduces surface tension 
is called a surfactant.
If the water is soapy, this makes the 
surface tension too low and the paper clip 
will sink no matter how you place it in the 
water.
Like any other object, a boat has a center of gravity. A boat in water also 
has another spot called the center of buoyancy (CB), which is located at 
the center of the distributed weight of the displaced water. As the boat’s 
weight pushes down along the line of gravity, pressure from the water 

276 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
If the center of buoyancy is above the center of gravity, the boat is stable; it 
will tend to right itself after being slightly tipped by waves or wind. A stable 
boat has the majority of its weight under water and below the center of 
buoyancy to prevent tipping. 
Conversely, a top-heavy boat, where the center of gravity is higher than the 
center of buoyancy, is unstable and prone to tipping. If wind or waves push 
the center of gravity off  the line of the center of buoyancy, the boat is likely 
to keep tipping, at which point it will take on water and become so heavy 
that it sinks. 
Stability is also aff ected by the shape of the hull. As the boat is lightly tossed 
in even the calmest water, the position of the CB shifts around, based on the 
water that’s displaced by the hull at any given moment. A good boat design 
includes a hull shape with enough room to keep the CB well above the CG. 
Liquid Appearance
You can determine a lot about liquid appearance from its viscosity, surface 
tension, adhesion and cohesion properties. 
MENISCUS
When a liquid sits in a container, there is some adhesion between the liquid 
and the substance that makes up the container. At the top of the liquid, 
where it meets both the air and the container, both adhesion and surface 
tension act on the liquid to give the top surface a curved shape at the edges. 
This part of the surface is called a meniscus.
Stable and unstable centers of gravity in a boat of the same size and weight.
underneath pushes the boat upward along the line on which the center 
of buoyancy lies.

 
L I Q U I D  E F F E C T S  
277
If surface tension is stronger than adhesion, the meniscus falls below the 
surface and creates a convex (up-curve) shape. If adhesion is stronger than 
surface tension, the meniscus is above the top surface of the liquid, making a 
concave (down-curve) shape. 
Diff erent types of containers and liquids produce diff erent meniscus shapes. 
Water in glass produces a concave meniscus, while mercury in glass produces 
a convex meniscus.
The meniscus curve aff ects the appearance of liquids. Visually, a glass of 
water has a noticeable line at the water’s surface due to light refl ecting off  
the meniscus. If the meniscus isn’t there, audiences instinctively know that 
the container isn’t glass, or the liquid isn’t water. Water has lower adhesion to 
plastic than to glass, so the meniscus on a plastic cup is less pronounced than 
the one on a drinking glass.
By learning the adhesion properties and the meniscus size and shape for the 
liquid and the container it’s in, you will be better able to represent the size of 
the refraction at the top of the liquid.
 POURING SHAPES
A highly viscous liquid pours with a shape that can appear almost solid. With 
a low-viscosity liquid, the pouring shape is more irregular due to low 
cohesion; the molecules don’t hold together as well during the fall. 
Liquids tend to be smooth and shiny when pouring unless they are full of 
chunky material, as with peanut butter or lava. If the liquid is translucent or 
transparent, it will refract the colors around it. Most natural liquids like oil, 
honey, and natural gas are translucent or transparent. Man-made liquids 
like glue and paint can be translucent or opaque, depending on how they’re 
made. 
During pouring, a low-viscosity translucent liquid will refl ect and refract more 
than a high-viscosity liquid with the same translucency, due to its irregular shape.
Meniscus of water and mercury.
Small meniscus of water in plastic cup (left) 
refracts less light than larger meniscus of 
water in glass (right).
Coffee (left) pours translucent with an irregular 
shape, while paint appears more solid.

278 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
Oceans and Lakes
Review: 
• 
Classical Physics > Motion and Timing > Wave Motion
• 
Classical Physics > Forces > Pressure and Gases
Representing the ocean or any large body of water is a common need for 
animation projects. Knowing the physics behind such bodies of water will 
help you make more realistic and convincing scenes. Whether you’re making 
traditional animation drawings or creating realistic visual eff ects, the same 
laws of physics apply.
WAVES
Any section of an ocean or large lake can have numerous small and large 
waves moving at the same time. In this chapter, we’ll look at the basics 
behind wave formation and movement.
Wave Terminology
All ocean and lake waves follow a similar pattern as transverse waves. Recall 
that with transverse waves, the material itself doesn’t move down the wave. 
With ocean and lake waves, the water droplets themselves don’t move 
much. However, the wave pattern itself can move hundreds or even 
thousands of miles.
When discussing ocean waves, we use the same terminology we use to 
discuss any kind of transverse wave. The top of the wave is called the crest, 
while the dip between crests is called the trough.
An ocean wave has a wavelength and amplitude. The amplitude, or wave 
height, is measured from halfway between the trough and the crest.

 
L I Q U I D  E F F E C T S  
279
How Ocean Waves Form
In the ocean or other large body of water, waves form from a disturbance in 
or over the water. The most common disturbance to cause waves is wind, but 
disturbances can also be caused by marine life, boats, shifting of tectonic 
plates, falling meteors, and anything else that moves water around.
In this section, we look at how wind forms waves out in the ocean. The end 
result, waves moving across the ocean’s surface, is the same regardless of 
whether it’s caused by wind or some other disturbance. 
Capillary Waves
When wind starts to blow over a still body of water, ripples and small waves 
form on the water’s surface due to friction between air and water. The wind 
just above the water’s surface moves slower than the wind above it because 
it is more aff ected by this friction. The faster-moving wind just above it 
topples in front of the slower-moving wind, creating a small trough and 
displacing water to form a small crest. These small ripples and waves, less 
than an inch in wavelength, are called capillary waves. Capillary waves tend to 
have sharper, more V-shaped troughs than larger ocean waves.

280 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
A capillary wave, once formed, radiates out in all directions from its source. 
If a surface consists of numerous capillary waves formed by wind, they will 
appear to move in the general direction of the wind but with a good degree 
of randomness. 
Right after a capillary wave is formed, the water’s surface tension tries to 
pull the surface taut to fl atten it out. If the disturbance that caused the 
capillary waves isn’t continuous but rather a one-shot deal, as with a stone 
being dropped in the water, the ripples radiate out and dissipate, and the 
surface goes back to its previous shape rather quickly. But capillary waves 
from wind will continue to form if the wind continues to blow, and if the 
wind is strong enough the waves will eventually get larger.
Gravity Waves
As the wind continues to blow, the air moves faster over the crests of the 
capillary waves. This higher speed causes the air to have lower pressure 
over the crests and higher pressure in the troughs. Water, being a liquid 
that’s easy to push around, responds to the higher pressure in the 
troughs by pushing down and making the trough wider and deeper, and 
responds to the lower pressure on the crests by drawing the water 
forward. This process can be likened to the wind gripping or grabbing 
the crest of the wave, pulling it forward. When its wavelength reaches 
more than 0.7in (1.74cm), the wave graduates from a capillary wave to a 
gravity wave. 
During the process of gravity waves forming due to steady wind, the change 
in wavelength is not proportional to change in wave height—the length 
of the wave increases a lot more than the wave height increases. In other 
words, the troughs widen a lot more than the height increases. 
Movement of Waves
Once the waves start going in an ocean, individual water droplets move 
around in a circular pattern. 

 
L I Q U I D  E F F E C T S  
281
The water droplets at a crest then roll downward and form a trough, then 
roll back up again to form a crest. While an individual water wave can appear 
to move a great distance, the individual droplets themselves are just rolling 
around and around within the same area. The droplets’ overall motion follows 
a wave pattern, with a wavelength and amplitude. 
Pattern for traveling waves in ocean, going left to right.
Breaking Waves
Wind and other factors can push a wave around and shorten its wavelength. 
When wavelength decreases, the wave height increases and crests become 

282 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
The falling peak of a breaking wave is infused with air as it falls, forming foam 
and bubbles that appear to us as white in color. 
Shoreline Breaks
Ocean waves commonly break as they run into shallow water at a shoreline. 
To understand why this happens, we need to look at the water underneath 
the visible wave. In the deep ocean, the circular motion of water droplets that 
make up a wave actually extends far below the surface. The circles around 
which the droplets travel get smaller and smaller farther down, and at a 
certain level the circular motion is negligible. This level, called the wave base, 
is about half a wavelength down in the water.
Wavelength shortening and height increasing until wavelength is less than 7 times 
the wave height, causing a break.
pointier, and at some point the peak can no longer hold together. When this 
happens, the wave breaks and the peak falls over.
The ratio of a wave’s height to its wavelength is called its steepness. As 
steepness increases, the wave becomes pointier at the crest. When 
steepness is less than 1:7, the wave breaks. In other words, the wave breaks 
when the wavelength becomes so short that it’s less than 7 times the wave 
height.
Wave breaking in the ocean.

 
L I Q U I D  E F F E C T S  
283
When waves move into shallow water near the shoreline, the water near the 
wave base is held back, holding the entire wave back. This causes the waves 
to slow down and crowd together, with a shortened wavelength and pointier 
crests. When a wave’s length reaches the point where it’s less than 7 times 
the wave height, it breaks. The water at the top of the break, in attempting to 
continue its circular motion, topples down in front of the wave. 
A wave that’s being held back on the 
bottom is said to “feel bottom.”
Any obstruction not far below the water’s surface, such as rocks and reefs, can 
also cause the same eff ect on waves and make them break.
BEAUFORT SCALE
 The Beaufort Scale is a chart of the visible eff ects of wind on water and the 
environment. The scale was originally developed by sailors to help determine 
what eff ects the wind would have on their immediate situations, such as 
whether their sails would be able to hold up under a gale. Rather than relying 
on scientifi c measurement, the scale was a simple and straightforward guide 
that any sailor could use just by being observant—by looking at the sea and 
observing the wind’s eff ect on skin, clothing, and objects on the boat, a sailor 
could tell if the wind was going to cause him problems. Over the years the 
Beaufort Scale has been refi ned and scaled against scientifi c measurement 
and is now an accepted way of measuring wind, particularly wind over water.
continued on the next page

284 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
Floating on a Wave
An object bobbing in the waves gives a strong visual cue about the turbulence 
of the water. Such an object moves back and forth as a circling water droplet 
does, going up and down the waveform without moving any net distance.
The Beaufort Scale is a handy tool for animators because it gives you the visual 
eff ects of various wind strengths on water, smoke, trees, and other objects 
likely to be visibly aff ected by wind. You can fi nd the Beaufort Scale in many 
places online. When creating an outdoor windy scene, consult the Beaufort 
Scale and determine where your wind falls on the chart, and animate the 
environment accordingly. 
Beaufort 
number
Description
Wind speed
Wave Height
Sea conditions
Land conditions
6
Strong breeze
38.8–49.9 km/h
24.1–31 mph
3–4 m
9–13 ft
Long waves begin to form. 
Frequent white foam crests, 
small amounts of airborne 
spray.
Large branches move. 
Umbrella use becomes 
diffi  cult. Empty garbage 
bins tip over.
Portion of the Beaufort Scale.

 
L I Q U I D  E F F E C T S  
285
If the wind is strong enough, the water at the crests does get pushed a small 
distance with each wave. An object bobbing on the water can get pushed 
along with the water in such a case, which is why something thrown in the 
ocean can wash up on shore eventually.

286 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
OCEAN AND LAKE APPEARANCE
Even though ocean and lake water is transparent, you usually won’t see 
through the surface when looking at it. The refl ections, waves, splashes, and 
foam on a large body of water are what diff erentiate it visually from paint or 
other opaque liquids, not its transparency. 
Water waves in particular are very shiny and reflective. The smooth, 
curved shapes of wave peaks generate specular highlights with light 
from the Sun and Moon. Breaking waves throw shiny water droplets and 
produce white foam. Wave troughs can appear quite dark in comparison, 
almost black.
For these reasons, when creating an ocean or other large body of water 
for animation, it’s usually more effi  cient to treat it as opaque rather than 
transparent. 
Water Reflection
If looking down through still or very shallow ocean water at a high angle in 
bright sunlight, you can see a refracted version of what’s just below the 
surface, but you can’t see very far down. The ocean’s bottom is visible only in 
shallow water, even on a bright day with a calm ocean. The water scatters and 
absorbs the light once it gets under the surface—the farther down you look, 
the less light there is. 
As your viewing angle goes closer to horizontal, water appears more 
refl ective, so you see the refl ected image of the sky and parts of objects 
above the water rather than what’s underneath it. The more disturbed the 
water is, the more distorted the refl ection.
You can barely make out the scuba diver’s 
feet, and can’t see the ocean’s bottom at all.
At this viewing angle, the boy’s body under the water isn’t visible at all.

 
L I Q U I D  E F F E C T S  
287
The refl ection coeffi  cient for water, as listed in the Refl ection section of 
the Light and Color chapter, is only 2%. This value is for refl ections of light 
rays hitting the water perpendicular to the surface. For other angles, the 
refl ection coeffi  cient increases as the angle of incidence moves away from 
the perpendicular. This means that at viewing angles low to the ground, a 
refl ected image appears in the water in place of the refracted image under 
the water.
In the forefront, rocks under the water’s 
surface are clearly visible due to a viewing 
angle close to the perpendicular, and no 
reﬂ ections are visible. Farther back on the 
lake, where the viewing angle is farther from 
the perpendicular, we see only a reﬂ ection 
of the sky.
The smoother the water, the clearer the refl ected image. Mud and dirt make 
the surface less “smooth” and cause light to bounce off  in many directions, 
making refl ections less distinct.
Muddy lake. Even though the viewing angle is low to the ground and the lake is 
calm, only vague reﬂ ections appear in the lake’s surface.

288 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
The peaks of waves can produce specular highlights. As with any medium, 
specular highlights occur on the water’s surface when the light source is 
at the same angle to the surface as the viewer. Specular highlights, being 
brighter than refl ections, will trump any refl ected images and appear as the 
color of the light source. 
The reﬂ ected image of the boat, already chopped up by the waves, is further 
interrupted by specular reﬂ ections on the peaks.
FRESNEL EFFECT
The dependence of refl ection level on angle of incidence is called a Fresnel Eff ect, 
named for the physicist who fi rst documented the relationship between index 
of refraction, angle of incidence, and refl ectivity. The Fresnel Eff ect explains why 
water is more refl ective at low angles, and why a transparent, curved object like 
a drinking glass looks diff erent at the sides than in the middle. 
The Fresnel equations tells us that the farther the viewing angle from the 
surface normal, the more light refl ects off  the surface (rather than refracting 
into the medium). With water waves, the “viewing angle” for each part of the 
wave is diff erent even if the viewer stays still. For viewing water an angle, 
Fresnel equations tell us that refl ection will be strongest at the peak of the 
wave, and weakest between the peak and trough, where the angle between 
the wave’s normal and viewing direction is smallest.

 
L I Q U I D  E F F E C T S  
289
Color of the Ocean
The base color of deep water in bright white light is blue. This shading is due 
to the way deep water absorbs and scatters the various wavelengths of light, 
similar to the way our atmosphere absorbs the Sun’s rays and scatters blue 
light to make the sky appear blue. Microscopic organisms such as algae can 
also tint the sea with green or brown colors, or can make it bluer.
Shallow water, as at an ocean’s shoreline, isn’t deep enough to absorb and 
scatter the diff erent color wavelengths to a visible degree, so it appears clear 
when you look down through it.
However, if you’re looking at the ocean or lake from a large angle off  the 
perpendicular, the visual base color is largely determined by the refl ected 
color of the sky. These bodies of water appear very blue on a sunny day, blue-
gray on an overcast day, and blue-black at night.
Spray, Mist, and Foam
Spray and foam make water appear more active and turbulent. When a large 
wave breaks, the result is a chaotic mass of water droplets and bubbles that 
looks rather solid, with stray droplets emanating from the mass and mist 
rising from the chaos.
Spray is fi ne water particles thrown into the air, which then follow projectile 
motion and fall back into the sea. Mist is fi ne water droplets small enough to 
be suspended in air. Visually, mist is very much like fog.
Mist can be present due to a big splash, or due to water evaporation early 
in the morning. A waterfall produces a sheet of mist that looks like particles 
slowly rising then dissipating or evaporating.
Foam is essentially bubbles. Foam in the ocean can form where water meets 
both a solid and air at the same time, as at the ocean’s shoreline or where 
waves move against rocks. The water is moving yet it clings to the solid (sand 
Mist (right) from waterfall.

290 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
or rock) to some degree, while the water’s surface tension attempts to keep 
the water together. In comes the air to fi ll in the gaps, forming bubbles.
Foam from water crashing on rocks.
In breaking waves, foam forms when the 
falling water attempts to continue moving 
through the “solid” of water below it, but 
is prevented from doing so by the circular 
motion of water waves.
Shadows fall on the bottom of clear, smooth, shallow water.
Shadows fall on the surface of choppy water.
The amount of foam and its color can be aff ected by microscopic plant life. Water 
that contains a lot of algae and other organisms is more prone to foaming.
Splashes, mist, and foam usually appear as white. Foam can also be tinted 
green or brown if a lot of plant life is present in the water. 
Shadows on Water
Shadows can behave diff erently on water depending on the water’s clarity 
and smoothness. In clear, smooth, shallow water, as in a swimming pool or 
calm lake, light can get through the water, so shadows are cast on the bottom. 
In muddy or choppy water, shadows are cast on the surface.

C H A P T E R 10
Earth and Outer Space
If your animation involves the great outdoors, chances are you’ll need to 
know something about Earth. We walk on its lands,  swim its waters and fl y 
through the air every day, but a more detailed understanding of its formation 
can help a great deal when representing it in your art.
And of course, the magic and mystery of outer space has captured artists’ 
imaginations for centuries. The intensely violent processes that formed our universe 
(and also our planet) continue on much as they have for billions of years, giving us a 
marvelously enormous canvas that’s both visually rich and ripe for interpretation.
Earth Today
The same forces that formed the landscape on Earth over the last several millions 
of years are still in play today, and account for the shapes of our mountains, valleys, 
and coastlines as well as natural disasters like earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. 
Let’s take a closer look at Earth’s structure and how it came to be that way.
EARTH’S LAYERS
Earth has many layers. Outside Earth is a gaseous atmosphere, and the planet 
itself is composed of a hot solid metal core surrounded by molten rock layers 

292 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
that become gradually cooler and more solid until you get to a solid, thin 
crust on the outside. 
The part of the Earth’s atmosphere you can see from Earth, where there’s 
enough air to catch the light, is quite thin compared to the size of the planet, as 
evidenced by this photo taken from space. The outer reaches of the atmosphere 
extend about 400km into space, and the radius of Earth, by comparison, is 
16 times larger at about 6400km. Most of the action, such as clouds and fl ying 
jets, occurs within a 10km strip of atmosphere just above the Earth’s surface.
Earth’s atmosphere as a thin, transparent layer at the outer 
edge of the planet. Image courtesy of NASA.
A silicate is a compound formed from 
silicon and other elements such as oxygen 
and aluminum. Clay and quartz are 
examples of silicates.
The Earth’s crust is the hard, relatively thin rocky layer on the outside. The 
thickness of the crust ranges from about 5km thick in the deepest parts of the 
ocean to around 30km thick on the continents. The crust is made up mostly 
of silicates. About 70% of the crust is covered by water.
The next layer down is the mantle, about 3000km deep. The mantle is made 
up of two basic layers—a rigid upper layer mostly solid, which the crust sits 
upon, and a low-viscosity layer underneath. The upper layer is less solid than 
the crust. Liquid lava can form when the mantle gets hot enough for rocks to 
melt. This is where lava for volcanoes comes from.
Earth’s layers with depths and technical names for crust layers.

 
E A R T H  A N D  O U T E R  S P A C E  
293
The center region of the Earth is the core. The core has two parts: the inner 
and outer cores. Both cores consist of iron and nickel. The outer core is 
hot liquid, about 5000°C, which compares to the temperature of the Sun’s 
surface. The inner core is even hotter, but is under such high pressure that it 
is solid rather than liquid.
This high temperature keeps most of the outer core and much of the lower 
mantle in a molten state and the mantle only becomes a semi-solid near 
its outer region. The upper crust is basically fl oating atop a layer of molten 
or semi-solid rock around 29 miles deep. This fl oating quality of the crust 
is responsible for much of our current topography as well as many natural 
disasters. 
Where the crust meets the mantle are the tectonic plates, a series of hard, 
separate plates with some mobility as they “fl oat” on the softer, sometimes 
liquid mantle. Understanding tectonic plates is vital to getting a grasp on 
both landscape formation and natural disasters.
ATMOSPHERE
Earth’s atmosphere is essential to life as we know it. The atmosphere provides 
air to breathe as well as protection from the harsh rays of the Sun, and from 
fl ying space debris such as asteroids. Scientists separate our atmosphere into 
several layers for easier study and discussion. 
The atmosphere is held to the Earth by gravity. Gravity causes the outer layers 
to push in on the lower layers, creating the greatest amount of air pressure at 
the Earth’s surface. By comparison, in the outer layers of the atmosphere the 
air is much less dense.
Separation lines of Earth’s major tectonic plates.
The composition of the Earth’s core is 
theoretical, as no one has actually ever 
dug down that far. In A Journey to the 
Centre of the Earth, an 1864 novel by early 
sci-ﬁ  author Jules Verne, two German 
explorers travel down volcanic tubes 
(tunnels through which lava ﬂ ows) to visit 
the Earth’s center, enjoying a lively and 
dangerous adventure along the way. While 
unbelievable from a scientiﬁ c point of view, 
the story is enchanting and has inspired a 
couple of ﬁ lm versions of the tale.
Layers of the atmosphere.

294 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
There is no defi nitive line where our atmosphere meets outer space. At the 
outermost regions of the exosphere are simple elements like hydrogen 
and helium which can drift into outer space. This is the level at which many 
satellites orbit.
Atmospheric Levels
The thermosphere catches a lot of heat from the Sun when compared with 
the air density at that level. If you were fl ying around in this area, you wouldn’t 
feel this heat because the air density is so low that there wouldn’t be enough 
air to transfer heat to your skin. Heat is the energy of molecular motion, and 
when there aren’t many molecules around, we just don’t feel it. But the air 
molecules that do heat up can rise to over 1000°C in temperature. 
The mesosphere is the coldest atmospheric layer, colder than any place on the 
Earth’s surface. Ice clouds can form in the mesosphere, which are sometimes 
visible just after sunset.
Mesosphere ice clouds are called noctilucent clouds (NLCs) because you can see 
them only after the Sun has set. These wispy mesosphere clouds are too faint 
to be seen during the day, but after sunset the lower parts of the atmosphere 
are in shadow while mesosphere clouds are still illuminated by the Sun due to 
their height. Nocti means night, while lucent means light or shining. Noctilucent 
clouds are most common near the Equator.
The stratosphere contains the ozone layer. It has very stable atmospheric 
conditions and so has no weather to speak of.
The troposphere is the area closest to the Earth’s surface, the turbulent and 
ever-changing layer where the majority of our weather takes place. All clouds 
visible during the day are in the troposphere.

 
E A R T H  A N D  O U T E R  S P A C E  
295
OZONE LAYER
The whitest areas of the image show a hole 
in the ozone layer over Antarctica in Septem-
ber, 2014. Satellite image courtesy of NASA.
Although the atmosphere started to form 4 billion years ago from condensed water 
vapor, the level of ozone needed to block out the Sun’s lethal ultraviolet radiation 
developed much later, about 600 million years ago. Before that, the only life that 
could exist on Earth was in the oceans and seas. The development of a critical level 
of ozone in the atmosphere made it possible for land-based animals to evolve.
Ozone is an oxygen compound that exists in all parts of our atmosphere. A 
heavy concentration of ozone in our stratosphere forms the ozone layer, which 
protects us from the harmful ultraviolet radiation the Sun puts out. The ozone 
layer varies in altitude over diff erent regions and seasons, but is generally in 
the range of 10–20 miles overhead. Since the ozone spreads out quite a bit, 
it’s hard to say exactly how “thick” it is—some methods of measurement tell 
us it’s a few millimeters thick, while others say it’s several miles thick—but 
apparently, it’s thick enough to keep us all from getting fried.
Scientists didn’t start to study the ozone layer until the 1970s. In 1984, scientists 
noticed a “hole” in the ozone layer over Antarctica. Since then, this hole has 
appeared every year between August and October. There is still a great deal of 
debate over when this hole really formed, what caused it, whether it will eventually 
close up, and if not, what impact it will have on human life going forward.
Height of Vehicles in Atmosphere
Man-made vehicles that orbit Earth stay within the thermosphere. Vehicles in 
common use, such as airplanes and hot-air balloons, travel within the 
stratosphere. Satellites and shuttles orbit in the thermosphere. 

296 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
Formation of Earth
Before we delve into the composition of the Earth’s crust, let’s take a look at 
how Planet Earth was formed. Understanding the history behind this rock we 
live on can help a great deal in understanding its composition today.
It’s important to note that scientists are still learning about the formation of 
Earth, with new evidence coming to light regularly. Nobody knows for sure 
how it all happened, but we can make some very educated guesses based on 
space observation and geological evidence.
GASEOUS EARTH
As a protostar, our sun gobbled up about 90% of the material in the 
nebula that surrounded it during its creation. The remaining 10% of the 
matter orbiting the Sun, mostly tiny grains of dust and gases, coalesced 
into large disk-shaped masses called planetesimals over a period of about 
100,000 years. 
Several planetismals formed around the Sun, with chunks in the disk 
gradually pulling together to form the planets of our solar system, including 
Earth. Over billions of years, the gravity of the planets that orbit our sun have 
drawn into them most of the material fl oating around them in the form of 
gas, dust, meteors, asteroids, and comets. 
Nearly 4 billion years ago, when Earth was still a somewhat loose collection of 
dust and gases, billions of asteroids and comets collided with this collection, 
bringing many materials with them, such as heavy metals, oxygen, and water. 
The period during which Earth received this massive number of collisions is 
called the Heavy Bombardment Period. One only has to look at the surface of 
the Moon to get an idea of how many of these objects have similarly struck 
the Earth. 
As Earth (and other planets) became more solid, the energy from the 
collisions generated enough heat to keep the surface of the Earth molten. 
Heavy elements like iron and nickel sank to the center of Earth. The Earth 
remained a molten sphere until the collisions with these objects slowed 
down long enough for the energy to dissipate, allowing the surface to cool 
and solidify again about 3.8 billion years ago. 
 Once the Earth cooled, it would not be long before there was liquid water 
on the surface and a gaseous atmosphere surrounding the entire planet. 
The Earth may have become a planetary mass over a period as short as 
600 million years.
SUPERCONTINENTS
After the Earth’s crust and upper mantle became somewhat stable, distinct 
landscape features such as continents began to emerge. The Earth’s surface 
has been changing appearance ever since, with tectonic plates moving 
around to form continents of diff erent shapes.
A protostar is a star in its earliest formative 
stages, when a mass of gases have just 
started to come together.
Artist’s rendering of planetismal. Image 
courtesy of NASA/JPL-Caltech.
Surface of the Moon.
Some of the heavy elements that sank 
to Earth’s center are radioactive, and 
generate the enormous heat that keeps 
the inner core near 5000°C today.

 
E A R T H  A N D  O U T E R  S P A C E  
297
Scientists have been able to dig around and fi nd ancient rock and mineral 
deposits that retain the magnetic orientations they had when they were 
buried, which often diff er greatly from present-day magnetism on the 
surface. This has told us a lot about where these rock deposits were in relation 
to the magnetic North Pole or South Pole when they were buried millions 
of years ago. Also, fossils give clues about similar or identical species now 
separated by thousands of miles, indicating that the tectonic plates on which 
they were found were once very close together.
From this information, scientists surmise that all the Earth’s continents drift 
around the surface and that on multiple occasions throughout the millennia, 
have been pushed together as a supercontinent: one single continent 
with regions separated by relatively small bodies of water. One of the fi rst 
supercontinents, Rodinia, existed between 1.1 billion and 750 million years 
ago. While many scientists agree that Rodinia existed, its exact form is still a 
subject of much speculation and debate.
The study of the Earth’s magnetic ﬁ eld 
in buried rocks and sediment is called 
paleomagnetism.
One rendition of Rodinia, shown as it begins to break apart.

298 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
Rodinia wouldn’t have had any life forms on it, but it is speculated that 
when it broke apart it gave rise to the earliest life on Earth. Our atmosphere 
had started to reach its fi nal form, giving it the ability to hold in the heat 
from the Sun as it does today. The shallow, warm oceans that resulted from 
Rodinia’s breakage made a great breeding ground for algae and other 
early plant life.
After Rodinia, the tectonic plates continued to move around, smashing into 
one another and forming larger continents, then breaking apart to form 
smaller ones. More supercontinents formed after Rodinia. The supercontinent 
Pangaea existed between 450 and 250 million years ago, during the time 
when insects and reptiles developed.
Pangaea.

 
E A R T H  A N D  O U T E R  S P A C E  
299
PREHISTORIC CONTINENT MAPS
In the maps in this chapter, the present-day continent names are shown. 
However, if you do any research on supercontinents, you’ll see unfamiliar 
continent names like Laurasia and Gondwana. Scientists assign these 
names when a supercontinent doesn’t correspond directly to a present-day 
continent or country. Giving names to these continents makes it easier for 
scientists to discuss and theorize about them.
Laurasia, one of Pangaea’s continents, is a single land mass that became 
North America, Europe, and Asia (minus India), while Gondwana was a 
mass with existing splits that divided into Antarctica, South America, Africa, 
Madagascar, Australia, and India. 
About 250 million years ago, Pangaea began to split into two sections, with 
one drifting north and the other south. This created one supercontinent in 
the southern hemisphere, which became Australia, South America, Africa, 
and Antarctica. From the northern portion came the continental regions of 
Asia, Europe, North America, and Central America. India was originally part 
of the southern portion, but moved north to smash into Asia to form the 
Himalayan mountain range. 

300 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
Many tectonic plates are currently drifting at a rate of a few inches a year. 
Scientists surmise that our continents will again look very diff erent in about 
50 million years. If Africa keeps drifting north at the current rate, it will collide 
with Europe and close off  the Mediterranean Sea. Australia will drift north to 
collide with Southeast Asia, and Baja California will slide up the west coast of 
North America to sit against Alaska.
FORMATION OF MODERN LANDSCAPE
When looking to illustrate or animate the variety of features of Earth’s 
landscape, it helps to know how they were formed. Many of the types of 
events that aff ected our landscape millions of years ago are still in play today, 
constantly reshaping the Earth.
Tectonic Shifts
In the 3.8 billion years since the Earth cooled down enough to form a solid 
crust, it has undergone constant upheaval and change. As the molten rock 
moves around under the crust, it causes the tectonic plates to slowly move 
with the current. Scientists label these plate shifts diff erently, depending how 
the plates move relative to one another.
• 
With a divergent plate boundary, plates are pulling away from each 
other.
• 
With a transform plate boundary, plates slide sideways against one 
another.
• 
With a convergent plate boundary, plates push directly against one 
another.
Because of the liquid nature of the mantle, these plates can shift and move 
at rates of a few inches a year. This might not seem like a lot, but when this 
movement involves huge land masses and spurting lava, the eff ects are far 
reaching. Movement of tectonic plates can change the landscape by creating 
mountains and valleys, or sudden movements can cause earthquakes, 
volcanic eruptions, and tsunamis. 
Divergent Boundary
A divergent boundary creates a large ridge that can fi ll with lava coming 
up from underneath, which quickly cools and becomes solid. Such 
boundaries are usually located under the world’s oceans, but can exist on 
land too. 
One well-known divergent boundary is the Mid-Atlantic Ridge in the 
Atlantic Ocean, which follows the line of tectonic plates.
A tsunami is a very large, high wave caused 
by a strong disturbance in the ocean, such 
as a shift of tectonic plates. Tsunami waves 
can travel over thousands of miles of ocean 
to devastate any populated land mass that 
they hit. The surge from the wave can travel 
several miles inland, destroying property 
and drowning an entire population in 
an instant.
When looking to animate a massive event 
like a tectonic plate shift, ﬁ guring out 
which type it is and how the shift’s energy 
will ﬂ ow and aﬀ ect the land around it 
will help you animate the scene more 
accurately and convincingly.

 
E A R T H  A N D  O U T E R  S P A C E  
301
Transform Boundary
A transform boundary is also called a transform fault. Such a boundary forms 
to relieve stress from tectonic plate movement. 
Where two plates slide against one another in a transform boundary, they 
will often get stuck and stress will build up. When the plates fi nally move, the 
sudden movement causes earthquakes. The San Andreas Fault in California 
is a series of transform boundaries that causes earthquakes regularly. 
Mid-Atlantic Ridge.
East African Great Rift Valley.
San Andreas Fault along the San Francisco 
peninsula.
Another divergent boundary is the East African Great Rift Valley, a series 
of rifts which run down through Ethiopia, Kenya, and Tanzania. This rift is 
expected to cause a separation of this region from the main continent in 
about 10 million years. 

302 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
Convergent Boundary
With a convergent boundary, there can be two diff erent outcomes. If one 
plate is pushed underneath another, the plate on top is forced upward 
creating mountains and the other plate is forced back down into the mantle 
to once again become molten magma. This process is known as subduction. 
Subduction can happen between two plates under the ocean fl oor, where it 
creates deep troughs and ridges. Subduction can take place where a plate 
meets a continent, and it forms mountains on the continent. The Andes, 
the longest continental mountain range in the world, was formed with this 
process.
When two plates, both with continents, collide in a convergent boundary, 
the two continent masses can both be pushed upward, fusing the two 
continents together and forming mountains on both continents. This is 
called continental collision. However, the subduction plate still continues to 
move downward after the crash, causing continued earthquakes.
India crashing into Asia after the breakup of Pangaea and forming the 
Himalayas is an example of this type of convergent boundary.
Subduction in a convergent boundary.
Satellite view of Andes mountains. Image 
courtesy of NASA.
Himalayas, with India below and China above. 
Image courtesy of NASA.
Volcanism
Not all volcanoes are caused by tectonic shifts. The Earth can form a hot spot 
where the crust is thin and the magma beneath is very hot (and thus under 
very high pressure). The crust can give way and a volcano can erupt, forming 
mountain. Such an eruption is referred to as volcanism. The Hawaiian islands 
and Iceland are examples of volcanism at work. 

 
E A R T H  A N D  O U T E R  S P A C E  
303
The largest volcanic episode occurred 250 million years ago in Asia. It is 
estimated to have lasted for a million years, creating the vast Siberian 
plains and fl ooding the region with hundreds of feet of basalt and also 
covering signifi cant portions of current-day Russia with several feet of 
molten material. It is also believed that this event extinguished about 
90% of the life on the planet at the time, making way for the rise of the 
dinosaurs. Although this event is the largest to be discovered, similar 
events are believed to occur every few million years. This process has been 
continuously changing the layers of the crust by depositing new material 
on the surface.
Bombardment
The late Heavy Bombardment Period ended long ago, but between then and 
now the Earth has been hit a number of times by asteroids, meteors, and 
comet debris. 
Even today, there are still objects speeding around our solar system that hit 
the Earth on a regular basis. Most of these relatively small objects burn up 
as they enter the atmosphere, eventually landing on the Earth as dust. But 
occasionally, the object is large enough to make it to the surface and can 
do much to alter the landscape. We fi nd meteor craters from these impacts 
throughout the world. 
The composition of the impacted material in a crater is a rich source of 
information about ancient Earth. With the relatively new ability to see Earth 
from space, scientists have been able to locate huge craters that weren’t 
detectable from the ground. These craters often bring forth new evidence 
of what happened thousands or millions of years ago to form our planet’s 
surface.
Geological digging for commercial purposes has also led to discoveries of 
ancient craters in the ocean. Before a fuel company starts the very expensive 
process of drilling deep into the Earth, it is common practice to have 
geologists take small samples and look for signs that natural fuel products 
are likely to be found deep beneath the surface. Such studies have led to 
discoveries of ancient craters, particularly in the ocean.
Erosion
Of all the forces that can aff ect our landscape, erosion is the most widespread. 
Erosion is the process of water, ice, or wind moving rock and soil from one 
area to another. Over thousands and millions of years, rivers have cut 
enormous canyons and valleys throughout the world, depositing the 
material into other areas downstream and reshaping the coastlines of 
continents. 
The wind carries dust and sand in slow-moving waves across the deserts and 
sculpts rock into amazing shapes. Ocean waves crash onto the shorelines 
and carve the land into new and interesting confi gurations.
The Pingualuit crater in northern Quebec, 
about 2 miles (3.5km) in diameter, was 
formed by a meteorite impact 1.4 million 
years ago. Image courtesy of NASA.
The Grand Canyon was carved out by the 
Colorado River over millions of years.

304 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
 Glaciers
A glacier is a large body of ice that is so heavy it can move under its own 
weight due to deformation. Glaciers can form where snow accumulates 
and doesn’t evaporate or erode away, and take up to hundreds of years 
to form. Sometimes chunks of mountains or rocks are frozen inside 
them. Eventually the glacier starts to move under its own weight in 
reaction to gravity, starting the glacier’s descent down the path of least 
resistance. 
During the numerous ice ages that have occurred over the millennia, 
mile-thick glaciers dragged pieces of mountains with them as they slowly 
marched southward from the polar north. Along the way they scarred 
the Earth, creating giant lakes and dropping boulders randomly over the 
landscape.
Earth’s Crust
With all of the tectonic, volcanic, meteoric, erosion, and oceanic activity 
affecting the Earth’s crust, it’s no wonder we have such a varied 
topography to the planet. Digging deeply into the Earth reveals it is 
made up of layer upon layer of rock. All one has to do is look at the steep 
wall of a canyon that has been dug out by a river to see this. You can 
clearly see telltale signs of a world that has been buried over and over 
with new material. 
The appearance of these rock layers varies from region to region. Where rock 
layers are slanted, we see evidence of cataclysmic prehistoric events like 
subduction due to tectonic plate shifts. 
Twelve Apostles rock formation, Australia.
Path formed from moving glacier.
White Desert, Egypt.

 
E A R T H  A N D  O U T E R  S P A C E  
305
The layers were formed and manipulated by a variety of causes; great upheavals, 
earthquakes, and volcanoes all play a part in depositing rock on the surface, 
but the most visibly active component is erosion caused by water and wind. 
WHAT’S A ROCK?
Earlier, you learned how the Earth originally formed over many millions of 
years by the compression of various materials coming in from outer space. 
This compression (and, occasionally, a release of the pressure) has continued 
throughout the ages to form many diff erent kinds of rock.
How Rock Forms
All rock is formed in one of three ways:
• 
From the cooling of magma to a solid, whether it remains under the 
Earth’s crust or comes to the surface from a volcanic eruption. Such rock is 
called igneous rock. Granite and basalt are igneous rocks. 
• 
Compression, where dust, minerals, sediment, the remains of dead 
organisms, and other particles and debris are compressed together with 
such force (by weight from water, or layers of sediment and rock above) that 
they fuse together. Such rock is called sedimentary rock because it comes 
from these deposits. Compression takes place over millions of years. An 
example of sedimentary rock is limestone, which forms on the ocean fl oor 
when the remains of coral and other organisms have been compressed.
• 
Metamorphism, where a combination of heat and compression change 
the molecular form of igneous or sedimentary rock into something 
completely diff erent. Such rock is called metamorphic. An example of a 
metamorphic rock is marble, which forms when enough heat and pressure 
are applied to the sedimentary rock limestone to cause its molecules to 
rearrange themselves into crystals. 
Igneous rock formation has been going 
on for the longest, so it’s not surprising 
that granite and basalt make up most of 
the Earth’s crust.

306 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
Feldspar. Image courtesy of 
Rob Lavinsky, iRocks.com.
Quartz.
An oxide is a compound formed with 
oxygen. While we usually think of oxygen 
as a gas, small amounts of oxygen can 
combine with solid elements to produce 
other solid elements. Rust, for example, 
is a compound formed from iron and 
oxygen.
Rock Composition
About 75% of the Earth’s crust is composed of silicon and oxygen, mostly in 
combination with other elements like aluminum, copper, and iron in the form 
of silicates and oxides. One particular silicate mineral, feldspar, is found mixed 
in with many rocks in the crust, and overall makes up over half of the crust. 
Quartz, another mineral, also makes up a large portion overall. 
On the Earth’s surface, the feldspar and quartz are constantly moving around, 
being washed away to form new sedimentary layers and rising to the top 
Crystals form in metamorphic rock 
when certain minerals are given enough 
time, heat, and pressure to rearrange 
themselves into a highly ordered structure 
like a lattice. Crystals are characterized by 
ﬂ at faces at sharp angles to one another, 
and some are transparent or translucent. 
The quartz found in granite countertops, 
for example, makes translucent specks 
that contribute to its beauty.
Igneous rock.
Sedimentary rock.
Metamorphic rock.

 
E A R T H  A N D  O U T E R  S P A C E  
307
again from tectonic movement. When igneous rocks form, there is usually a 
large quantity of feldspar and quartz mixed in with the magma. 
While there are a lot of diff erent types of rocks, most of them contain some 
quantity of feldspar, quartz, or both.
Rock Classification
Geologists have classifi ed many diff erent kinds of rock, each with its own 
story about how it formed and how it arrived where it is currently found. 
Many of them are classifi ed by the quantity of feldspar they contain, or lack 
thereof.
• 
Igneous rocks are classifi ed by the type and quantity of minerals they 
contain. Granite is a label applied to igneous rock that contains large 
portions of feldspar and quartz. 
• 
Sedimentary rocks are classifi ed by the minerals they contain. Minerals, 
in turn, are classifi ed by the elements they contain and the elements’ 
confi guration. Limestone, for example, is a sedimentary rock composed 
of two calcium-rich minerals and little to no feldspar.
• 
While some metamorphic rocks (like marble) have a specifi c composition 
and are easy to label, others are harder to classify because of the variety 
of materials they can contain. Geologists attempt to classify metamorphic 
rock by a number of properties such as color, mineral composition, 
hardness, breakage patterns, and the original sedimentary or igneous 
rock before heat and pressure were applied. 
CAUSES OF GEOLOGY
The formation of rock works hand in hand with other environmental factors 
to create our varied landscape.
Geology from Magma
All igneous rock comes from magma. The rock that forms is described as 
extrusive or intrusive. 
Extrusive rock includes two major types: a volcano itself, and the fl ow it 
produces. When a large volcano erupts, it deposits layers of material over 
large areas. Lava and rocks can be ejected from the volcano, and ash can be 
carried for hundreds of miles before falling back to the Earth. Lava can fl ow 
down the side of the mountain to change the local landscape, and can form 
islands in the ocean. 
The lava material that cools on the surface may not be pure lava—it’s often 
mixed with dust, dirt, rocks, and debris. Because of the quick cooling time, 
the rocks that form tend to have a lot of air mixed in with them, making them 
less solid than rocks formed over a long period of time. 
When magma reaches the Earth’s surface, 
it is then called lava.

308 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
The base of most of our ocean fl oors is basalt, an extrusive igneous rock. 
Basalt fl ows can also occur on the land, where layers of basalt can cool into 
hard polygonal columns with 3–12 sides.
Magma can also push up toward the crust very slowly over thousands or 
millions of years, cooling into minerals on the way up and solidifying with 
sedimentary and igneous rocks along its path. Rocks formed under the crust 
from this type of magma fl ow are called intrusive igneous rocks. Such rocks are 
typically very hard, and are often used for building and road construction. All 
our continents sit on a base made mostly of granite, an intrusive igneous rock.
As intrusive igneous rock forms, it can fuse sedimentary rock to a continent. 
We can clearly see this in the Grand Canyon, where multi-colored layers of 
sedimentary rock sit on granite layers.
Extrusive igneous rock is visible on the Earth’s surface until it’s buried by 
some other geological event. Intrusive igneous rock is visible only after being 
exposed by erosion or tectonic plate movement.
Geology from Compression
Compression of sedimentary rock can occur under the ocean, where the 
weight of the water presses down on the particles, or on land where additional 
particles settle in a thick layer on top to provide the necessary pressure down 
below. 
Polygonal basalt columns at Giant’s 
Causeway, Ireland.
Sedimentary rock is generally harder than extrusive igneous lava rock, but 
not as hard as intrusive igneous, basalts, or metamorphic rock. Such rocks 
aren’t visible on Earth’s surface until they are exposed by erosion or tectonic 
upheaval. After exposure, it’s not uncommon for sedimentary rock to be 
washed away and compressed again somewhere else.
The continental (land) crust, having had 
more time to form, is much thicker, harder 
and less prone to destruction by tectonic 
movement than the oceanic crust. The 
average age of the Earth’s continental 
crust is about 2 billion years, whereas 
the oldest oceanic crust is only about 
200 million years old.
Exposed sedimentary layers.
While all the air and water is being 
squeezed out of the particles during 
compression, minerals can get into the 
cracks and help fuse the rock together. 
This process is called cementation.

 
E A R T H  A N D  O U T E R  S P A C E  
309
Geology from Heat and Pressure
Metamorphic rock needs heat to form. This heat can come from being near 
magma, or from heavy geological friction such as tectonic plates rubbing 
together. Rocks far below the crust near the magma layer are subject to this 
heat and also great pressure from the rocks pressing down from above. 
In addition to causing crystals to form, heat and pressure can also cause any 
small quantities of minerals to create colorful veins within the rock.
Geology from Buoyancy
When a rift opens up in the crust and an area just below the crust is lighter 
than the semi-solid upper mantle below it, an entire region can be pushed 
upward by simple buoyancy. Entire continents like Australia may have been 
formed this way, by fl oating upward. Rocks in the northwestern region of 
Australia have been dated to an age of 4.3 billion years, making them the 
oldest rocks on the crust.
Geology from Weathering and Erosion
Exposure to air and water can also change the composition of rock. We 
commonly see such changes in cliff s near water, where exposure to air and 
water can turn silicate-heavy rock into clay or tinge a hillside red.
Air, water, and minerals can seep in through the Earth’s crust, and over long 
periods of time (thousands or millions or years) can break rocks apart while 
they’re still in the ground, and even change the rock’s composition. Rocky 
cliff s exposed to both air and the bashing of water can also change in this 
way, again over very long periods of time.
Wind, water, and gravity can also move rocks and sand across the Earth’s surface 
quickly and easily. Rain water pours down mountainsides and into valleys and 
eventually ends up in lakes and oceans, carrying with it softer sediments. 
Exposed metamorphic layers.
The Transantarctic mountains are believed 
to have been created by buoyancy about 60 
million years ago. Image courtesy of NASA.
When rock changes composition due to 
exposure to air and water without moving, 
the process is called weathering. If the 
rock falls down, washes away, or moves 
in any way because of air and water, 
the process is called erosion. Basically 
weathering doesn’t move rock, while 
erosion does.
Rock exposed due to erosion.

310 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
Designing a Landscape
If it weren’t for magma bubbling up above the crust, tectonic plate crashes, 
glaciers moving around, and water battering away at rocks, we would have a 
fl at, uniformly grayish-red landscape. These processes are responsible for the 
formation of vertical landscape features such as mountains, gorges, and 
everything in between. 
A landscape’s long history determines its appearance. When designing 
a landscape for art or animation, answering these questions will help you 
determine how it should look. 
• 
Was the land at the bottom of a body of water at one time?
• 
After that, was the land part of a tectonic upheaval that brought it to the 
surface?
• 
After that, has the land been exposed to water, allowing it to erode and 
expose the layers?
If the answer to all these questions is Yes, then you have a strong candidate for 
a landscape that varies in height with a variety of layers, colors, and shapes.
USUAL ROCK COLORS
The colors of our landscape fall within a small range between red and black. 
Let’s take a look at where these colors come from.
Our continents are based on granite, a rough, gray igneous rock, with only 
slight color variations due to small quantities of minerals. Our ocean fl oors 
are based on basalt, which is a smooth, gray igneous rock. On top of these 
bases are layers of sedimentary rock.
Sedimentary rock that was originally deposited on land usually has a reddish-
brown (rust) color due to reactions between iron and oxygen during rock 
formation or erosion. Sedimentary rock formed under the ocean, where 
oxygen isn’t plentiful enough to turn sediment to rust, includes a large 
amount of decayed sea life which is black, gray, or white. While layers of 
exposed sedimentary rock can have distinctly diff erent colors, all these colors 
fall into the black-gray-brown-red color group, with the occasional white 
where calcium-rich remains of sea life have compressed without impurities. 
Because heat and pressure can produce colorful veins and crystals, 
metamorphic rock might seem like a great candidate for multi-colored rock. 
However, when exposed, metamorphic rock is subject to the same eff ects of 
erosion as any other rock. Marble, for example, forms deep in the earth as white 
with colored veins. Marble is usually mined or quarried while still in the earth, 
then covered in a protective coating before being used as building material. 
If marble makes it to the surface through tectonic lift, it’s not long before iron 
in the air and water start to make a mess of it and it’s not so pretty any more.
Granite can also be tinged with pink, blue, 
or green due to high content of speciﬁ c 
minerals that impart these colors, but the 
tint is very slight. The most common tint is 
pale pink from feldspar.
Weathered marble.

 
E A R T H  A N D  O U T E R  S P A C E  
311
UNUSUAL ROCK COLORS
In rock above ground (eroded rock), colors outside the usual group are found 
only in very small quantities. Blue, green, and yellow mineral veins can form 
in marble, quartz can crystallize with a purple color to make amethyst, and 
even feldspar can occasionally be green. However, we see these colors mostly 
on rocks that are still in the ground, by mining and quarrying, and even then 
we can only see the colors when we look close up. From a distance, it’s all 
gray, brown, red, and white.
So why don’t we see thick layers of bright green, blue, or purple above the 
ground? You might think that colorful crystals would form and make their 
own layer. However, formation of crystals, in the larger scheme of things, is 
rare compared to formation of granite, basalt, and other gray rocks. While 
large veins of gemstones are occasionally found in the ground, the chance 
of a crystal-heavy layer getting heaved up and exposed by erosion is low. 
In addition, rocks exposed to air and water through erosion tend to take 
on a reddish hue—if the rock contains a quantity of iron, or if rain or water 
splashing against it contains iron, the iron reacts with oxygen and over time 
turns the color to rust or brown.
We sometimes see unusually bright red, orange, and white layers after 
erosion, particularly when the layers are formed from finer sediments 
like sandstone and chalk. Such sediments create smooth land forms that 
reflect color more than rough surfaces. The colors of these land forms 
aren’t any different than the colors found in other types of rock—they 
appear bright to us simply because of their smooth surfaces, which reflect 
more light.
One of the most striking examples is the Danxia Landform in China. 
Eighty million years ago, sand and iron washed down into lakes and rivers, 
then the land was heaved up as the Himalayan mountains shifted. Erosion 
has since exposed distinct layers of red, white, and orange sandstone. At 
sunrise and sunset, the rock’s iron content coupled with its smooth sandstone 
surface make the red and orange colors appear very bright.
You can also find pure white cliffs and hills formed in this way. If decayed 
sea life in a sedimentary layer consists mostly of shells or other calcium-
rich remains, a white layer can form. The White Cliffs of Dover in Great 
Britain were formed with this process. The shells of small organisms fell to 
the floor of the ocean, where they were compressed into chalk. The land 
then rose to form continental Europe and the United Kingdom, which 
were all one land mass at the time. When the English Channel formed 
from a flood less than 100,000 years ago, the relatively smooth white 
cliffs were eroded and exposed. The chalk contains little or no iron, so 
the cliffs are able to retain their white color even though they’re exposed 
to air.
Danxia Landform.
The White Cliffs of Dover.

312 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
Life on Earth
Although simple singular cellular life forms have existed on Earth as long as 
3.6 billion years, advanced multicellular life only began to appear from about 
1 billion years ago, and all of it was located in the ocean. As no ozone layer 
existed in the atmosphere at the time, the Sun’s radiation made it impossible 
for life to exist on land. 
Early in the formation of life on Earth, it is thought that the entire top of the 
ocean’s surface was covered in an extremely thick layer of algae. As the algae 
died it sank to the bottom of the ocean as new algae grew on top. This went 
on for nearly 2.8 billion years and created a sedimentary rock layer of vast 
carbon deposits deep in the earth, which would eventually be compressed 
into some of the modern Earth’s oil and coal. 
The air at the time had a heavy concentration of carbon dioxide (CO2), great 
for plants but not conducive to the development of animal life. The algae 
converted the carbon dioxide to oxygen and made the air more oxygen rich 
over time, which was unfortunate for the algae—the low carbon dioxide 
content eventually killed it off . 
After this age of great algae beds ended, the higher oxygen content in the air 
and oceans allowed many new life forms to evolve. One billion years ago, vast 
coral reefs, shellfi sh, crustaceans, and new oceanic plants began to appear. 
As these creatures died, they left their mark on the Earth in a thick layer of 
calcium made by their shells as they sank to the bottom of the oceans. Under 
the extreme pressure of the Earth’s oceans, these shells were transformed 
into the thick limestone layers that were later heaved up during tectonic 
events, and which we now fi nd on the Earth’s surface worldwide. 
As the atmosphere gradually increased in oxygen and decreased in CO2 and 
temperature, some of the plants and animals left the seas for land. This gave 
rise to most all of the plants and animals we see today, after millions of years 
of evolution and extinction have changed them in a variety of ways. 
This many years ago. . .
. . . these life forms appeared
3.6 billion years 
Single-cell organisms in ocean
1 billion years
Multicellular life in water
475 million years 
Plants 
400 million years
Insects
360 million years 
Amphibians
300 million years 
Reptiles
250 million years 
Dinosaurs
200 million years 
Mammals
150 million years 
Modern birds
130 million years 
Flowers
60 million years 
Primates
20 million years 
Human ancestors
Coral reef.

 
E A R T H  A N D  O U T E R  S P A C E  
313
FOSSILS
Among the upper layers of rock, we fi nd signs of very ancient life in the form 
of fossils. A fossil is evidence of a living thing preserved in rock, either an 
impression or the actual remains of the plant, animal, or organism itself. 
Both dinosaur bones themselves and the impression made by long-decayed 
dinosaur bones in rock, can be considered fossils.
Due to the great upheavals caused by plate subduction and continent 
collision, we can fi nd early shellfi sh fossils in limestone 10,000 feet above 
sea level in many of the mountain ranges around the world. So much has 
the Earth’s surface changed that many of its mountaintops, great plains, and 
valleys were once at the bottom of an ocean. 
Conversely, areas that were once the top of the world are now many hundreds 
of miles below ground, being turned to molten rock again, perhaps to make 
an appearance on the surface millions of years from now.
METEORITES AND LIFE ON EARTH
Meteorites (giant rocks from space) have played a vital role in the development 
of life on Earth. One theory holds that amino acids brought to Earth by 
meteorite impacts combined to form proteins which in turn became the fi rst 
single-cell organisms within our oceans and lakes.
Fossils that are subject to a great deal 
of heat and pressure in the Earth’s crust 
over hundreds of millions of years are 
sometimes converted to fossil fuels like 
oil, coal, and natural gas. Fuel companies 
digging or drilling deep below the crust 
are looking for big deposits of these fuels.
Bubble algae, a single-cell organism that still 
grows in the tropics, are typically 1–4cm in 
diameter.
A single-cell organism, also called a 
unicellular organism, is one whose entire 
“body” is one big cell. Single-cell organisms 
still exist today, and can be up to a couple 
of inches in diameter with resilient cell 
exteriors. Bubble algae and paramecia are 
two examples of such organisms.
A small gang of paramecia, a common single-cell 
organism often used for biological studies. Para-
mecia are typically 0.05–0.3mm long.
Some meteorite impacts have been large enough to cause dust and debris to 
be thrown around the entire planet, covering its surface with a thin layer of 
dust and blocking sunlight from getting through the atmosphere for months 
to years. 
One asteroid in particular had a strong impact on life as we know it: the 
Chicxulub Asteroid, which landed 65 million years ago in the area that is now 

314 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
Mexico. The six-mile-wide asteroid landed with such force that it created a 
crater over a hundred miles wide and gave off  2 million times more energy 
than the most powerful man-made explosive, generating enough heat to 
start spontaneous fi res. The impact triggered earthquakes and tsunamis, and 
the resulting debris in the air blocked the Sun and cooled the Earth, aff ecting 
animal and plant life worldwide. 
The Chicxulub Asteroid is believed to be responsible for the extinction of 
dinosaurs. More than 70% of all species were wiped out—the only dinosaurs 
left were the avian (fl ying) kind, which evolved into birds. The extinction 
of land-based dinosaurs allowed for the rise of mammals including human 
beings, so it’s not a stretch to say that if it weren’t for that asteroid we wouldn’t 
be around today. As soon as we’d evolved, the dinosaurs would have had us 
for lunch.
EVOLUTION AND DIVERSITY
During the time of Pangaea (450–250 million years ago) temperatures on 
Earth were similar to the levels we see today, and it was easy for plant and 
animal life to move from one region to another. While movement was limited 
by climate and weather conditions—inland areas were dry and far north/
south areas were cold—in general, all of Pangaea housed the same species of 
plants and animals.
After the continents split, the plant and animal life on each continent 
continued to evolve (and sometimes go extinct) on separate genetic lines, 
giving us the variations we fi nd today. However, our continents were never as 
separate as they might seem. North America and Asia have been connected 
at various times throughout the millennia by a land bridge between Siberia 
and Alaska, thus connecting all the large continents. This means over the last 
several million years, animal and plant life has continued to move back and 
forth between the continents. 
The terms meteorite and asteroid both 
describe the same type of object—a 
giant rock from space—but scientists 
generally use the term asteroid for a rock 
that hasn’t gone through our atmosphere, 
and meteorite for a rock that’s made it 
through our atmosphere to Earth. There 
are additional breakdowns of ﬂ ying 
space rock into diﬀ erent categories (such 
as comet, meteor, and meteoroid) and 
more technical distinctions which we 
won’t get into here, but in general you 
can use the terms meteorite and asteroid 
interchangeably as long as everyone 
in the conversation knows what you’re 
talking about.

 
E A R T H  A N D  O U T E R  S P A C E  
315
Descendants of the fi rst cats, for example, are found on every continent 
with a moderate climate. Early cat ancestors are believed to have evolved 
in Asia then spread all over Europe and Africa, and then crossed over from 
Siberia to Alaska about 18 million years ago to spread out into North America. 
After that, they evolved into species that diff er on each continent—cougars 
evolved only in North America, while leopards evolved only in Asia and Africa. 
Satellite image of the Bering Strait, which lies between Siberia (left) 
and Alaska (right). Today, only 82km (about 50 miles) separates them. 
This makes it highly likely that the two were once connected by a land 
bridge, which scientists call Beringia. Image courtesy of NASA.
Cougars (left) evolved with large, strong hind legs for quick sprints, 
and though cougar cubs have spots, they lose them when they reach 
 adulthood. Leopards (right) keep their spots into adulthood, and evolved 
with a large skull and strong jaws for catching and dragging prey.
Conversely, land masses that split off  permanently many millions of years ago 
show a dramatic diff erence in wildlife and plants when compared with the 
major continents. 

316 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
The island of Madagascar split off  from Gondwana about 90 million years 
ago. This long separation gave the plants and animals on Madagascar time 
to evolve without input from the rest of the continents; more than 80% of 
Madagascar’s wildlife is unique to the island. Australia has been separated 
from larger continents for around the same length of time, and it too boasts 
over 80% of wildlife unique to the continent.
Outer Space
The fi rst thing to know about outer space is that no one really knows for sure 
what’s going on out there. What information we have has been gathered 
from telescopes, probes, shuttles, satellites, sensors here on Earth, and a few 
quick jaunts to the Moon. Most of what we’ve actually observed has taken 
place light years away, and has been over and done with for thousands of 
years before we even see it.
Lemurs evolved only in Madagascar.
Kangaroos evolved only in Australia.
A light year is the distance a ray of light 
travels in a year, about 6 trillion miles 
or 10 trillion km. This term is used in 
astronomy to describe long distances. It is 
also the origin of Buzz’s last name in the 
animated ﬁ lm Toy Story. 
The Pleiades star cluster, also known as the Seven Sisters or 
M45. Image courtesy of NASA.

 
E A R T H  A N D  O U T E R  S P A C E  
317
ORIGIN OF THE UNIVERSE
The currently prevailing idea about the origin of the universe is the Big Bang 
theory. This theory surmises that more than 13 billion years ago, there was a 
very dense, hot point at the center of the universe that contained all matter 
and energy. This expanded, then eventually cooled to form gases, stars, and 
solid matter like planets. 
This giant explosion is believed to have been initially composed of protons and 
neutrons. As these particles collided, they were fused together and formed 
hydrogen and helium atoms along with vast amounts of nuclear fusion energy. 
The very early universe was composed almost entirely of hydrogen and helium.
The Big Bang theory comes from the observation that the universe appears 
to be expanding. Astronomers have been able to measure the velocities of 
galaxies, and they fi nd that they’re moving apart. This led to the idea that pieces 
of the universe are still moving outward from the initial thrust of the Big Bang.
The Big Bang. Image courtesy of NASA.
The very fast expansion in space right 
after the Big Bang is called inﬂ ation.
ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES IN SPACE
Here on Earth, we live in a protected bubble where our atmosphere protects 
us from many of the dangers of outer space. One of these hazards is high-
frequency electromagnetic waves emitted by stars and other outer space 
sources. Most of these waves can’t make it through our atmosphere, but any 
space travel has to take into account the space capsule’s or astronaut’s 
exposure to such waves. At the same time, astronomers fi nd such waves 
useful for detecting outer space activity that can’t be seen by other means.
continued on the next page

318 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
Scientists give electromagnetic waves diff erent names to make it easier to 
discuss them. The main diff erence between these waves is their wavelengths. 
For example, gamma rays and X-rays are the names given to high-energy, 
high-frequency electromagnetic waves with short wavelengths, with gamma 
rays having the shortest wavelengths. 
Range (spectrum) of electromagnetic waves in our universe. Image courtesy of NASA.
In outer space there are plenty of X-rays and gamma rays due to star activity, 
but fortunately our atmosphere blocks them from reaching us. Here on Earth, 
we can generate these tiny-wavelength rays with medical equipment to get 
inside the human body without having to cut the skin. These waves can be 
used to produce imagery of our insides (as with an X-ray machine), or as a 
treatment to weaken cancer cells.
STARS
Trillions upon trillions of stars have been created in the universe over time 
and many more have yet to be born. Stars go through a life cycle with 
diff erent characteristics at each point along the way. The stars we see in the 
sky are in various stages of their lives. 
All matter in the universe possesses some gravitational attraction. A star 
begins its life when a cloud of gas and dust develops enough gravitational 
attraction to collapse in on itself. As the matter gets pulled together the gravity 
increases, and eventually these pockets of extremely dense gas form a nebula. 

 
E A R T H  A N D  O U T E R  S P A C E  
319
Protostars in the Elephant’s Trunk Nebula indicated with dotted circles. 
Image courtesy of NASA.
As these nebula regions compress further with the intensifi ed gravity over 
millions of years, the hydrogen and helium gas becomes denser and forms 
a very large object known as a protostar. Over time, these dense regions 
become quite large and generate enough gravity to fuse the helium and 
hydrogen atoms together, creating some of the heavier elements and 
enormous amounts of fusion energy that ignites the mass. Thus a star is born. 
The life cycle of stars. Image courtesy of NASA.

320 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
A high-mass star (over 8 times more massive than the Sun) can go 
beyond the production of helium to set off a chain reaction of nuclear 
fusion. If you condense helium with another hydrogen atom, you get 
lithium, which has three protons and three electrons. As you keep 
adding protons, eventually you end up with silicon, nitrogen, iron, and 
various heavier-than-helium elements familiar to us here on Earth. This 
reaction doesn’t happen spontaneously under normal Earth pressure 
and temperature, which is why the carbon in your pencil doesn’t turn 
into iron on its own. But with high temperatures and great forces (like 
those found at the center of a large star), elements can combine to form 
new elements. 
At some point many millions of years later the star runs out of hydrogen 
and helium at its core, essentially running out of fuel for its fusion. As the 
nuclear fusion energy subsides, the core collapses, causing the outer region 
to cool down and expand. Eventually the core collapses in on itself, releasing 
all of the energy at once. If the star is big enough, this explosion will be 
a supernova, emitting more light and energy than all the stars in a single 
galaxy. Sometimes the cores expel heavier elements like magnesium and 
gold with this explosion, sending “star dust” throughout the galaxy 
and universe. 
After the explosion, the star takes on one of three possible forms, depending 
on how big the star was when it was formed. A small star will become a 
dwarf star until it exhausts the remainder of its fuel for nuclear fusion. When 
light stops being produced, the star becomes known as a black dwarf. Large 
stars become neutron stars which emit little light due to extreme gravity. 
Supergiant stars collapse into black holes.
The larger stars often leave enough material behind to form a new nebula, 
which will eventually give birth to additional new stars. 
GALAXIES
A galaxy is a massive grouping of stars held together by gravity. The stars, 
although quite distant from each other, possess enough gravity to pull 
themselves together into extremely large clusters. Galaxies are fi lled with 
stars of various sizes and ages at diff erent points of their life cycles. On the 
scale of size, our sun is a relatively small star.
Our solar system is part of the spiral-shaped Milky Way galaxy, which has a 
diameter of about 100,000 light years. You can actually see part of the Milky 
Way on clear nights when no moonlight or man-made light is present. We 
can’t get an accurate picture of the Milky Way from space because we haven’t 
yet developed a camera that can get far away enough to take a picture, but 
from what we see of other galaxies and the stars around us, we can make a 
pretty good guess.
Our planet is largely composed of star 
dust, and this is the reason we have many 
of these heavier elements on our planet 
at all.
Our sun was born more than 4.55 billion 
years ago, and has about 4–5 billion years 
left before it collapses and becomes a 
dwarf.
According to NASA, there are at least 100 
billion galaxies in the universe.

 
E A R T H  A N D  O U T E R  S P A C E  
321
Our nearest neighbor, the Andromeda galaxy, is 2.5 million light years away. 
Some would argue that the Canis Major Dwarf galaxy is the closest to us at 
a mere 25,000 light years away, while others say Canis is actually part of the 
Milky Way so it doesn’t count. But until the Galactic Empire comes along and 
draws up a zoning map, it’s all up for debate.
Properties of Galaxies
A galaxy usually forms a discernible ellipse or spiral pattern that spins around a 
center. The galaxies are believed to be condensing into their own centers, which 
contain a huge mass with enormous gravity, called a black hole. Such a center 
has enough gravitational pull that even light cannot escape its grasp. The gravity 
of galaxies also draws them toward each other to collide and join together.
Artist’s rendering of the Milky Way.
The Milky Way over Mount Cook National Park, 
New Zealand.
Artist’s concept of the black hole at the center of the Milky Way with a mass of 
about four million times that of our sun and occupying the innermost 15 light 
years of our galaxy. Hot gas around the black hole is believed to be falling toward 
it. Image courtesy of NASA.

322 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
NEBULAS
When a star reaches the end of its life, it expands and sometimes explodes, 
releasing an enormous cloud of gas and dust. These clouds, called nebulas, 
can contain a variety of elements. Light from stars refl ects off  the elements in 
a variety of wavelengths. When images of nebulas are represented with 
varying colors for diff erent wavelengths, the imagery shows us some of the 
most beautiful forms in space.
Hubble’s “tuning fork” model for galaxy classiﬁ cation. Our Milky Way is an SBb 
galaxy. Image courtesy of NASA.
Astronomer Edwin Hubble played a crucial role in establishing the fi eld of 
astronomy that studies objects outside the Milky Way. One of Hubble’s many 
contributions to the fi eld was the Hubble Sequence, a method of classifying 
galaxies by shape.
Eagle Nebula. Image courtesy of NASA.
THE COLORS OF SPACE
When looking for reference images for outer space animation, keep in mind 
that most of what you’ll fi nd is not photographs showing how galaxies, stars, 
and nebulas look to the naked eye, but renderings with various color 
assignments based on scientifi c data. Much of the light emitted in space 
doesn’t fall into our visible spectrum, and what light we can see often just 
looks like a big white blur to our limited vision. 

 
E A R T H  A N D  O U T E R  S P A C E  
323
The Hubble Telescope, Spitzer Space Telescope, and Chandra X-Ray 
Observatory are three major sources of information about outer space, and 
much of the data they give us is not visible to the human eye. This information 
is often combined to make colorful imagery that not only gives scientists a 
fuller view, but also captures the imagination.
One example is the Small Magellanic Cloud (SMC), a neighbor to our Milky 
Way galaxy that is so bright that navigators like Magellan used it to fi nd their 
way across the oceans. A typical representation of this cloud shows X-ray data 
from Chandra as purple, visible light from the Hubble Space Telescope in red, 
green, and blue, and infrared data from the Spitzer Space Telescope as red. 
Such a depiction gives us a fuller vision of the cloud and all its components.
Even if a heavenly body emits visible light, imagery is altered to make it easier 
to study (or just to make it prettier). A familiar example is the Pillars of 
Creation formation in the Eagle Nebula, a breathtaking formation of gas 
clouds in our galaxy. Much of the light it emits is red, but from distinctly 
diff erent sources. The classic image depicts red light from hydrogen atoms as 
green, red light from sulfur ions (sulfur atoms with one electron removed) 
as red, and green light from doubly ionized oxygen (oxygen atoms with two 
electrons missing) as blue. This depiction is similar to what was used in the 
striking outer space scene that opens the fi lm Contact.
Small Magellanic Cloud with colors assigned to various light wavelengths.
continued on the next page

324 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
Image with stair-step shape from Hubble Telescope (left), produced from 
four quadrant images, one of which is recorded as magniﬁ ed (right).
Some images from the Hubble Telescope are cropped with a stair-step pattern 
due to the instruments used to gather information. Some instruments have 
four cameras, each of which takes a photo of a quadrant of a larger picture. 
The camera for the upper right quadrant records a magnifi ed view, which is 
shrunk down to make the full picture.

 
E A R T H  A N D  O U T E R  S P A C E  
325
The word vacuum comes from the Latin 
word for vacant. We are accustomed to 
thinking about a vacuum as something 
that sucks air, but a vacuum cleaner only 
works in this way because of air pressure. 
A true, complete vacuum has zero air 
pressure.
The world’s largest vacuum chamber at the NASA facility in Sandusky, Ohio 
measures 100ft in diameter and is 122ft tall.
THE VACUUM OF OUTER SPACE
Outer space has no air. We have air because of the atmosphere around our 
planet. As soon as you get outside the atmosphere, there is no air any 
more. 
A space with nothing in it is called a vacuum. Outer space is a vacuum with 
a few things fl oating around in it, like stars and gases and rocks. Planet 
Earth is just another rock fl oating around in the vacuum, and the air in our 
atmosphere is just another gas occupying some of that vacuum.
It is possible to simulate outer space conditions by creating a vacuum on 
Earth. Scientists often perform experiments in a vacuum chamber, a big 
container from which all the air has been sucked out. The air pressure inside 
the container is nearly zero, and the normal air pressure outside the container 
is much greater, so the container has to be strong. It also requires camera 
equipment to view what’s going on inside, and a way to put things inside it 
to see how they react.
A vacuum chamber is necessary for testing equipment that will go into 
outer space, such as satellites and shuttle parts and even astronauts in 
space suits. 
DEATH BY OUTER SPACE
After several vicious minutes of hand-to-hand combat aboard the spaceship, 
the hero shoves the villain out of the airlock into the cold vacuum of space, 
where he immediately explodes. Hurrah! Justice!
It’s true that our skin and organs are accustomed to getting oxygen 
and experiencing air pressure, which is why astronauts need space suits 
when they enter outer space. But what really happens if you go out there 
unprotected? Deaths in outer space have been depicted in fi lms in a 
number of ways, some based on reality and some played out in unrealistic 
yet dramatic ways. 
continued on the next page

326 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
Astronauts wear pressurized suits to keep 
air pressure at normal levels around the 
body. Pressurized gloves are designed for 
maximum mobility while still maintaining 
pressure. Image courtesy of NASA.
Actually, you would pass out in less than a minute, and your heart would stop 
due to oxygen deprivation within 10 minutes. Within that time, lack of air 
pressure would cause your eardrums to burst and your soft tissues to bruise. 
You might also experience a fast, severe sunburn from starlight or cosmic rays. 
Then a lot of other bad stuff  would happen too, but it would take some time.
Because there’s nothing to pass your body’s heat to in a vacuum, you’d keep 
your usual temperature for some time, until perhaps some gases passed by to 
soak it up. As your body loses its internal pressure, your saliva, tears, and blood 
would eventually boil (turn to gas), but not from heat. Recall that liquids boil at 
lower temperatures when air pressure is lower, so lowering pressure is just as 
eff ective as heat for making something boil. For both blood and water, a normal 
body temperature is high enough for boiling when air pressure is very low. We 
are accustomed to thinking of boiling being caused by heat, but in this case 
your body would be at a normal temperature or even a little cooler than usual.
The vapor from the boiled blood (which, of course, would try to expand) 
would cause your skin to bloat. However, on the odd occasion that this has 
happened to a live person, the skin returned to normal when air pressure 
was restored, and there was no long-term damage. In outer space your body 
would eventually cool and your skin would return to its original shape.
So a sunburn, bruising and temporary bloating, then some freezing over 
time. Not very dramatic. The NASA space program has had a few non-
lethal mishaps that confi rm these eff ects. The only death by outer space 
depressurization occurred in 1971 when the three cosmonauts of the Soyuz 
11 died quietly in a leaky capsule during re-entry. When the capsule landed, 
they were discovered to have suff ered bleeding ears and noses and a few 
bruises. Strangely, none of them had exploded. 
In fact, there is no evidence that exposure to outer space causes a human body 
to explode, vomit organs, pop its eyeballs, immediately freeze or boil, or do any 
number of dramatic things sometimes depicted in the movies. But because 
we’ll never see or experience it fi rsthand, and because we love to see the enemy 
blow up at the end of the movie, we’re happy to temporarily forget these facts 
and enjoy a fi lmmaker’s imaginative rendition of Death by Outer Space.
“Open the airlock . . . please . . . aggghhhhhhh . . .”

 
E A R T H  A N D  O U T E R  S P A C E  
327
Temperature in a Vacuum
A vacuum itself does not actually have a temperature. Our air has a temperature, 
which is the temperature of the gas molecules themselves. When scientists talk 
about the temperature in outer space, they are actually talking about the 
temperature of the radiation in the vacuum of outer space, which is quite cold: 
about 3K (−270°C/−454°F).
An object fl oating in space will actually retain its temperature for a long time. 
An object cools off  by transferring its heat to something else (like air) or by 
emitting infrared radiation (as seen with night goggles). In space, heat can’t 
be transferred to a vacuum because the vacuum won’t conduct it. Unless 
there’s something touching the object that will accept the heat, like gases or 
another object, no heat transfer will occur. 
On the other hand, if the object is receiving direct light from a nearby star or 
radiation from any number of sources, it could become very hot very quickly. 
All these circumstances aff ect the temperature of the object in the vacuum, 
not the vacuum itself.
Sound in a Vacuum
Recall that sound is a longitudinal wave through air, meaning the air itself 
doesn’t travel from point A to point B. Instead, the sound wave pushes air, 
which vibrates our eardrums. Sound is defi ned as vibrations against your 
eardrum or a microphone or something that can grab the pressure wave and 
make some sense out of it. If there’s no eardrum or microphone to interpret 
the pressure wave, there is no sound.
Because there’s no air in space, there’s no sound in space, at least not in 
the way we’re accustomed to perceiving it. An exploding star creates a 
shockwave and push gases around in the same way sound waves push air 
around on Earth, and if you position yourself inside such a gas cloud you 
would defi nitely hear something (at least until your eardrums blow out). But 
if you clap your hands while fl oating around in open space, there’s no air or 
gas to carry the sound anywhere, so there’s no sound.  
Suppose you’re watching a space battle from a distance. Maybe you’re in your 
own fi ghter spacecraft, or you’re watching from the safety of a nearby space 
station. You see the bad guy’s spaceship explode, and everybody cheers. 
Would you actually hear the explosion? If the gases pushed outward from 
such an explosion reach your spacecraft or the space station, there would 
be a pressure wave through this gas, and an opportunity to “hear” the 
explosion. But how would the wave actually get to your ears? The only way 
it could reach you is by vibrating your spacecraft or space station, which 
would create another pressure wave inside the vehicle, which you would 
hear as sound.
SPACE BATTLE SOUND EFFECTS
continued on the next page

328 
V I S U A L  E F F E C T S
The chances of this pressure wave being just large enough to rock your space 
station but small enough to not destroy it are pretty slim. If the explosion 
produced no gases, there would be no pressure wave at all and you’d hear 
nothing. The pieces of the broken spaceship might drift over and hit your 
craft, but the chances of that happening are also low.
So technically, an explosion in space would make a sound, but the chances 
of hearing it without dying are next to zero. But when a spaceship explodes 
in a movie, we expect a bright orange fi reball and a loud noise, so that’s what 
fi lmmakers provide. 
You might have heard of health products 
that neutralize free radicals in your body, 
thus keeping them from altering your 
body’s chemistry in a way that will cause 
tissue damage.
Sunburn is a mild form of radiation burn.
RADIATION
Radiation is the emission of energy as electromagnetic waves or as moving 
subatomic particles. Electromagnetic waves with lower frequencies, such as radio 
waves, are not physically dangerous. But at higher frequencies, electromagnetic 
waves can be extremely dangerous to the human body and other physical objects. 
Radiation as high-frequency electromagnetic waves can be emitted by nuclear 
bombs, or can be found in outer space as X-rays and gamma rays.
One of the things that makes these high-energy particles and electromagnetic 
waves so dangerous is that they don’t need a medium to travel in, and 
ordinary barriers like walls do not stop them. They can travel through a 
vacuum, through air, and through rocks and other solid objects. Fortunately 
Earth’s magnetic fi eld and thick atmosphere protect us from most of the 
harmful radiation found in outer space.
Radiation falls into two categories: ionizing and non-ionizing. Ionizing 
radiation is the most dangerous kind. It has enough energy in it to dislodge 
electrons and leave behind free electrons (called free radicals) that attach to 
chemicals and alter them signifi cantly. X-rays commonly used for medical 
visualization are a type of ionizing radiation. A small amount over a short 
time is not harmful, but over a longer time can cause cancer or birth defects.
Non-ionizing radiation isn’t as dangerous, but can still wreak havoc on 
objects or bodies. Such radiation isn’t strong enough to dislodge electrons 
but can still change chemical bonds, causing visible eff ects similar to 
strong heat. For example, ultraviolet rays from the Sun cause non-ionizing 
radiation, which can cause sunburn after minutes of exposure.
Outer space has a lot of radiation in it. A few types are:
• 
Solar wind—A stream of energized, charged particles coming steadily off  
the Sun.
• 
Cosmic rays—Extremely high-energy radiation, thought to originate 
mostly from supernovas outside our solar system.
• 
Cosmic microwave background (CMB)—Radiation left over from the Big 
Bang, which is still bouncing around the universe. CMB is considered the 
“white noise” of outer space.

 
E A R T H  A N D  O U T E R  S P A C E  
329
RADIATION MAKES THINGS GLOW, RIGHT?
Representing radiation in animation and other visual fi elds is tricky because 
you can’t see it. You can, however, see its eff ects on the objects in your scenes. 
The most visible eff ects of radiation are charring or sunburn, or long-term 
eff ects like birth defects. But these results are ugly and no fun at all. It’s much 
more visually pleasing to make an object glow.
Radiation does not actually make an object glow, but artists often represent 
radiation that way. This is probably due to confusion about the diff erence 
between radioactivity and radiation, or between radiation and phosphorescence, 
which makes glow-in-the-dark paint glow.
A radioactive object or substance is one that spontaneously emits radiation 
due to nuclear decay. It is just one of many sources of radiation in the universe, 
and not a very common one.
Radium, a highly radioactive element, can cause elements around it to 
glow. Radium used to be painted onto household items like glow-in-the-
dark alarm clocks until the 1960s, when it became apparent that accidental 
ingestion caused cancer. While very few people were actually aff ected by the 
radium, the fact that its radioactive infl uence is invisible and slow moving 
fed into newly bred fears of radiation from nuclear bombs, which was also 
known to cause cancer and other horrible eff ects. To reinforce the notion that 
glowing stuff  was dangerous, nuclear bombs make a big, bright light when 
they go off . In the public’s mind, radiation means glowing, a big bright light, 
and cancer.
To further support this idea in the public’s mind, we all know that stars 
(including the Sun) glow. In recent years there have been many campaigns 
to educate the public about the dangers of long exposure to ultraviolet (UV) 
light from the Sun, which is a form of radiation that causes sunburn and 
skin cancer. Again, in the public’s mind, a glowing Sun equals radiation and 
danger.
Plus, we all know that glowing things are hazardous. Fire, a hot stove, a 
jellyfi sh, and electrical sparks glow for reasons other than radiation, but they 
can all hurt you. Therefore, glowing means danger, right?
Because there’s really no pretty way to show radiation visually, there’s 
nothing wrong with using a glow, as long as you know you’re doing it for 
artistic reasons and not scientifi c accuracy.
Glow-in-the-dark clock numbers used to be 
painted with radium.
In the Fallout video game series, characters 
exposed to high radiation tend to glow. 
Image courtesy of Bethesda Softworks.

This page intentionally left blank

Index
 acceleration 47; constant force and 
50; expression of 62; gravitational 
56, 62–3; jump magnifi cation and 
193–5; motion graph of 55–6; Odd 
Rule for 50, 52–3; timing for 48–50 
 accretion rings 255 
 action: overlapping 219–22; path of 
17–18 
 action/reaction 98–101; and 
balanced forces 98; and changing 
momentum 213–14; and fi xed 
objects 100–1; Newton’s Third Law 
for 98; with two mobile objects 
98–9; and weight 99–100 
 addition of waves 41–2 
 adhesion 268–9 
 aerodynamic lift 86 
 air, shockwaves through 261 
 air pressure 84–7 
 air resistance 85–6 
 algae 312, 313 
 Allen, Tim 2 
 allometry 165 
 alto clouds 228 
 ambient color 141 
 amplitude 37–8, 278–9 
 analog photography 154 
 Andes mountains 302 
 Andromeda galaxy 321 
 angle of incidence 117 
 angle of refl ection 117 
 animal characteristics 172–5 
 animal joints 178 
 anisotropy 141 
 apex of motion 64 
 arc(s) 19; parabolic 68 
 area 166 
 ascending against gravity 68–9 
 asteroids 303, 314; and life on Earth 
313–14 
 asthenosphere 292 
 astronauts 325–6 
 atmosphere 291, 292, 293–5; heated 
air in 80–2; height of vehicles in 
295; layers of 293, 294, 295 
 atmospheric pressure 84–7 
 atom(s) 9–11; and binding 11–13; 
electrical charge of 102, 103 
 atomic fusion 13 
 attenuation of light 121–2, 142 
 Australia 316 
 axis(es) 23; of rotation 88, 89; and 
rotational inertia 23–4 
 babyness 164, 173–5 
 backlit clouds 230 
 balance(s): in character design 
183–7; improving 185–7; with 
multiple characters 206; stable and 
unstable 70 
 balanced forces, action/reaction and 98 
 balanced objects 72 
 ball and socket joints 176–7 
 basalt 308 
 base distance 51 
 base of support 71–2 
 Beaufort Scale 283–4 
 Bering Strait 315 
 Beringia 315 
 biceps muscle 179 
 Big Bang theory 317 
 The Big Easy (fi lm) 113 
 binding, atoms and 11–13 
 black dwarf 320 
 black holes 319, 320, 321 
 blast front 261 
 boat, center of buoyancy of 275–6 
 body weight: in character design 
167–9; shifting of 209 
 bombardment 303 
 bone structure 176 
 Boyle’s Law 79 
 breakage 261–5; anatomy of 262; 
animation of 264–5; crack patterns 
in 262–4; fl ying pieces from 265 
 Breaking Bad (TV series) 112–13 
 breaking waves 281–3 
 bubble algae 313 
 bullet, momentum from 213–14 
 buoyancy 275–6; geology from 309 
 burning 154 
 calf muscle 180 
 cameras, gamma correction and 154–5 
 campfi re smoke 257 
 cancellation of waves 41–2 
 candela 122 
 Canis Major Dwarf galaxy 321 
 capillary waves 279–80 
 cast shadows 124–32; angle of 
128–30; caster and receiver of 124; 
defi ned 124; intensity of 131–2; 
and light source shapes 130–1; 
sharp and fuzzy 127–8; umbra and 
penumbra of 125–8 
 caster of shadow 124 
 cats: babyness in 173–5; evolution 
of 315 
 caustics 148–51 
 cementation 308 
 center of buoyancy (CB) 275–6 
 center of gravity (CG) 70–3; vs. center 
of mass 15, 70; in character design 
182–3; defi ned 70; horizontal shift 

332 
I N D E X
in 203; in jumping 197–8; location 
of 70–1; lowering and raising of 73; 
tipping and 71–3; vertical shift in 
203–4 
 center of mass 15, 70 
 center of pressure 71–2 
 centipoise (cP) 270 
 centrifugal force 28–30 
 centripetal force(s): circular speed and 
26–7; comparing 27–8; defi ned 25; 
motion after stopping of 26; radius, 
speed and 27; and vehicles 30–2 
 centripetal motion 24–32 
 Chai, David 67 
 Chandra X-Ray Observatory 323 
 changing momentum 211–14; action/
reaction and 213–14; force and 
212–13 
 character animation 189–222; dancing 
and gymnastics in 205–8; drag and 
follow through in 217–19; getting 
hit in 210–15; jumping in 189–200; 
lifting weight in 208–9; overlapping 
action in 219–22; shifting body 
weight in 209; sitting and standing 
in 209; tipping over in 215–17; 
walking in 201–5 
 character design 163–87; animal 
characteristics in 172–5; babyness 
in 164, 173–5; balance in 183–7; 
center of gravity in 182–3; climate 
and 171; deformability in 170; 
joints in 175–81; longevity in 172; 
physical characteristics and size 
in 169–72; posture in 169–70; 
proportion and scale in 165–7; 
size and scale in 163–72; sound in 
173; weight and strength in 167–9; 
weight distribution in 181–7; wing 
size and shape in 170–1 
 chemical explosion 258 
 chemical reactions, gases in 82–3 
 Chicxulub Asteroid 313–14 
 child object in system 217–18 
 circular motion 19–33; centripetal 
24–32; pendulum 32–3; rotational 
19, 20–4; types of 19–20 
 circular speed 26–7 
 circumference 20 
 cirrus clouds 227 
 climate in character design 171 
 clocks 46 
 clouds 225–31; altitudes of 227–8; alto 
228; backlit 230; CG approaches 
to 231; cirrus 227; color of 237; 
combinations of 229; composition 
of 226; cumulonimbus 228, 233, 
234, 237; cumulus (“fair weather”) 
226–7; formation of 81, 226; and 
God rays 230; inside of 228; lighting 
eff ects with 229–31; movement 
of 229; mushroom 253–5; 
nimbostratus 233–4; nimbus 227; 
noctilucent 294; rain 233–7; stratus 
227; types of 226–7 
 cloud-to-cloud lightning 244–5 
 cloud-to-ground lightning 243–4 
 CMB (cosmic microwave background) 
328 
 coeffi  cient 77 
 coeffi  cient of friction 76–7 
 cohesion 268, 269 
 cold front 82, 234 
 color(s): of clouds 237; detection of 
139; form shadow (ambient) 141; 
and gamma correction 151–9; 
highlight 136, 141; light and 116; 
of oceans and lakes 289; of outer 
space 322–4; overall (diff use) 141; 
of raindrops 239–40; of rocks 310–
11;  see also light 
 comet debris 303 
 compression: of gases 78–82; geology 
from 308 
 concave shape 277 
 conductors 104–5 
 constant forces 49; and acceleration 50 
 constant speed graph 55 
 contact, in walking 201 
 Contact (fi lm) 323 
 container(s): and explosions 260; 
heated gas in 80 
 continent maps, prehistoric 299 
 continental collision 302 
 continental drift 297–300 
 convection 234 
 convection rain 234 
 convergent boundary 300, 302 
 convex shape 277 
 coral reefs 312 
 core of Earth 291, 292, 293 
 cosine 139 
 cosmic microwave background (CMB) 
328 
 cosmic rays 328 
 cougars, evolution of 315 
 cP (centipoise) 270 
 crack(s), internal 263–4 
 crack patterns 262–4 
 craters 303 
 crepuscular rays 230 
 crest 38, 278 
 crouch in jump 190 
 crust: Earth’s 291, 292, 304–9; oceanic 
308 
 crystal formation 306, 311 
 cumulonimbus clouds 228, 233, 
234, 237 
 cumulus clouds 226–7 
 current, electric 105–6, 111–12 
 cycle 39 
 cylindrical joint 178 
 dancing 205–8; balance with multiple 
characters in 206; torque and 
turning in 205 
 Danxia Landform (China) 311 
 death by outer space 325–6 
 deceleration 47; Odd Rule for 50, 52, 
53–4 
 decibel (dB) 38 
 defl agration 261 
 deformability in character design 170 
 demagnetization 110 
 detonation 261 
 diff use color 141 
 diff use interrefl ection 141–2 
 diff use refl ection 136–41; and light 
intensity 137–9; specular vs. 139–41 
 diff user 131 
 digital cameras 154–5 
 digital fi les, gamma correction on 156 
 dinosaurs: extinction of 314; fossils 
of 313 
 direct illumination 142 
 direction of force 60 
 discharges from static electricity 
102–3 
 dispersion 147 
 distance, rotation and 20 

 
I N D E X     333
 divergent boundary 300–1 
 diversity 314–16 
 dodging 154 
 Doppler eff ect 44–5 
 down pose in walking 201 
 drag 217–18 
 dripping of raindrops 242–3 
 dry ice 260 
 dry ice bomb 260 
 dwarf star 319, 320 
 Eagle Nebula 322, 323 
 Earth 291–316; atmosphere of 291, 
292, 293–5; crust of 291, 292, 
304–9; and designing a landscape 
310–11; formation of 296–304; 
gaseous 296; inner core of 291, 
292, 293; layers of 291–3; life on 
312–16; lower mantle of 291, 292; 
outer core of 291, 292, 293; tectonic 
plates of 293; upper mantle of 
291, 292 
 East African Great Rift Valley 301 
 effi  ciency 91 
 effi  cient lever systems 91 
 eff ort 90 
 eff ort arm 88, 90 
 elbow joint 179 
 electric current 105–6, 111–12 
 electric shock 106–7, 111 
 electrical attraction 10 
 electrical charge 102 
 electricity 101–7, 111–13; conductors 
vs. insulators in 104–5; electric 
current in 105–6, 111–12; and 
electric shock 106–7, 111; electrical 
charge in 102, 103; fl owing 103–6; 
in sparks and lightning 107; static 
102–3; visualizing 111–13 
 electromagnet(s) 109–10 
 electromagnetic pulse (EMP) 113 
 electromagnetic spectrum 318 
 electromagnetic waves in space 
317–18 
 electrons 11–13; electrical charge of 
102, 103; in fl owing electricity 103; 
loss or gain of 104–5 
 elemental gas 78 
 Elephant’s Trunk Nebula 319 
 emission patterns of light 122 
 EMP (electromagnetic pulse) 113 
 energy effi  ciency, walking and 203–5 
 environment 225–48; clouds in 
225–31; eff ects of wind on 283–4; 
lightning in 243–7; rain in 232–43; 
thunder in 247–8 
 erosion 303–4; geology from 309 
 evolution 314–16 
 exosphere 293 
 explosion(s) 257–61; after 259–60; 
before 259; chemical 258; defi ned 
257; fuel 258; life of 258–60; 
and mushroom clouds 254–5; 
nuclear 258; pressure 257; role 
of containers in 260; shockwaves 
from 260–1; timing for 260; types 
of 257–8 
 extrusive rock 307–8 
 “fair weather” clouds 226–7 
 falling: moving and 67; timing for 
64–7 
 Fallout video game series 329 
 familiar forces 60–1 
 fast lever systems 91–2 
 feldspar 306–7 
 ferromagnetic substance 109 
 fi eld(s): defi ned 107; gravitational 107; 
magnetic 107–10 
 fi ght scenes 210–11 
 fi re 249–57; defi ned 249; and fi reball 
252–5; and fl ames 249–52; and 
smoke 255–7; and smoldering solid 
matter 252 
 fi reballs 252–5; and mushroom clouds 
253–5; in space 253 
 fi rst class lever system 93 
 fi xed objects, action/reaction and 
100–1 
 fl ames 249–52; appearance of 250–1; 
creating 251–2 
 fl at surfaces, friction on 76 
 fl oating 275–6; on wave 284–5 
 fl ow vs. wave 37 
 fl owing electricity 103–6 
 fl uid(s): defi ned 267; Newtonian and 
non-Newtonian 271–3 
 fl ying pieces from fracture 265 
 foam 289–90 
 fog 228 
 follow through 217–19 
 foot joint 180 
 force(s) 57–113; action/reaction 
98–101; and changing momentum 
212–13; components of 60–2; 
constant 49; direction of 60; and 
electricity 101–7, 111–13; examples 
of 58–9; exerted by characters 49; 
familiar and unfamiliar 60–2; and 
friction 74–8; and gravity 62–73; of 
impact 211; and magnetism 107–13; 
magnitude of 60; and motion 57–9; 
with pressure and gases 78–87; 
from pressure decrease 84; and 
torque 87–97; variable 62 
 form shadow 132–3 
 form shadow color 141 
 fossil(s) 313 
 fossil fuels 313 
 Fourth Down at Half Time method for 
timing of falling 66–7 
 fracture 261–5; anatomy of 262; 
animation of 264–5; crack patterns 
in 262–4; fl ying pieces from 265 
 frames 46 
 free radicals 328 
 frequency 39–40 
 Fresnel Eff ect 144, 288–9 
 friction 74–8; coeffi  cient of 76–7; 
defi ned 74; eff ects of 77–8; on fl at 
surfaces 76; static and kinetic 74–6; 
tipping and 217 
 frictionless surfaces 76 
 front(s) 82, 234 
 frontal rain 233–4 
 fuel 258 
 fuel explosion 258 
 fulcrum 88, 89 
 fuzzy shadows 127–8 
 gait 202 
 galaxies 320–2 
 gamma calculations 156–7 
 gamma correction 151–9; calculation 
of gamma intensity values for 
156–7; and cameras 154–5; defi ned 
153–4; on digital fi les 156; and 
linear vs. curved light intensity 152; 
linear workfl ow and 158–9; monitor 
adjustment for 157–8; for real world 

334 
I N D E X
perception 153–4; RGB gamma 
curves in 158 
 gas(es) 78–87; chemical reaction of 
82–3; commonly encountered 78; 
compression of 78–82; defi ned 8–9, 
78; elemental 78; pressure increase 
from heat of 79–82; pressurized 
78–82 
 gaseous Earth 296 
 gastrocnemius muscle 180 
 geology, causes of 307–9 
 getting hit 210–15; changing 
momentum in 211–14; in fi ght 
scenes 210–11; momentum and 
force of impact for 211; recoil in 
214–15 
 glaciers 304 
 global illumination (GI) feature 142 
 glowing due to radiation 329 
 glow-in-the-dark object 329 
 God rays 230 
 Gondwana 299 
 Grand Canyon 303, 308 
 granite 307, 310 
 gravitational acceleration 56, 62–3 
 gravitational fi eld 107 
 gravity 62–73; acceleration of 56, 
62–3; ascending against 68–9; 
common misconceptions about 63; 
line of 71; with moving and falling 
67; timing for 64–7;  see also center 
of gravity (CG) 
 Gravity (fi lm) 61 
 gravity waves 280 
 ground, shockwaves through 261 
 gun, recoil from 214–15 
 gymnastics 205–8; balance with 
multiple characters in 206; lever 
systems in 206–8; torque and 
turning in 205 
 Hanks, Tom 2 
 Hawaiian islands 302 
 HDRI images 155 
 heat: geology from 309; pressure 
increase from 79–82 
 heated air in atmosphere 80–2 
 heated gas in container 80 
 Heavy Bombardment Period 296, 
303 
 heavy object, lifting of 208–9 
 helical object 34 
 helix 34 
 hertz (Hz) 39 
 highlight color 136, 141 
 high-pressure systems 82, 234 
 Himalayas 302 
 hinge joints 176–7 
 hip rotation in walking 204–5 
 hit, getting  see getting hit 
 Hooke’s Law 221 
 horizontal CG shift 203 
 horizontal velocity of projectile 68–9 
 hot spot 302 
 Hubble, Edwin 322 
 Hubble Sequence 322 
 Hubble Space Telescope 323, 324 
 Hz (hertz) 39 
 Iceland 302 
 IES fi le format 123 
 igneous rock 305–6, 307–8 
 illumination: direct and indirect 142; 
global 142 
 The Illusion of Life: Disney Animation 
(Johnston & Thomas) 5 
 impact, force of 211 
 “in phase” 41 
 incident rays 117, 137 
 index of refraction (IOR) 146 
 indirect illumination 142 
 induction 110 
 ineffi  cient lever systems 91–2 
 inertia: law of 19, 24–5, 28; rotational 
23–4, 96–7 
 infl ation after Big Bang 317 
 inherent weak points and crack 
patterns 263 
 inner core of Earth 291, 292, 293 
 insulators 104–5 
 intermediate axis 23–4 
 internal cracks 263–4 
 interrefl ection, diff use 141–2 
 intra-cloud lightning 245 
 intrusive rock 307–8 
 ion 13 
 ionizing radiation 328 
 IOR (index of refraction) 146 
 Iron Man 3 (fi lm) 111–12 
 isotropy 141 
 jet stream 229 
 JM (jump magnifi cation) 193–5 
 Johnston, Ollie 5 
 joints 175–81; animal 178; ball and 
socket 176–7; elbow 179; foot 180; 
hinge 176–7; knee 178; as levers 
179–80; muscles for 180; neck 180; 
pivot 176–7; prismatic or cylindrical 
178; revolute 176–8; of robots or 
machines 178; sliding 178; types of 
176–8 
 Jones, Chuck 178 
 A Journey to the Center of the Earth 
(Verne) 293 
 juggling 24 
 jump action(s): calculating 192; 
defi ned 189 
 jump(s) and jumping 189–200; crouch 
in 190; defi ned 189; landing in 191, 
198; parts of 189, 190–1; path of 
action for 191; push height of 190; 
push key spacing of 196; push time 
of 190, 195–6; stop height of 191; 
stop time of 198–9; takeoff  in 190; 
very high 199–200 
 jump height 190 
 jump magnifi cation (JM) 193–5 
 jump time and timing: calculating 
192–200; defi ned 191; motion arc 
and 197–8 
 kangaroos, evolution of 316 
 ketchup 273 
 keys 46 
 kicking 210–11 
 kilograms 14 
 kinetic friction 76 
 kite motion 221 
 knee joint 178 
 lakes  see oceans and lakes 
 Lambert, Johann Heinrich 138 
 Lambert shader 138 
 Lambert’s Cosine Law 139 
 land bridge 315 
 landing of jump 191, 198 
 landscape, design of 310–11 
 Laurasia 299 
 lava 307 
 law 23 

 
I N D E X     335
 Law of Inertia 19, 24–5, 28, 97 
 leader in lightning 245, 246 
 lemurs, evolution of 316 
 length and motion 219–21 
 leopards, evolution of 315 
 lever(s) 88, 89, 91; classes of 93–4; 
joints as 179–80 
 lever arm 88, 90 
 lever system(s) 90–6; balancing torque 
in 95; classes of 93–4; defi ned 
91; effi  ciency vs. speed of 91–3; 
gymnastic 206–8; increasing 
leverage in 95; as simple machine 91 
 leverage 95 
 Lichtenburg Figures 247 
 life on Earth 312–16 
 lift: aerodynamic 86; in walking 201 
 lifting weight 208–9 
 light(s) 115–59; attenuation of 121–2, 
142; basics of 116–34; and caustics 
148–51; and color 116; and gamma 
correction 151–9; IES fi le format 
for 123; photometric 116, 122–3; 
physically based 122–3; as rays 116; 
and refl ection 116, 117–19, 134–45; 
refraction of 116, 145–8; scattering 
of 116; and shadows 116, 123–34; 
and translucence 140 
 light intensity: diff use refl ection and 
137–9; linear vs. curved 152 
 light patterns 122 
 light rays 116; bouncing 119–20; 
incident 117, 137; reciprocity of 
120; refl ected 117 
 light source(s) 122–3; defi ned 116; 
point 128 
 light source shapes 130–1 
 light year 316 
 lightning 107, 243–7; appearance 
of 245–6; cloud-to-cloud 
244–5; cloud-to-ground 243–4; 
components of 243; defi ned 
107, 243; eff ects from 106, 247; 
formation of 243–6; intra-cloud 
245; leader in 245, 246; and 
Lichtenburg Figures 247; streamer 
in 246; world map of 245 
 lightning trees 247 
 limestone 307 
 line of action 17 
 line of gravity 71 
 linear gamma 156 
 linear motion 18–19; timing of 46–8 
 linear progression 152 
 linear workfl ow and gamma 
correction 158–9 
 liquid(s) 267–90; adhesion of 268–9; 
appearance of 276–7; buoyancy 
of 275–6; cohesion of 268, 269; 
defi ned 8, 267; fl uid vs. 267; 
meniscus of 276–7; oceans and 
lakes as 278–90; pouring shapes of 
277; properties of 268–76; surface 
tension of 273–5; viscosity of 
269–73 
 lithosphere 292 
 load 90 
 load arm 90 
 long axis 23–4 
 longevity in character design 172 
 longitudinal wave 35, 36–7 
 lower mantle of Earth 291, 292 
 low-pressure systems 82, 234 
 lumen 122 
 lux 122 
 machine(s): joints of 178; simple 91 
 Madagascar 316 
 magma 305; geology from 307–8 
 magnet(s): defi ned 107; electro- 109–10; 
making 108–9 
 magnetic fi elds 107–10 
 magnetism 107–13; demagnetization 
in 110; electromagnets in 109–10; 
ferromagnetic substance in 109; 
magnetic fi elds in 107–10; making 
a magnet in 108–9; visualizing 
112–13 
 magnitude of force 60 
 mantle of Earth 291, 292 
 marble 310 
 mass(es) 14–15; center of 15, 70; 
defi ned 7, 14; weight vs. 14–15, 211 
 matter 7–13; atoms and binding 
of 11–13; composition of 9–13; 
defi ned 7; and nuclear fusion 13; 
types of 7–9 
 mechanical advantage 92 
 medium 34, 142 
 meniscus 276–7 
 mesosphere 292, 293, 294 
 metamorphic rock 305–6, 307, 309 
 metamorphism 305 
 meteor(s) 303 
 meteorites 303, 314; and life on Earth 
313–14 
 Mid-Atlantic Ridge 300–1 
 Milky Way galaxy 320, 321 
 mirror: refl ection in 117; seeing in 118–19 
 mist 240, 289–90 
 mobile objects, action/reaction with 
two 98–9 
 molecule 10 
 moment 71 
 momentum 211; changing 211–14 
 monitor gamma adjustment 157–8 
 Moon, surface of 296 
 motion 17–45; apex of 64; centripetal 
24–32; circular 19–33; force and 
57–9; length and 219–21; linear 
18–19; lines and paths of 17–18; 
parabolic 68–9; pendulum 32–3; 
rotational 19, 20–4; slow in and 
slow out 48; surface area and 221; 
uniform 19, 46–8; wave 34–45 
 motion arc and jump timing 197–8 
 motion graphs 55–6 
 moving and falling 67 
 multiplication 21 
 muscles for joints 180–1 
 mushroom clouds 253–5 
 nanometers (nm) 38–9 
 nebulas 318–19, 322 
 neck joint 180 
 negative charge 102, 103 
 nervous system 106–7 
 net force 48 
 neutral effi  ciency 93 
 neutron(s) 11, 12 
 neutron stars 319, 320 
 Newton, Isaac 271 
 Newtonian fl uids 271–2 
 Newton’s First Law 19, 24–5, 28, 96 
 Newton’s Third Law 98 
 nimbostratus clouds 233–4 
 nimbus clouds 227 
 nm (nanometers) 38–9 
 noctilucent clouds (NLCs) 294 
 non-ionizing radiation 328 

336 
I N D E X
 non-Newtonian fl uids 271–3 
 non-reactive element 13 
 normal 117 
 normal line 117 
 nuclear explosion 258 
 nuclear fusion 13 
 nucleus 11 
 occlusion shadow 133–4 
 ocean wave(s) 278–85; breaking 
281–3; capillary 279–80; fl oating 
on 284–5; formation of 279–80; 
gravity 280; movement of 280–1; 
terminology for 278–9; tsunami 300 
 oceanic crust 308 
 oceans and lakes 278–90; appearance 
of 286–90; Beaufort Scale for 283–4; 
color of 289; Fresnel Eff ect for 288–
9; refl ection on 286–8; shadows 
on 290; spray, mist, and foam with 
289–90; waves in 278–85 
 Odd Rule 50–4; multipliers for 51–2; 
scenarios for 52–4; for timing of 
falling 65–6 
 ohm(s) 105 
 Ohm, George 105 
 Ohm’s Law 105 
 orographic rain 235–6 
 orography 235–6 
 oscillation 110 
 “out of phase” 41 
 outer core of Earth 291, 292, 293 
 outer space 316–29; colors of 322–4; 
death by 325–6; electromagnetic 
waves in 317–18; fi reballs in 
253; galaxies in 320–2; nebulas 
in 318–19, 322; and origin of 
universe 317; radiation in 328–9; 
sound in 327–8; stars in 318–20; 
temperature in 327; unfamiliar 
forces in 61; vacuum of 325–8 
 overall color 141 
 overlapping action 219–22 
 oxide 306 
 oxidizer 249 
 ozone 295 
 ozone layer 294, 295 
 paleomagnetism 297 
 Pangaea 298–9 
 parabola 68 
 parabolic arc 68 
 parabolic motion 68–9 
 paramecia 313 
 parametric resonance 222 
 parent object in system 217–18 
 partial refl ections 142–5 
 particle systems 231 
 passing in walking 201 
 path of action 17–18; for jump 191 
 pendulum motion 32–3 
 penumbra 125–8 
 period 33 
 Periodic Table of Elements 12 
 phase of wave 40–1 
 Photometria (Lambert) 138 
 photometric lights 116, 122–3 
 physical characteristics and size 
169–72 
 pi 20 
 Pillars of Creation formation 323 
 Pingualuit crater 303 
 pivot 88, 89 
 pivot joints 176–7 
 planet(s) 320 
 planetismals 296 
 plate boundaries 300, 302 
 plate shifts 300–2 
 Pleiades star cluster 316 
 PNG fi le format 157 
 point light source 128 
 Poiseuille, Jean Léonard Marie 270 
 ponytail swing 221, 222 
 poses in walking 201 
 positive charge 102, 103 
 posture in character design 169–70 
 pounds 14 
 pounds per square inch (psi) 79 
 pouring shapes 277 
 precipitation 232 
 prehistoric continent maps 299 
 pressure 78–87; atmospheric 84–7; 
center of 71–2; geology from 309; 
measurement of 79 
 pressure decrease, force from 84 
 pressure diff erences in action 86–7 
 pressure explosion 257 
 pressure increase from heat 79–82 
 pressure wave 36 
 pressurized gas 78–82 
 prismatic joint 178 
 projectile 68–9 
 propellants 84 
 proportion in character design 165–7 
 protons 11, 12, 102 
 protostar 296, 319 
 psi (pounds per square inch) 79 
 puddles, raindrops on 241 
 puff y smoke 256 
 punching 210–11 
 push height of jump 190 
 push key spacing of jump 196 
 push time of jump 190, 195–6 
 pyrolysis 252 
 quartz 306–7 
 radiation in outer space 328–9 
 radioactive object 329 
 radium 329 
 radius(ii): and centripetal force 27; and 
torque 89–90 
 rain 232–43; convection 234; defi ned 
232; enhancing 240–1; formation 
of 232, 237; frontal (stratiform) 
233–4; orographic (relief) 235–6; 
predicting 237–8; sheets of 240; 
sound of 240–1; topography and 
235–6, 237; and weather systems 
238; wind and 237, 240 
 rain clouds, types of 233–7 
 rain shadow 235, 236 
 rainbows 147 
 raindrops 238–43; blurring of 239; 
dripping 242–3; falling 238–9; 
invisible (puddle eff ects) 241; 
shape of 238–9; slow-moving 
(windowpane) 241–2; visibility and 
color of 239–40 
 RAW fi le format 154–5 
 ray tracing, reciprocity and 120 
 reaction  see action/reaction 
 reactive element 13 
 receiver of cast shadow 124 
 reciprocity of light rays 120 
 recoil from gun 214–15 
 red giant 319 
 red sunrise 238 
 red sunset 238 
 red supergiant 319 

 
I N D E X     337
 refl ected images 135, 136, 143–5 
 refl ected ray 117 
 refl ection(s) 134–45; angle of 117; 
defi ned 116, 134–5; diff use 136–41; 
diff use inter- 141–2; partial 142–5; 
refl ected image vs. 135; rules of 
117–18; seen in mirror 118–19; 
specular 117, 135–6, 139–41; water 
286–8 
 refl ection coeffi  cient 142, 144; for 
water 287 
 refraction 145–8; created with CG 
software 147–8; defi ned 116, 145; 
index of 146 
 relief rain 235–6 
 resistance: air 85–6; and electric 
current 105; rolling 77–8 
 resonance 43–4; parametric 222 
 revolute joints 176–8 
 RGB gamma curves 158 
 rig 175 
 rigging 175 
 Road Runner series 2 
 robots, joints of 178 
 rock(s) 305–7; classifi cation of 307; 
colors of 310–11; composition of 
306–7; extrusive 307–8; formation 
of 305–6; igneous 305–6, 307–8; 
intrusive 307–8; metamorphic 
305–6, 307, 309; sedimentary 305, 
307, 308 
 Rodinia 297–8 
 rolling resistance 77–8 
 rotation: axis of 88, 89; and distance 20 
 rotational inertia: axes and 23–4; and 
tipping 216; and torque 96–7 
 rotational motion 19, 20–4; axes and 
inertia in 23–4; calculating number 
of times a wheel turns in 21; and 
juggling 24; rotation and distance 
in 20; spinning, tumbling, and 
wobbling as 21–2; tennis racquet 
theorem for 23 
 San Andreas Fault 301 
 scale: in character design 163–72; 
proportion and 165–7; size and 
163–5 
 scattering of light 116 
 sea  see oceans and lakes 
 sea breezes 81–2 
 Seattle, Wash., rain in 236 
 second class levers 93 
 sedimentary rock 305, 307, 308 
 seesaw 206–7 
 self-induction 110 
 SFX (special eff ects) 223 
 shaders 138, 141 
 shadow(s) 123–34; angle of 128–30; 
cast 124–32; caster and receiver of 
124; defi ned 116, 123; form 132–3; 
intensity of 131–2; and light source 
shapes 130–1; occlusion 133–4; rain 
235, 236; sharp and fuzzy 127–8; 
umbra and penumbra of 125–8; on 
water 290 
 shape, detection of 139 
 sharp shadows 127–8 
 shock, electric 106–7, 111 
 shockwaves 260–1 
 shoreline breaks 282–3 
 short axis 23–4 
 shoulder rotation in walking 205 
 silicate 292 
 simple machine 91 
 simulators 231 
 single-cell organism 313 
 sitting 209 
 size: in character design 163–72; 
climate and 171; longevity and 172; 
physical characteristics and 169–72 
 skeletal structure 176 
 sliding joints 178 
 slow in motion 48 
 slow lever systems 91 
 slow out motion 48 
 slowing down  see deceleration 
 Small Magellanic Cloud (SMC) 323 
 smoke 255–7; appearance of 256–7; 
campfi re 257; puff y 256; tendril 
256–7 
 smoldering solid matter 252 
 solar system 320 
 solar wind 328 
 solids 7 
 sonic boom 45 
 sound: in character design 173; in 
vacuum 327–8 
 sound eff ects, common 43–5 
 sparks 107 
 special eff ects (SFX) 223 
 specular refl ection 135–6; diff use vs. 
139–41; rules of 117 
 speed: and centripetal force 27; 
circular 26–7; of projectile 68–9; of 
wave 40 
 speeding up  see acceleration 
 spinning 22 
 Spitzer Space Telescope 323 
 spray 289–90 
 springboard 208 
 stable balances 70 
 standing 209 
 standing waves 42–3 
 star(s) 318–20 
 “star dust” 320 
 Star Wars (fi lm) 61 
 static electricity 102–3 
 static friction 74–5 
 stem of mushroom cloud 253 
 steps in walking 201, 202 
 stop height of jump 191 
 stop time of jump 198–9 
 stopping, Odd Rule for 50 
 stratiform rain 233–4 
 stratosphere 292, 293, 294 
 stratus clouds 227 
 streamer in lightning 246 
 strength in character design 167–9 
 strides in walking 202 
 subduction 302 
 sun 319, 320; position of 238 
 sunburn 328 
 sunrise, red 238 
 sunset, red 238 
 supercontinents 296–300 
 supernova 319, 320 
 surface area 166; and motion 221 
 surface normal 117 
 surface tension 242, 273–5 
 surfactant 275 
 suspension of disbelief 1–2 
 swinging, motion graph of 56 
 takeoff  in jump 190 
 tectonic plates 293, 296–300 
 tectonic shifts 300–2 
 teenagers, character design of 174 
 temperature in vacuum 327 
 tendril smoke 256–7 

338 
I N D E X
 Tennis Racquet Theorem 23–4 
 theorem 23 
 thermosphere 293, 294 
 third-class levers 94 
 Thomas, Frank 5 
 thunder 247–8 
 ticks 46 
 timing 46–56; for acceleration 48–50; 
defi ned 46; for gravity 64–7; 
measurement of 46; in motion 
graphs 55–6; Odd Rule for 50–4; 
slow in and slow out 48; of uniform 
motion 46–8 
 timing tools 46 
 tipping over 72–3; character 
animation for 215–17; and friction 
217; rotational inertia and 216; as 
torque 96 
 topography and rain 235–6, 237 
 torque 87–97; in animation 96–7; 
balanced in lever system 95; 
basics of 88; calculating 89–90; 
in dancing and gymnastics 205; 
defi ned 87; and lever systems 90–6; 
maximizing 88–9; terminology for 
88; visualizing 89 
 Toy Story (fi lm) 316 
 Toy Story II (fi lm) 2 
 trajectory 17–18 
 Transantarctic Mountains 309 
 transform boundary 300, 301 
 transform fault 300, 301 
 translucence 140 
 transverse waves 35, 278 
 triceps muscle 179 
 troposphere 292, 293, 294 
 trough 38, 278 
 tsunami 300 
 tumbling 22 
 turning in dancing and gymnastics 205 
 Twelve Apostles rock formation 
(Australia) 304 
 umbra 125–8 
 unbalanced objects 72 
 unfamiliar forces 60–1 
 unicellular organism 313 
 uniform motion 19; timing of 46–8 
 universe, origin of 317 
 unstable balances 70 
 up pose in walking 201 
 upper mantle of Earth 291, 292 
 vacuum chamber 325 
 vacuum of outer space 325–8; sound 
in 327–8; temperature in 327 
 variable forces 62 
 vehicles: in atmosphere 295; 
centripetal forces and 30–2 
 velocity  see speed 
 Verne, Jules 293 
 vertical CG shift 203–4 
 vertical velocity of projectile 68–9 
 viscosity 269–73 
 visual eff ects (VFX) 223 
 visual eff ects (VFX) compositing 159 
 volcanism 302–3 
 voltage 105 
 voxel 231 
 walking 201–5; and energy effi  ciency 
203–5; gait for 202; hip rotation in 
204–5; horizontal CG shift in 203; 
poses in 201; shoulder rotation in 
205; strides and steps in 202; timing 
of 202–3; vertical CG shift in 203–4 
 warm front 82, 234 
 Washington, rain in 236 
 water: eff ects of wind on 283–4; 
refl ection in 286–8; shadows on 
290;  see also oceans and lakes; rain 
 wave(s): addition and cancellation 
of 41–2; amplitude of 37–8; and 
common sound eff ects 43–5; crest 
of 38; defi ned 34; electromagnetic 
317–18; fl ow vs. 37; frequency of 
39–40; longitudinal 35, 36–7; phase 
of 40–1; pressure 36; properties of 
37–43; standing 42–3; transverse 
35, 278; trough of 38; types of 
34–7; velocity of 40; visibility of 34; 
wavelength of 38–9;  see also ocean 
wave(s) 
 wave base 282–3 
 wave equation 40 
 wave height 37–8, 278–9 
 wave motion 34–45 
 wave relations 40 
 wavelength 38–9, 278–9 
 weak points and crack patterns 263 
 weather  see environment 
 weather forecasting 82 
 weather systems 238 
 weathering, geology from 309 
 weight: action/reaction and 99–100; 
in character design 167–9; lifting of 
208–9; mass vs. 14–15, 211; shifting 
of 209 
 weight distribution in character 
design 181–7 
 wheel, calculating number of turns 
of 21 
 White Cliff s of Dover 311 
 White Desert (Egypt) 304 
 white dwarf 319 
 Williams, Richard 201 
 wind: eff ects on water and 
environment of 283–4; and rain 
237, 240; solar 328; sound of 240–1; 
and time of day 240 
 windowpane, raindrops on 241–2 
 wings, size and shape of 170–1 
 wobbling 22 
 X-rays 328 
 Zero Moment Point (ZMP) 71 

