

In order to ensure that this resource offers high-quality support for the
associated Pearson qualification, it has been through a review process by the
awarding body. This process confirms that this resource fully covers the
teaching and learning content of the specification or part of a specification at
which it is aimed. It also confirms that it demonstrates an appropriate balance
between the development of subject skills, knowledge and understanding, in
addition to preparation for assessment.
Endorsement does not cover any guidance on assessment activities or
processes (e.g. practice questions or advice on how to answer assessment
questions), included in the resource nor does it prescribe any particular
approach to the teaching or delivery of a related course.
While the publishers have made every attempt to ensure that advice on the
qualification and its assessment is accurate, the official specification and
associated assessment guidance materials are the only authoritative source of
information and should always be referred to for definitive guidance.
Pearson examiners have not contributed to any sections in this resource
relevant to examination papers for which they have responsibility.
Examiners will not use endorsed resources as a source of material for any
assessment set by Pearson. Endorsement of a resource does not mean that the
resource is required to achieve this Pearson qualification, nor does it mean
that it is the only suitable material available to support the qualification, and
any resource lists produced by the awarding body shall include this and other
appropriate resources.
The Acknowledgments are listed on page viii.
Although every effort has been made to ensure that website addresses are correct
at time of going to press, Hodder Education cannot be held responsible for the
content of any website mentioned. It is sometimes possible to find a relocated
web page by typing in the address of the home page for a website in the URL
window of your browser.
Orders: please contact Bookpoint Ltd, 130 Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14
4SB.
Telephone: (44) 01235 827720. Fax: (44) 01235 400454. Lines are open 9.00–
17.00, Monday to Saturday, with a 24-hour message answering service. Visit our
website at www.hoddereducation.co.uk
© Nick England 2017
First published in 2017 by
Hodder Education
An Hachette UK Company,

338 Euston Road
London NW1 3BH
Impression number 5 4 3 2 1
Year 2021 2020 2019 2018 2017
All rights reserved. Apart from any use permitted under UK copyright law, no
part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and recording, or held
within any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in
writing from the publisher or under licence from the Copyright Licensing
Agency Limited. Further details of such licences (for reprographic reproduction)
may be obtained from the Copyright Licensing Agency Limited, Saffron House,
6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.
Cover photo © Andrew Brookes/Corbis
Typeset in ITC Legacy Serif by Elektra Media Ltd.
Printed in Italy
Project managed by Elektra Media Ltd.
A catalogue record for this title is available from the British Library.
ISBN 978 151 040 5189
eISBN 978 151 040 5165

Contents
Getting the most from this book
Acknowledgments
Section 1 Forces and motion
1.1 How fast do things move?
1.2 Acceleration
1.3 Observing and calculating motion
1.4 Introducing forces
1.5 Forces, acceleration and Newton’s laws of motion
1.6 Applying forces
1.7 Stretching
1.8 Momentum
1.9 Collisions and explosions
1.10 Turning moments
1.11 Balancing forces
Summary
Sample answers and expert’s comments
Exam-style questions
Extend and challenge
Section 2 Electricity
2.1 Introducing electricity
2.2 Using mains electricity
2.3 Electrical power
2.4 Electric circuits
2.5 Calculating the resistance
2.6 Current, charge and voltage
2.7 Current and voltage rules
2.8 Circuit calculations
2.9 Electrostatics
2.10 Electrostatics at work
Summary
Sample answers and expert’s comments
Exam-style questions
Extend and challenge
Section 3 Waves
3.1 Introducing waves
3.2 Ripple Tanks
3.3 Electromagnetic waves

3.4 Reflection of light
3.5 Refraction of light
3.6 Total internal reflection
3.7 Sound waves
3.8 Loudness, quality and pitch
Summary
Sample answers and expert’s comments
Exam-style questions
Extend and challenge
Section 4 Energy resources and energy transfer
4.1 Energy
4.2 Conduction and convection
4.3 Radiation
4.4 What is work?
4.5 Calculating energy
4.6 Energy resources and electricity generation
Summary
Sample answers and expert’s comments
Exam-style questions
Extend and challenge
Section 5 Solids, liquids and gases
5.1 Density
5.2 Pressure
5.3 Pressure in liquids
5.4 Solids, liquids and gases
5.5 Specific heat capacity
5.6 Ideal gas molecules
Summary
Sample answers and expert’s comments
Exam-style questions
Extend and challenge
Section 6 Magnetism and electromagnetism
6.1 Magnets
6.2 Magnetising
6.3 Currents and magnetism
6.4 The motor effect
6.5 Electric motors
6.6 Electromagnetic induction
6.7 Generators

6.8 Transformers
Summary
Sample answers and expert’s comments
Exam-style questions
Extend and challenge
Section 7 Radioactivity and particles
7.1 Atomic structure
7.2 Radioactivity
7.3 The nature of α, β and γ radiations
7.4 Radioactive decay
7.5 Uses of radioactive materials
7.6 The hazards of radiation
7.7 Nuclear fission
7.8 Nuclear fusion
Summary
Sample answers and expert’s comments
Exam-style questions
Extend and challenge
Section 8 Astrophysics
8.1 Earth’s place in the Universe
8.2 Orbits
8.3 Stellar evolution
8.4 Brightness of stars and absolute magnitude
8.5 The evolution of the Universe
8.6 The evidence for the Big Bang Theory
Summary
Sample answers and expert’s comments
Exam-style questions
Extend and challenge
Index

Getting the most from this book
Welcome to the Edexcel International GCSE (9–1) Physics Student Book. This
book has been divided into eight Sections, following the structure and order of
the Edexcel Specification, which you can find on the Edexcel website for
reference.
Each Section has been divided into a number of smaller Chapters to help you
manage your learning.
The following features have been included to help you get the most from this
book.
At the start of each Section you will find the learning objectives for that
section.
DISCUSS • CALCULATE
Try the activity before you start, and then have a look at it again once
you have completed the Section to see if your responses are different
before and after learning more about the topics.
PRACTICAL
Practical boxes highlight the practical work covered in the book. They
provide hints on key things to remember, or alternative practical work
that you can do to help you learn more about that topic.
TIP
Tips throughout the book will guide you in your learning process.
STUDY QUESTIONS
At the end of each Chapter you will find Study Questions. Work
through these in class or on your own for homework. Answers are
available online.
You will find Exam-style questions at the end of each Section covering
the content of that Section and the different types of questions you will
find in an examination.
Formulae and laws have been highlighted so that you can easily find
them as you work through the book. Remember that in your exam you
will be given some formulae; others you have to memorise.

Before you try the exam-style questions, look at the sample answers
and expert’s comments to see how marks are awarded and common
mistakes to avoid.
EXTEND AND CHALLENGE
When you have completed all the Exam-style questions for the
Section, try the Extend and Challenge questions.
ANSWERS
Answers for all questions and activities in this book can be found online
at www.hoddereducation.co.uk/igcsephysics

Acknowledgments
The Publisher would like to thank the following for permission to reproduce
copyright photographs:
p.1 © Philippe Devanne / Fotolia; p.2 © OLIVIER MORIN / Staff/ Getty
Images; p.5 t © Carolina K Smith MD - Fotolia.com, b © jpmatz - Fotolia.com;
p.8 © GUSTOIMAGES/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY; p.11 t © Daniel Vorley /
Stringer / Getty Images, b © Toutenphoton - Fotolia.com; p.15 © NASA; p.18 ©
Look and Learn / The Bridgeman Art Library; p.19 © Anton Podoshvin /
123RF; p.20 © Stephen Finn – Fotolia; p.22 © MSPhotographic – Fotolia; p.26
© bytesurfer - Fotolia.com; p.27 © Volvo Car UK Ltd; p.28 © Peter Ginter /
Peter Ginter / Superstock; p.29 © SondraP/ iStockphoto.com; p.33 © baranq -
Fotolia.com; p.36 © Wally Stemberger; p.49 © Larry Brownstein/ Getty Images;
p.50 t © SeanPavonePhoto - Fotolia.com, b © nikkytok - Fotolia.com; p.51 t ©
photobyjimshme - Fotloia.com, c © ermess - Fotolia.com, b © Aaron Kohr -
Fotolia.com; p.52 © Nicky Rhodes - Fotolia.com; p.53 t © Reidos - Fotolia.com,
b © Sanguis - Fotolia.com; p.54 © ia_64 - Fotolia.com; p.56 © Dariusz
Kopestynski - Fotolia.com; p.58 © TREVOR CLIFFORD
PHOTOGRAPHY/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY; p.62 © Calek - Fotolia.com;
p.66 © adisa - Fotolia.com; p.69 l © xalanx - Fotolia.com, r © Ricardo
Reitmeyer / 123RF; p.75 ©TopFoto/ImageWorks; p.79 © JEAN-LOUP
CHARMET/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY; p.85 l © lucielang - Fotolia.com, r
© Bondarau - Fotolia.com; p.92 © pljvv / 123RF; p.93 t © Junjie - Fotolia.com,
b © MARTIN DOHRN/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY; p.94 © Art Konovalov /
Shutterstock; p.101 © Freefly - Fotolia.com; p.102 t © BABAK
TAFRESHI/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY, b © Jinx Photography Animals /
Alamy; p.103 t © EUROPEAN SPACE AGENCY/SCIENCE PHOTO
LIBRARY, c © FRANCK FIFE / Staff / Getty Images, b © Csák István -
Fotolia.com; p.105 © Flying Colours Ltd / Getty Images; p.107 ©
GIPhotoStock/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY; p.109 © Nick England; p.110 ©
Igor Kali - Fotolia.com; p.112 © BSIP SA / Alamy; p.115 © Grafvision -
Fotolia.com; p.126 © ASHLEY COOPER/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY; p.127
t © Zoe - Fotolia.com, b © pixeldigits / istock; p.131 t © Rob Wilkinson / Alamy
Stock Photo, b © Alexander Erdbeer - Fotolia.com; p.134 © Nick England;
p.136 © nevodka / 123RF; p.138 © AVAVA - Fotolia.com; p.141 t © Image
Source Plus / Alamy, c © MGrushin / Megapixl.com, b © Stefan Scheer /
Creative Commons; p.142 © Lovrencg - Fotolia.com; p.143 © Mikael Damkier -
Fotolia.com; p.147 © Nigel Hicks / Alamy; p.148 © China photos / Contributor /
Getty Images; p.149 t © Laurence Gaugh - Fotolia.com, b © Stephen Hill /
123RF; p.150 t © Saskia Massink / 123RF, b © kilukilu /Shutterstock; p.158 ©

Fotonanny - Fotolia.com; p.159 © DigiMagic Editorial / Alamy; p.160 ©
ISO400 - Fotolia.com; p.162 tr © Valuykin S. - Fotolia.com, tl © azure /
Shutterstock, l © Minik - Fotolia.com, br © Nick England, bl © Gina Sanders -
Fotolia.com; p.164 © frantisek hojdysz – Fotolia; p.167 l © Bradford Calkins /
123RF, c © Richard Lindie / 123RF, r © Dmitry Pichugin / 123RF; p.171 ©
OJPHOTOS / Alamy Live News; p.175 © Wajan - Fotolia.com; p.187 © Jay
Pasachoff / Getty Images; p.188 © Stockbyte / Getty Images; p.189 © ALFRED
PASIEKA/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY; p.192 © Science and Society Picture
Library / Getty; p.193 © sciencephotos / Alamy; p.195 l © Leslie Garland
Picture Library / Alamy, r © Martin Bond/Science Photo Library; p.196 ©
SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY; p.197 © Nick England; p.199 © mario
beauregard – Fotolia; p.201 YVES SOULABAILLE/LOOK AT
SCIENCES/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY; p.204 © Artem Merzlenko – Fotolia;
p.207 © TebNad – Fotolia; p.218 © Mark Clifford / Barcroft Media / Getty
Images; p.219 © Jack C. Schultz; p.221 © ullsteinbild / TopFoto; p.224 ©
Science Photo Library; p.226 © NASA / Harrison Schmitt; p.227 © Pamela
Maxwell / 123RF; p.228 t © James King-Holmes/Science Photo Library, b ©
Ton Keone/Visuals Unlimited/Science Photo Library; p.230 t © Centre Oscar
Lambret / Phanie / Rex Features, b © Martyn F. Chillmaid/Science Photo
Library; p.232 © PUBLIC HEALTH ENGLAND/SCIENCE PHOTO
LIBRARY; p.235 © Tim Wright/Getty; p.238 © EFDA-JET/SCIENCE PHOTO
LIBRARY; p.248 © neutronman – Fotolia; p.249 t © Dieter Willasch / NASA, b
© Galaxy Picture Library / Alamy Stock Photo; p.250 l © David
Brewster/Minneapolis Star Tribune/ZumaPress/Corbis, c © NASA / ESA /
Hubble Heritage Team, r © NASA, b © Royal Observatory,
Edinburgh/AATB/Science Photo Library; p.251 © Brent Hofacker – Fotolia;
p.253 © European Southern Observatory (ESO) / Science Photo Library; p.255
© EUROPEAN SOUTHERN OBSERVATORY/Science Photo Library; p.256 l
© European Southern Observatory (ESO), c © NASA / ESA, r © NASA; p.258
© NASA, ESA, J. Hester, A. Loll (ASU); p.259 © NASA/ESA/STScI/HUBBLE
SM4 ERO TEAM/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY; p.262 ©
NASA/ESA/STSCI/N.BENITEZ, JHU/ SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY, b ©
NASA / Bjarn Hindler; p.263 t © NASA, c © NASA / ESA & Hubble Heritage
Team, b © NASA / ESA & Hubble Heritage Team; p.264 © HALE
OBSERVATORIES/SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY; p.274 NASA / ESA &
Hubble Heritage Team

1
Forces and motion
When moving in a straight line at a constant speed, balanced forces
must act on this surfer.
By the end of this section you should:
• be able to plot and explain distance-time graphs
• know the relationship between average speed, distance and time
• know the relationship between acceleration, change in velocity
and time taken
• be able to plot and explain velocity-time graphs, and use them to
calculate an acceleration and the distance travelled
• be able to use the relationship between final speed, initial speed,
acceleration and distanced moved
• describe the effects of forces that act on bodies
• be able to identify different types of force
• understand how vector quantities differ from scalar quantities
• be able to calculate the resultant of forces that act along a line
• know that friction is a force that opposes motion
• know and be able to use the relationship between unbalanced
force, mass and acceleration
• know and be able to use the relationship between weight, mass
and gravitational field strength
• know that the stopping distance of a car is the sum of the
thinking and braking distances

• be able to describe the factors which affect vehicle stopping
distance
• be able to describe the forces that act on falling objects, and
explain why a falling object reaches a terminal velocity
• know Hooke’s Law and be able to describe elastic behaviour
• know and be able to use the relationship between momentum,
mass and velocity
• be able to use the idea of momentum to explain safety features
• be able to use the conservation of momentum to calculate mass,
velocity and momentum
• be able to use the relationship between force, change in
momentum and time taken
• understand Newton’s Third Law
• know that moment = force × perpendicular distance from the
pivot
• know that the weight of an object acts through its centre of
gravity
• be able to use the principle of moments to analyse the forces
acting in one plane.
CONSIDER • DISCUSS
1 Can you suggest how many forces are acting on the surfer in the
photograph?
2 How do they balance to keep him upright and moving forwards?

1.1 How fast do things move?
Average speed
When you travel in a fast car you finish a journey in a shorter time than when
you travel in a slower car. If the speed of a car is 100 kilometres per hour (100
km/h), it will travel a distance of 100 kilometres in one hour.
Often, however, we use the equation to calculate an average speed because the
speed of the car changes during the journey. When you travel along a motorway,
your speed does not remain exactly the same. You slow down when you get
stuck behind a lorry and speed up when you pull out to overtake a car.
The average speed of an object can be calculated using the equation:
average speed is in metres per second, m/s distance moved is in metres, m time
taken is in seconds, s 
Example. A train travels 440 km in 3 hours. Calculate its average speed in m/s.
To solve this problem, you need to remember that 1 km = 1000 m and that 1
hour = 3600 s.

Speed and velocity
The word speed is defined in the previous paragraph. When we use the word
velocity we are stating a speed in a certain direction – for example a car has a
velocity of 20 m/s in an easterly direction. Often you will find that speed and
velocity are used interchangeably. However, in International GCSE Physics we
must be careful because sometimes direction is important.
Definition: velocity is a speed in a defined direction 
Distance–time graphs
When an object moves along a straight line, we can represent how far it has
moved using a distance–time graph. Figure 1.2 is a distance–time graph for a
runner. He sets off slowly and travels 20 m in the first 10 seconds. He then
speeds up and travels the next 20 m in 5 seconds.
We can calculate the speed of the runner using the gradient of the graph.
Example. Calculate the speed of the runner using the distance–time graph
(Figure 1.2)
over the first 10 seconds, b) over the time interval 10 s to 15 s.

You can see from the graph that these speeds are the gradients of each part of the
graph.
When you set off on a bicycle ride, it takes time for you to reach your top speed.
You accelerate gradually.
Figure 1.3 shows a distance–time graph for a cyclist at the start of a ride. The
gradient gets steeper as time increases. This tells us that her speed is increasing.
So the cyclist is accelerating.
We can calculate the speed of the cyclist at any point by drawing a tangent to the
curve, and then measuring the gradient.
Example. On the graph in Figure 1.3, a gradient has been drawn at point A, 20
seconds after the start of the ride. Calculate the speed at this time.

Investigating motion
The purpose of this experiment is for you to be able to determine the speed of an
object or a person, by measuring how long it takes something (or someone) to
cover a measured distance.
You can design your own experiments, or base yours on the ideas below.
Go outside and mark places at a separation of 2 m. A pupil walks slowly for 10
m, then walks quickly or runs for 10 m. His motion is recorded by ten students
with stopwatches; they start their watches as the walker starts, and they record
the time that the walker passes.
TIP
You should be familiar with an experiment to investigate the motion of
everyday objects.

1 Plot a graph of distance against time, draw the best straight lines through the
points.
2 Which student was slow to react as the walker passed?
3 Use the graph to determine the walker’s speed:
a) over the first 10 m b) over the second 10 m.
4 Explain the significance of the gradient of the graph.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 A helicopter flies from London to Paris in 2 hours, covering a distance
of 300 km. Calculate the helicopter’s speed in km/h.
2 Curtis cycles to school. Figure 1.5 shows the distance–time graph for
his journey.
a) How long did Curtis stop at the traffic lights?
b) During which part of the journey was Curtis travelling

fastest?
3 A car travels 100 m in a time of 5 s at a constant speed. Sketch a
distance–time graph to show the motion of the car.
4 The table below shows average speeds and times recorded by top
male athletes in several track events. Copy and complete the table.
5 Ravi, Paul and Tina enter a 30 km road race. Figure 1.6 shows
Ravi’s and Paul’s progress through the race.
a) Which runner ran at a constant speed? Explain your answer.
b) Calculate Paul’s average speed for the 30 km run.
c) What happened to Paul’s speed after 2 hours?
Tina was one hour late starting the race. During the race she ran

at a constant speed of 15 km/h.
d) Copy the graph and add to it a line to show how Tina ran.
e) Determine how far Tina had run when she overtook Paul.
6 Sketch a graph of distance travelled (y-axis) against time (x-axis) for
a train coming into a station. The train stops for a while at the station
and then starts again.
7 Determine which of the answers below is the closest to the speed at
point B of Figure 1.3.
a) 4 m/s b) 10 m/s c) 15 m/s

1.2 Acceleration
Starting from the grid, a Formula 1 car reaches a speed of 30 m/s after 2 s. A flea
can reach a speed of 1 m/s after 0.001 s. Which accelerates faster?
Speeding up and slowing down
When a car is speeding up, we say it is accelerating. When it is slowing down we
say it is decelerating.
A car that accelerates rapidly reaches a high speed in a short time. For example,
a car might speed up to 12.5 m/s in 5 seconds. A van could take twice as long, 10
s, to reach the same speed. So the acceleration of the car is twice as big as the
van’s acceleration.
You can calculate the acceleration of an object using the equation:
where acceleration, a, is in metres per second squared, m/s2

change in velocity (v − u) is in metres per second, m/s v is the final velocity after
something has accelerated and u is the velocity before the acceleration.
time, t, taken is in seconds, s 
TIP
The units of acceleration are m/s2
Velocity–time graphs
It can be helpful to plot graphs of velocity against time.
Figure 2.3 shows the velocity–time graph for a cyclist as she goes on a short
journey.
• In the first 8 seconds, she accelerates up to a speed of 12 m/s (section AB of
the graph).
• For the next 8 seconds, she cycles at a constant speed (section BC of the
graph).
• Then for the last 4 seconds of the journey, she decelerates to a stop (section CD
of the graph).
The gradient of the graph gives us the acceleration. In section AB she increases
her speed by 12 m/s in 8 seconds.

You can also work out the distance travelled by calculating the area under the
velocity–time graph. The area under section BC gives the distance travelled
because: 
TIP
The area under a velocity-time graph is the distance travelled.
The distance travelled in the first 8 seconds, the region AB, is calculated using
the formula: 
TIP
The gradient of a velocity-time graph is the acceleration.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 Which is the correct unit for acceleration?
2 Explain the meaning of the words:
a) acceleration b) deceleration.
3 a) Write down the equation which links acceleration to a change of
velocity and time.
b) Use the information at the top of page 5 to calculate the
acceleration of:
i) the F1 car ii) the flea

4 This question refers to the journey shown in Figure 2.3.
a) Calculate the cyclist’s deceleration over region CD of the
graph.
b) Use the area under the graph to calculate the distance
covered during the whole journey.
c) Calculate the average speed over the whole journey.
5 The table shows how the speed, in m/s, of a Formula 1 racing car
changes as it accelerates away from the starting grid at the
beginning of a Grand Prix.
a) Plot a graph of speed (y-axis) against time (x-axis).
b) Use your graph to calculate the acceleration of the car at:
i) 16 s ii) 1 s.
c) Calculate how far the car has travelled after 16 s.
6 Drag cars are designed to cover distances of 400 m in about 6
seconds. During this time the cars accelerate very rapidly from a
standing start. At the end of 6 seconds, a drag car reaches a speed
of 150 m/s.
a) Calculate the drag car’s average speed.
b) Calculate its average acceleration.
7 Copy the table and fill in the missing values.


1.3 Observing and calculating motion
An athlete’s trainer used to watch them and time their motion with a stopwatch.
Now motion can be tracked with a GPS tracker in great detail. Movement can
also be analysed by high speed multiframed photography.
The following practicals show two further ways of analysing motion.
Light gates
The speed of a moving object can also be measured using light gates. Figure 3.2
shows an experiment to determine the acceleration of a rolling ball as it passes
between two light gates. When the ball passes through a light gate, it cuts a beam
of light. This allows the computer to measure the time taken by the ball to pass
through the gate. By knowing the diameter of the ball, the speed of the ball at
each gate can be calculated. You can tell if the ball is accelerating if it speeds up
between light gates A and B. Follow the questions below to show how the gates
can be programmed to do the work for you. The measurements taken in an
experiment are shown here.

1 Explain why it is important to adjust the light gates to the correct height.
2 Calculate the speed of the ball as it goes through:
a) gate A b) gate B.
3 Calculate the ball’s acceleration as it moves from gate A to gate B.
Ticker timer
Changing speeds and accelerations of objects in the laboratory can be measured
directly using light gates, data loggers and computers. However, motion is still
studied using the ticker timer (Figure 3.3), because it collects data in a clear way,
which can be usefully analysed. A ticker timer has a small hammer that vibrates
up and down 50 times per second. The hammer hits a piece of carbon paper,
which leaves a mark on a length of tape.

Figure 3.4 shows you a tape that has been pulled through the timer. You can see
that the dots are close together over the region PQ. Then the dots get further
apart, so the object moved faster over QR. The movement slowed down again
over the last part of the tape, RS. Since the timer produces 50 dots per second,
the time between dots is 1/50 s or 0.02 s. So we can work out the speed: 
1 Work out the speed of the tape in the region QR.
2 Which is the closest to the speed in the region RS?
Equation of Motion
When an object accelerates in a straight line, the final speed, initial speed, the
acceleration and the distance travelled may be connected by the following
equation.

where v is the final velocity in metres per second, m/s
u is the initial (starting) velocity in metres per second, m/s
a is the acceleration in metres per second squared, m/s2
s is the distance in metres, m.
Provided the value of three of the quantities is known, the equation can be
rearranged to calculate the unknown quantity.
Example. The second stage of a rocket accelerates at 3 m/s2. This causes the
velocity of the rocket to increase from 450 m/s to 750 m/s. Calculate the distance
the rocket travels while it is accelerating.
Answer.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 A model car is rolled down a slope in a laboratory. Describe
apparatus and explain how you would use that apparatus to show
that the car is accelerating.
2 The graph shows how the velocity of a jet aircraft increases as it
takes off from the deck of an aircraft carrier.
Calculate its acceleration
a) during the first second b) between 3 and 4 seconds.

3 An aeroplane can accelerate at a rate of 2.5 m/s2. The plane takes off when it
speed reaches 60 m/s. Calculate the minimum length of runway that the plane
needs to take off.

1.4 Introducing forces
A force is a push or a pull. The shot putter pushes the shot and the archer pulls
the string on the bow. Forces are measured in newtons, N. Where does the name
come from?
What is a force?
A force is a push or a pull. Whenever you push or pull something you are
exerting a force on it. The forces that you exert can cause three things:
You can change the shape of an object. You can stretch or squash a spring. You
can bend or break a ruler.
You can change the speed of an object. You can increase the speed of a ball
when you throw it. You decrease its speed when you catch it.
A force can also change the direction in which something is travelling. We
use a steering wheel to turn a car.
The forces described so far are called contact forces. Your hand touches
something to exert a force. There are also non-contact forces. Gravitational,
magnetic and electric forces are non-contact forces. These forces can act over

large distances without two objects touching. The Earth pulls you down whether
or not your feet are on the ground. Although the Earth is 150 million km away
from the Sun, the Sun’s gravitational pull keeps us in orbit around it. Magnets
also exert forces on each other without coming into contact. Electrostatic forces
act between charged objects.
The size of forces
The unit we use to measure force is the newton (N). The box in the margin will
help you to get the feel of the size of several forces.
Large forces can be measured in kilonewtons, kN.
TIP
The size of some forces
• The pull of gravity on a fly = 0.001 N
• The pull of gravity on an apple = 1 N
• The frictional force slowing a rolling football = 2 N
• The force required to squash an egg = 50 N
• The pull of gravity on a 50 kg student = 500 N
• The tension in a rope, towing a car = 1000 N
• The braking force on a car = 5000 N
Vectors and scalars
Vector quantities have both size and direction. Scalar quantities only have size.
Speed is a scalar because we only define how fast something is moving. Velocity
is a vector quantity because we should define both a size and a direction. Figure
4.3 shows the importance of direction: a helicopter can fly at 150 km/h, it can
reach one of three cities in two hours, depending on the direction of travel. When
the helicopter flies to Brussels from London, its velocity is 150 km/h on a
bearing of 110°.
Force is an example of a vector quantity. Vector quantities have both size and
direction. Other examples of vectors are: velocity (the wind blows at 50 km/h
from the North); displacement (a car travels 20 km due East). A quantity that has

only size is a scalar quantity. Some examples of scalar quantities are: mass (3 kg
of potatoes); temperature (20 °C); energy (100 joules).
Some important forces
Weight is the name that we give to the pull of gravity on an object. Near the
Earth’s surface the pull of gravity is approximately 10 N on each kilogram.
Tension is the name given to a force that acts through a stretched rope; when
two teams pull on a rope it is under tension.
Friction is the contact force that slows down moving things. Friction can also
prevent stationary things from starting to move when other forces act on them.

Drawing forces
Figure 4.4 shows two examples of forces acting on Michael: (a) his weight (the
pull of gravity on him) is 800 N; (b) a rope with a tension of 150 N pulls him
forwards.
It is usual for more than one force to act on something. Then we must show all
the forces acting. When Michael is pulled by the rope (Figure 4.5), his weight
still acts on him, and the floor supports him too – if the floor did not exert an
upwards force on him equal to his weight, he would be falling downwards. The
force is called the floor’s normal contact force, R. The floor will also exert a
frictional force on him, in the opposite direction to that in which he is moving.
All these forces are shown together in Figure 4.5.

Adding forces
When two forces act in the same direction, they add up to give a larger resultant
force. In Figure 4.6, for example, two people each push the car with a force of
300 N. The resultant force acting on the car is now 600 N.
If forces act in opposite directions they may cancel each other out. In Figure 4.5
Michael’s weight, which pulls him downwards, is balanced by the upwards force
from the floor. The resultant force is zero; 800 N − 800 N. We say that these
forces are balanced. Michael therefore stays on the floor.
There are other forces that act on Michael; the pull from the rope to the right is
150 N, but the frictional force to the left is 50 N. The resultant horizontal force
on Michael is therefore 150 N − 50 N = 100 N, to the right.
Resultant force and state of motion
The diagrams in Figure 4.7 show two more examples of how forces add up along
a line. In Figure 4.7(a) the dolphin has adjusted his buoyancy so that the upthrust
from the water balances his weight; he can now stay at the same depth. In Figure
4.7(b), a car is moving forwards and increases its speed. The push from the
engine (900 N) is greater than the wind resistance (700 N), so there is an
unbalanced force of 200 N forwards. The car accelerates forwards.

STUDY QUESTIONS
1 a) Give three examples of forces that are pulls, and three examples
that are pushes.
b) For each of the examples of forces you have given, state an
approximate value for the size of the force.
2 A fisherman has caught a large fish and has to use two balances to
weigh it. Look at the diagram to calculate its weight.
3 A golf ball is hit off its tee, 200 m down the fairway. Draw diagrams to
show all the forces acting on the ball:
a) when the ball rests on the tee b) while the club strikes the
ball on the tee c) as the ball is in flight.
4 For each of the diagrams state the size and direction of the resultant
force.
i)

ii)
iii)
iv)
5 Frank’s weight is 800 N and his bike’s weight is 2500 N. Determine
the upwards force exerted by the road on his rear wheel.
6 Calculate the resultant force on this rocket.


1.5 Forces, acceleration and Newton’s laws
of motion
Newton’s laws of motion allowed scientists to calculate how to land a spacecraft
on the Moon.
Can you state three equations that they used in their calculations?
What important device do you use every day that was developed as a result of
the NASA space programme?
Newton’s first law: balanced forces
When the resultant force acting on an object is zero, the forces are balanced and
the object does not accelerate. It remains stationary, or continues to move in a
straight line at a constant speed.
Figure 5.2 and 5.3 show some examples where the resultant force is zero.
• A person is standing still. Two forces act on him: his weight downwards and
the normal contact force from the floor upwards. The forces balance; he
remains stationary.
• A car moves along the road. The forwards push from the road on the car is

balanced by the air resistance on the car. The forces are balanced and so the car
moves with a constant speed in a straight line.
• A spacecraft is in outer space, so far away from any star that the gravitational
force is zero. There are no frictional forces. So the resultant force is zero. The
spacecraft is either at rest or moving in a straight line at a constant speed.
The speed and/or direction of an object will only change if a resultant force acts
on the object.
Newton’s second law: unbalanced forces
When an unbalanced force acts on an object it accelerates. The object could
speed up, slow down or change direction. Figure 5.4 shows two examples of
unbalanced forces acting on a body.
• The spacecraft has turned its engine on. There is a force pushing the craft
forwards, so it accelerates.
• The driver has taken his foot off the accelerator while the car is moving
forwards. There is an air resistance force that acts to decelerate the car.

Force, mass and acceleration
You may have seen people pushing a car with a flat battery. When one person
tries to push a car, the acceleration is very slow. When three people give the car a
push, it accelerates more quickly.
You will know from experience that large objects are difficult to get moving.
When you throw a ball you can accelerate your arm more quickly if the ball has
a small mass. You can throw a tennis ball much faster than you put a shot. A shot
has a mass of about 7 kg so your arm cannot apply a force large enough to
accelerate it as rapidly as a tennis ball.
Newton’s second law states that
• acceleration is proportional to the resultant force
• acceleration is inversely proportional to the mass
This can be written as an equation: 
resultant force = mass × acceleration where force is in newtons, N
mass is in kilograms, kg acceleration is in metres per second squared, m/s2
TIP
When using F = ma, F means resultant force.

Example. The mass of the car in Figure 5.5 is 1200 kg. Calculate the
acceleration.
Note
First we had to work out the resultant force.
The acceleration is in the same direction as the resultant force, so the car speeds
up or accelerates.
TIP
When you use the equation F = ma, the force must be in N, the mass
in kg and the acceleration in m/s2
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 a) A car is stationary on some ice on a road. Explain why the car
might have difficulty starting to move on ice.
b) A sprinter fixes blocks into the ground to help him get a good
start. Explain how these assist him.
2 You leave a parcel on the seat of a car. When you brake suddenly,
the parcel falls onto the floor. Explain why.
3 The diagram shows the direction of a force on a model car. Which of
the following is a possible state of motion for the car? Explain your
answers.

a) Staying at rest.
b) Beginning to move backwards.
c) Moving backwards at a constant speed.
d) Slowing down while moving forwards.
4 Draw all the forces that act on a plane
a) just after take off b) while flying at a constant speed at a
constant height.
5 Trains accelerate slowly out of stations. Why is their acceleration
slower than that of a car?
6 You are in a spacecraft in a region where there is no gravitational
pull. You have two biscuit tins, one of which has no biscuits (because
you have eaten them) and the other is full. How can you tell which is
full, without opening the lid?
7 a) Calculate the acceleration of a mass of 3 kg, which experiences a
resultant force of 15 N.
b) Calculate the mass of an object that experiences an
acceleration of 4 m/s2 when a resultant force of 10 N acts on it.
8 The figure shows an experimental arrangement for measuring the
acceleration of a trolley and then investigating how the acceleration
depends on the applied force.

a) The slope of the table is adjusted to compensate for friction.
How is this done? Explain why this is important.
In the diagram, the trolley has a mass of 0.7 kg and the three
masses each have a mass of 0.1 kg.
b) i) State the accelerating force on the trolley and masses
on the string.
ii) State the total mass being accelerated by that force.
iii) Calculate the acceleration you would be expect the
masses and the trolley to have when released.
When a student accelerates the trolley, she uses a ticker tape to
analyse its motion. She discovers that the trolley accelerates over a
distance of 29.4 cm in a time of 0.44 s.
c) i) Calculate the average speed of the trolley over the
distance travelled.
ii) State the final speed of the trolley after it has travelled
29.4 cm. Why is this twice the average speed?
iii) Now calculate the acceleration of the trolley.
d) i) Explain how you would use the weights on the trolley
to vary the accelerating force, while keeping the mass
accelerated constant.
ii) Design a second experiment to investigate how the mass
of an object affects its acceleration for a constant applied
force.

1.6 Applying forces
When you drop something it accelerates downwards, moving faster and faster
until it hits the ground. In 1589 Galileo demonstrated to the crowds in Pisa that
objects of different masses fall to the ground at the same rate. He dropped a large
iron cannon ball and a small one. Both balls hit the ground at the same time.
They accelerated at the same rate of about 10 m/s2. Aristotle, the Greek
philosopher, had previously taught that heavier objects fall more quickly.
Weight and mass
The size of the Earth’s gravitational pull on an object is proportional to its mass.
The Earth pulls a 1 kg mass with a force of 10 N and a 2 kg mass with a force of
20 N. We say that the strength of the Earth’s gravitational field, g, is 10 N/kg.
The weight, W, of an object is the force that gravity exerts on it, which is equal
to the object’s mass × the pull of gravity on each kilogram.
The value of g is roughly the same everywhere on the Earth, but away from the
Earth it has different values. The Moon is smaller than the Earth and pulls things
towards it less strongly. On the Moon’s surface the value of g is 1.6 N/kg. In
space, far away from all stars and planets, there are no gravitational pulls, so g is
zero, and therefore everything is weightless.
Example. Calculate the weight of a 70 kg man on the Moon.

The size of g also gives us the gravitational acceleration, because:
The difference between mass and weight
Weight is the pull of gravity on an object. Weight is a force measured in
newtons, N. The weight of an object depends on the gravitational field strength
of a planet.
The mass of an object is always the same anywhere and is not affected by a
planet’s gravitational pull; it depends on the amount of matter in the object. Mass
is measured in kilograms, kg.
Mass is also a measure of how difficult it is to accelerate an object.
Since acceleration 
 a large mass accelerates more slowly than a small
mass, when the same force is applied to each.
Falling and parachuting
You have read above that everything accelerates towards the ground at the same
rate. But that is only true if the effects of air resistance are small. If you drop a
feather you know that it will flutter slowly towards the ground. That is because
the size of the air resistance on the feather is only slightly less than the
downwards pull of gravity.
The size of the air resistance on an object depends on the area of the object and
its speed:
The larger the area, the larger the air resistance.
The larger the speed, the larger the air resistance.

Figure 6.2 shows the effect of air resistance on two balls, which are the same
size and shape, but the red ball has a mass of 0.1 kg and the blue ball a mass of 1
kg. The balls are moving at the same speed, so the air resistance is the same, 1
N, on each. The pull of gravity on the red ball is balanced by air resistance, so it
now moves at a constant speed. It will not go any faster and we say it has
reached terminal velocity. For the blue ball, however, the pull of gravity is
greater than the air resistance so it continues to accelerate.
Figure 6.4 shows how the speed of a sky diver changes as she falls towards the
ground. The graph has five distinct parts:
OA. She accelerates at about 10 m/s2 just after leaving the aeroplane.
AB. The effects of air resistance mean that her acceleration gets less as there is
now a force acting in the opposite direction to her weight.
BC. The air resistance force is the same as her weight. She now moves at a
constant speed because the resultant force acting on her is zero.
CD. She opens her parachute at C. There is now a very large air resistance force
so she decelerates rapidly.
DE. The air resistance force on her parachute is the same size as her weight, so
she falls at constant speed until she hits the ground at E.


Driving safely – 1
When you learn to drive, the most important thing you must understand is not
how to start, but how to stop. Coming to a halt safely is vital for your own and
others’ well-being.
Stopping distance
When you are driving you should be aware of your stopping distance for a
particular speed. The stopping distance is the sum of your thinking distance and
braking distance. The thinking distance is the distance the car travels while you
react to a hazard ahead – it takes time for you to take your foot off the
accelerator and apply the brake.
If you are travelling at 13 m/s, which is just less than 50 km/h (a typical speed in
a city) and your reaction time is 0.7 s, your thinking distance will be: 
You will have travelled about 9 m before you begin to brake.
What affects your reaction time?
You will react more slowly if you are tired, so you should take a break from
driving every few hours. Some medicines might make you drowsy, so you
should not drive if you are taking these medicines. It is illegal to drive under the
influence of alcohol or drugs, both of which slow your reactions and impair your
judgement. Your reaction time is longer if you are distracted by using your
phone or changing your music.
Braking distance
Your braking distance depends on your speed. Table 1 shows typical braking
distances for a saloon car. There is a gap in the second column, which you will
be able to fill in when you answer Study Question 7.

Certain factors can increase your braking distance:
Icy or wet roads can reduce the grip on the tyres.
Gravel, mud or oil on the road can reduce the grip on the tyres.
Worn tyres can reduce their grip on the road.
Worn brake pads can reduce the braking force.
A heavily laden car means there is more mass to slow, so the deceleration is less
and the braking distance increased.
Your braking distance will be longer if you are going downhill, as gravity is
pulling the car forwards.

Visibility
It is dangerous to drive fast when the visibility is restricted by heavy rain, or mist
or fog. You need to make sure that you are able to stop within the distance you
can see ahead.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 A student wrote ‘my weight is 67 kg’. What is wrong with this
statement, and what do you think his weight really is?
2 A hammer has a mass of 1 kg. What is its weight a) on Earth, b) on
the Moon, c) in outer space?
3 Explain this observation: ‘when a sheet of paper is dropped it flutters
down to the ground, but when the same sheet of paper is screwed
up into a ball it accelerates rapidly downwards when dropped’.
4 Refer to Figure 6.2 and explain the following.
a) Why is the red ball falling at a constant speed?
b) Why does the blue ball fall with an acceleration of 9 m/s2?
5 This question refers to the speed–time graph in Figure 6.4.
a) Determine the speed of the sky diver when she hit the
ground.
b) Why is her acceleration over the part AB less than it was at
the beginning of her fall?
c) Use the graph to estimate roughly how far she fell during her
dive. Was it nearer 100 m, 1000 m, or 10 000 m?
d) Use the information in the graph at point E to make a rough
estimate of the acceleration on landing.
6 The graph (right) shows how the force of air resistance on our sky
diver’s parachute changes with her speed of fall.
a) State the resistive force acting on her when she is travelling
at a constant speed of 5 m/s.
b) Explain why your answer to part a) must be the same size
as her weight.
c) Use the graph to predict the terminal velocity of the following
people using the same parachute:

i) a boy of weight 400 N
ii) a man of weight 1000 N.
d) Make a copy of the graph and add to it a sketch to show
how you think the air resistance force would vary on a parachute
with twice the area of the one used by our sky diver.
7 List three features that affect:
a) The thinking distance for a driver b) The breaking distance
of a car.
8 Copy Table 1 and add to it two further columns headed ‘thinking
distance’ and ‘stopping distance’.
a) Calculate the thinking distances for the speeds listed,
assuming your reaction time is 0.6 s.
b) Now fill in the stopping distances where you can.
c) Plot a graph to show the stopping distances (y-axis) against
the speed (x-axis).
d) Use your graph to predict the stopping distance for a speed
of 25 m/s. Now also fill in the braking distance for a speed of 25
m/s.
e) Calculate the maximum safe speed if the visibility is limited
to 50 m.

1.7 Stretching
Our muscles exert forces when they are stretched. An exercise rope helps this
woman stretch and tone up her muscles. On most occasions our muscles behave
elastically. What does this mean? Describe what happens to a muscle when too
much force is applied to it.
If one force only is applied to an object, for example a car, then it will change
speed or direction. If we want to change the shape of an object, we have to apply
more than one force to it.
Figure 7.3 shows some examples of how balanced forces can change the shape
of some objects. Because the forces balance, the objects remain stationary.
• Two balanced forces can stretch a spring.
• Two balanced forces can compress a beam.
• Three balanced forces cause a beam to bend.

Sometimes when an object has been stretched, it returns to its original length
after the forces are removed. If this happens, the object experiences elastic
deformation.
Sometimes an object that has been stretched does not return to its original length
when the forces are removed. If the object remains permanently stretched, the
object experiences inelastic deformation.
Elastic and inelastic deformations can be shown easily by stretching a spring in
the laboratory. When small forces are applied and then removed, the spring
returns to its original length and shape. When large forces are applied and then
removed, the spring does not return to its original length.
You can also explore elastic and inelastic behaviour with an empty drinks can.
When you squeeze the can gently, it springs back to its original shape when you
remove your fingers. However, by applying larger forces you can change the
can’s shape permanently.
Stretching a spring
For a spring that is elastically deformed, the force exerted on a spring and the
extension of the spring are linked by the equation:
Where: force is in newtons, N
spring constant is in newtons per metre, N/m
extension is in metres, m
The spring constant is a measure of how stiff a spring is. If k is large, the spring
is stiff and difficult to stretch. When a spring has a spring constant of 180 N/m,
this means that a force of 180 N must be applied to stretch the spring 1 m. The

equation, F = k × e, can also be applied to the compression of a stiff spring by
two forces. In this case, e is the distance by which the spring has been
compressed (squashed).
Example. George uses a spring to weigh a fish he has just caught. The spring
stretches 8 cm. George knows that the spring constant is 300 N/m. Calculate the
weight of the fish.
Remember: you must convert the 8 cm to 0.08 m, because the spring constant is
measured in N/m.
Investigating the relationship between force and
the extension of a spring
Method
1 Set up the apparatus as shown in Figure 7.4. Make sure that the ruler is vertical
and close to the spring.
2 Measure the position of the bottom of the spring on the metre rule. This is l0.
3 Extend the spring by placing a 100 g mass on the bottom. This exerts a force of
1.0 N. Measure the new position of the bottom of the spring. This is l1.
4 Calculate the extension of the spring l1 − l0.
5 Now construct a suitable table to record the applied force, original length,
extended length and the extension.
6 Add a further weight so that the spring is stretched by a force of 2 N. Record
the new length l2, and new extension l2 − l0.
7 Repeat the procedure up to a weight of 6 N.

Analysing the results
1 Plot a graph of the extension of the spring against the force applied to it.
2 Draw a straight line of best fit through your results.
3 What conclusion can you draw from your results?
Advisory notes
1 Before starting the experiment, check that 6 N is an appropriate force to stretch
the spring.
2 Sometimes new springs are compressed. Under those circumstances begin with
one weight on the spring, and use that length as l0.
3 Make sure the retort stand is clamped to the bench or weighted down so that it
cannot topple over.
PRACTICAL
Safety: during the investigation you should wear safety glasses.

Limit of proportionality
The graph in Figure 7.5 shows some typical results as you increase the weights
to stretch the spring. In this case you can see that the extension is proportional to
the force up to a force of 7 N. This is called the limit of proportionality.
Beyond this point there is a greater extension for each weight added to the
spring.
The spring constant for the spring can be calculated from the linear section of the
graph by dividing the force by the extension:
The fact that the initial linear extension of a spring is proportional to the Force is
known as Hooke’s Law.
Further investigations
1 You can use the same apparatus (in Figure 7.4) and procedure for measuring
the extension of a rubber band as different forces are applied to it. Question 4
refers to the extension–force graph for rubber.
2 If you want to investigate the extension of a metal wire – copper for example –
you will find it best to use a long piece of wire stretched along a bench as
shown in Figure 7.6.

Your teacher will provide a wire of suitable thickness for the investigation. A
wire diameter of about 0.2 mm or 0.3 mm works well.
If the wire snaps the mass may damage the floor as it falls – place some
padding beneath it just in case.
TIP
If a material obeys Hooke’s Law, the extension is proportional to the
load. When the load doubles the extension doubles too.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 Explain what is meant by:
a) elastic deformation b) inelastic deformation.
2 This question refers to the graph of the extension of a spring shown
in Figure 7.5.
a) Up to what extension does the spring obey Hooke’s Law?
b) Use the graph to determine the spring constant for the
spring.
3 A force of 600 N is applied to compress a car suspension spring, that
has a spring constant of 20 000 N/m.
Calculate the compression of the spring.

4 Figure 7.7 shows an extension–force graph for a rubber band.
a) Explain whether the rubber band obeys Hooke’s Law.
b) Describe the relationship between extension and the applied
force.
5 Figure 7.8 shows an extension/force graph for a long thin copper
wire. When the wire is stretched beyond A, it does not return to its
original length.

a) Describe the relationship between the extension of the wire
and the applied force. In your answer include the words elastic,
inelastic and limit of proportionality.
b) Discuss whether a copper wire obeys Hooke’s Law.

1.8 Momentum
Momentum is defined as the product of mass and velocity.
The units of momentum are kilogram metres per second, kg m/s.
Velocity is a vector quantity and therefore momentum is too. You must give a
size and a direction when you talk about momentum. Look at Figure 8.2, where
you can see two objects moving in opposite directions. One has positive
momentum and the other negative momentum.
Forces and change of momentum
When a force, F, pushes a mass, m, we can relate it to the mass and acceleration,
using the equation:
The acceleration is defined by the equation:

These two equations can be combined to give:
Because (mass × change of velocity) is the change of momentum, the force can
be written as:
Example. A mass of 7 kg is accelerated from a velocity of 2 m/s to 6 m/s in 0.5 s.
Calculate the force applied.
Momentum and safety
The equation relating force and change of momentum is important when it
comes to considering a number of safety features in our lives. If you are moving
you have momentum. To stop moving a force must be applied. But the equation
shows us that if we stop over a long period of time, the force to slow us is
smaller. This way we get hurt less.
Here are some examples of how we protect ourselves by increasing the time we
or another object has to stop.
• When we catch a fast ball we move our hands backwards with the ball.
• We wear shin pads in hockey so that the ball has more time to stop when it hits
us.
• When we jump off a wall we bend our legs when we land, so that we stop in a
longer time.
• Children’s playgrounds have soft, rubberised matting under climbing frames,
so that a faller takes longer to stop.
• In a bungee jump the elastic rope slows your fall gradually.
TIP
Make sure you understand and can explain these examples.

Driving safely – 2
Figure 8.3 shows two cars being tested in a trial crash. In the centre of the cars
are rigid passenger cells, which are designed not to buckle in a crash. However,
the front and back of the cars are designed to buckle in a crash – these are the
crumple zones. These zones absorb energy and also reduce the deceleration by
increasing the time and the distance to slow the passenger. The force acting on
the passenger is less.
Seat belts
Another vital safety feature in a car is a seat belt – you must wear one by law in
most countries. Figure 8.4 shows some statistics that illustrate how wearing seat
belts has reduced the rate of serious injuries in car crashes.

There is some ‘give’ in a seat belt, which allows the passenger to slow over a
longer distance. The seat belt allows you to take advantage of the time it takes
the crumple zone to buckle. The graph in Figure 8.5 shows approximate
decelerations of two passengers in a car crash. Helen was wearing a seat belt and
John was not. Helen decelerated over a period of 0.1 s while the front of the car
crumpled. John kept moving forwards until he hit the windscreen. His
deceleration was much larger as he stopped in a shorter time. John received very
serious injuries.


STUDY QUESTIONS
1 A car of mass 1200 kg moves at a speed of 30 m/s. Calculate its
momentum.
2 Using your knowledge of momentum, explain:
a) why you bend your knees when you land after a jump b)
why cars are designed to have crumple zones.
3 Explain why passengers should wear seat belts in cars and coaches.
4 Explain why it hurts more if you fall over on concrete than it does if
you fall over on grass.
5 This question refers to Figure 8.5. John’s mass is 80 kg and Helen’s
mass is 60 kg.
a) Use the graph to calculate the force that acted on each of
them as they decelerated. Explain why John received more
serious injuries than Helen.
b) Use the graph (Figure 8.5) and the equation: 
to calculate the speed of the car before the crash.
c) Helen was driving the car and was responsible for the
crash. She was breathalysed by the police and found to be
over the drink-drive limit. What measures should
governments take to deter drink-drivers?
6 In the UK in 1966, 7985 people were killed in road accidents
and 65 000 seriously injured. In 2013, 1713 people were killed
in road accidents and 20 800 seriously injured. Suggest six
factors that have improved road safety during this period of
time.

1.9 Collisions and explosions
When the firework explodes, stored chemical energy is transferred to kinetic
energy and thermal energy. But the momentum after the explosion is the same as
it was before the explosion. Can you explain why?
Conservation of momentum
When it comes to calculating what happens in collisions and explosions,
momentum is a very useful quantity. Momentum is always conserved.
When two bodies collide, the total momentum they have is the same after the
collision as it was before the collision.
Figure 9.2 shows two ice hockey players colliding on the ice. When they meet
they push each other – the blue player’s momentum decreases and the red
player’s momentum increases by the same amount.

Before the collision the total momentum was: 
TIP
In a collision between two bodies, where no external force acts on
then, momentum is always conserved 
This makes a total of 740 kg m/s.
After the collision the total momentum was: 
This makes a total of 740 kg m/s – the same as before.
Momentum as a vector
Figure 9.3 shows a large estate car colliding head-on with a smaller saloon car.
They both come to a halt. How is momentum conserved here?

Momentum is a vector quantity. In Figure 9.3(a) you can see that the red car has
a momentum of + 1500 kg m/s and the blue car has momentum of − 1500 kg
m/s. So the total momentum is zero before the collision – there is as much
positive momentum as negative momentum. After the collision they have both
stopped moving and the total momentum remains zero.
Investigating collisions
Figure 9.4 shows how you can investigate conservation of momentum using
laboratory trolleys. One trolley is pushed into a second stationary trolley and the
speeds measured before and after the collision. These speeds can be measured
with light gates and data loggers, or with ticker tape.
In Figure 9.4(a) a trolley of mass 1 kg, travelling at 1 m/s, collides with an
identical trolley, which is at rest. They stick together. The momentum before the
collision is: 
The trolleys move off after the collision with the same total momentum of 1 kg
m/s, but this is shared by the two trolleys, so they move with a speed of 0.5 m/s.
What happens in Figure 9.4(b)?
The total momentum before the collision is: 

The momentum after the collision = 3 kg m/s (momentum is conserved). The
trolleys stick together to make a new mass of 3 kg, which now carries the
momentum. So: 
The unknown speed, v, is therefore 1 m/s.
Newton’s third law
Newton’s third law of motion states that: to every force there is an equal and
opposite force. This law sounds easy to apply, but it requires clear thinking.
First, it is important to appreciate that the pair of forces mentioned in the law act
on different bodies. Some examples are given in Figure 9.5.
a) If I push you with a force of 100 N, you push me back with a force of 100 N
in the opposite direction.
b) When you walk, you push the ground backwards; the ground pushes you
forwards.
c) A spacecraft orbiting the Earth is pulled downwards by Earth’s gravity; the
spacecraft exerts an equal and opposite gravitational pull on the Earth. This
means that as the spacecraft moves, the Earth moves too. But the Earth is so
big that it only moves a tiny amount – far too little for us to notice.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 Explain why momentum is a vector quantity.
2 Explain what is meant by the conservation of momentum.
3 In Figure 9.3 two cars collided head-on. Each driver had a mass of

70 kg.
a) Calculate the change of momentum for each driver.
b) The cars stopped in 0.25 s. Calculate the average force that
acted on each driver.
c) Explain which driver is more likely to be seriously injured.
4 In each of the following experiments shown in the diagrams, the two
trolleys collide and stick together, Work out the speeds of the trolleys
after their collisions.
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
5 A lorry of mass 18 000 kg collides with a stationary car of mass 2000
kg.
a) Calculate the momentum of the lorry before the collision.
b) After the collision the lorry and car move off together. State
their combined momentum after the collision.
c) Calculate the speed of the lorry and car after the collision.
d) Each of the drivers of the car and lorry has a mass of 80 kg.
Calculate their changes of momentum during the collision.
e) The collision last for 0.2 s. Calculate the force that acts on
each driver during the collision. Explain which driver is more
likely to be injured.
f) Explain why a crumple zone protects the drivers in a
collision.
6 Apply Newton’s third law of motion to explain the following:

a) A gun recoils when it is fired.
b) When you lean against a wall you do not fall over.
c) You have to push water backwards so that you can swim
forwards.
7 A field gun of mass 1000 kg, which is free to move, fires a shell of
mass 10 kg at a speed of 200 m/s.
a) Calculate the momentum of the shell after firing.
b) State the momentum of the gun just after firing.
c) Calculate the recoil velocity of the gun.
d) Why do you think very large guns are mounted on railway
trucks?

1.10 Turning moments
If you have ever tried changing the wheel of a car, you will know that you are
not strong enough to undo the nuts with your fingers. You need a spanner to get
a large turning effect. You need a long spanner and a large force.
The size of the turning effect a force exerts about a point is called a turning
moment. The turning moment is increased by applying a large force and by
using a long lever.
Perpendicular means ‘at right angles’. Figure 10.2 shows you why this distance
is important. In Figure 10.2(a) you get no turning effect at all as the force acts
straight through the pivot, P. In Figure 10.2(b) you can calculate the turning
moment.

Turning forces in action
Figures 10.3 to 10.6 show four examples of how tools can be used to give us
large turning moments.

Lifting loads
Turning moments need to be considered when lifting heavy loads with a mobile
crane (Figure 10.7). If the turning effect of the load is too large the crane will tip
over. So, inside his cab, the crane operator has a table to tell him the greatest
load that the crane can lift for a particular working radius.

TIP
The unit of a turning moment is N m or N cm.
Table 1 shows you how this works. For example, the crane can lift a load of 60
tonnes safely with a working radius of 16 m. If the crane is working at a radius
of 32 m, it can only lift 30 tonnes. You get the same turning effect by doubling
the working radius and lifting half the load.
Centre of gravity
Figure 10.9(a) on the next page shows a see-saw that is balanced about its

midpoint. Gravity has the same turning effect on the right-hand side of the see-
saw, as it has on the left-hand side. The resultant turning effect is zero.
The action of the weight of the see-saw is the same as a single force, W, which
acts downwards through the pivot (Figure 10.9(b)). This force has no turning
moment about the pivot. As the see-saw is stationary, the pivot must exert an
upwards force R on it, which is equal to W.
When the see-saw is not pivoted about its midpoint, the weight will act to turn it
(Figure 10.9(c)).

The point that the weight acts through is called the centre of gravity. The centre
of gravity of the see-saw lies at its midpoint because it has a regular shape. In
Figure 10.9(d) the centre of gravity lies nearer the thick end of the shape.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 a) When you cannot undo a tight screw, you use a screwdriver with a
large handle. Explain why.
b) Explain why door handles are not put near hinges.
2 Look at the crane in Figure 10.7.
a) What is meant by working radius?
b) Use the scale in Figure 10.7 to show that the working radius
of the crane is 26 m.
c) Use the data in Table 1 to calculate the greatest load that
the crane can lift safely in this position.
d) Laura, a student engineer, makes this comment: ‘You can
see from the driver’s table that the crane can lift 960 tonnes,
when the working radius is 1 m.’ Do you agree with her?
3 a) A crowbar is used to lever a nail out of a block of wood. Use the
information in the diagram to calculate the size of the turning
moment exerted.
b) A student finds that the minimum force required to lift up the
lid of a computer is 6.4 N.
i) Calculate the moment of the force that opens the
computer.
ii) Explain why the minimum force required to close the
computer lid is likely to be less than 6.4 N.

4 A passenger in an airport has a case with wheels.
She decides it will be easier to pull the case if she packs all the
heavy items of luggage nearest the wheels.
Explain why this is a good idea. Include ideas about turning
moments in your answer.
5 The diagram shows some apparatus being used to find the centre of
gravity of a piece of card. Three small holes have been made in the
card. There is a retort stand that supports a cork with a pin it. There
is also a weight attached to a thin piece of cotton.
Explain carefully how you would use this apparatus to find the
centre of gravity of the card.

1.11 Balancing forces
This tightrope walker is helped if he has a head for heights and an understanding
of physics. What conditions must exist for him to remain balanced? How does
the pole help him?
Balancing
In Figure 11.2 you can see Jaipal and Mandy sitting on a see-saw, which is
balanced. It balances because the turning moment produced by Jaipal’s weight
exactly balances the turning moment produced by Mandy’s weight in the
opposite direction.
The turning moments balance. The seesaw is in equilibrium.
In equilibrium:

 the sum of the anti-clockwise moments = the sum of the clockwise moments •
the sum of the forces balance.
TIP
When an object is balanced (or in equilibrium) the turning forces in one
direction balance the turning forces in the opposite direction.
Moments in action
In Figure 11.3 a small crane is being used to load a boat. A counterbalance
weight on the left-hand side is used to stabilise the crane and to stop it from
toppling over.
These turning moments keep the beam in equilibrium.

A window cleaner is carrying his ladder (Figure 11.4). The weight of the ladder
and the bucket exert a downwards turning moment behind him. He must balance
this by pulling down on the ladder in front of him.
In Figure 11.5 a nut is being cracked by a nutcracker. How big are the forces F,
acting on the nut?
Just before the nut cracks, the turning moments of the forces, F, balance the
turning moments of the 20 N forces.

This is the force which the nut exerts on the nutcracker. Newton’s 3rd law tells
us that the nutcracker exerts the same force on the nut, in the opposite direction.
Forces on beams
In Figure 11.6 a man is running with a constant velocity across a light bridge
(which has a negligible weight). How do the forces at A and at B change as he
crosses?
There are three easy places where you can use common sense to calculate the
forces:
When he is at A, the upward force at A is 1000 N and the upward force at B is
zero.
When he is at B, the upward force at B is 1000 N and the upward force at A is
zero.
When he is at C, the centre of the bridge, the upward force at each of A and B is
500 N.
When the man is 1 m from A you can use your knowledge of moments to see
that A will support more of his weight than B. The exact force can be calculated
using the principle of moments.
The turning moment of the man’s weight about A is balanced by the turning
moment of the upward force at B.
The upward force at A is 800 N, as together the two forces A and B must add up

to 1000 N.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 a) Explain why cranes use counterbalances.
b) In Figure 11.3 the dock workers want to load a heavier
weight into the boat. Which way should they move the
counterbalance to balance the crane? Explain your answer by
referring to turning moments.
c) A load of 1200 N is now lifted into the boat. Calculate where
the counterbalance should be placed now.
2 This question refers to the window cleaner in Figure 11.4.
a) Calculate the turning moment due to the weight of the
bucket about the window cleaner’s shoulder.
b) Calculate the turning moment due to the weight of the ladder
about his shoulder.
c) State the size of the turning moment his arm must produce
to balance these turning moments.
d) Calculate the size of the force, F, which the window cleaner
must exert.
e) A friend suggests that his ladder would be easier to carry if
he put the bucket at the other end. Use your knowledge of
moments to discuss why this is a good idea.
f) Can you make a further suggestion, which would make the
ladder easier for the man to carry?
3 The diagram shows a pair of cutters.

a) Explain why they have long handles.
b) You want to cut some thick wire. Use your knowledge of
moments to explain whether it is better to put the wire at A or B.
c) Wire that needs a force of 210 N to cut it is placed at B, 5
cm from the pivot. How big a force will you need to exert at the
ends of the handle to cut the wire?
4 This question refers to the man running across the bridge in Figure
11.6.
a) Calculate the size of the upward forces at A and B when he
is 1 m away from B.
b) Using the information in the text and your answer to part a),
sketch a graph of the way the upward force at A changes as the
man runs from A to B.
c) Calculate the sizes of the forces at A and B when he is 3 m
away from A and 2 m away from B.

Summary
I am confident that:
✓ I can recall these facts about forces and motion
• Average speed = distance/time • The unit of speed is m/s.
• Acceleration = change of velocity/time • The unit of acceleration is
m/s2.
• The gradient of a distance–time graph is the speed.
• The area under a velocity–time graph is the distance travelled.
• The gradient of a veolocity–time graph is the acceleration.
• A force is a push or a pull.
• The unit of force is the newton, N.
• Force is a vector quantity.
• Air resistance increases with speed.
• Newton’s first law: if balanced forces act on an object, it remains at
rest or moves with constant speed in a straight line.
• Newton’s second law: resultant force = mass × acceleration • Newton’s
third law: to every force there is an equal and opposite force.
✓ I can recall these facts about stopping distances
• Thinking distances are affected by the driver’s reaction time.
• The reaction time can be slower if the driver is sleepy, has taken drugs
or alcohol or is distracted.
• Braking distances depend on the speed and mass of the car.
• Braking distances are increased: if the tread on the tyres is worn; if the
brakes are worn; if the road is covered with water, ice or mud; if you are
going downhill.
✓ I understand and can describe these facts about stretching
• The extension varies with the applied force for springs, metal wires and
rubber bands.
• Hooke’s law states that the extension of a spring or wire is proportional
to the applied force. This law is associated with the initial linear region of a
force–extension graph.
• Elastic materials return to their original shape when a force is removed.
✓ I can recall these facts about momentum
• momentum = mass × velocity • The units of momentum are kg m/s.
• Momentum is a vector quantity.
• force = change of momentum/time • In collisions, the forces acting are
smaller when the time is longer. This is important when designing crumple
zones in cars.

• Momentum is conserved in collisions and explosions.
✓ I can recall and use these facts about turning forces
• moment = force × perpendicular distance from the pivot • The unit of
moment is Nm • The weight of a body acts through its centre of gravity.
• The principle of moments states that in equilibrium the turning
moments balance on a body.
• The upward forces on a light beam, supported at its ends, vary with the
position of a heavy object placed on the beam.

Sample answers and expert’s comments
1 The graph shows how the velocities of two cars, A and B, change after they
accelerate from rest.
a) Use the graph to estimate the speed of car B, in m/s, after 3 seconds.
(1)
b) Which car accelerates faster during the first 4 seconds? Explain your
answer.
(2)
c) Calculate how far car A travels, in m, between 4 and 10 seconds.
(2)
d) State the equation which links acceleration, change of speed and
time. Use the graph to calculate the acceleration of car B between 6 and 10
seconds. State the unit of acceleration.
(4)
(Total for question = 9 marks)

2 A student sets up the apparatus shown below to investigate the principle of
moments.
She hangs a 4 N weight from the 50 cm mark on the ruler.
She uses a force meter to hold the ruler in a horizontal position.
The force meter reads from 0 N to 20 N.
a) Explain how the student checks that the ruler is horizontal.
(2)
b) i) State the equation which links moment, force and distance from

the pivot.
(1)
ii) Calculate the moment of the 4 N weight. State the unit.
(3)
c) The student holds the ruler horizontal with the force meter on the 20
cm mark. She calculates that the meter will read 10 N.
i) Show how she reached the answer of 10 N.
(3)
ii) The actual reading is 12 N. Explain why the correct reading
should be greater than 10 N.
(2)
d) The picture shows two farmers using a pole to carry some vegetables.
The two farmers feel different forces from the pole. Use ideas about
moments to explain why farmer B feels the larger force.
(3)
(Total for question = 14 marks)

3 The diagram shows a spacecraft which is ready to take off from the Moon’s
surface.
The mass of the spacecraft is 30 000 kg.
a) The weight of the spacecraft of the Moon is 48 000 N. Calculate the
Moon’s gravitational field strength. State the unit of gravitational field
strength.
(3)
b) When the spacecraft takes off, the upward force on it is 63 000 N.
Calculate the resultant force acting on the spacecraft.
(1)
c) Write an equation which links resultant force, mass and acceleration.
Calculate the acceleration of the spacecraft, in m/s2, when it takes off.
(3)
d) Write an equation which links change of speed, acceleration and
time. Calculate the speed of the spacecraft, in m/s, after 60 seconds.
(3)
(Total for question = 10 marks)


Exam-style questions
1 The unit of acceleration is:
a) m/s b) m/s2
c) ms2
d) (m/s)2
2 The unit of a turning moment is:
a) Nm b) N/m c) m/N
d) N/m2
3 In diagram A the skydiver is falling at a constant speed. Which of the
following is the value of the drag force X?
a) Just less than 700 N
b) Slightly more than 700 N
c) 700 N
d) It is impossible to predict because we do not know her speed
4 In diagram B the skydiver has just opened her parachute. Which of the
following correctly describes her motion in the next few seconds?
a) She flies upwards b) She decelerates until the drag force is 700 N and
she then falls at a constant speed.
c) She slows down until she stops falling.
d) She slows down until the drag force is just a little more than 700 N
5 A cyclist increases his speed from 5 m/s to 7 m/s in 5 seconds. This
acceleration is:
a) 2 m/s b) 2 m/s2
c) 0.4 m/s d) 0.4 m/s2

6 The cyclist and his bicycle in question 5 have a mass of 50 kg. The resistive
force, R, acting on him is: 
a) 50 N
b) 70 N
c) 10 N
d) 20 N
7 The unit of momentum is:
a) kg/s b) kg m/s2
c) kg m d) kg m/s
8 A car of mass 800 kg travels at a constant speed. It travels 80 m in 4 seconds.
The momentum of the car is:
a) 6400 kg m b) 3200 kg s c) 16 000 kg m/s d) 160 0000 N m/s
9 The moment of the bucket of water about P is:
a) 360 Nm b) 360 W
c) 1440 Nm d) 160 N/m
10 The force F the man must exert to lift the bucket is:
a) 240 N
b) 80 N
c) 720 N
d) 60 N
11 A triathlon race has three parts: swimming, riding a bicycle and running.

a) The diagram shows the force responsible for the forward movement
of the athlete in the swimming race.
Copy the diagram and show two other forces acting on the athlete.
[2]
b) The table shows the distance of each part of a triathlon race and the
time an athlete takes for each part.
i) Calculate the athlete’s average speed during the swim.
[1]
ii) Calculate the athlete’s average speed for the whole race.
[2]
iii) The graph shows how the distance varied with time for the
running part of the race.

Describe how the athlete’s speed changed during this part of the race.
[2]
12 The table gives information about a journey made by a cyclist.
a) Plot a graph using the data in the table.
[3]
b) i) Use your graph to find the distance in kilometres that the cyclist
travelled in 4.5 hours.
[1]
ii) Use the graph to find the time in hours taken by the cyclist to
travel 35 kilometres.

[1]
c) State the equation that connects average speed, distance moved and
time taken.
[1]
13 A train travels between two stations. The velocity–time graph shows the
train’s motion.
a) Give a reason why you know that the train is decelerating in part C.
[1]
b) State the features of the graph that represent the distance travelled
between the two stations.
[1]
c) A second train travels between the two stations at a constant velocity
and does not stop. It takes the same time as the first train. Sketch a copy
of the graph and then draw a line showing the motion of the second train.
[2]
14 a) The diagram shows a lorry. It is travelling in a straight line and it is
accelerating. The total forward force on the lorry is F and the total
backward force is B.
i) Which is larger, force F or force B? Explain your answer.
[2]
ii) State an equation that connects acceleration, mass and resultant
force.
[1]
iii) A resultant force of 15 000 N acts on the lorry. The mass of the
lorry is 12 500 kg. Calculate the lorry’s acceleration and give the unit.

[3]
b) The thinking distance is the distance a vehicle travels in the driver’s
reaction time. The braking distance is the distance a vehicle travels when
the brakes are applied.
i) State one factor that increases the thinking distance.
[1]
ii) State one factor that increases the braking distance.
[1]
15 The graph shows the minimum stopping distances, in metres, for a car
travelling at different speeds on a dry road.
a) Write an equation to show the link between stopping distance,
thinking distance and braking distance.
[1]
b) Describe the patterns shown in the graph.
[2]
c) Use the graph to estimate the stopping distance for a car travelling at
35 miles per hour.
[1]
d) To find the minimum stopping distance, several different cars were
tested. Suggest how the data from the different cars should be used to
give the values in the graph.
[1]
e) The tests were carried out on a dry road. If the road is icy, explain
what change if any there would be to:

i) the thinking distance [2]
ii) the braking distance.
[2]
16 The graph shows how the velocity of an aircraft changes as it
accelerates along a runway.
a) Use the graph to find the average acceleration of the
aircraft.
[3]
b) Explain why the acceleration is not constant, even though
the engines produce a constant force.
[3]
17 The following graph is a velocity–time graph for the Maglev train,
which travels from Longyang Station, on the outskirts of
Shanghai, to Pudong International Airport.

a) Use the graph to calculate the train’s acceleration over the
region AB. Give the unit of acceleration.
[4]
b) How far does the train travel at its maximum speed?
[3]
c) Use the graph to calculate how far it is from Longyang
Station to Pudong Airport.
[3]
d) The Trans-Siberian express takes 6 days and 4 hours to
travel the 9289 km from Moscow to Vladivostok. Estimate
how long it would take to cover the same distance in a Maglev
train.
[3]
18 Gina plans to investigate drag forces on falling objects. She
decides to use a cupcake case as a parachute. The weight of the
case can be increased by stacking more cases inside each other.
The table shows the times that were recorded for the different
numbers of cases stacked together, when they were timed falling a
distance of 4 m. Where a number of 1.5 cases is shown, she cut
one case in half and put it inside another case.

a) Why did Gina record three times for each number of cake
cases?
[1]
b) Paul said that Gina should have used a more precise
stopwatch. Gina replied that her readings were accurate
enough, as her reaction time introduced an error anyway.
Evaluate this discussion.
[2]
c) Copy the table and add two further columns to show:
i) the average time of fall [2]
ii) the average speed of fall.
[2]
d) Plot a graph of the number of cases on the y-axis
against the speed of fall on the x-axis. Draw a

smooth line through the points and comment on any
anomalous results.
[5]
e) Use the graph to predict the speed of fall for a
weight of:
i) 2.5 cases [1]
ii) 7 cases.
[1]
f) Explain what is meant by terminal
velocity.
[2]
g) Draw a diagram to show the forces
that act on a cupcake case, falling at its
terminal velocity.
[2]
h) Assuming that the cases reach their
terminal velocity quickly after release,
comment on how the drag force on a
falling cupcake case depends on its speed.
[2]
i) Paul did an experiment using a cake
case with twice the area of Gina’s cases.
He discovered that one case fell 4 m in a
time of 2.63 s. He concluded that ‘this
means that the area has no effect on the
drag force’. Do you agree? Give a reason
for your answer.
[2]
19 A group of students uses a special track. The
track is about 2 metres long and is horizontal.
Two gliders, P and Q, can move along the
track.
The surface of the track and the inside surface
of the gliders are almost frictionless. The
diagram shows that the gliders can move
though two light gates, A and B.

The mass of glider P is 2.4 kg. This glider is
moving toward Q at a constant velocity of 0.6
m/s. Glider Q is stationary.
The diagram below shows a side view. Each
glider has a card and a magnet attached. Light
gate A records the time for which the card is
in front of the light gate.
a) i) Apart from the time recorded by
the light gate A, state the other
measurement that would needed to
calculate the velocity of glider P.
[1]
ii) Why does the surface of the track
need to be frictionless and horizontal?
[1]
b) Momentum is a vector quantity.
i) State what is meant by a vector
quantity.
[1]
ii) Calculate the momentum of glider
P.
[2]

iii) State the momentum of glider Q.
[1]
c) Glider P collides with glider Q and
they move off together at a speed of 0.4
m/s.
i) State the combined momentum of P
and Q after the collision.
[1]
ii) Calculate the mass of glider Q.
[2]
iii) Calculate the change in
momentum of glider P during the
collision.
[2]
iv) The time taken for the collision
was 0.05 s. Calculate the force that
acted on glider P during the collision.
[3]
v) State the size of the force acting on
glider Q during the collision.
[1]
20 The diagram shows a crane being used to lift a
container into a boat.
a) Calculate the turning moment of the
container, about the pivot P.
[3]
b) Explain the purpose of the concrete
blocks.
[1]
c) Calculate the weight of concrete

blocks that would balance the turning
moment of the container.
[3]
21 The diagram shows a man climbing a step
ladder.
Use the term ‘centre of gravity’ to explain
why the man is unlikely to topple over in this
position.
[3]
22 The diagram shows a windsurfer in action.
a) Explain why the windsurfer leans out

on her sailboard.
[2]
b) The weight of the windsurfer is 750
N. Calculate the turning moment caused
by this weight about the mast.
[3]
c) Explain why the windsurfer leans out
further when the wind blows with greater
force.
[2]

EXTEND AND CHALLENGE
1 a) A rocket has a mass of 3 000 000 kg at take-off. The thrust from
the engines is 33 MN. Calculate the initial acceleration.
b) The rocket burns 14 000 kg of fuel per second. Calculate the
mass of the rocket 2 minutes after lift-off.
c) Calculate the acceleration of the rocket 2 minutes after lift-
off, assuming that the engines produce the same thrust.
2 This question is about the take-off of from the Moon a lunar landing
craft. Use the data provided: mass of craft 20 000 kg; take-off thrust
from engines on craft 52 000 N; Moon’s gravitational field strength
1.6 N/kg.
a) Calculate the craft’s weight on the Moon.
b) At take-off, determine the resultant force on the craft.
c) Calculate the acceleration of the craft at take-off.
d) Calculate the craft’s speed 30 seconds after take-off.
e) Calculate how far above the Moon’s surface the spacecraft
will be after 30 seconds.
f) Give two reasons why the craft will actually have travelled
slightly further than you estimate.
g) Explain why this spacecraft could not take off from the
surface of the Earth.
3 The graph shows the size of the forces required to stretch samples of
steel and spider’s silk. Both samples are of the same thickness and
length.
a) Explain why it was decided to use samples of silk and steel
that were exactly the same length and thickness.

b) A student observed that neither material obeys Hooke’s law.
Evaluate this remark.
Both samples break as shown on the graph.
c) Determine the force that breaks the sample of steel.
d) Determine extension of the spider’s silk when it breaks.
e) Although the sample of steel is stronger, the spider’s silk is
less likely to break when catching a fly. Use your understanding
of forces and momentum to explain this.
4 You are in outer space, and you are worried that your crew are
looking thin. How are you going to work out their mass in a
weightless environment? Describe an experiment to calculate an
astronaut’s mass, using a chair, a large spring balance, a stop clock
and a tape measure.
5 Greg test drives his new car. He accelerates rapidly until he reaches
a speed of 20 m/s. The mass of the car (with him in it) is 750 kg. The
graph shows how the speed changes.
a) Calculate his acceleration over the first 4 seconds.
b) Work out the force acting on the car to accelerate it.
c) Greg invites three friends (total mass 250 kg) into his car to
demonstrate its rapid acceleration. Copy the graph, and show
how it now accelerates over the first 4 seconds.
6 The diagram below shows an alpha particle colliding head on with a
stationary proton in a cloud chamber. Before the collision the alpha
particle has a speed of 107 m/s. After the collision its speed is 6 ×
106 m/s. The mass of the alpha particle is 4 times that of the proton.
Calculate the speed of the proton after the collision.


2 Electricity
The supply of electricity to our homes and city centres is an
essential part of twenty-first century life. Lights in the streets, our
homes and offices allow us to be active 24 hours a day. However,
electricity comes at a price and care must be taken with how much
we use it.
By the end of this section you should:
• know and be able to use electrical units
• understand the use of insulation, earthing, fuses and circuit
breakers
• understand why a current in a resistor results in the transfer of
energy
• know that power = current × voltage
• know that energy transferred = current × voltage × time
• know the difference between alternating and direct currents
• be able to explain the use and benefits of parallel and series
circuits
• understand how the current in a series circuit depends on the
applied voltage and the nature of components in the circuit
• be able to describe and investigate how current varies with
voltage in wires, resistors, filament lamps and diodes
• be able to describe the qualitative effect on current of changing
the resistance in the circuit
• describe the variation of light-dependent resistors with light
intensity and thermistors with temperature
• know that lamps and LEDs show the presence of a current in a

circuit
• know that voltage = current × resistance
• know that current is the rate of flow of charge
• know that charge = current × time
• know that electric current in solid metallic conductors is a flow
of negatively charged electrons
• understand that current is conserved at a junction
• know that the voltage across two components in parallel is the
same
• be able to calculate the currents, voltages and resistances of
two resistive components connected in a series circuit
• know that voltage is the energy transferred per unit charge
• know that energy transferred = charge × voltage
• be able to identify common materials that are insulators and
conductors
• be able to explain the charging of materials by the loss or gain of
electrons
• know that there are attractive forces between unlike charges and
repulsive forces between like charges
• be able to explain the potential dangers of electrostatic charges
• be able to explain some uses of electrostatic charges
discuss • calculate
1 How would your life have been different had you lived in the same
country as you do now, in 1880?
2 How much does it cost to provide electricity to your home each year?
How much does it cost to provide electricity to your school each
year?
3 What impact does electricity generation have on our environment?
4 What hazards are associated with the use of electricity?

2.1 Introducing electricity
Figure 1.1 shows how important electricity is in our lives. Electrical devices
provide entertainment in the family room and convenience in the kitchen. How
many electrical devices do you use every day?
Electrical transfer of energy
Below are two statements about a torch cell connected to its lamp. Which one is
correct?
Statement A: The cell does electrical work to transfer energy from one
store to another. Energy is transferred from the chemical store in the cell,
into the thermal store of the lamp. Energy is then transferred to the
thermal store of the surroundings, by heating and radiation.
Statement B: The cell in an electrical circuit is like a pump in a central
heating system that circulates water. Electricity in the wires is pushed
round by the cell; water is pushed through the pipes by the pump.
The answer is that both ideas are helpful and correct. Statement A provides a
good description of electrical transfer of energy from one store to another. (You
meet this idea again in Section 4.) Statement B uses a model (or an analogy) of

water flow, which is designed to help the student visualise how electrical circuits
work.
Cells and brightness
Figure 1.3(a) shows a tank of water with an outlet pipe at the bottom; water
flows out at a slow rate. When the depth of water in the tank is increased, as in
Figure 1.3(b), the pressure of water at the bottom of the tank is increased and
water flows out at a faster rate.
The cell in an electrical circuit provides an ‘electrical pressure’ that pushes
electricity through the lamp. In Figure 1.3(c) one cell pushes electricity through
the lamp at a slow rate and the lamp is dull; energy is being transferred at a slow
rate. In Figure 1.3(d), two cells push the electricity round the circuit more
quickly and the lamp is brighter; electrical energy is now being transferred more
quickly.
Voltage and current
The words voltage and current are important in describing electrical circuits.
• When describing a stream or river we use the word ‘current’ to describe the
flow of water. When the current is large, this means lots of water flows past us
each second.
• In an electrical circuit we use the same word. Current describes the flow of
electricity. When the current is large a lot of electricity flows through the
circuit.
The unit of current is the ampere (A), though this is often shortened to amp.
• Figure 1.4 shows two fire fighters practising to use their hose. The pressure in
the hose is high and water flows quickly.

• The voltage of a cell is like an ‘electrical pressure.’ A high voltage drives a
large current around the circuit. High voltages transfer large amounts of energy
and can be dangerous.
• Electric shocks delivered from a high voltage source can be very painful, and
can even cause death. This is why we are warned about high voltages.
The unit of voltage is the volt (V).
Electrical hazards
Electricity provided for the home is called the mains supply. The voltage of the
mains supply differs from country to country but is usually either about 230 V or
120 V. Either voltage is large enough to be dangerous.
Due to the dangers of electricity, we must be on the lookout for hazards. Some of
these are listed below:
Look out for damaged plugs or bare wires.
Remember that an electric fires and toasters expose you to high voltages. Do not
try to remove toast from the toaster with a metal knife or fork.
Do not overload a socket by connecting many plugs. A large current might melt a
wire.
Be careful outside. Do not cross railway lines. Keep clear of overhead cables.


STUDY QUESTIONS
1 a) Choose two electrical hazards mentioned in the chapter and
explain what you would do to remove the danger.
b) Identify two electrical hazards that have not been mentioned
in the chapter. Explain why we need to be careful of these
hazards.
2 Describe the energy transfers that occur when a cell is used to light
an electric lamp.

2.2 Using mains electricity
In the home we use electricity for heating, lighting, cooking and powering many
other devices, which we use for leisure or tasks.
Alternating and direct current
In Figure 2.2(a) and (b) you can see two lamps that are lit by two different
electrical supplies. In Figure 2.2(a) the lamp is lit by a 6 V battery. A battery
provides a direct current (d.c.) – this means that there is a constant current in one
direction. In electrical diagrams a cell is represented by two vertical lines, one
long and the other shorter. Here the longer line is on the left. This is the positive
side or ‘terminal’ of the cell. We use the convention that a current flows from the
positive terminal to the negative. The current flow is marked with an arrow.
In Figure 2.2(b) the lamp is lit by an alternating supply (a.c.). In an alternating

supply, the voltage switches direction many times each second and the current
changes direction too.
Figure 2.3 shows graphs of how the a.c. and d.c. supplies change with time. The
d.c. supply remains constant at 6 V; the a.c. supply changes from positive to
negative. The peak of the a.c. supply rises above 6 V to make up for the time
when the voltage is close to zero.
Mains supply
All countries use a.c. supplies for their mains electricity. Most countries use a
mains voltage of about 120 V or 230 V. By using a standardised voltage,
electrical devices can be used in different countries.
We also describe an alternating current by its frequency. The frequency of most
mains supplies is either 50 cycles per second or 60 cycles per second. Figure 2.3
shows one cycle of an a.c. supply. So if the frequency of a supply is 50 cycles
per second, the current completes each cycle in 1/50 of a second.
The unit of frequency is the hertz. A frequency of 50 cycles per second is
written as 50 hertz or 50 Hz.
TIP
Sometimes direct currents fluctuate. But provided the current is always
in the same direction, it is still called a direct current.
Electrical heating
Figure 2.4 shows a 230 V mains supply. It provides current to a heater, which
can also be called a resistor. This is shown in the diagram, marked ‘R’. The
symbol R is used, because we say that the heater offers resistance to the current.

When there is a current through a resistor, there is an electrical transfer of energy
into the resistor’s thermal store. This results in an increase in the temperature of
the resistor. Some resistors glow red hot.
Electricity at home
We use electricity in our homes for several things, e.g. lighting, cooking,
heating, computers and TVs. Each electrical device is designed to take a
different current, depending on its use. Table 1 shows the size of current through
some electrical appliances attached to a 230 V mains supply.
Fuses
Fuses are used with electrical devices for safety. Their main purpose is to
prevent a fire.
A fuse contains a thin wire that heats up and melts if there is too much current. If
this happens we say that the fuse has ‘blown’. The rating of a fuse is the
maximum current that can pass through it without melting the fuse wire.
You need to choose the correct fuse to put into a plug or fuse board, so that it
blows if there is a fault. In the UK it is common to use 3 A or 13 A fuses. Look
at the appliances in Table 1. You need to use a 3 A fuse for the lamp and the

computer monitor, and a 13 A fuse for the other appliances. A lamp will work
with a 13 A fuse but is it safer to use a 3 A fuse. A lamp works on a low current
such as 0.1 A or 0.2 A. So, if 3 A go through a lamp circuit it means there is a
fault – a 3 A fuse will blow but a 13 A fuse will not.
Figure 2.5 shows the symbol for a fuse. In most countries mains electricity is
supplied by a live wire (or hot wire in the USA) together with a neutral wire.
The live or hot wire has a large voltage, which supplies the energy. This is the
dangerous wire. The fuse is put into the live wire so that it is disconnected when
a fuse blows.

Circuit breakers
A circuit breaker is an electromagnetic switch that opens or ‘trips’ when a
current is bigger than a certain value. The advantages of circuit breakers over
fuses are that they are sensitive and also they can quickly be reset once a fault
has been put right. Circuit breakers are often found in modern houses instead of
fuses in the fuse boxboard.
Earthing
Many countries use three-pin plugs for the electrical supply. The third wire is
called the earth wire, which as its name suggests is attached to the earth. Figure
2.7 shows a diagram of a correctly wired three-pin plug in use in the UK. The
live wire is brown, the neutral wire is blue and the earth wire is green and
yellow.

Figure 2.9 explains why the earth wire is an important safety feature. Figure 2.9
(a) shows the circuit diagram for an electric heater, which is enclosed in a metal
case. The current is goes from the live wire to the neutral and the fire is working
safely. The earth wire is attached to the metal case. When the heater is working
correctly the earth wire does not carry a current.
TIP
The earth wire and fuse together protect the person using an electrical
device.
Figure 2.9 (b) shows what happens when a fault develops. Now a wire is
touching the metal case. Without the earth wire, someone could touch the metal

case and get a shock. With the earth wire in place current goes through the earth
wire and not the person touching the case. A large current going to earth can also
blow the fuse, which disconnects the dangerous live wire.
TIP
Metals are conductors that allow a current to pass.
Plastics are insulators which do not allow currents to pass.
Double insulation
Many modern electrical appliances are made out of plastic, which does not
conduct electricity. Plastic is an insulator. Appliances that are made of plastic
can safely be connected to the mains using only two wires. The earth wire is not
needed as you cannot get a shock from the plastic.
This method of protection is called double insulation and it is shown by the sign
. When you see this sign on an appliance you know you do not need an earth
wire.
Residual-current circuit breaker (RCCB)
A residual-current circuit breaker (RCCB) is a device that disconnects a circuit
when it detects that the current is not the same in the live and neutral wires.
When the currents are different there is a small current leaking to earth, which
could be through the body of a person who accidentally touches the live wire.
Figure 2.10 shows two examples of where there could be an imbalance of
current. A gardener is mowing his lawn with an electric mower. The mower is
double insulated, so the gardener is protected if the live wire becomes detached

inside the mower.
It is possible that the wire to the mower becomes damaged – it could be cut by
the mower itself. In Figure 2.10 (a), a damaged live wire allows a small current
to earth. This extra current is not large enough to melt the fuse, so the mower
keeps working.
In Figure 2.10 (b), the gardener has turned off the mower and picks up the wire.
A residual current passes through him. This current is small – only 30 mA, but it
could deliver a lethal shock.
An RCCB, which detects an imbalance of currents between the live and neutral
wires, will disconnect the supply before an injury occurs. RCCBs are widely
used in different countries.
TIP
Make sure you understand these terms about electricity in the home: •
fuse
• earthing
• circuit breaker
• double insulation
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 a) Explain the purpose of a fuse in a mains circuit.

b) State the advantages circuit breakers have over fuses.
2 Explain carefully each of the following:
a) why the fuse is put into the live or hot wire of a mains circuit
b) why the rating of a fuse should be slightly higher than the
normal working current through an appliance c) why appliances
with metal cases need to be earthed, but appliances with plastic
cases do not need to be earthed.
3 Name the colours of the live, neutral and earth wires in your country.
4 Explain the difference between an a.c. and a d.c. electrical supply.
5 State and explain the energy transfers that occur in an electrical
circuit when a battery is connected to a resistor.
6 The diagram shows the trace on an oscilloscope that is being used to
measure the voltage of an electrical supply.
a) State the type of supply.
b) Determine the peak (maximum) voltage of the supply.
c) Calculate the frequency of the supply.
7 Do some research to find out how an RCCB works.

2.3 Electrical power
How do electric cars shape up against petrol-driven cars? Find out: how long it
takes to charge up an electric car; how much it costs to drive 100 km; what the
average range of an electric car is. By 2040, only electric cars will be for sale in
the UK.
Calculating the power
When you use an electrical appliance at home you are interested in how much
energy it provides you with in each second. This determines how bright a light
is, or how effective a heater is at keeping you warm. The energy supplied per
second is called the power.
Power is measured in joules per second (J/s) or watts (W). Sometimes power is
supplied in large quantities. An electric fire can do 1000 J of electrical work per
second (which is the same as 1000 W), transferring energy to the thermal store
of the surroundings; 1000 W is called a kilowatt (1 kW). If you want to talk

about the output of a power station you will need to use megawatts (MW); 1
MW is a million watts. Some power stations produce 2000 MW of electrical
power.
You can work out the electrical power, P, used in a circuit, if you know the
voltage, V, of the supply and the current, I, using the formula:
TIP
Remember these letters for electrical quantities: • power, P
• voltage, V
• current, I
Tables 1 and 2 give examples of electrical appliances with their power, operating
voltage and the current supplied.
Choosing a fuse

Countries with a 230 V mains supply commonly use 3 A, 5 A or 13 A fuses. It is
safest to use a fuse which is just slightly above the maximum current that the
appliance uses.
Example. You buy a kettle that is marked 230 V 2.4 kW. Which fuse should you
use in the plug?
You can calculate the current using the formula: 
You must use a 13 A fuse to protect the kettle because the current will blow a
smaller fuse.
Paying for energy
When you pay an electricity bill you are paying the electricity company for the
energy you have used. You can calculate how much energy has been used with
the formula:
or
TIP
Remember the formula 
Example. Calculate the energy used when a 1 kW heater is on for 1 hour.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 Calculate the power supplied to each of the following appliances
when they are attached to the correct operating voltage.

a) a 12 V, 5 A lamp b) a 230 V, 2 A heater c) a 115 V, 4 A
toaster
2 a) Calculate the current flowing in each of the following electrical
appliances when they are supplied with the correct operating
voltage.
i) a 230 V, 11.5 W lamp ii) a 115 V, 2 kW shower iii) a 230
V, 800 W microwave oven iv) a 115 V, 460 W TV set
b) You have available 3 A, 5 A, 13 A and 20 A fuses. Which
would you choose for each of the appliances in part a) of the
question?
3 a) Make a list of some household electrical appliances that run off the
mains supply, for example television, heater, fridge.
b) Look on the back of the appliance to find out the
recommended voltage supply for each, and the power used.
c) Calculate the current used by each device and recommend
a safe fuse to use.
4 A householder goes on holiday for two weeks. To deter burglars she
leaves four lights that come on for 6 hours a day. Each bulb is rated
at 23 W.
Calculate the energy used over the two weeks in:
i) joules ii) MJ.
5 The battery for an electric car is charged from a 230 V supply using a current
of 65 A. The charging time to charge the battery fully is 3.5 hours. Calculate
the electrical energy used to charge the battery in joules.

2.4 Electric circuits
A continuous circuit
Figure 4.2(a) shows how some components are connected together to make an
electrical circuit. This is called a circuit diagram. You can see that the current
passes from the positive terminal of the cell, through an ammeter and resistor,
before returning to the cell. The current passes through all the circuit
components, one after another. These components are in series.
The ammeter is a device that measures the size of the current – 1 A in this
example. In Figure 4.2(a) the switch, S, is closed. This means there is a
complete, continuous circuit for the current. When the switch is open (Figure
4.2(b)), there is a break in the circuit and there is no current.
Controlling the current
You can change the size of the current in a circuit by changing the voltage of the
cell or battery, or by changing the components in the circuit. Figure 4.3 shows

the idea.
TIPS
• Doubling the voltage doubles the current in a series circuit.
• Increasing the resistance reduces the current.
In Figure 4.3(a), an extra cell has been added to the circuit in Figure 4.2. Now
the current is larger.
In a series circuit increasing the voltage increases the current.
In Figure 4.3(b), the voltage of the cell is 1.5 V but now the resistance has been
increased by adding a second resistor to the circuit. This makes the current
smaller.
In a series circuit increasing the resistance makes the current smaller.
In Figure 4.3(c) a variable resistor has replaced the fixed resistor in the circuit.
You can control the size of the current by adjusting the resistor.
Figure 4.4 shows how the variable resistor works. If you use terminals B and C
you have a fixed resistor. But if you use terminals A and C you have a variable
resistor. The current passes through the thick metal bar at A, then along the
resistance wire to C via the sliding contact. The metal bar has low resistance. So
the resistance gets lower as the slider moves away from A.

PRACTICAL
You should be able to set up a series circuit and use an ammeter to
measure the current.
Note: Avoid connecting the ammeter across the cell or battery without
there being a resistor in series - the ammeter may be damaged if you
do.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 a) Draw a circuit diagram to show a cell connected in series to an
ammeter, a diode and a fixed resistor.
b) Draw a circuit diagram to show how you can control the
brightness of a lamp.
2 In the circuit diagrams, lamp A is connected to a single cell. The lamp
lights with normal brightness.

a) Use the words normal, bright, dim or off to describe the
lamps B, C, D, E, F and G.
b) Describe the brightness of the lamps H, I and J when the
switch S is:
i) open ii) closed.
3 a) Which of the lamps in the diagram, K or L, will light?
b) What will happen to the lamps if the cell is turned around?
c) Draw a new circuit diagram with two diodes and two lamps,
so that both lamps light.
4
Describe what happens to the brightness of lamp M as the
resistance of the variable resistor is decreased.

Circuit symbols
Table 1 shows the circuit symbols for the electrical components that you will
meet in the next few chapters. A brief explanation of the function of each
component is given next to each symbol.
TIP
Make sure you know your circuit symbols.



2.5 Calculating the resistance
These ceramic discs have a very high resistance so that the power line is
insulated from the metal pylon. Each ceramic disc is connected to the next with a
metal core to provide strength.
When the ceramic insulators are wet, a small leakage current can flow down the
outside of the ceramic discs. Discuss how the design of the discs reduces the size
of this current.
What changes would you make to this insulator to make it suitable for a higher
voltage power line?
Ammeters and voltmeters
Figure 5.2 shows you how to set up a circuit using an ammeter and a voltmeter.
• The ammeter is set up in series with the resistor, R. The same current passes
through the ammeter and the resistor. The ammeter measures the current in
amperes (A), or milliamperes (mA). 1 mA is 0.001 A.
• The voltmeter is placed in parallel with the resistor, R. The voltmeter measures
the voltage across (between the ends of) the resistor. The unit of voltage is the
volt (V). The voltmeter only allows a very small current to pass through it, so
it does not affect the current passing around the circuit.

Resistance
The circuit in Figure 5.2 can be used to calculate the resistance in the circuit.
The resistance of a resistor or electrical component is defined using this
equation:
TIP
You will often see the equation on the right written in this form: 
This equation is usually written as:
where R is the resistance, V is the voltage across the resistor and I is the current
flowing through the resistor.
The unit of resistance is the ohm (Ω). Resistances are also measured in kΩ,
where 1 kΩ is 1000 Ω.
Ohm’s law
The circuit diagram in Figure 5.3 shows how you can investigate the resistance
of a wire. A variable resistor is used to vary the current flowing. You can take
pairs of readings of current and voltage. Table 1 shows some typical results.

To avoid risk of damaging the meters, before switching on check that the
ammeter is in series and the voltmeter is connected in parallel with the resistor.
Also check that they are able to read the expected current and voltage.
You can then plot a graph to show how the current flowing through the resistor
depends on the voltage across it. Figure 5.4 shows the points plotted. This is
called a current–voltage graph. A straight line has been drawn through the
points, which passes through the origin. This shows that the current is directly
proportional to the voltage. If the direction of the voltage is reversed, the graph
has the same shape. The resistance is the same when the current direction is
reversed.

When a resistor or wire behaves in this way, it is said to obey Ohm’s law. This
states that:
For some resistors, at constant temperature, the current through the resistor is
proportional to the voltage across it.
The resistor in this case is said to be ohmic.
The resistance can be calculated using any voltage and the corresponding
current: 
Check that the resistance is the same using another pair of voltage and current
readings.
The filament lamp
The circuit in Figure 5.3, with the test wire replaced by a filament lamp, can be
used to investigate how the current through a filament lamp changes with the
applied voltage. The results of the investigation are plotted in a graph, which is
shown in Figure 5.5. The line is not straight – it curves away from the current
axis (y-axis). The current is not proportional to the applied voltage. So the
filament lamp does not obey Ohm’s law. We describe the lamp as a non-ohmic
resistor.

As the current increases, the resistance gets larger. The temperature of the
filament increases when the current increases. So we can conclude that the
resistance of the filament increases as the temperature increases.
PRACTICAL
Make sure you can describe an experiment to investigate how the
current for a filament lamp or diode changes as the applied voltage
changes.
The diode
A similar investigation can be carried out for a diode. Figure 5.6 shows a
current–voltage graph for a diode.
A diode is a component that allows current to pass through it in only one
direction. For a ‘forward’ voltage, current starts to pass when the voltage reaches
about 0.7 V. When the voltage is ‘reversed’, there is no current at all.
A light-emitting diode (LED) lights up when there is a current through it. This is
useful because it allows an LED to be used as an indicator – to show us when
there is a current.

Changing resistance
Some resistors change their resistance as they react to their surroundings. The
resistance of a thermistor decreases as the temperature increases. You can
control its temperature by putting it into a beaker of warm or cold water, as in
Figure 5.7.

Figure 5.8 shows how one type of thermistor’s resistance changes as the
temperature changes.

The resistance of a light-dependent resistor (LDR) changes as the light
intensity changes. In the dark the resistance is high but in bright light the
resistance of an LDR is low. This is shown in Figure 5.9. There is a higher
current through the resistor in bright light because the resistance is lower.

Adding resistance
When you add resistors in series you increase the resistance. Here is a simple
example: you place a 6 Ω, an 8 Ω and a 12 Ω resistance in series. State the total
resistance. The answer is 26 Ω. You just add up the resistors, as each one limits
the current.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 Explain what is meant by an ohmic resistor.
2 This question refers to Figure 5.3. Explain what happens to the
current through the ammeter when you increase the resistance of
the variable resistor.
3 Figure 5.5 shows the current–voltage graph for a filament lamp.
a) Calculate the resistance of the filament when the applied
voltage is:
i) 1 V
ii) 3 V.
b) Explain what causes this resistance to change.
4 Figure 5.9 shows two current–voltage graphs for an LDR in dim and
bright light. Calculate the resistance of the LDR in:
a) bright light b) dim light.
5 a) Draw a circuit diagram to show a cell, a 1 kΩ resistor, and an LED
used to show that there is a current flowing through the resistor.
b) Draw a circuit diagram to show how you would investigate
the effect of light intensity on an LDR.
6 The table shows the values of current, voltage and resistance for five
resistors, A, B, C, D and E. Use the equation R = V/I to fill in the
missing values.


2.6 Current, charge and voltage
Electroplating with metals is a common industrial process. How does
electroplating work?
Give two more examples of the use of electroplating.
Figure 6.2 shows a diagram of an electrical circuit. In this circuit a cell provides
a voltage of 1.5 V, and a current of 0.1 A flows round the circuit. You have
already met the terms voltage and current, but in this chapter they are defined
and explained in greater detail.

Current and charge
The current is a measure of the rate at which electrical charge flows round the
circuit. In a metal the current is carried by electrons which are free to move. The
electrons are repelled from the negative terminal of the cell and attracted towards
the positive terminal.
The direction of the electric current is defined as the direction in which positive
charge would flow – from the positive terminal of the battery to the negative
terminal. Current was defined in this way before the electron was discovered, at
a time when people did not understand how a wire carried a current. So in Figure
6.2 the direction of current is shown from positive to negative.
The amount of charge flowing round in the circuit is measured in coulombs, C. 1
coulomb of charge is equivalent to the charge on 6 billion billion electrons.
The unit of current is the ampere, A. This unit is often abbreviated to amp. Small
currents can be measured in milliamps or mA.
The current at all points of the circuit is the same. So the two ammeters on either
side of the lamp read the same current – in this case 0.1 A.
Current and the flow of charge are linked by the equation.
charge flow, Q, is measured in coulombs, C
current, I, is measured in amperes, A time, t, is measured in seconds, s Example.
In Figure 6.2 the current of 0.1 A flows for 30 minutes. Calculate how much
charge flows round the circuit.
Ionic solutions
Figure 6.3 shows an ionic solution which contains both positive and negative
ions. A cell is making a current flow through the solution. In the solution the
current is carried by positive ions moving to the right and also by negative ions
moving to the left. In the connecting wires the current is carried only by
electrons. The conventional current flows around the circuit as shown by the
arrows.

TIP
You will not be examined on ionic solutions, but it is included here to
help you understand that conventional current is in the direction of
positive charge flow.
Defining the volt
You have already met the idea that voltage is a measure of energy. Voltage is
defined as the energy transferred for each unit of charge that passes through a
component such as a resistor. This allows us to define the volt:
A volt is one joule per coulomb.
This equation can also be written in the form: 
energy, E, is in joules, J
charge, Q, is in coulombs, C
voltage, V, is in volts, V
So in figure 6.2 the cell transfers 1.5 joules of energy to each coulomb of charge

that flows through the lamp.
A worked example will help you understand this idea.
Example. In Figure 6.4 there is a current of 2 A through a resistor. The battery
has a voltage of 6 V. Calculate the energy transferred to the resistor in one
minute.
TIP
When calculating the current, remember to turn time in minutes into
time in seconds.
First, we must calculate the charge that flows around the circuit in 1 minute.
Then the energy is calculated using the equation: 
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 State the unit of each or the following quantities:
a) charge b) current c) voltage.
2 a) Write an equation that links current, charge and time.
b) Write an equation that links energy, charge and voltage.
3 a) Calculate the charge that flows round a circuit when a current of

0.1 mA passes for 2 minutes.
b) Calculate the current when it takes 30 s for a charge of 6 C
to flow.
c) A charge of 7200 C is required to electroplate a metal object.
The current in the process is 0.5 A. Calculate the time taken to
complete the electroplating.
4 a) A charge of 0.8 C flows through a resistor that has a voltage of 9 V
across it. Calculate the energy transferred to the resistor.
b) A current of 3 A passes through a resistor for 5 minutes.
During this time 6300 J of energy are transferred to the resistor.
Calculate the voltage across the resistor.
c) A resistor has a voltage of 20 V across it. A current is
switched on and 4000 J of energy are transferred to the resistor.
Calculate the charge that flows through the resistor.
5 A student decides to copper plate a spoon by placing it in a solution
of copper sulfate and passing a current through the solution. The
process takes 80 minutes.
a) Use the information in the diagram to calculate how much
charge is passed by the battery during this time.
b) Calculate how much energy is delivered by the battery
during the process of electroplating the spoon.

c) Draw a diagram to show the movement of ions through the
copper sulfate solution during the copper plating process.
6 A camera flash bulb is lit for 0.02 s. During this time 0.1 C of charge
flows through the bulb. Calculate the average current flowing through
the bulb while it is lit up.

2.7 Current and voltage rules
Some decorative lights are wired in series and some are wired in parallel. Which
method is suitable for each of the examples in Figure 7.1? What are the
advantages of using a parallel circuit and what are advantages of using a series
circuit?
Current paths
Figure 7.2 reminds you of the rules about a series circuit. In this case the current
in the circuit is 1 A. It is the same in each part of the circuit. So the current is 1 A
in each of the lamps B and C, and 1 A through both ammeters and the cell. A
circuit cannot lose current – in every circuit the current leaving the cell is the
same as the current returning to the cell.
Figure 7.3 shows a circuit with branches in it. In this case, 2 A leaves the cell
and passes through lamp D. Then, the current splits equally through the identical
lamps E and F, and a current of 2 A returns to the negative terminal of the cell.
When the current splits between two lamps in this way, we say they are in
parallel.

The current does not always split equally. Figure 7.4 shows another parallel
circuit with three identical lamps. More current flows through lamp I than
through lamps G and H. Lamp I provides a lower resistance path. The sum of the
currents going in the two parallel paths is 3 A – the same as the current flowing
out of and back into the cell.
Figure 7.5 shows an example of a short circuit. A copper wire placed across
lamp J provides a very low resistance path, so virtually no current flows through
the lamp; it goes through the wire. Lamp J does not light up.

Current rules
The current is the same in all parts of a series circuit.
The same current flows into a junction as comes out of the junction.
Adding the voltage
Figure 7.6 shows a car headlamp connected to a 12 V car battery. The battery
does electrical work to transfer energy from its chemical store into the thermal
store of the lamp and the surroundings. The voltage across the lamp is the same
as the battery voltage.
TIP
Remember: voltage is a measure of energy provided by a cell.
In Figure 7.7 two headlamps are connected in parallel to the car battery; a
current of 5 A passes through each. The voltage across each lamp is 12 V
because both lamps are connected directly to the battery.

Figure 7.8 can help you understand why the voltage is the same across each
headlamp. The voltage is like an ‘electrical pressure’. The pressure on the water
in each pipe from the water tank in Figure 7.8 is the same. The water tank
empties more quickly when water flows through two pipes rather than one. The
same idea works for the headlamps in a car. The battery transfers energy more
quickly when two lamps are on rather than one.
In Figure 7.9 two identical lamps are connected in series to the car battery. In
this example each lamp has a voltage of 6 V across it. As the charge flows
through the lamps, it transfers half its energy to each lamp.

The voltages do not always split equally. In Figure 7.10, lamp 1 has a larger
resistance than lamp 2. There is a larger voltage across lamp 1 than across lamp
2. The charge flowing transfers more of its energy to lamp 1, so it is the brighter
lamp.
Voltage rules
The voltage across electrical components in parallel is the same.
The sum of the voltages across electrical components in series adds up to the
battery voltage.
Uses of parallel circuits
• Lamps in a car are placed in parallel across a 12 V battery. Each lamp is
designed to work on 12 V. If the lamps are placed in series they get less than
their operating voltage.
• All domestic appliances are designed to work at mains voltage (about 230 V or
120 V in most countries). By putting them in parallel, domestic appliances
receive the full mains voltage and can be independently controlled.

• Voltmeters are placed in parallel with appliances to measure the voltage across
them.
Uses of series circuits
• Decorative lights are an example of a string of small lamps placed in series.
The lamps are designed to work on low voltages so they share the mains
voltage. They can all be turned off with the same switch.
• A switch is placed in series with a light to turn it on and off.
• An ammeter is placed in series with a resistor to measure the current through it.
• A resistor is placed in series with a component such as a diode or thermistor to
protect it from overheating.
• A fuse is placed in series with a domestic appliance to protect it. The fuse melts
if the current is too large.
Cells and batteries
A battery consists of two or more electrical cells. Figure 7.11 shows three ways
in which two cells may be connected.
In series:
a) the voltages add up to produce a larger voltage, provided the cells ‘face’ the
same way; b) if the cells face in opposite directions the resultant voltage is
zero.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 State which current in the diagram below is the largest, p, q or r.
Which is the smallest?

2 Copy the diagrams below and mark in the missing values of current.
3 In the circuit shown in the diagram, each cell provides a voltage of
1.5 V.
a) State the total voltage provided by the battery.
b) State the reading on the voltmeter.
c) Calculate the current through the ammeter.
d) Calculate the resistance of the lamp.

4 A set of decorative lights has 40 identical lamps connected in series.
Each lamp is designed to take a current of 0.1 A. The set of lights
plugs directly into the 230 V mains electricity supply.
a) Write down an equation that links voltage, current and
resistance.
b) Calculate the voltage across one of the lamps.
c) Calculate the resistance of one lamp.
d) Calculate the resistance of the 40 lamps in series.
e) Calculate the power transferred by the 40-lamp set.
5 The circuit diagram shows a 16 Ω resistor in series with a component
X.
a) Calculate the voltage across the 16 Ω resistor.
b) State the voltage across the component X.
c) Now calculate the resistance of X.
6 The diagram shows six elements of a car rear-window heater, which
are connected in series to a 12 V car battery. The resistance of each
element is 2.5 Ω.

a) Calculate the total resistance of the heater.
b) Calculate the current flowing through the heater.
c) Use the formula: power = voltage × current to calculate the
power generated by the heater.
d) A student suggests that the power could be increased by
using elements with a greater resistance. A second student
suggests that using less resistance would be better because the
current would be larger. Who is correct?
e) The elements of some car rear-window heaters are
connected in parallel. Suggest an advantage of this different
arrangement.

2.8 Circuit calculations
In the previous chapters you have learnt the basic rules about electrical circuits.
The best way to make sure that you have understood them is to practise by
solving problems. In this chapter, some examples are given, but most of the work
is to be done by you.
Resistance, voltage and current calculations
You can compare the value of two resistors using an ammeter and a cell; the
larger resistor lets less current through. In Figure 8.1(a) the cell pushes a current
of 1 A through a 6 Ω resistor; in Figure 8.1(b) the same cell pushes a current of 2
A through a second resistor whose value is not known. Because the current is
more than 1 A, the second resistor must have a resistance less than 6 Ω. Can you
explain why it is a 3 Ω resistor?
The value of a resistor may be calculated using an ammeter and a voltmeter; for
example, in Figure 8.2, 

More complicated problems may be solved with the help of the current and
voltage rules in Chapter 2.6. For example, you might be asked to calculate the
cell voltage in Figure 8.3.
The current through the 12 Ω resistor is: 
The voltage across the 6 Ω resistor is: 
The cell voltage is the sum of the voltages across the two resistors, which is 9 V.
Power calculations
Similar care needs to be taken to calculate the power developed in a resistor. For
example how much power is transferred by the 3 Ω resistor in Figure 8.4?

Each resistor has 12 V across it. So the current through the 3 Ω resistor is: 
So the power transferred is: 
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 Determine which of R1 and R2 has the larger resistance.
2 Explain why you can deduce that R3 has a larger resistance than R4.
3 a) Calculate the current in Figure 8.7
b) Calculate the power dissipated by the 24 Ω resistor.
c) State the voltage across R.
d) Calculate the resistance R.

4 a) Calculate the current in Figure 8.8.
b) Use your answer to part a) to calculate the voltage V1.
c) Determine the voltage V2.
5 Calculate the resistance R in Figure 8.9.
6 a) Calculate the voltage V in Figure 8.10.
b) State the ammeter readings A1 and A2.

7 a) Determine the ammeter readings A1 and A2 in Figure 8.11.
b) i) Calculate the voltmeter reading V2.
ii) State the voltmeter reading V1.
c) Calculate the power delivered by the battery in Figure 8.11.

2.9 Electrostatics
The Van de Graaff generator in Figure 9.1 charges the girl up to 250 000 V. Why
is it safe to use such a high voltage in these circumstances?
Electrical charge
Electricity was discovered a long time ago when the effects of rubbing materials
together were noticed. If you pull off a shirt containing synthetic fibres you may
hear the shirt crackle and in a dark room you may also see some sparks. A well-
known trick is to rub a balloon and stick it on to the ceiling. You may have felt
an electrical shock after walking across a carpet. In these examples, you, or the
balloon, have become charged as a result of friction (rubbing).
There are two types of electrical charge, positive and negative. A positive charge
is produced on a Perspex ruler when it is rubbed with a woollen duster. You can
put negative charge onto a plastic comb by combing it through your hair.
TIP
Like charges repel; unlike charges attract.
Some simple experiments show us that like charges repel each other, and unlike
charges attract each other. These experiments are shown in Figure 9.2.

Where do charges come from?
There are three types of small particle inside atoms. There is a very small centre
of the atom called the nucleus. Inside the nucleus there are protons and
neutrons. Protons have a positive charge but neutrons have no charge. The
electrons carry a negative charge and they move around the nucleus. The size of
the charge on an electron and on a proton is the same. Inside the atom there are
as many electrons as protons. This means that the positive charge of the protons
is balanced by the negative charge of the electrons. So the atom is neutral or
uncharged (Figure 9.3).
When you rub a Perspex ruler with a duster, some electrons are removed from
the atoms in the ruler and are transferred to the duster. As a result the ruler has
fewer electrons than protons and so it is positively charged. But the duster has
more electrons than protons and is negatively charged (Figure 9.4).
Picking up litter
You can use a plastic comb to pick up small pieces of paper. Figure 9.5 shows
the idea. The comb is negatively charged after combing your hair (Figure
9.4(b)). When it is placed close to the paper, electrons in the paper are pushed to

the bottom or repelled. The top of the paper becomes positively charged and the
bottom negatively charged. The negative charges on the comb attract the top of
the paper upwards. The comb’s charges repel the bottom, but the positive
charges at the top of the paper are closer to the comb. Therefore, the upwards
force is bigger than the repulsive downwards force and the piece of paper is
picked up.
The gold leaf electroscope
The construction of a gold leaf electroscope is shown in Figure 9.6. A metal rod

and cap are insulated from a metal box. A thin piece of gold leaf is attached to
the end of the rod. When the cap is negatively charged, the electrons flow in the
metal and the charge is spread out over the electroscope including the gold leaf.
Like charges repel, so the leaf moves away from the rod next to it.
PRACTICAL
A gold leaf electroscope can be used to investigate the nature of the
charge on a plastic rod. The electroscope can be charged safely using
an approved 5 kV laboratory power supply.
Note:
The gold leaf electroscope is not a required part of the specification.
However, it can be used easily to show that there are two types of
charge.
Figure 9.7 shows how a gold leaf electroscope is used to investigate the charges
on two plastic rods. In Figure 9.7 (a) the electroscope has been charged
positively by connecting it to the positive terminal of a high-voltage supply. It
has lost electrons and has an overall positive charge.
In Figure 9.7 (b) a negatively charged rod is held near the cap. This repels some
of the negatively charged electrons from the cap towards the leaf. This
neutralises some of the positive charge near the gold leaf, so there is less overall
positive charge there. The gold leaf falls.
In Figure 9.7 (c) a positively charged rod is held near the cap. This attracts some
electrons away from the gold leaf towards the cap, so the overall positive charge

near the gold leaf increases. The gold leaf rises further.
Investigating charges
The purpose of this experiment is to investigate how insulating materials can be
charged through friction. You will need a variety of plastic rods and dusters, and
a gold leaf electroscope. The class also need access to a high voltage power
supply.
REQUIRED PRACTICAL
The purpose of this experiment is to investigate how insulating
materials can be charged through friction.
1 Charge your electroscope using the high voltage supply. Note whether your
electroscope is positively or negatively charged.
2 Rub an insulator with a duster and hold the insulator close to the electroscope.
3 From the movement of the electroscope leaf, deduce whether
a) the insulator is charged, b) and then the sign of the charge.
4 Record your results, noting the duster, the insulator and the sign of the charge
on the duster and on the insulator.
5 Repeat the process for other pairs of insulators and dusters.
Which materials conduct electricity?
Metals are good conductors of electricity. Most metal atoms have one or two
loosely held electrons, which are free to move. When a cell is placed across a

metal, the electrons inside it are attracted to the positive terminal of the cell and
repelled from the negative terminal. So, electrons move around a circuit,
carrying the electric current (Figure 9.8).
Currents can also be carried by positive or negative ions. When an atom gains an
electron it is called a negative ion. When an atom loses an electron it becomes a
positive ion. You conduct electricity because your body is full of ions. This is
why you can get an electric shock.
Materials such as plastics and rubber do not have electrons that are free to move
around. These materials do not conduct electricity. They are called insulators.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 a) Two balloons are rubbed with the same woollen cloth so that they

become electrically charged. They are then suspended close to
each other as shown in Figure 9.9. Explain what you can deduce
about the charges on the two balloons.
b) The cloth is then held close to one of the suspended
balloons as shown in Figure 9.10.
i) Explain why you can deduce that the balloon and cloth
have opposite charges.
ii) Explain why it is not possible to produce the same sign
of charge on the balloon and cloth by rubbing them together.
2 a) A plastic rod is rubbed and it becomes positively charged. Explain,
in terms of electron movement, what has happened to some of
the atoms in the rod.
b) A plastic rod is rubbed and it becomes negatively charged.
Explain, in terms of electron movement, what has happened to
some of the atoms in the rod.
c) Explain why it is not possible to charge a metal rod that is
earthed.
3 Design an experiment to investigate whether a plastic rod has a
positive or a negative charge. You can use a gold leaf electroscope
and a high-voltage power supply to help you. Describe how you will
use the apparatus, and how the result of the investigation will allow
you to come to a conclusion.
4 You are given a number of materials that you have not seen before.
Design an experiment to investigate which of the materials conduct

electricity. You should explain clearly which electrical components
you will use, drawing a circuit diagram to show how you will use
these components. You should also explain how you will use your
results to draw conclusions.

2.10 Electrostatics at work
Large thunderclouds have strong convection currents inside them. Ice crystals
are carried up and down by these currents and they become charged as a result of
friction. The base of the cloud gains a large negative charge; the electric forces
are so large that air becomes ionised. A lightning flash occurs when electrons on
the base of the cloud flow through a conducting pathway in the air, to the ground
or a tall object. A flash of lightning can transfer a billion joules of electrostatic
energy to thermal energy in the surroundings.
Spark hazards
A sailor who works on board an oil tanker has to wear shoes that conduct
electricity. Metals are conductors of electricity. Materials like plastic and rubber
do not conduct electricity; they are insulators. Wearing shoes with rubber soles
on board a tanker could be very dangerous.

When the sailor moves around the ship in rubber shoes, charges can build up on
him as he works. When he touches the ship, there will be a small spark as
electrons flow to neutralise his body. Figure 10.2 explains this process. Such a
spark could ignite oil fumes and cause an explosion. Some very large explosions
have destroyed tankers in the past. So sailors wear shoes with soles that conduct.
Now any charge on him flows away and he cannot make a spark.
Sparks are most likely to ignite the oil when it is being unloaded. To avoid this,
the surface of the oil is covered with a ‘blanket’ of nitrogen. This gas does not
burn, so a spark will not cause an explosion.
Electrostatic precipitation
Many power stations burn coal to produce electrical energy. When coal is burnt a
lot of soot is produced. It is important to remove this soot before it gets into the
atmosphere. One way of doing this is to use an electrostatic precipitator. Inside
the precipitator there are wires that carry a large negative charge. As the soot
passes close to these wires the soot particles become negatively charged. These
particles are repelled away from the negative wires and are attracted to positively
charged plates. The soot sticks to the plates, and can be removed later. Some
large precipitators in power stations remove 30 or 40 tonnes of soot per hour.

Photocopying
Most offices use photocopying machines. The key to photocopying is a plate that
is affected by light. When the plate is in the dark its surface is positively
charged. When the plate is in the light it is uncharged.
An image of the document to be copied is projected on to the plate (Figure
10.4(a)). The dark parts of the plate become charged. Now the plate is covered
with a dark powder, called toner. The particles in the toner have been negatively
charged (Figure 10.4(b)), so the toner sticks to the dark parts of the plate, leaving
a dark image.

Next, a piece of paper is pressed on to the plate. This paper is positively charged,
so the toner is attracted to it (Figure 10.4(c)).
Finally, the paper is heated. The toner melts and sticks to the paper, making the
photocopy of the document (Figure 10.4(d)).
Electrostatic paint spraying
Electrostatic paint spraying is used to ensure that cars and bicycles get an even
coat of paint. Figure 10.5 shows the idea.
• The spray nozzle is charged negatively.
• Paint droplets leaving the nozzle become negatively charged. They repel each
other and make a fine mist.
• The droplets are attracted to the positively charged car. The droplets get into
places that are difficult to reach.

STUDY QUESTIONS
1 When an aircraft is being refuelled it is fitted with a bonding line to
electrically connect it to earth. Explain why this is an important safety
precaution.
2 a) A photocopier needs toner powder. Explain why does the powder
needs to be charged.
b) When you get your photocopy out of the copier it is usually
warm. Why?
c) The lens in Figure 10.4(a) produces an image of the
document, which is upsidedown and back-to-front.
Explain why the final image is the right way round.
3 a) When you polish a window using a dry cloth on a dry day the
window soon becomes dusty. Why does this not happen on wet
days?
b) Cling film is a thin plastic material that is used for wrapping
up food. When you peel the film off the roll it sticks to itself.
Suggest why this happens.
4 a) Electrostatic charges can be dangerous. Name one example of a
dangerous situation. Explain what we do to reduce the danger.
b) Name a process in which electrostatics is put to good use in
industry. Give an account of how the process works.
5 A lightning flash delivers a charge of 5C. The voltage between the

cloud and Earth is 100 million volts.
a) The flash lasts 0.002s. Calculate the average current during
this time.
b) Calculate the electrical energy transferred by the flash.
c) Explain what transfers of energy take place.

Summary
I am confident that:
✓ I can recall these facts about mains electricity:
• Electric shocks delivered from a high voltage source can be very
painful, and can even cause death.
• A direct current (d.c.) flows in one direction at a constant rate.
• An alternating current (a.c.) switches direction many times each
second.
• All countries use a.c. supplies for their mains electricity.
• Current in a resistor results in an electrical transfer of energy and a rise
in temperature.
• The wire in a fuse heats up and melts if there is too much current.
• In a circuit breaker the electromagnetic switch opens when the current
is too big.
• An earth wire in a plug prevents electrical shocks.
• Insulators are materials that do not conduct electricity.
• Appliances made of an insulating material do not need an earth wire.
This is called double insulation.
✓ I can recall these equations about electrical power and energy:
• 
• 
✓ I can recall these facts about series and parallel circuits:
• In a series circuit the same current passes through all the components,
one after another.
• In a series circuit increasing the voltage increases the current.
• In a series circuit increasing the resistance makes the current smaller.
• An ammeter is placed in series with a resistor to measure the current
through it.
• A domestic appliance is placed in series with a fuse to protect it. The
fuse melts if the current is too large.
• In a parallel circuit the current is split between two (or more)
components.
• Components in parallel have the same voltage across them.
• Car headlights and domestic appliances are connected in parallel so
they receive the full voltage.
• Voltmeters are placed in parallel with appliances to measure the voltage
across them
✓ I can recall these facts about resistance:

• 
• 
• For some resistors and wires, at constant temperature, the current
through the resistor is proportional to the voltage across it; these are Ohmic
resistors.
• As the current across a filament lamp increases, the resistance gets
larger.
• The resistance of a thermistor decreases as the temperature increases.
• The resistance of a light-dependent resistor (LDR) changes as the light
intensity changes
✓ I can recall these facts about current, charge and voltage:
• Current is a measure of the rate at which electrical charge moves round
the circuit.
• charge = current × time • An amp is equivalent to a flow of charge of 1
coulomb per second.
• A volt is one joule per coulomb.
✓ I can recall these facts about electrostatics:
• Insulators can be charged by friction.
• When electrons are removed from a material, it becomes positively
charged.
• When electrons are added to a material, it becomes negatively charged.
• Like charges repel and unlike charges attract.
• Metals and ionic materials are good conductors.
• Rubber and plastics are good insulators.
• Electrostatics has applications in industry, such as paint spraying and
electrostatic precipitation.

Sample answers and expert’s comments
1 The diagram shows a 12 V battery in series with an ammeter, a variable
resistor and a lamp.
a) Explain how the circuit can be adjusted, using the same components,
to make the lamp brighter.
(2)
b) i) State the equation which links voltage, current and resistance.
(1)
ii) Calculate the resistance of the lamp. State the unit of resistance.
(3)
c) i) State the equation which links charge, current and time.
(1)
ii) Calculate the charge which flows through the bulb in 5 minutes.
State the unit of charge.
(2)
(Total for question = 9 marks)

2 A student uses this circuit to investigate how the current in a diode changes
with the voltage across it. The graph shows the results of this investigation.
a) Describe how the current changes with the applied voltage.
(2)
b) Use the graph to calculate the voltage across the diode when the
current is 10 mA.
(1)
c) Calculate the voltage across the resistor when the current is 10 mA.
(3)
d) Use your answers to b) and c) to calculate the battery voltage.
Explain your answer.
(1)
(Total for question = 7 marks)

3 Using electricity can be dangerous.
a) Suggest two safety precautions you should take when putting a plug
into a mains socket.
(2)
b) Mains electricity provides an alternating current (a.c.). A battery
provides a direct current (d.c.). Describe the difference between a.c. and
d.c.
(2)
c) The photograph shows two mains plugs. Mains plug A has a
connection for an earth wire. Mains plug B does not have an earth
connection.
i) Describe how the earth wire can act together with a fuse as a safety
device.
(3)
ii) Explain why mains plug B can be safe to use even though it has
no earth connection.
(2)
(Total for question = 9 marks)


Exam-style questions
1 The unit of the volt can be expressed as:
A J × s B J/C
C J × C
D J/s [1]
2 The unit of the amp is equivalent to:
A C × s B C
C C/s D s/c [1]
The diagrams A to D show current-voltage graphs for 4 electrical
components.
3 Which is a lamp?
[1]
4 Which is an Ohmic resistor?
[1]
5 Which is a diode?
[1]
6 The resistance of R is decreased. Which of the following is true
about the brightness of lamps X and Y?
[1]

7 The value of the resistance R is:
A 24 Ω
B 16 Ω
C 13 Ω
D 8 Ω
[1]
8 Which of the following correctly shows the reading on
ammeters A1 and A2?

[1]
9 Which of the following correctly shows what happens to the
readings on the voltmeter and ammeter when the light intensity
increases?
[1]
10 A kettle heating element has a resistance of 20 Ω. It is
connected to a 220 V supply. Which of the following correctly
shows the electrical transfer of energy by the kettle in 2

minutes?
A 4.4 kJ
B 4.8 kJ
C 290 kJ
D 528 kJ
[1]
11 The diagram shows an electric mains plug with a fuse and an
earth wire.
a) Name the third wire X, and the parts labelled A and B.
[3]
b) Why is part A put in the live wire?
[2]
c) The diagram below shows a plug that has been wired
dangerously. Explain how you would change the wiring to
make it safe.
[4]

12 An electric iron has been wired without an earth connection.
After years of use the live wire becomes loose and touches the
metal iron.
a) A man touches the iron and receives an electric shock.
Sketch a diagram to show the path of the current through
him.
[1]
b) Explain how an earth wire would have made the iron
safe for him to touch.
[2]
c) The mains voltage is 230V. The man’s resistance is
46kΩ.
Calculate the current through the man.
[3]
13 A four-way adaptor is plugged into a mains supply of 230V.
The adaptor has a 13A fuse. Four appliances may be powered
from the adaptor in parallel. The table shows some appliances
that might be plugged in to the adaptor and the current that
each draws from the mains.

a) Explain why appliances are connected to the mains
supply in parallel.
[2]
b) Calculate the electrical power used when the
television, computer, lamp and radio are all plugged in to
the adaptor together.
[3]
c) Explain what will happen if you plug the iron, the
hairdryer and the heater into the adaptor.
[2]
d) Explain why we are advised to plug heaters directly in
to a mains socket, rather than using an adaptor.
[1]
e) Explain why it is important to earth the metal heater.
[2]
f) The hairdryer is double insulated. What does this
mean?
[2]

14 The circuit shown has four ammeters in it.
a) Ammeter A1 reads 0.6 A, and ammeter A2 reads 0.2
A. Determine what ammeters A3 and A4 read.
[2]
b) Is the resistance, R, larger or smaller than 25Ω?
Explain your answer.
[2]
c) Calculate the voltage shown on the voltmeter. Show
your working.
[3]
d) State the voltage of the battery.
[1]
15 A student decides to investigate how the current through a
filament lamp changes with the voltage applied across it.
The student uses a 12V battery, a filament lamp, an ammeter,
a voltmeter, a variable resistor, a switch and some connecting
wires.
a) Draw a suitable circuit diagram for the experiment.
[3]
b) The student obtained the following results.
i) Plot a graph of current against voltage.
[4]
ii) Use the graph to find the current when the voltage
is 7.0V.

[1]
iii) Calculate the resistance of the filament lamp for
voltages of 2.0V and 6.0V.
[3]
iv) Explain why the resistance of the lamp changes as
the current increases.
[2]
v) Calculate the power used by the lamp when the
voltage across it is 10.0V.
[3]
16 The diagram shows three lamps connected in parallel to a 12V
battery.
a) Calculate the currents through the ammeters A1, A2
and A3.
[3]
b) Calculate the resistance of lamp P.
[3]
c) Calculate the power dissipated by lamp R.
[3]
17 A filament lamp is connected to a 12V battery. The current
through the lamp is recorded by a data logger when the lamp
is switched on. The graph shows how the current in the
filament changes with time.

a) Describe how the current in the filament changes with
time when it is switched on.
[2]
b) Use the graph to determine:
i) the maximum current in the lamp ii) the current
after a time of 1 second.
[2]
c) The resistance of the filament increases as its
temperature rises. Use this information to explain the
shape of the graph.
[2]
d) The lamp is marked 12V 24W. Explain what these
markings mean.
[2]
18 A strain gauge is a device that detects the way an object
changes shape when it is squashed, stretched or bent. The
diagram shows how one is made. A thin piece of wire is set
into a piece of flexible plastic. When the plastic is bent, the
wire stretches. This causes the resistance of the wire to
increase.

a) Draw a diagram to show how the resistance of the
strain gauge can be measured using a battery, ammeter and
voltmeter.
[2]
b) Before the gauge is stretched it is connected to a 6V
battery. A current of 30mA flows through it. Calculate the
gauge’s resistance.
[3]
c) Explain why the resistance of the gauge increases
when the wire is stretched.
[1]
d) State what happens to the current in the circuit when
the wire is stretched.
[1]
19 A student is investigating the relationship between voltage and
current.
a) State the equation linking voltage, current and
resistance.
[1]
b) The meters show the current in a resistor and the
voltage across it.

i) Copy the results table and add the readings on the
two meters to the last column.
[1]
ii) Use the data in the table to draw a graph of current
against voltage.
[5]
iii) Circle the anomalous point on the graph.
[1]
iv) How did you decide that this point was
anomalous?
[1]
v) Use your graph, or the table, to find the resistance
of the resistor that the student used.
[2]
c) The student wants to investigate the effect of changing
light intensity on a circuit. She sets up equipment outside
in a garden for an experiment lasting 24 hours. She uses
the circuit shown in the diagram.

i) Give the name of the component labelled X.
[1]
ii) List the variables that the student should measure.
[2]
iii) Explain why the student might need help to take
all the readings for this investigation.
[2]
iv) The graph below shows some results of the
student’s investigation.
Copy the graph and label both axes with appropriate
quantities and units.
[2]
20 A student rubs a plastic rod with a cloth.
a) i) The plastic rod gains a negative charge. Explain
how the rod becomes charged.

[2]
ii) Describe experiments the student could do to show
that there are two types of electric charge.
[4]
b) The teacher uses a Van de Graaff generator to give
another student a negative charge.
Use ideas about electric charge to explain why the student’s
hair stands on end.
[3]
21 Burning coal in power stations produces soot, ash and waste
gases.
The diagram shows an electrostatic precipitator, which collects
the soot and ash particles.
Explain how the electrostatic precipitator prevents the ash and
soot escaping to the atmosphere.
[4]
22 The diagram shows a car being painted by a process of
electrostatic paint spraying.

a) Explain why it is important that all the paint droplets are
positively charged.
[2]
b) Explain why the car must be charged negatively.
[2]
23 The diagram shows a thundercloud.
a) Explain why the tree below has a positive charge.
[2]
b) The base of the cloud carries a charge of 15C. The
voltage between the cloud and the ground is 800000kV.
i) A flash of lightning discharges the cloud completely
in 0.04s. What is the average current that flows in this
time?
[3]
ii) Calculate the maximum energy that could be
delivered by this lightning flash.
[3]

Extend and challenge
1 a) The table shows the current in three different electrical appliances
when connected to a 230 V a.c. supply.
i) Which appliance has the greatest resistance? Explain
how the data shows this.
ii) The lamp is connected to the mains supply using thin,
twin-cored cable, consisting of live and neutral connections.
State two reasons why this cable should not be used to
connect the kettle to the mains supply.
b) i) Calculate the power rating of the kettle when it is
operated from the 230V a.c. mains supply.
ii) Calculate the current flowing through the kettle when it is
connected to a 115V mains supply.
iii) The kettle is filled with water. The water takes 90s to boil
when working from the 230V supply. Explain how the time it
takes to boil changes when the kettle operates on the 115V
supply.
2 The graph shows how the current through a type of filament lamp
depends on the voltage applied to it. Three of these lamps are
connected into the circuit shown.
a) The circuit diagram shows 0.2A flowing through lamp B. Use
the graph to find the voltage across it.

b) Calculate the resistance of bulb B.
c) Work out the currents in:
i) bulb C
ii) bulb A.
d) Use your answer to part c) ii) to calculate the voltage across
bulb A.
e) Now calculate the voltage of the battery
3 In this question you are asked to work out the unknown values I and
R in the circuit diagram below. The questions below take you through
the process of solving this problem.
a) Write down an expression for the current flowing through the
4 Ω resistor.
b) Now explain why it is possible to write the following equation
relating the voltage of the battery to the voltage across the
resistors: 
c) Solve the equation in part b) to calculate the value of I.
d) Now calculate the value of R.

3
Waves
Sea waves store a lot of kinetic energy. They also carry some
information – about the weather conditions at sea. Energy to set
these waves in motion may have travelled thousands of miles, but
matter has not been transferred this distance. Water waves are
some of the waves we can see. We make use of many types of
waves in our everyday lives, to communicate, to cook and in
medicine.
By the end of this section you should:
• be able to explain the difference between longitudinal and
transverse waves
• know the definitions of amplitude, wavefront, frequency,
wavelength and period of a wave
• know that waves transfer energy and information without
transferring matter
• know and use the relationship between wave speed, wavelength
and frequency
• be able to use the relationship between frequency and time
period
• be able to use the relationships above in different contexts
• be able to explain the Doppler effect
• be able to explain that all waves are reflected and refracted
• know that light is part of a continuous electromagnetic spectrum
• know the order of the electromagnetic spectrum by wavelength
and frequency
• be able to explain the uses and the detrimental effects of the
electromagnetic spectrum

• know that light waves are transverse waves and that they can be
reflected and angle of refracted
• be able to use the law of reflection
• be able to draw ray diagrams to show reflection and refraction
• be able to investigate the refraction of light
• know the relationship between refractive index and the angle of
incidence and angle of refraction
• be able to investigate refractive index
• be able to describe the role of total internal reflection in optical
fibres
• be able to explain the meaning of the critical angle
• know the relationship between critical angle and refractive index
• know that sound waves are longitudinal and can be reflected
and refracted
• know the range of human hearing
• understand how an oscilloscope and a microphone can display
sound waves
• be able to investigate the frequency of sound with an
oscilloscope
• understand that the loudness of a sound relates to the amplitude
of the source vibration
WRITE • CONSIDER
Write down five examples of the use of waves. In each case explain
how we use them and how information and energy is carried by the
waves.

3.1 Introducing waves
Waves do two important things; they carry energy and information. When you
watch television you are taking advantage of radio waves. These waves carry
energy and information from the transmitting station to your house. Light and
sound waves then carry energy and information from the television set to your
eyes and ears.
Waves in solids and liquids
When you drop a stone into a pond you see water ripples spreading outwards
from the place where the stone landed (with a splash). As the ripples spread, the
water surface moves up and down. These ripples are examples of waves.
The water ripples transfer energy and information. The energy moves outwards
from the centre but the water itself does not move outwards. The shape of the
waves provides us with the information about where the stone landed (if we did
not see it land).
Transverse and longitudinal waves
A good way for us to visualise waves is to use a stretched ‘slinky’ spring. When
two students stretch a slinky across the floor in a laboratory, they can transmit
waves that travel slowly enough for us to see.

Transverse waves
Figure 1.3 shows a transverse wave. One student holds the end of the slinky
stationary. The other end of the slinky is moved from side to side. A series of
pulses moves down the slinky, sending energy from one end to the other. The
student holding the slinky still feels the energy as it arrives. None of the material
in the slinky has moved permanently.
Water waves and light waves are two examples of transverse wave. The water
shown in Figure 1.2 moves up and down. Energy is carried outwards by the
wave, but water does not pile up at the edge of the pond.
Longitudinal waves
Figure 1.4 shows a longitudinal wave. Energy is transmitted along the slinky by
pulling and pushing the slinky backwards and forwards. This makes the slinky
vibrate backwards and forwards. The vibration of the slinky is parallel to the
direction of energy transfer. The coils are pushed together in some places (areas
of compression). In other places the coils are pulled apart (areas of rarefaction).
As energy is transferred, none of the material of the slinky moves permanently.

Sound is an example of a longitudinal wave. When a guitar string is plucked,
energy is transferred through the air as the string vibrates backwards and
forwards. However, the air itself does not move away from the string with the
wave and there is not a vacuum left near the guitar.
TIP
Can you explain the difference between transverse and longitudinal
waves?
Describing waves
Waves are described by the terms, amplitude (A), wavelength (λ), frequency (f)

and time period (T). λ, the symbol for wavelength, is a Greek letter pronounced
lambda.
TIP
Make sure you can define amplitude, wavelength, time period and
frequency.
Figure 1.6 shows a transverse water wave. This diagram helps us to understand
the meaning of these terms.
• In Figure 1.6 the amplitude is the distance from a peak to the middle or from a
trough to the middle.
• In Figure 1.6 a wavelength, λ, is the distance between two peaks or two troughs
(or two equivalent points such as A and B).
• Frequency is measured in hertz (Hz). A frequency of 1 Hz means a source is
producing one wave per second. If a student, using a slinky, moves his hand
from side to side and back twice each second, he produces two complete
waves each second. The frequency of the waves is 2 Hz.
• The time period, T, of a wave is the time taken to produce one wave.
• The frequency and time period of a wave are linked by this equation:
TIP
Make sure you can recall an equation linking wave speed to frequency
and wavelength.
where period is in seconds, s frequency is in hertz, Hz.
Example. Calculate the period of a wave with a frequency of 10 Hz.

You can remember this as follows: if a source produces 10 waves each second,
the source takes 0.1 s to produce one wave.
Wave speed and the wave equation
The wave speed is the speed at which energy is transferred (or the wave moves)
through the medium.
All waves obey this equation:
Example. Sound travels at a speed of 330 m/s in air. Calculate the wavelength of
a sound wave with a frequency of 660 Hz.
TIP
A wavefront is a surface that is affected in the same way by a wave at
any given time. All the points in a wavefront move in phase.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 Use diagrams to illustrate the nature of
a) transverse waves b) longitudinal waves.
2 What do the terms ‘area of compression’ and ‘area of rarefaction’
mean?
3 Describe how you would use a slinky to show that waves transfer
both energy and information.
4 In Figure 1.7 waves go past a cork travelling from left to right.

a) In which way does the water move as the waves travel?
b) Describe the motion of the cork.
5 Figure 1.8 shows wave pulses travelling at the same speed along
two ropes. How are the wave pulses travelling along rope A different
from the wave pulses travelling along rope B?
6 Figure 1.9 shows transverse waves on a rope of length 8 m.
a) What is the name given to each of these horizontal
distances?
i) ae ii) bf iii) dg

b) What is the name given to each of these vertical distances?
i) ed ii) ef
c) Calculate:
i) the wavelength of the wave ii) the amplitude of the wave
iii) the horizontal distance ag.
7 The time periods of two waves are:
a) 0.25 s b) 0.01 s.
Calculate the frequency of each wave.
8 A stone is thrown into a pond and waves spread outwards. The
waves travel with a speed of 0.4 m/s and their wavelength is 8 cm.
Calculate the frequency of the waves.
9 Make a sketch to show the wavelength of a longitudinal wave.

3.2 Ripple Tanks
We can learn more about the properties of waves by studying ripples that move
over the surface of water. Figure 2.1 shows a ripple tank. A motor is used to
produce waves continuously, by vibrating a dipper up and down. A beam can be
used to produce straight waves, and a small sphere is used to produce circular
waves. By shining a light over the top of the glass tank, we can see the pattern of
crests and troughs on the screen below the tank.
We use the word wavefront to describe a line where the water is affected by a
wave in the same way at the same time. For example, the circular crests of the
waves seen in Figure 1.2 are parts of the same wavefront: where there is a crest,
all the water has been lifted to its maximum displacement. In Figure 2.2, we can
see straight wavefronts produced by the straight beam. As the wavefront passes,
all the water along the line of the wavefront, rises and falls together.
Reflection
Figure 2.2 shows what happens when straight water wavefronts, in a ripple tank,

approach a solid barrier (a metal plate). The waves are reflected off the barrier as
shown, so that they leave the barrier (the red wavefronts) at the same angle as
they approached (the blue wavefronts).
When describing reflection, we define an angle of incidence, i, and angle of
reflection, r; these are shown in Figure 2.2. The normal is a line at right angles to
the barrier. The angle of incidence i, is the angle between the direction of travel
(the green line) for the incident waves and the normal. The angle of reflection, r,
is the angle between the direction of travel (the green line) for the reflected
waves and the normal.
The angle of incidence always equals the angle of reflection.
All types of waves show the property of reflection. For example, we see light
waves reflected in mirrors, and when we hear an echo, sound waves have been
reflected. The reflection of light is studied further in Chapter 3.4.
Refraction
A ripple tank can also be used to show the refraction of water waves. When
water waves travel from deep water to shallow water they slow down, and their
wavelength also reduces. Figure 2.3 shows the side view of what happens to
water ripples as they travel from deep water to shallow water. (The frequency of

the waves stays the same.) 
Figure 2.4 shows the ripple tank from the top. Here some waves travel into some
shallow water. The waves in the deep water travel faster than the waves in
shallow water.
Figure 2.5 shows what happens when the water waves meet a region of shallow
water at an angle. Now the waves slow down and change direction. This is called
refraction. All waves show the property of refraction. The refraction of light is
studied further in chapter 3.5.

Figure 2.6 shows how refraction can be demonstrated by students acting as a
platoon of soldiers. The idea is that a platoon (of eight soldiers in this example)
walks briskly towards a line, with their arms linked firmly by meter rules. When
they cross the line, each in turn slows down. The result is that the platoon slows
and their row changes direction. This is a model or an analogy of refraction.
Doppler effect
You will be familiar with the Doppler effect. This is the name given to the
apparent change in the frequency of a moving source of sound (or other type of
wave). When you hear the siren from a fire engine as you stand in a street, you
hear one pitch (frequency) of sound as the fire engine approaches you, and a
lower pitch of sound after the fire engine has passed you and is travelling away
from you. Figure 2.7 helps you to understand why the sound changes pitch.

MATHS TIP
You are not expected to be able to derive this formula, but you meet
this formula again in Section 8.
From diagrams 2.7a) and 2.7b), you can see that: 
but λ’ = λ – ∆λ, where ∆λ is the change in wavelength.
So
and
In Figure 2.7a), a source of sound is emitting waves which are heard by the
observer, who is a distance c metres away from the source; c is the speed of
sound in m/s. A one-second burst of sound stretches from the source to the
observer. In Figure 2.7b), the source is moving towards the observer with a
velocity v. Now, the one-second burst of sound is squashed into a length (c − v)

metres. This means that the wavelength is reduced, and the observer hears a
higher frequency. If the source moves away from the observer, the waves are
stretched out into a length of c + v metres; the wavelength is increased and the
observer hears a lower frequency.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 Sea waves approach a harbour wall as shown in the diagram. Copy
the diagram and show the path of the waves after they have hit the
harbour wall.
2 a) i) Sea waves approach a shallow beach as shown in the diagram.
Copy the diagram and show the direction of the waves as they
cross into the shallow area of water.
ii) Explain why the waves change direction as they move
into shallow water.
iii) Wavefronts approaching a beach are usually parallel to
the beach. Use your answers to parts i) and ii) to explain why.
b) The diagram below shows water waves moving from
shallow water to deep water. Copy the diagram to show the
wavefronts in the deep water. [Hint: the waves travel faster in
deep water and have a longer wavelength; and the wavefronts
must join the waves in the shallow water.]

3 Explain why the apparent pitch of a fire engine’s siren changes as
the vehicle passes you. Draw diagrams to show how the wavefronts
of sound are affected by the siren’s motion towards you, and then
away from you.

3.3 Electromagnetic waves
These people on the beach are exposed to several types of electromagnetic
waves. Can you name four types of electromagnetic wave, some of which could
be damaging their bodies?
Can you explain what happens to the sunbathers as time passes from morning to
afternoon?
The electromagnetic spectrum
You will already have heard of radio waves and light waves. These are two
examples of electromagnetic waves. There are many sorts of electromagnetic
wave, which produce very different kinds of effect. Figure 3.2 shows you the full
electromagnetic spectrum. The range of wavelengths in the spectrum stretches
from 10-12 m for gamma rays to about 2 km for radio waves.
Electric and magnetic fields
Many waves that you are familiar with travel through some material. Sound
waves travel through air; water ripples travel along the surface of water.
Electromagnetic waves can travel through a vacuum; this is how energy reaches
us from the Sun. The energy is carried by changing electric and magnetic fields.
These changing fields are at right angles to the direction in which the wave is

travelling. So electromagnetic waves are transverse waves (Figure 3.3).
TIP
Electromagnetic waves are transverse waves, carrying energy and
information in their electric and magnetic force fields.
Wave speed
Electromagnetic waves show the usual wave properties. They can be described
by frequency and wavelength. In a vacuum all electromagnetic waves travel at
the same speed of 3 × 108 m/s. However, electromagnetic waves travel at slower
speeds when they travel in a material. For example, light travels at a slower
speed in glass.
TIP
In a vacuum, all electromagnetic waves travel at the speed of light.
Radio waves
Radio waves with wavelengths of a few hundred metres are used to transmit
local and national radio broadcasts. Radio waves with wavelengths of a few
centimetres are used to transmit television signals and international phone calls.
These short-wavelength radio waves are also known as microwaves.
Microwaves are also used for mobile internet connection and satellite
navigation. When you make a phone call to America, your radio signals are sent
into space by large aerial dishes (see Figure 3.4). These signals are received by a

satellite in orbit around the Earth. The signals are then relayed to another dish in
America.
Microwaves
Microwaves have wavelengths between radio waves and infrared waves. As
well as satellite transmissions, microwaves are used for cooking. Microwaves of
a particular wavelength are chosen that are absorbed by water molecules.
Microwave cooking provides the advantage that the waves can penetrate further
than infrared waves, thereby cooking the inside as well as the outside. This is
much faster than the conventional method of cooking, where heat is conducted
to the inside. Microwave ovens must be made of metal in order to trap the waves
inside them. Microwaves of certain wavelengths are a hazard and could burn us
internally by heating up our body tissues. The metal case of the oven protects us
from the harmful effects of microwaves.
Infrared waves
Infrared waves have wavelengths between about 10−4 m and 10−6 m. Anything
that is warmer than its surroundings will transfer energy by giving out infrared
radiation. You transfer some thermal energy by radiation. You can feel the
infrared radiation given out, or emitted, by an electric fire. Prolonged exposure
of the skin to infrared in sunlight can cause skin burns. We can limit sunburn by
keeping out of the sun and wearing protective clothing.
Infrared photography can be used to measure the temperature of objects. The
hotter something is, the more infrared radiation it gives out. We can also use
infrared photography to ‘see’ objects at night, by detecting radiation from warm
objects.

Light waves
Light waves form the part of the electromagnetic spectrum to which our eyes
are sensitive (‘visible’ light). Red light has a wavelength of 7 × 10-7 m and violet
light a wavelength of 4 × 10-7 m. Common uses of light waves include
transmitting information along optical fibres (see Chapter 3.4) and taking
photographs with cameras. Very bright light can damage the eye. It is more
comfortable to wear sunglasses on a bright day and you must avoid looking
directly at the Sun.
Ultraviolet waves
Ultraviolet waves have wavelengths shorter than visible light – approximately
10−8 m or 10−9 m. While infrared waves are emitted from hot objects (1000 °C
or so), ultraviolet waves are emitted from even hotter objects 4000 °C and
above). The Sun and other stars are sources of ultraviolet ‘light’. Exposure to
ultraviolet waves can damage your eyes, including snow-blindness, which is
sunburn of the retina. Prolonged exposure to ultraviolet light from the Sun can
damage your skin and cause skin cancer. We can protect ourselves from the
harmful effects of ultraviolet by limiting our time in the sun, wearing protective
clothing and using suncreams to block ultraviolet rays.

Some materials fluoresce when exposed to ultraviolet light. This can have
applications in deterring crime (see Figure 3.7).

TIP
Ultraviolet lamps can cause some materials to fluoresce.
X-rays
X-rays have wavelengths of about 10-10 m. These rays can cause damage to
body tissues, so your exposure to them should be limited. X-rays are widely used
in medicine. X-rays of short wavelengths will pass through body tissues but will
be absorbed by bone. Such rays can be used to take a photograph to see if a
patient has broken a bone or has tooth decay.
Slightly longer wavelength X-rays are used in body scanning. These X-rays are
absorbed to different degrees by body tissues, so doctors can build up a picture
of the inside of a patient’s body. This allows doctors to investigate whether a
patient has a disorder in the body.

Gamma rays
Gamma rays are very short-wavelength electromagnetic waves that are emitted
from the nuclei of atoms. Gamma rays are very penetrating and can be very
harmful. They can cause mutations in cells leading to cancer. These rays have
many industrial, agricultural and medical uses (see Chapter 3.7).
People who work with X-rays and gamma rays make sure to limit their exposure
by keeping well away from the source. They work behind protective screens and
radiation badges monitor their radiation dose (see Chapter 3.7).
TIP
Make sure you know and understand the uses and hazards of the
seven types of electromagnetic waves listed here.
The discovery of infrared and ultraviolet
This is an example of discovery by investigation. In 1800 William Herschel
decided to investigate the temperature produced by each colour of the visible
spectrum. Figure 3.9 shows how a prism can be used to split white light up into
all the colours of the rainbow. Herschel put the bulb of a blackened thermometer
in turn into each colour, noting that as he did so, the temperature increased
towards the red end of the spectrum. He then put the thermometer just beyond
the red end of the spectrum and noted that, although he could see no light, the
temperature was even higher. He had discovered invisible heat rays, which we
now call infrared rays. ‘Infra’ means below – the rays are outside the red end of
the spectrum.

Inspired by Herschel, a year later in 1801, Johann Ritter investigated the other
end of the spectrum. He investigated the effect of light on silver chloride, which
was known to be blackened by sunlight. Ritter discovered that the chemical
blackened more quickly as he moved towards the violet end of the spectrum. To
his surprise, he discovered that the blackening effect was most pronounced just
beyond the violet end. So he had discovered ultraviolet rays – ‘ultra’ means
beyond.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 a) Name the parts of the electromagnetic spectrum that have
frequencies higher than ultraviolet waves.
b) Name the parts of the electromagnetic spectrum that have
wavelengths longer than light waves.
2 a) Give two reasons why microwave ovens are made from steel.
b) Which electromagnetic waves cause:
i) skin burns ii) skin cancer?
c) Give three examples of how electromagnetic waves are
used in your life every day.
3 In the table below you can see some data showing typical values of
wavelengths and frequencies for different types of radio wave. The
speed of radio waves is 300 000 000 m/s.
a) Copy the table. Then use the equation v = f × λ to fill in the
missing values.
b) Which wave would you use for
i) a local radio station, ii) television broadcasts to the USA?
4 For each of the following types of electromagnetic wave, give an
example of a use of the wave and a hazard posed by each:
microwave, infrared, ultraviolet, gamma ray.


3.4 Reflection of light
Light is a transverse wave, which can be reflected in the same way that water
waves are reflected.
Reflection of light rays
You may use a mirror every day for shaving or putting on make-up. Mirrors
work because they reflect light. In Figure 4.2 you can see an arrangement for
investigating how light is reflected from a mirror. A ray box is used to produce a
thin beam of light. Inside the ray box is a light bulb; light is allowed to escape
from the box through a thin slit.

TIP
All types of waves can be reflected. Your image in a mirror and the
echo of a sound are both examples of reflection.
Before the light ray strikes the mirror it is called the incident ray. The angle of
incidence, i, is defined as the angle between the incident ray and the normal.
The normal is a line at right angles to the surface of the mirror. After the ray has
been reflected it is called the reflected ray. The angle between the normal and
this ray is called the angle of reflection, r. Light waves reflect in the same way
as water waves.
PRACTICAL
Make sure you understand how to investigate angles of incidence and
reflection using ray boxes. Remember that ray box bulbs can
become very hot.
There are two important points about reflection of light rays, which can be
summarised as follows:
The angle of incidence always equals the angle of reflection; i = r.
The incident ray, the reflected ray and the normal always lie in the same plane.

All surfaces can reflect light. Shiny smooth surfaces produce clear images.
Figure 4.3 shows that light is reflected in all directions from a rough surface so
that no clear image can be produced.
Figure 4.4 shows how it is possible to produce the illusion of a ghost in a play.
The technique is known as ‘Pepper’s Ghost’. A large sheet of glass is placed
diagonally across the stage. The audience can see a wall through the glass on the
darkened stage. An actor is hidden from the audience in the wings. He is brightly
illuminated so that his image is reflected by the glass for the audience to see.
When the actor walks off up the stage, his image (the ghost) appears to leave by
walking through the wall.

STUDY QUESTIONS
1 At what angle must the mirrors be fitted into the periscope in Figure
4.5?
2 John runs towards a mirror at 5 m/s. At what speed does his image
approach him?
3 Copy the diagrams and complete the paths of the rays after
reflections in the mirrors. Use a protractor to draw your diagrams
accurately.
a)
b)

c)
d)
e)
4 a) Draw a diagram to show a ray of light being reflected off a mirror.
Show the angle of incidence and the angle of reflection.
b) Describe an experiment to show that the angle of incidence
always equals the angle of reflection.
5 This question refers to Figure 4.4.
a) The actor moves to position X. Draw a diagram to show the
reflection of 2 light rays from this new position. Use a protractor
to ensure the angle of incidence and the angle of reflection are
the same.
b) Use your diagram to suggest where the actor might appear

to be now.

3.5 Refraction of light
Refraction of light
When a light ray travels from air into a transparent material such as glass or
water, the ray changes direction — it is refracted. Refraction happens because
light travels faster in air than in other substances (Figure 5.2).

The amount by which a light ray bends when it goes from air into another
material depends on two things:
what the material is • the angle of incidence.
Refraction by a rectangular block
Figure 5.3 shows you an experiment to study how light rays bend when they go
into a block of glass. The angle i between the normal and the incident ray, AB, is
the angle of incidence. The angle r between the normal and refracted ray, BC, is
the angle of refraction.

Method
1 Set up the ray box, adjusting the slit to produce a narrow ray.
2 Position the block.
3 Mark the path of the rays AB and CD by putting a series of pencil marks along
their lines.
4 Trace around the block, then remove it.
5 Use a ruler to draw the rays AB, BC, CD. Show that the rays AB and CD are
parallel.
6 Use a protractor to mark the two normals.
7 Finally, measure the angle of incidence i, and the angle of refraction r. Record
the angles in a suitable table.
8 Repeat the experiment to determine six pairs of i and r.
PRACTICAL

Make sure you understand how to trace the incident rays, how to
measure the refracted rays and how to measure the angles of
incidence and refraction.
Taking it further
Devise an experiment to investigate the refraction of light by a triangular prism
and a semi-circular glass block.
The experiment should show these points:
The light ray is bent towards the normal when it goes into the glass. The angle of
incidence is greater than the angle of refraction.
When the light ray leaves the block of glass it is bent away from the normal.
If the block has parallel sides, light comes out at the same angle as it goes in.
TIP
Refraction occurs as light changes speed in passing from one medium
to another.
Refractive index
You can use the apparatus in Figure 5.3 to investigate a relationship between the
incident and the refracted rays. Figure 5.4 shows a graph of the investigations for
three materials: glass, water and diamond.

There is also a mathematical connection between the incident and refracted rays.
This is illustrated in Table 1.
You can see that the ratio of sin i/sin r is approximately constant – in this case its
average value is about 1.5. The ratio, 1.5 is the refractive index (n) of glass. The
refractive index is the ratio of the speed of light in air to the speed of light in
glass.

Because n is a ratio of speeds, it has no unit.
These results may also be plotted on a graph, Figure 5.5. The gradient tells us the
refractive index of the glass when sin i is plotted against sin r.
Investigating the refractive index of glass
REQUIRED PRACTICAL
Make sure you are familiar with this practical.
Method
Follow the procedure outlined in the practical work above.
1 Add two further columns to your table and use a calculator to add values of sin
i and sin r, as shown in Table 1.
2 Draw a graph of sin i on the y-axis against sin r on the x-axis.
3 Measure the gradient. Comment on how your answer compares with the
refractive index for glass (usually about 1.5).
4 Discuss the nature of the errors in your experiment.

Example. A light ray is incident on still water at an angle of 45° to the normal.
Calculate the angle of refraction. The water has a refractive index of 1.33.
Refraction by prisms
You learnt some simple rules about refraction from the experiment shown in
Figure 5.3. You can apply these rules to predict what will happen to light rays
going into any shape of block. In Figure 5.7 you can see a light ray passing
through a triangular glass prism. Notice that as the ray goes into the prism it is

bent towards the normal; as it leaves the prism it is bent away from the normal.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 a) Explain what is meant by the word refraction.
b) Explain why light refracts when it travels from air into water.
2 When light travels from air into glass, light bends towards the normal.
When light travels from glass into air, it bends away from the normal.
a) Use this rule to show the paths of light rays through each of
these glass shapes.
i)
ii)
iii)

b) Use your knowledge of refraction, to sketch a diagram to
show the path rays through the glass of water in Figure 5.1. Use
your diagram to explain why the blue and yellow colours of the
background are reverse by the refraction of the light rays.
3 A student uses an experimental arrangement similar to the one
shown in Figure 5.3 to measure the refractive index of a block of
glass. He measures the angle of incidence as 64° and the angle of
refraction as 34°.
a) Use the student’s results to calculate the refractive index of
the glass.
b) Discuss how the student could improve his experiment to
provide a more accurate answer.
4 Water has a refractive index of 1.33. A ray is incident at an angle of
30° on to a flat water surface.
Calculate the angle of refraction for the ray entering the water.

3.6 Total internal reflection
In the last chapter you learnt that when a light ray crosses from glass into air, it
bends away from the normal. However, this only happens if the angle of
incidence is small. If the angle of incidence is too large, all of the light is
reflected back into the glass. This is called total internal reflection.

Figure 6.2 shows how you can see this effect for yourself in the lab. Three rays
of light are directed towards the centre of a semicircular glass block. Each ray
crosses the circular edge of the block along the normal, so it does not change
direction. However, when a ray meets the plane surface there is a direction
change. For small angles of incidence, the ray is refracted (solid red emerging
ray). Some light is also reflected back into the block (shown as a dashed red on
the diagram).
Critical angle
At an incident angle of 42° the ray is refracted along the surface of the block
(blue ray). This is called the critical angle. If the angle of incidence is greater
than this critical angle then all of the light is reflected back into the glass (green
ray). The critical angle varies from material to material. While it is 42° for glass,
for water it is about 49°.
PRACTICAL
Make sure you understand how to determine the critical angle for
glass.
Total internal reflection in prisms
An ordinary mirror has one main disadvantage: the silver reflecting surface is at
the back of the mirror. So light has to pass through glass before it is reflected by
the mirror surface. This can cause several weaker reflections to be seen in the
mirror, because some light is internally reflected off the glass/air surface (Figure
6.3(a)).

We can avoid the extra reflections by using prisms. In Figure 6.3(b) the light ray
AB meets the back of the glass prism at an angle of incidence of 45°. This angle
is greater than the critical angle for glass, so the light is totally reflected. There is
only one reflection because there is only one surface. Total internal reflection by
prisms is also put to use inside binoculars and cameras.
Critical angle and refractive index
We can calculate the critical angle, c, for a material if we know its refractive
index, n, using the equation:
Example. Calculate the critical angle for a sample of Perspex, with a refractive

index of 1.4.
Optical fibres
Optical fibres are used for carrying beams of light. The fibres usually consist of
two parts. The inner part (core) carries the light beam. The outer part provides
protection for the inner fibre. It is important that light travels more quickly in the
outer part. Then the light inside the core is trapped due to total internal reflection
(Figure 6.4).
Surgeons use a device called an endoscope to examine the inside of patients’
bodies. This is made of two bundles of optical fibres. One bundle carries light
down inside the patient, and the other tube allows the surgeon to see what is
there.
Optical fibres are also used in telephone networks. A small glass fibre, only
about 0.01 mm in diameter, is capable of carrying hundreds of messages, coded
as light pulses, at the same time. These fibres have largely replaced the old
copper cables in telephone systems.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 Turn back to the last chapter. Explain how the graphs in Figure 5.4
can help you work out critical angles. State the critical angles of

glass, water and diamond.
2 Below, you can see a ray of light entering a five-sided prism
(pentaprism) in a camera. The ray undergoes three internal
reflections before emerging. Copy the diagram and mark in the ray’s
path.
3 State two uses for internal reflection. Illustrate your answer with
diagrams.
4 The diagram below shows sunlight passing through a prismatic
window that is used to light an underground room.
a) Copy the diagram and show the path of the rays through the
window.
b) Explain why the window spreads out the light.
5 Diamond has a high refractive index of 2.4. Use the equation: sin c =
1/n to calculate the critical angle for diamond.
6 Describe an experiment to measure the critical angle of a transparent
material.

3.7 Sound waves
The ear
Sound waves travel as compressions and rarefactions through air in the same
way that compressions and decompressions move along a slinky. Your ear
detects the changes in pressure caused by these waves. When a compression
reaches the ear it pushes the eardrum inwards. When a decompression arrives,
the eardrum moves out again. The movements of the eardrum are transmitted
through the ear by bones. Then nerves transmit electrical pulses to the brain.

Making and hearing sounds
Vibrations
When you pluck a guitar string the instrument makes a noise. If you put your
finger on the string you can feel the string vibrating. Sounds are made when
something vibrates. The vibrations of a guitar string pass on energy to the air.
This makes the air vibrate. Our ears can hear frequencies in the range 20 Hz to
20 000 Hz.
Longitudinal waves
Sound is a longitudinal wave. Molecules in air move backwards and forwards
along the direction in which the sound travels. In Figure 7.2, when the guitar
string moves to the right it compresses the air on the right hand side of it. When
the string moves to the left the air on the right expands. This produces a series of
compressions and decompressions. In a compression the air pressure is greater
than normal atmospheric pressure. In a decompression (rarefaction) the air
pressure is less than normal atmospheric pressure.
Speed of sound
The speed of sound depends on which material it travels through. Sound waves
are transmitted by molecules knocking into each other. In air, sound travels at
about 340 m/s. In solids and liquids, where molecules are packed more tightly
together, sound travels faster (Table 1). In a vacuum there are no molecules at
all. Sound cannot travel through a vacuum.
Measuring the speed of sound in a laboratory
It is possible to measure wave speed using the equation:
The problem with measuring the speed of sound in air is that sound travels
quickly. So we must find a way to measure short times accurately in the
laboratory. Figure 7.3 shows how we can do this.
• A loudspeaker is connected to a signal generator which produces short pulses
of sound.

• Two microphones are placed near the loudspeaker but separated by a short
distance, d. Each microphone is connected to an input of a dual beam
oscilloscope.
• The oscilloscope can measure the time difference, t, between the sound
reaching microphone A and microphone B.
Example. A student sets the microphones a distance of 220 cm apart. The time
base on the oscilloscope is set to 1 ms per centimetre: this means that a distance
of 1 cm on the horizontal scale corresponds to a time of 1 ms (0.001 s). Using
Figure 7.3(b), you can measure that the sound reaches microphone B 6.5 ms
after the sound reaches microphone A.
TIP
The speed of sound in air is 330 m/s.

Remember: you must convert distance into metres and time into seconds.
Measuring the speed of sound outside
• When outside, the echoes from a tall building can be used to measure the speed
of sound in air.
• Stand 40 m in front of a tall building and clap your hands or bang two blocks
of wood together – watch your fingers.
• Each time you hear an echo, clap or bang the blocks together again.
• Have another student use a stopwatch to time how long it took to hear 10
echoes.
PRACTICAL
Make sure you can explain how to measure the speed of sound.
The results obtained by two students are given in the table.
1 Calculate the mean value of the time for 10 echoes.
2 How long does it take the sound to travel 80 m?
3 Calculate the speed of sound given by these results.
So the speed of sound is given by: 

TIP
When calculating the speed of sound by reflection, make sure you
remember that the sound travels there and back – so in this example
the distance travelled is 2 × 40 m = 80 m.
Ultrasound
Ultrasound waves are high-frequency sound waves. Like all sound waves, these
waves are longitudinal, and their vibrations produce compressions and
decompressions (expansions) in the material they travel through. Ultrasound has
such a high frequency (above 20 000 Hz) that our ears cannot detect it. The high-
frequency waves have a short wavelength.
TIP
You will not be examined on ultrasound. All you need to know is that
ultrasound is a very high pitched sound wave.
Ultrasonic depth finding
Ships use beams of ultrasound (or sonar) for a variety of purposes. Fishing boats
look for fish; destroyers hunt for submarines; explorers chart the depth of the
oceans. Figure 7.6 demonstrates the idea. A beam of ultrasonic waves is sent out
from the bottom of a ship. The waves are reflected from the sea bed back to the
ship. The longer the delay between the transmitted and reflected pulses, the

deeper the sea is (Figure 7.5).
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 The frequency of a particular sound from your mouth is 250 Hz.
Calculate the wavelength of this sound (use Table 1 to find the
speed).
2 A student is using the apparatus in Figure 7.3. She moves the
microphones closer together so that the horizontal distance between
the traces on the oscilloscope is 4.2 cm. Calculate how far apart the
microphones are. (The speed of sound in air is 340 m/s.) 3 The ship
in Figure 7.6 sends out short pulses of ultrasound every 0.5 s; the
frequency of the waves is 50 kHz (50 000 Hz).
a) The duration of each pulse is 0.01 s. Calculate how many
complete oscillations of the ultrasound waves are emitted during

that time.
b) Use the information in Figures 7.5 and 7.6 to show that the
ultrasound travels at a speed of 1500 m/s through water.
c) Sketch a graph, similar to Figure 7.5, to show both the
transmitted and reflected pulses when the ship reaches point A.
d) What difficulties would the sonar operator face when trying
to measure depths of around 500 m?
e) Calculate the wavelength of the ultrasonic waves in water.
4 Describe an experiment that you could do to measure the speed of
sound. Discuss the accuracy of your method.

3.8 Loudness, quality and pitch
Amplitude and loudness
The loudness of a noise depends on the amplitude of the vibrations that produce
the noise. When a guitar string vibrates it causes compressions and rarefactions
in the air. These pressure changes cause vibrations in the air, which in turn set
our eardrum vibrating. The amplitude of the vibrations in our eardrum
determines the loudness of the sound. Figure 8.2 compares the amplitude of
pressure changes for two voices: the larger amplitude sounds louder.
Pitch
We use the term pitch to describe how a noise or a musical note sounds to us.
Men have low-pitched voices, women have voices of higher pitch. The pitch of a
note is related directly to its frequency. The higher-pitched notes are the notes
with higher frequency.
A data logger and microphone can be used to analyse the waveform of the sound
from a tuning fork. Once the data has been collected it can be downloaded and

displayed on a computer screen. The higher-pitched sound, shown in Figure
8.3(b), has more cycles per second than the lower-pitched sound, shown in
Figure 8.3(a).
Quality
On a piano the note that is called middle C has a frequency of 256 Hz. This note
could be played on a piano or a violin, or you could sing the note. Somebody
listening to the three different sounds would recognise straight away whether
you had sung the note or played it on the piano or violin. The quality of the
three notes is different. The quality of a note depends on the shape of its
waveform. Although notes may have the same frequency and amplitude, if their
waveforms are of a different shape you will detect a different sound (Figure 8.4).

Using an oscilloscope to measure frequency
A microphone is a device that turns sound vibrations into an electrical signal.
The vibrations of a sound move a diaphragm in a microphone backwards and
forwards, which generates an a.c. voltage. If the microphone is attached to an
oscilloscope, we can see how the a.c. voltage changes with time. This is shown
in Figure 8.5.
PRACTICAL
You can use data loggers to display the shape of sound waves, but you
also need to know how to use an oscilloscope to measure the
frequency of a sound wave. Make sure you understand how to use the
y-gain and timebase controls.
Here are some notes on how the oscilloscope works.
The size of the voltage is measured with the y-axis. The y-gain control (on the
right-hand side in Figure 8.5) adjusts the sensitivity of the oscilloscope. Here the
y-gain is set at 2 V/cm. This means that each centimetre displacement in a
vertical direction measures 2 V. So here the peak voltage is 4 V, as the peak is 2
cm above or below the zero voltage level.
The x-axis allows us to measure the time period (and frequency) of the voltage.
The timebase (left-hand control in Figure 8.5) is set at 2 ms/cm. This means that
each centimetre on the x-axis measures a time of 2 ms. One complete cycle of

this voltage takes 4 squares. This is 8 ms or 8/1000 s. Since the frequency of the
voltage is equal to 1/time period, the voltage frequency is 1000/8 = 125 Hz.
You should practise using an oscilloscope to measure the frequency for yourself.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 Look at Figure 8.4. The data logger collected information about the
four musical instruments for the same length of time in each case.
a) Which note has the highest frequency?
b) Which instrument is played most loudly?
c) Which instruments are played most softly?
d) Which two instruments are playing notes of the same pitch?
2 a) Use Figure 8.3 to calculate the frequencies of the sounds emitted
from the two tuning forks.
b) Using the same scales as Figure 8.3, sketch the forms of
notes from tuning forks of frequencies
i) 2000 Hz ii) 750 Hz.
3 Look at the signal in Figure 8.5. Draw another diagram to show how
the trace looks when you make these two separate changes:
a) increase the y-gain to 1 V/cm b) increase the timebase
setting to 1 ms/cm.
4 The diagram below shows a waveform on an oscilloscope screen;
the timebase is set to 1 ms/cm and the y-gain control to 2 V/cm.
Calculate the peak voltage and frequency of the a.c. supply

Summary
I am confident that:
✓ I know and understand the properties of waves.
• I know that waves carry information and energy • I can describe
transverse and longitudinal waves.
• I can describe the meaning of the terms: amplitude, wavelength, time
period, frequency and wavefront.
• I can recall and use the equations:
• I know that there is a change in the observed frequency and wavelength
of a wave when its source is moving relative to an observer. The frequency
appears to increase when the source is moving towards the observer, and to
decrease when the source is moving away. This is called the Doppler
effect.
• I know that all waves reflect and refract.
✓ I can recall the electromagnetic spectrum.
• I understand that all electromagnetic waves travel at the speed of light
in a vacuum (3 × 108 m/s) • I know that electromagnetic waves are
transverse waves.
• I know the spectrum in the order of its increasing frequency:
radiowaves, microwaves, infrared, visible light, ultraviolet, X-rays, gamma
rays.
• I can recall uses of all the types of electromagnetic wave.
• I can recall the detrimental effects of microwaves, infrared, ultra violet
and gamma rays, and the precautions we take to reduce the risks of
exposure to these radiations.
✓ I can recall the properties of light.
• Light can be reflected and refracted.
• Light is a transverse wave.
• I can draw ray diagrams to show refraction and reflection.
• I know how to draw a normal to a surface.
• I know that the angle of incidence equals the angle of reflection.
• I can describe experiments to investigate the refraction of light.
• I know that refractive index can be calculated using the equation: 

where i is the angle of incidence and r is the angle of refraction.
• I can describe an experiment to measure the refractive index of a
glass block.
• I can describe total internal reflection, and know about the critical
angle.
• I can use the equation relating critical angle, c to refractive index,
n: 
✓ I can recall and describe the properties of sound.
• Sound can be reflected and refracted.
• Sound is a longitudinal wave.
• The range of human hearing is 20 Hz to 20 000 Hz.
• I can describe experiments to measure the speed of sound in
air.
• I understand how to use an oscilloscope to measure the
frequency of sound.
• I know that the pitch of a sound is related to its frequency.
• I know that the loudness of a sound is related to the
amplitude of the vibrations producing the sound.

Sample answers and expert’s comments
1 The diagram shows water waves in a ripple tank. The waves are travelling in
deep water. The waves cross a boundary into some shallow water, where they
travel more slowly than in the deep water.
a) Copy and complete the diagram to show what happens to the waves
after they travel into the shallow water.
(2)
b) The diagram on the right shows a ray of light incident on a block of
glass.
i) Copy and complete the diagram to illustrate how the ray enters the
glass and leaves on the other side of the block.
(2)
ii) Explain, in terms of the speed of light, why the ray behaves in this
way.
(1)
(Total for question = 5 marks)

2 The diagram shows the waveform of a sound wave displayed on an
oscilloscope.
The settings on the oscilloscope are: 
Each large square on the screen measures 1 cm by 1 cm.
a) Determine the voltage that corresponds to the amplitude of the wave
on the screen.

(2)
b) i) Calculate the time period of the note.
(3)
ii) Calculate the frequency of the note. State the unit of frequency.
(2)
c) Make a copy of the diagram of the screen. Add the waveform of a
second sound wave which has twice the frequency and the same loudness
as the first note.
(2)
(Total for question = 9 marks)
3 The diagram shows how the depth of a liquid in an oil storage tank can be
checked using sound waves. Some of the sound emitted by the transmitter is
reflected back from the surface of the liquid. The time interval between the
transmitted and reflected pulses is measured using the time base on an
oscilloscope.

a) State the maximum frequency of sound which can be heard by
humans. State the unit of frequency.
(2)
b) The oscilloscope trace is shown below.
Use the oscilloscope trace to find the time taken for the sound to travel
from the transducer to the surface and back.
(2)
c) The speed of the sound through the liquid is 1200 m/s.

Calculate the depth of the liquid.
(3)

Exam-style questions
The diagram shows a wave on the sea.
1 Which letter shows the wavelength of the wave?
[1]
2 Which letter shows the amplitude of the wave?
[1]
3 Which of the following decreases as the pitch of a sound decreases?
A amplitude B speed C frequency D wavelength [1]
4 A sound took 0.6 seconds to travel 900 m in water. Based on that timing,
which of the following is the speed of sound in water, in m/s?
A 540 m/s B 1500 m/s C 1800 m/s D 3000 m/s [1]
Below are listed four parts of the electromagnetic spectrum.
A infrared B ultraviolet C microwave D radio wave
5 Which of the above is used for transmitting phone calls via
satellite?
[1]
6 Which of the above is the most likely to cause skin cancer?
[1]
A seismic wave has a speed of 6.5 km/s; it has a frequency of
0.04 Hz [1]
7 Which of the following is the wavelength of the seismic wave?
A 260 m B 26 km C 160 km D 6500 km [1]
8 Which of the following is the time period of the seismic
wave?
A 25 s B 6.5 s C 4.0 s D 0.04 per second [1]
9 Which of the following correctly describes the nature
of light and sound waves?
[1]

10 A car drives past you blowing its horn. Which of the
following correctly describes the pitch of the horn
that you hear?
A The apparent pitch gets lower.
B The apparent pitch stays the same.
C The apparent pitch gets higher.
D The apparent pitch goes from low to high
and back to low.
[1]
11 A teacher and two students are measuring the speed
of sound.
The teacher makes a sound by hitting two cymbals
together. Each student starts a stopwatch when they
see the teacher hit the cymbals. They each stop their
stopwatch when they hear the sound.
a) Describe how a sound wave moves through
the air.
[3]
b) The students repeat the experiment and
record their readings in a table.
i) State the precision of Andrew’s readings.
[1]
ii) State the equation linking speed, distance
travelled and time taken.

[1]
c) The teacher was standing 150 m from the
students. Use the experimental data recorded by
each student to calculate:
i) the mean measured time for each student
[2]
ii) the speed of sound calculated by each
student.
[2]
Write each answer to an appropriate
number of significant figures.
d) The students look in a data book
and find that the speed of sound in air
is given as 341 m/s.
The students discuss their results:
Andrew: ‘My experiment was more
accurate because my answer
was closest to 341 m/s.’
Kefe: ‘No, you did not allow for
reaction time. My result is
the best that you can get
with this method.’
Andrew: ‘No, reaction time didn’t
matter because I had to react
twice and it cancelled out.’
Evaluate these conclusions.
[5]
12 A student is investigating refraction of light.
a) Explain the word ‘refraction’.
[2]
b) The diagram shows a ray of light travelling
from air to glass.
Copy the diagram and add labels to show the
angle of incidence, i, and the angle of refraction,
r.
[2]

c) The student wants to find the refractive
index of the glass.
i) State the equation linking refractive
index, angle of incidence and angle of
refraction.
[1]
ii) The student has available the following
pieces of apparatus: a rectangular glass
block, a protractor and a ray box. Describe
how the student should carry out the
experiment. You should include:
• what the student should measure • how the
measurements should be made • how the
student should use a graph to find the
refractive index.
[6]
13 Light from an object forms an image in a plane
mirror.
a) State which statement in the box below is
correct.
[1]
Light from the object passes through the
image in a plane mirror.
Light waves are longitudinal.
The angle of incidence equals the angle

of reflection.
The incident ray is always at right angles
to the reflected ray.
b) i) Copy the diagram and use words from
the box to label the numbers on the diagram.
[2]
ii) Write r on your diagram to show the
angle of reflection.
[1]
14 a) The diagram shows a ray of light directed at a
semicircular glass block.
i) Name line X.
[1]
ii) State which letter, a, b, c, d, e or f, is the
angle of incidence.

[1]
iii) Name angle b.
[1]
iv) State an equation that relates angle of
incidence, angle of refraction and refractive
index of glass.
[1]
v) At point Y light passes from air to glass
but refraction does not take place. How can
you tell this from the diagram?
[1]
vi) Why does refraction not take place at
point Y?
[1]
b) Glass with a critical angle of 42° was used
to make the blocks shown below.
i) Copy and complete the diagram to show
how the ray of light passes through the
rectangular block and out into the air.
[3]
ii) Copy and complete the diagram to show
how the ray of light passes through the
triangular glass block and out into the air.
[2]
15 This question is about radiations in the
electromagnetic spectrum.
a) Name the two parts of the spectrum that are

missing (A and B).
[1]
b) Which electromagnetic radiation is used for
heating and night vision equipment?
[1]
c) Which electromagnetic radiation is used for
cooking and satellite transmission?
[1]
d) Which end of the electromagnetic spectrum
has the highest frequency?
[1]
e) Exposure to excessive electromagnetic
radiation can be harmful to the human body. For
two named types of radiation, describe:
i) a harmful effect [2]
ii) how the risks of exposure can be
reduced.
[2]
16 The diagram shows a ray of light incident
at point A inside a glass optical fibre. The
ray of light is totally internally reflected
at A and eventually passes out into the air
from point B.
a) Copy then draw on the diagram
the path taken by the ray of light:
i) between A and B
[1]
ii) as it passes into the air from B.
[2]
b) Explain:
i) why the light is totally
internally reflected inside an
optical fibre [1]
ii) why the light is able to emerge

at B.
[1]
17 A student investigates total
internal reflection of light
inside semicircular blocks.
a) The student draws this
diagram of the apparatus,
which shows the path
followed by a ray of light in
a plastic block.
i) Copy the diagram.
Mark and name the two
angles that the student
should measure.
[1]
ii) Describe how the
student should measure
and record the angles.
[3]
iii) State how these two
angles are related.
[1]
b) The student repeats the
experiment with a glass
block rather than a plastic
one. The light emerges
from a different place, as
shown in the next diagram.
i) State the name given

to the angle marked 42°
in the diagram.
[1]
ii) Calculate the
refractive index of the
glass.
[3]
18 Pete and Annie use the
microphone and an
oscilloscope to display the
different waveforms of their
voices. Trace A shows the
form of Annie’s voice, and
trace B shows the form of
Pete’s voice.
The oscilloscope is adjusted
to these settings for both
singers: y-axis 0.5 V/cm x-
axis 2 ms/cm Each square on
the grid measures 1 cm by 1
cm.
a) i) Which singer has
the louder voice?
Explain your answer.
[2]
ii) Which singer’s
voice has the higher
pitch? Explain your
answer.
[2]
b) Calculate the voltage
that corresponds to the
amplitude of the sound

from Pete.
[2]
c) i) Calculate the time
period of the sound
from Annie.
[2]
ii) Calculate the
frequency of this sound.
State the unit.
[2]
19 Explain what is meant by the
Doppler Effect. Give an
example of the Doppler Effect
in your answer.
[4]

EXTEND AND CHALLENGE
1 Read the article below about whales, then answer the questions.
Whale song
Not only are blue whales the largest animals in the world, but they
are also the noisiest. They give out low-frequency sounds that allow
them to communicate over distances of thousands of kilometres.
The whales are helped in their long-distance communications
because the sounds they give out are trapped in the upper surface
layers of the ocean. Sounds that hit the surface of the sea at a
shallow angle are reflected back. Sounds that travel downwards are
turned back upwards. At greater depths sound travels faster,
because the water is more compressed. This causes sound waves
to be refracted as shown in the diagram. This is similar to the
refraction of light waves on a hot day, which allows us to see a
mirage. Only in the top layers of the ocean does sound travel a long
way. The sounds are trapped, rather like light waves in an optical
fibre.
a) Explain why the reflection and refraction of waves shown in
the diagram help the whales to communicate over large
distances.
b) Explain why creatures living at the bottom of the sea cannot
communicate over long distances.
c) Wallis, an amorous bull whale, is prepared to swim for a day
to find a mate. After singing for half an hour, he gets a response
from Wendy 7 minutes after he stops. How far away is she, and
will Wallis bother to make the journey? (Assume Wendy replies
as soon as Wallis finishes his serenade.)
• Wallis can swim at 15 km/h.
• Sound travels at about 1500 m/s in water.

d) Why are there long pauses in whale conversations?
e) Explain how the refraction of sound waves shown in the
diagram tells us that sound travels faster at greater depths. Draw
a diagram to show what would happen to whale sounds if sound
travelled more slowly at greater depths.
f) On a hot day, it is common to see a mirage on a road as you
drive along. The mirage is an image of the sky. Draw a diagram
to explain how mirages occur.
(Hint: light travels slightly faster in the hot air just above the road
surface.)
2 An earthquake produces seismic waves which travel around the
surface of the Earth at a speed of about 6 km/s. The graph shows how
the ground moves near to the centre of the earthquake as the waves
pass.
a) Calculate the time period of the waves.
b) Calculate the frequency of the waves.
c) Calculate the wavelength of the seismic waves.
d) Explain why the ground is moving most rapidly at times C and E.
e) When is the ground accelerating at its greatest rate?
f) Use the graph to estimate the vertical speed of the ground at the time
marked C.
g) Make a sketched copy of the graph. Add to it a second graph, to
show the ground displacement caused by a second seismic wave of the
same amplitude but twice the frequency.
h) Discuss whether high-frequency or low-frequency seismic waves
will cause more damage to buildings.
i) The diagram shows seismic waves passing a house. The waves
produce ground displacements that have a vertical component YY1 and a
horizontal component XX1. Which component is more likely to make the
house fall down?


4
Energy resources and energy transfer
The UK will stop generating electricity in coal-fired power stations
by 2025. Increasingly the country is moving to renewable energy
sources. In 2009 two per cent of the UK’s electricity was generated
using wind power, which has grown to eleven per cent of
production in 2017.
By the end of this section you should:
• be able to describe energy transfers from one energy store to
another
• be able to use the principle of energy conservation
• know and use the relationship between efficiency, useful energy
output and total energy input
• be able to use Sankey diagrams
• be able to describe how thermal energy transfer may take place
by conduction, convection and radiation
• be able to explain the role of convection in every day
phenomena
• be able to explain how emission and absorption of radiation are
related to surface and temperature

• be able to investigate thermal energy transfer by conduction,
convection and radiation
• be able to explain ways of reducing unwanted energy transfer
• know and be able to use the definitions of work and power
• know and be able to use the relationships for gravitational
potential energy and kinetic energy
• understand how conservation of energy produces a link between
gravitational potential energy, kinetic energy and work
• be able to describe the energy transfers involved in generating
electricity
• be able to describe the advantages and disadvantages of
methods of large-scale electricity production from various
renewable and non-renewable resources.
CALCULATE • PRESENT
1 Find out the electrical energy requirement for your country each year.
2 What fraction of electricity is generated in your country using fossil
fuels?
3 Find out the total electrical energy requirement each year for the
world.

4.1 Energy
When you fill a car up with fuel, do you think about the principle of the
conservation of energy?
• State the type of energy store in the fuel.
• Where did that energy store come from in the first place?
• When the fuel is used, its energy is transferred to other stores of energy. Can
you name three other stores of energy?
Energy stores and systems
We can begin to understand energy by studying changes in the way energy is
stored when a system changes. A ‘system’ is an object or a group of objects that
interact. Here are some situations that you should be familiar with.
• Throwing an object upwards
When you throw a ball upwards, just after the ball leaves your hand it has a
store of kinetic energy. When the ball reaches its highest point, it has a store of
gravitational potential energy. Just before you catch it again, it has a store of
kinetic energy.
• Boiling water in a kettle
When you turn on your electric kettle, the water in the kettle gets hotter. There
is now more internal (or thermal) energy stored in the hot water than there was
in the cold water.
• Burning coal
When we burn coal, there is a chemical reaction. Coal has a store of chemical
energy which is transferred to thermal energy as it burns. A coal fire can warm
up a room.
• A car using its brakes to slow down
A moving car has a store of kinetic energy. When the car slows to a halt, it has
lost this store of kinetic energy. The brakes exert a frictional force on the

wheels, and the brakes get hot. The store of kinetic energy in the car has been
transferred to a store of thermal energy in the brakes. This energy is then
transferred to the surroundings.
• Dropping an object which does not bounce
Just before the object hits the ground, it has a store of kinetic energy. Once the
object has stopped moving, all of its kinetic energy has been transferred to a
store of thermal energy in the object and the surroundings, so they warm up a
little. (You might hear a noise, but the energy carried by the sound is also
transferred to the internal energy of the surroundings.) 
• Accelerating a ball with a constant force
We have a store of chemical potential energy in our muscles. When we throw
a ball, our store of chemical potential energy decreases, and the ball’s store of
kinetic energy increases. The hand applies a force to the ball and does work to
accelerate it.
• Holding two magnets with north poles facing
When you hold two magnets with like poles facing, you can feel a force which
repels the magnets from each other. When the magnets are close together,
there is a store of magnetic potential energy. When you release the magnets,
they move apart. The magnets’ store of magnetic potential energy has reduced,
and their store of kinetic energy has increased.
Energy stores
In the simple everyday events and processes that were described above, we
identified objects that had gained or lost energy. For example, objects slow down
or get hotter. We saw that the way energy is stored changes.
We use the following labels to describe the stores of energy you will meet:

kinetic • chemical • thermal (or internal) • gravitational • magnetic • electrostatic
• elastic • nuclear.
Counting the energy
Energy is a quantity that is measured in joules, J. Large quantities of energy are
measured in kilojoules, kJ, and megajoules, MJ.
The reason that energy is so important to us is that there is always the same
energy at the end of a process as there was at the beginning. If we add up the
total energy in all the stores at the end, the amount is the same as it was at the
beginning.
Figures 1.3, 1.4 and 1.5 show some examples of counting the energy.
TIP
You will often find the word ‘potential’ used to describe an energy store.
A rock on the top of a hill has a store of gravitational (potential) energy.
It may not look as if it has an energy store, but the rock has the

potential to roll downhill – when it has a store of kinetic energy (which
is more obvious to the observer).

The principle of conservation of energy
The principle of conservation of energy states that the amount of energy always
remains the same. There are various stores of energy. In any process, energy can
be transferred from one store to another, but energy cannot be destroyed or
created.
Transferring energy from one store to another
Light, sound and electricity are useful, but they are not stores of energy. They are
ways of transferring energy from one store to a different energy store. You
cannot go into a shop to buy a box of ‘electrical energy’, but you can buy a cell
or battery. In a circuit, the chemical energy stored in a cell or battery causes
electric charge to flow.
In a torch, the chemical energy stored in the battery causes an electric current (a
flow of charge). The electric current causes the temperature of the bulb to
increase so much that the bulb lights up. The light cannot be stored but it is
useful. When the light strikes an object and is absorbed, the thermal energy of
the object increases.

If we drop a bunch of keys onto a table, the collision will make the air vibrate
and we hear a sound. The sound wave transfers energy; it is not an energy store.
The energy will transfer to the air and surrounding objects causing an increase in
their store of thermal energy.
Useful and wasted energy transfers
When we use an energy store, we usually want to transfer the energy into
another useful store. For example, we may use a crane to lift a heavy load for us.
What we want to do is to use the chemical energy stored in the petrol to transfer
energy into the gravitational store of the load we are lifting. Unfortunately, when
we use an engine there are unwanted energy transfers. You know from
experience that a car engine makes a noise and gets hot. So there is an unwanted
transfer to the thermal store of the surroundings.
Efficiency
When a machine wastes energy we say that it is inefficient. We can express
efficiency as a percentage or a decimal. In the case of a petrol engine, only about
25% of the available energy is usefully used to lift a load or drive a vehicle
forwards. The other 75% of the stored chemical energy is transferred wastefully
to the thermal store of the surroundings. We calculate efficiency using the
equation:
TIP
The word dissipate means to spread out, or waste. Thermal energy
spreads out and is hard to transfer back in to a useful store.
A steam engine is rather less efficient than a petrol engine. Calculate the
efficiency of a steam engine that gets 18 kJ of useful energy transfer from 150 kJ
of chemical energy stored in the coal in its furnace: 
Figure 1.6 shows how we can show the same information in a Sankey diagram.

Such a diagram shows how the energy put into a machine is used usefully or
dissipated as thermal energy.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 In the question below, state the energy transfers that occur. State the
starting and end points only.
a) An electric motor lifts a load.
b) A firework rocket flies into the air and explodes.
c) A car brakes and comes to a halt without skidding.
d) A car brakes and skids to a halt.
e) A golfer hits a ball down the fairway.
2 Explain what is meant by the principle of conservation of energy.
3 In the diagram below, a ball falls to the ground. In positions A to E
some values of its kinetic energy (KE) and gravitational potential
energy (GPE) are shown. Copy the diagram and fill in the missing
values (you may ignore air resistance.) 
4 A student compares two engines, A and B. Both machines have the
same energy input. She discovers that A wastes less energy as heat

than B does. Which engine is more efficient?
5 a) A car’s engine is supplied with a kilogram of diesel, which stores
45 MJ of chemical energy. The engine is 36% efficient. How
much useful energy is available to drive the car forwards?
b) Draw a Sankey diagram to show how the energy in the
diesel is transferred to other stores.
6 a) An electric crane, with an efficiency of 30%, transfers 240 J of
useful gravitational potential energy in lifting a load. How much
energy was transferred to the motor to do this job?
b) Draw a Sankey diagram for this process to show how the
energy put into the motor was transferred to other stores of
energy.
7 Explain what is wrong with this statement: ‘A battery stores electrical
energy for the lights, horn and starter motor’.

4.2 Conduction and convection
Insulators and conductors
Materials that conduct thermal energy quickly are known as conductors, and
materials that only allow a slow transfer of energy are know as insulators. All
metals are very good conductors, building materials such as concrete, brick and
glass are reasonably good conductors. Air, wood and plastics are classed as
insulators. Metals are good conductors because they have free electrons, which
can carry energy quickly. Insulators transfer energy slowly, as one atom can only
transfer energy to its immediate neighbours.
Keeping warm
Fat, air and wool are all insulators. These three materials are important for
keeping warm-blooded animals (including us) at the right temperature. Marine
animals such as whales and seals, have a thick layer of blubber to keep them
warm. Birds trap air in feathers, and we trap layers of air in our clothing.

Practical: The conductivity of metals
Figure 2.3 shows how you can compare the conductivities of four metals. In this
case, aluminium, copper, brass and iron have been used.
Method
1 The four metals are placed centrally on a tripod.
2 Water is placed into hollows at the end of each conductor.

3 A Bunsen burner is placed in the centre so that all the metal sheets are heated
equally. The water on the best conductor will boil first. NB the sheets will
become very hot – handle with tongs to avoid burning.
Questions
1 Explain how this is made a fair test.
2 The time taken for the water to boil on the four conductors is given below.
Match each of the conductors A, B, C, D to the metals mentioned above.
Convection currents
When air is heated it expands and its density becomes less. When air is
surrounded by cold denser air, it rises. This is the same principle as a submerged
cork rising to the surface in water.
Figure 2.5 shows how air circulates around you if you stand lightly clothed in a
cold room. Your body transfers thermal energy to the air surrounding you. The
air rises as it is less dense, and colder denser air takes its place. This is a
convection current. Although air is a poor conductor, it is very efficient at
transferring thermal energy by convection. We avoid thermal energy transfer by
convection, by trapping layers of air in our clothing.

Sea breezes
Convection currents also play an important part in our weather systems. Winds
are convection currents on a large scale. You have probably noticed when you
have been sunning yourself on the beach that there is usually a sea breeze
(Figure 2.6). In the daytime the land warms up quickly. This causes a rising air
current and so a breeze blowing in from the sea. Seabirds are quick to take
advantage of these rising currents of air, and can soar upwards without flapping
their wings.
Practical: Observing convection currents
Method
REQUIRED PRACTICAL
Make sure you can explain how you can see convection currents in
water.

1 Fill a beaker (or a flask) with water, and place the beaker onto a tripod and
gauze.
2 Carefully drop a crystal of potassium manganate(VII) into the centre of the
beaker.
3 Heat the centre of the beaker slowly under the crystal. Observe the path of the
dissolved potassium manganate(VII) which shows the direction of the
currents.
Questions
1 Draw the path of the convection currents.
2 Explain the paths of the convection currents in terms of the density of water.
Safety advice
1 Wear safety glasses.
2 Be careful – potassium manganate(VII) is harmful if swallowed. Do not allow
it to stain your clothing.
Avoiding unwanted energy transfer

When we heat our homes, the energy stored inside the house is dissipated
through the roof, walls, windows or doors of the house to warm up the air
outside. We want to make sure the energy escapes as slowly as possible.
Here are some ways in which we reduce unwanted energy dissipation at home.
Chimneys
Figure 2.8 shows a coal fire burning in a sitting room. Some of the energy from
the burning coal is transferred to the air outside the house. This is wasted energy.
By having the chimney inside the house, thermal energy can be transferred into
the bedrooms upstairs. This is useful energy.
Walls
The rate at which energy is transferred through the walls of a house depends on
four factors.
• The temperature difference between inside and outside. (Our heating bills are
larger in winter than in summer.) • The area of the walls. (Large houses cost
more to heat than small houses.) • The thermal conductivity of the walls. Brick
and glass are quite good thermal conductors. Energy flows out of a warm
house through the walls and windows. The higher the thermal conductivity of

a material, the higher the rate of energy transfer by conduction across the
material.
• The thickness of the walls (or windows) is important. The thicker the walls, the
slower the rate of thermal energy transfer.
TIP
Make sure you understand how houses are insulated to keep them
warm.

Modern houses are built with two layers of brick as shown in Figure 2.10. Then
the house is insulated with cavity wall insulation, between the two layers of
brick. The foam which insulates the walls is full of trapped air. The air is a good
insulator; it has a much lower thermal conductivity than brick or glass.
Loft insulation and carpets
The most efficient way to reduce energy waste from our house is to insulate the
loft. A thick layer of loft insulation reduces thermal energy transfer by
conduction through the roof. We also use insulating carpets to reduce thermal
energy transfer by conduction through the floor.
Double glazing
A thin pane of glass in a window transfers energy out of the house. We use
double glazing to reduce thermal energy transfer through the windows. A layer
of gas trapped between two panes of glass provides good insulation (Figure
2.12).
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 The kitchen and lounge of a house are at the same temperature.
When a girl walks bare foot on the carpet in the lounge, her feet feel
warm. When she walks on the tiled floor in the kitchen, her feet feel

cold. Explain why this happens.
2 The diagram below shows a piece of wood with a ring of brass round
part of it. A piece of paper has been stuck partly across the wood
and partly across the brass. A flame is now applied gently
underneath the paper as the wood is turned slowly. The paper over
the wood turns black and burns. The paper over the brass discolours
slightly and does not burn. Explain why.
3 a) Explain why a woollen sweater keeps you warm.
b) Explain why it is dangerous to put your bare hand on to
metal when the temperature is –15 °C, but it is safe to make a
snowball.
4 Thermal energy cannot be transferred by convection in a solid.
Explain why.
5 Figure 2.6 shows the direction of a sea breeze in daytime. At night,
the land cools down more quickly than the sea. Draw a diagram to
show the direction of the breeze at night.
6 Over a hundred years ago in tin mines, fresh air used to be provided
for the miners through two ventilation shafts shown below.
a) To improve the flow of air, a fire was lit at the bottom of one
of the shafts. Explain how this worked.
b) One day, Mr Trevethan, the owner of the mine, had an idea.
To make the ventilation even better he lit another fire at the
bottom of the second shaft. Comment on this idea.

7 The diagram shows 2 test tubes A and B. In A, ice has been forced
down to the bottom of the tube by some metal gauze. In B, some ice
floats at the top.
When A is heated at the top, water boils at the top, and the ice melts
slowly.
When B is heated at the bottom, the ice melts quickly at the top.
Explain these observations.
8 Name 4 ways to reduce thermal energy transfers from your home. In
each case, explain how the energy transfer is reduced.

4.3 Radiation
Radiation is the third way by which thermal energy can be transferred.
Electromagnetic energy from the Sun is transferred to us by radiation. The Sun
emits electromagnetic waves, which travel through space at high speed. Light is
such a wave, but the Sun also emits a lot of infrared waves (or infrared
radiation). Infrared waves have longer wavelengths than light waves. It is the
infrared radiation that makes you feel warm when you lie down in the sunshine.
Good and bad absorbers
Infrared radiation behaves in the same way as light. It can be reflected and
focused using a mirror. Figure 3.2 shows the idea behind a solar furnace. The
shiny surface of the mirror is a poor absorber of radiation, but a good reflector.
Radiation is absorbed well by dull black surfaces. So the boiler at the focus of
the solar furnace is a dull black colour.
Good and bad emitters

Figure 3.3 shows an experiment to investigate which type of teapot will keep
your tea warm for a longer time. One pot has a dull black surface, the other is
made out of shiny stainless steel. Radiation that is emitted from the hot teapots
can be detected using a thermopile and a sensitive ammeter. When you do the
experiment you will find that, when the teapots are filled with hot water at the
same temperature, the black teapot emits radiation at a greater rate than the shiny
surface. So a shiny teapot will keep your tea warmer than a black teapot.
• Black surfaces are good absorbers and good emitters of radiation.
• Shiny and white surfaces are bad absorbers and bad emitters of radiation.
TIP
Don’t forget that thermal energy can be transferred by three methods:
conduction, convection and radiation.
Energy transfer by radiation
Figure 3.4 shows how you can investigate how different surfaces absorb
radiation.
REQUIRED PRACTICAL
Make sure you are familiar with this practical. Take care when using
the heater to avoid getting burnt.
Method
1 You have two sheets of aluminium, A and B. A has been painted black on one
side, and B is shiny on both sides. Use some melted wax from a candle to
stick a marble on to each sheet (using the shiny side of A).
2 Place the sheets equal distances from a heater and turn the heater on.
3 Observe which marble falls off the sheet first.

TIP
Make sure you know which surfaces are good emitters and absorbers
of radiation.
Questions
1 Discuss whether this is a fair test.
2 Which marble fell off first? Explain why.
Vacuum flask
A vacuum flask keeps things warm by reducing thermal energy losses in all
possible ways. The flask is made with a double wall of glass and there is a
vacuum between the two walls. Conduction and convection cannot take place
through a vacuum. The glass walls are thin, so that little thermal energy is
conducted through the glass to the top. Thermal energy can be radiated through a
vacuum, but the glass walls are silvered like a mirror so that they are poor
emitters of radiation. The stopper at the top prevents thermal energy loss by
evaporation or convection currents (Figure 3.5).

STUDY QUESTIONS
1 Explain why each of the following is true, in terms of thermal energy
transfer.
a) Clean snow does not melt quickly in bright sunshine, though
dirty snow does.
b) Some casserole dishes that are used in ovens are black, but
the outside of an electric kettle is shiny.
c) After finishing a marathon, athletes may be wrapped in
aluminium-coated plastic sheets.
d) In hot countries many houses are painted white.
2 Explain three ways in which a vacuum flask helps to keep drinks
warm.
3 Describe an experiment to investigate which type of surface is a
good emitter of radiation. Explain how you make it a fair test.

4.4 What is work?
A job of work
Tony works in a supermarket. His job is to fill up shelves when they are empty.
When Tony lifts up tins to put them on the shelves he is doing some work. The
amount of work Tony does depends on how far he lifts the tins and how heavy
they are.
We define work like this:
Work is measured in joules (J). 1 joule of work is done when a force of 1 newton
moves something through a distance of 1 metre, in the direction of the applied
force.
TIP
In everyday language we use the word ‘work’ to mean the job we do.
When physicists say ‘work’ they mean ‘force × distance moved’.
Example. Calculate the work Tony does when he lifts a tin with a weight of 20 N
through a height of 0.5 m.

Tony does the same amount of work when he lifts a tin with a weight of 10 N
through 1 m.
The unit of work, J, is the same as that used for energy, J. When work is done,
energy is transferred. In the case of the tins, the work done by Tony is transferred
to increase the tin’s store of gravitational potential energy.
You do work when you throw a ball. The work done transfers energy from the
body’s chemical store to the ball’s kinetic store. When you stretch a rubber band,
the work done in stretching it transfers energy from the body’s chemical store to
the band’s elastic potential store.
TIP
A store of energy can be used to do work to transfer energy to another
store.
Work and energy transfers
There are four ways in which energy can be transferred
by mechanical work • by electrical work • by heating • by radiation.
The word radiation includes light and electromagnetic waves. Radiation also
includes ‘mechanical radiation’ such as sound or shock waves.
Figure 4.2 summarises how energy is transferred when a crane’s engine lifts a
load.

• The fuel burns in the engine’s cylinders making hot high pressure gas. Pistons
then do work to drive the engine.
• The motor turns and does work to lift the load – energy is transferred to the
gravitational potential energy store of the load.
• The engine gets hot and energy is transferred to the thermal store of the crane
by heating (by conduction and convection).
• The engine makes a noise and energy is transferred to the thermal store of the
surroundings by sound. Sound waves cause random vibrations in atoms and
molecules, thus increasing the store of thermal energy.
Does a force always do work?
Does a force always do work? The answer is no. In Figure 4.3 Martin is helping
Salim and Teresa to give the car a push start. Teresa and Salim are pushing from
behind; Martin is pushing from the side. Teresa and Salim are doing some work
because they are pushing in the right direction to get the car moving and to
increase its store of kinetic energy. Martin is doing nothing useful to get the car
moving. Martin does no work because he is pushing at right angles to the
direction of movement.

In Figure 4.4 Samantha is doing some weight training. She is holding two
weights but she is not lifting them. She becomes tired because her muscles use
energy, but she is not doing any work because the weights are not moving. To do
work you have to move something, for instance lifting a load or pushing a car.
Paying for the fuel
When you want a job done you usually have to pay for it. This is because you
have to buy fuel. Figure 4.5 shows a crane at work on a building site. The crane
runs on diesel fuel.

Table 1 shows the amount of diesel used by the crane in Figure 4.5 for some
jobs. You can see that to lift a heavier load, or to move it further, more diesel is
used. When the crane does work, energy is transferred into the gravitational
potential energy store of the load.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 a) Define work.
b) Give the unit of work and the unit of energy.
2 In which of the following cases is work being done?
a) A magnetic force holds a magnet on a steel door.
b) You pedal a cycle along a road.
c) A pulley is used to lift a load.
d) You hold a 2 kg mass, but without moving it.
3 Calculate the work done in each case below.
a) You lift a 20 N weight through a height of 2 m.
b) You drag a 40 kg mass 8 m along a floor using a force of 80

N.
4 Table 2 below shows some more jobs done by the crane in Figure
5.4. Copy the table and fill in the missing values.
5 Jo is on the Moon in her spacesuit. Her mass including her suit is
120 kg. The gravitational field strength on the Moon is 1.6 N/kg.
a) Calculate Jo’s weight in her spacesuit.
b) Jo now climbs 30 m up a ladder into her spacecraft. How
much work does she do?
6 Mr Hendrix runs a passenger ferry service in the Caribbean. He has
three ships, which are all the same. Sometimes he has problems
with the bottoms of the ships, when barnacles stick to them. This
increases the drag on the ships, and they use more fuel than usual.
Explain why a larger drag makes the ships use more fuel.

4.5 Calculating energy
In Figure 5.1, how much work is done in lifting 110 kg through 2 m? Can you
estimate the total kinetic energy stored of the vehicles shown in Figure 5.2? On
the vampire roller coaster in Figure 5.3, you can fall a height of 15 m. If you
start from a very low speed what is the speed you will reach by the bottom of the
fall?

Gravitational potential energy
When a weightlifter lifts his weights he does some work. This work increases the
gravitational potential energy (GPE store) of the weights. The total mass of the
bar is m. How much work does he do when he lifts the bar a height h? (m is in
kilograms and h is in metres.) The pull of gravity on the bar (its weight) is m × g.
We call the pull of gravity on each kilogram g; this is 10 N/kg.
Kinetic energy
The kinetic energy of a moving object is given by the formula:
Using equations to calculate the energy changes
Now that you have learnt some formulae for various types of energy, you can use
them together with the principle of conservation of energy to do some
calculations. Some examples are given below.
1 A ball of mass 100 g is thrown vertically upwards with a speed of 12 m/s.
Calculate the maximum height it will reach.
As the ball rises, its kinetic energy store will be transferred to a gravitational

potential energy store. So we can use equations for those quantities to solve
the problem. (The gravitational field strength g is 10 N/kg.) 
2 A car, with a mass of 1200 kg and travelling at 30 m/s, is slowed by its brakes
to a speed of 20 m/s. The brakes are applied for a distance of 75 m. Calculate
the force the brakes apply in slowing the car down.
We solve this by thinking of energy transfers. Work is done by the brakes in
transferring the car’s kinetic energy store to a thermal energy store in the
brake blocks.
TIP
Look at the calculation for the change in the kinetic energy store. Work
out the first value for kinetic energy, then subtract the second value for
kinetic energy.
3 This problem refers to energy transfers in a bungee jump. Figure 5.4 shows a
jumper, Chloe, launching herself off the Victoria Falls Bridge, which crosses
over the Zambezi River at a height of 128 m. Chloe has a mass of 60 kg.
Clearly, the bungee rope is designed so that she does not fall into the river.
Figure 5.5 shows the elastic potential energy stored in the rope as it stretches;
the unstretched length of this rope is 90 m.


We can use this data to calculate the maximum speed of the jumper and to check
that she falls a total of only 120 m and so avoids falling into the river.
She reaches her greatest speed after she has fallen 90 m, just before the rope
begins to slow her down. So her potential energy store has been transferred to a
kinetic energy store.
When Chloe falls a total of 120 m the gravitational potential energy
transferred is: 
You can see from the graph (Figure 5.5) that when the rope is stretched by 30
m, it stores 72 000 J of elastic potential energy, so she stops there, having
fallen a total of 90 m + 30 m, which is 120 m, 8 m above the river.
In the examples above we used the idea that the conservation of energy links
gravitational potential energy, kinetic energy and work done.
• Example 1: the initial store of kinetic energy is transferred to gravitational
potential energy.
• Example 2: the reduction in the car’s kinetic energy store is transferred to the
thermal store of the car’s brakes and the surroundings. However, the transfer of
energy is due to the work done by the car’s brakes, so we can use this link to
calculate the force exerted by the brakes.
• Example 3: the bungee jumper’s initial store of gravitational potential energy is
transferred to a kinetic energy store, and then to a store of elastic potential
energy.
Power
Often when we want to do a job of work, we want to do it quickly. A crane that
lifts a crate more quickly than another crane lifting the same crate is more
powerful.
Power is defined as the rate at which energy is transferred or the rate at which
work is done. Power can be calculated by using these equations.

An energy transfer of 1 joule per second is equal to a power of 1 watt.
Large powers are also measured in kilowatts, kW, and megawatts, MW.
1 kW = 1 000 W (103 W) 1 MW = 1 00 000 W (106 W) Example. A weight lifter
lifts a mass of 140 kg a height of 1.2 m in 0.6 s. Calculate the power developed
by the weight lifter.
The potential energy transferred = mgh
Practical
Calculate your personal power by running up a flight of steps. You need to know
your mass, the time it takes you to run up the stairs and the vertical height of the
stairs.

1 Record your time and calculate the increase in your gravitational potential
energy store.
2 Now calculate your power.
3 Explain why you need the vertical height of the staircase and not the length
along the staircase.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 What is the unit of power?
2 State the connection between the energy transferred and power.
3 A charging rhinoceros moves at a speed of 15 m/s and its mass is
750 kg. Calculate its kinetic energy.
4 A car of mass 750 kg slows down from 30 m/s to 15 m/s over a
distance of 50 m.
a) Calculate its change in kinetic energy.
b) Calculate the average braking force that acts on it.
5 A crane lifts a weight of 12 000 N through a height of 30 m in 90 s.
Calculate the power output of the crane in kW.
6 Two students have an argument about who is more powerful. Peter
says he is more powerful because he is bigger. Hannah says she is
more powerful because she is quicker.
To settle the argument, they run up stairs of height 4.5 m. Use the

information about their weights and times to settle the argument.
7 A catapult stores 10 J of elastic potential energy when it is fully
stretched. It is used to launch a marble of mass 0.02 kg straight up
into the air. Assume all the energy stored in the catapult is
transferred to the marble’s kinetic energy store.
a) Calculate how high the marble rises.
b) Calculate the speed of the marble when it is 30 m above the
ground. (Ignore any affects due to air resistance.) 8 a) Gregg has
a mass of 90 kg.
i) Calculate the gravitational potential energy transferred if
he falls 128 m.
ii) Use the graph in Figure 5.5 to calculate the elastic
potential energy stored when the rope has extended 38 m.
iii) Discuss whether the rope is safe for Gregg to use in the
bungee jump.
b) Discuss the change or changes you would make to
ensure a safe jump for someone of Gregg’s mass.
9 When an express train travels at a speed of 80 m/s, the resistive
forces acting against it add up to 150 kN.
a) Calculate the work done against the resistive forces in 1 s.
b) Calculate the power output of the train, travelling at 80 m/s.
10 Read this extract from a magazine article: The hind legs of a locust
are extremely powerful. The insect takes off with a speed of 3 m/s.
The jump is fast and occurs in a time of 25 milliseconds. The
locust’s mass is about 2.5 g.
Use the information to answer the problems below.
a) Calculate the locust’s average acceleration during take off.
(25 milliseconds = 0.025 s) b) Calculate the average force
exerted by the locust’s hind legs (remember to turn the mass into

kg).
c) The locust’s legs extend by 5 cm (0.05 m) during its jump.
Calculate the work done by its legs.
d) Calculate the power the locust develops in its muscles.

4.6 Energy resources and electricity
generation
Electricity generation and energy transfers
Figure 6.1 illustrates a simple way in which we can generate electricity in the
laboratory. A magnet is moving towards a solenoid. The changing magnetic field
induces a voltage in the solenoid, which then drives a current through the light
emitting diode (LED). The direction of the current is such that the left hand side
of the solenoid behaves like a north pole, so there is a repulsive force on the
magnet that acts in the opposite direction to the magnet’s movement. (You can
read more about this in chapter 6.6.) 
In the process shown in Figure 6.1 the following energy transfers occur.
• First, chemical energy stored in someone’s muscles is transferred to kinetic
energy stored in the moving magnet.
• As the magnet moves, work is done against the repulsive force from the
magnet. There must be a continuous transfer of energy from the muscles’
chemical store to do this work.
• The magnet exerts a force on the solenoid (this is an example of Newton’s
Third Law of motion.) Now electrical work is done by the induced voltage as
it pushes the current through the LED.
• Finally, energy is transferred to the thermal store of the LED and the
surroundings.
Energy transfers occur when electricity is generated by any means. Energy can
be generated using the following resources:
fossil fuels • nuclear power • wind • water • geothermal resources • solar cells •
solar heating systems.

Fossil fuels
Fossil fuels include coal, oil and gas. In 2016, the UK generated just over half its
electricity using fossil fuels: 30% was generated using gas, 20% using coal and
2% with oil. Figure 6.2 shows the principle of a power station using a fossil fuel;
you will not be expected to remember this for IGCSE, but it is helpful to see the
diagram to understand the energy transfers. In the UK the average power
consumption of electricity is about 35 GW (a GW is a gigawatt or 109 W.) 
Chemical energy stored in the fuel is transferred into thermal energy stored in
water and steam. Superheated steam, at high pressure, transfers energy into the
kinetic store of the turbines. Then the turbines do work to drive the generators.
The end point of the energy transfer occurs in factories and houses, when
electrical devices and machines transfer energy in to the thermal store of the
surroundings. (This is the same endpoint for all electrical generation, so will not
be mentioned in other discussions about energy transfers.)
The advantages of using fossil fuels are that they are readily available and
provide a reliable source of power. Gas fired power stations can be turned on and
off at short notice, thereby allowing electricity companies to respond to changes
in demand throughout the day.
The disadvantages of using fossil fuels are that they are non-renewable and that

they produce gases, which contribute to global warming and cause pollution. A
non-renewable energy resource is one that runs out, we have limited reserves of
all the fossil fuels, so we need to look for renewable energy sources, which will
not run out. Burning a fossil fuel produces carbon dioxide, which is a
‘greenhouse’ gas that warms the Earth by trapping energy in the atmosphere’s
thermal store. Coal, in particular causes pollution, which can damage our health.
The UK government is committed to phasing out coal burning power stations by
2025.
TIP
A renewable energy resource is one that never runs out: wind, water
and solar power for example.
A non-renewable energy resource is one that has a limited supply: oil,
gas, coal and nuclear.
Nuclear power
The principle of a nuclear power station is discussed in greater detail in chapter
7.7. The initial source of energy is the nuclear energy store of the nuclei, which
undergo nuclear fission. The kinetic energy store of the nuclei is transferred into
the thermal energy store of water and steam, which then drive turbines to
generate electricity. In 2016 the UK generated 22% of its electricity using
nuclear power; this percentage might increase in the future.
• Advantages. There is plenty of nuclear fuel so the resources will last for a long
time; there is a great amount of energy released for each kilogram of nuclear
fuel – this allows relatively small amounts of fuel to be transported. Nuclear
power does not produce gases which contribute to global warming.
• Disadvantages. Nuclear power stations produce radioactive waste, which has a
long half-life; waste needs to be stored safely for many years. Nuclear power is
expensive to produce. There have been some serious accidents at nuclear
power stations, which have contaminated the environment.
Wind power
Figure 6.3 (a) shows the principle of a wind turbine. The source of energy is the
kinetic energy stored in the moving wind. The wind turns a blade, which is

attached to a generator.
• Advantages. Wind power is clean and has no waste products. It is a renewable
source that will never run out.
• Disadvantages. Wind power is unreliable. If the wind is too light no power is
generated, and sometimes when the wind is too strong the turbines can
overheat and have to be turned off. Wind turbines can make a noise, that
disturbs people living close to them, and some people complain that they are
unsightly.

In the UK in 2016, about 11% of the country’s electricity was generated using
wind power. Wind power works well provided there are other sources of energy:
when the wind blows electricity is generated using wind turbines, but gas can be
used when the wind turbines are not in use. But, over a year, using wind power
reduces the overall use of fossil fuels.
Water power (hydroelectric power)
The most common type of hydroelectric power plant uses a dam on a river to
store water in a reservoir. Water released from the reservoir flows through a
turbine, spinning it, which then activates a generator to produce electricity. Here
the gravitational potential energy stored in the water, is transferred to a kinetic
energy store to drive the turbines. This is illustrated in Figure 6.4.

Hydroelectric power contributes to 2% of the UK requirement. In other countries
hydroelectric power is the main source of electricity; for example, Norway 99%,
Brazil 75% and Kenya 70%.
Tidal power is also used to generate electricity, but on a relatively small scale.
Every day tides rise and fall. Massive amounts of water move in and out of river
estuaries. It is estimated that tides could generate about 20% of the UK’s
electricity. It has been proposed to build a barrage across the Severn Estuary as
shown in Figure 6.5. The barrage would have underwater gates that open as the
tide comes in, and then close at high tide. (Figure 6.6). When the tide goes out a
second set of gates opens. Water flows out of these gates to drive turbines, which
are connected to generators. The stored gravitational potential energy in the
water is transferred to a kinetic energy store to drive the turbines.

• Advantages. Hydroelectric power and tidal power are reliable and have no
waste products. Hydroelectric power is reliable because rivers usually flow: in
Norway there is no shortage of rain and snow to fill the rivers. Hydroelectric
power generated from rivers is relatively cheap to provide – the water is free
and does not need mining or transporting. High tides come and go reliably
twice a day.
• Disadvantages. Many hydroelectric power schemes have environmental
impacts, because building a dam causes a new lake to be formed. In the
process of building: forests have been cut down; farmland is lost; wildlife
habitats have been destroyed; people lose their homes. Opponents to the
building of the Severn Barrage point out that birds and other animals would
lose their habitat. Tidal power can only be used when the tides are going out.

Geothermal power
Iceland is able to generate all of electricity using clean renewable energy
resources; 70% of the country’s electricity is generated using hydroelectric
power and 30% using geothermal power (Figure 6.8). Iceland is a volcanic
country and there are regions where the ground is very hot. In some places steam
is used directly to warm houses. In other areas water is pumped down into the
ground where it is heated. Steam then returns to drive turbines that are attached
to generators. In this case thermal energy builds up a pressure in the steam
(which is a type of potential energy store), and the kinetic energy store of the
escaping steam does work to drive the turbines.

• Advantages. Geothermal power is renewable and reliable; it never runs out.
There are no waste products. It is cheap to provide; Iceland uses more

electricity per head of population than any other country.
• Disadvantages. Geothermal power is only available in some regions of
geological activity. In Iceland there appear to be few disadvantages of using
geothermal power. However, there are risks associated with setting up a
geothermal power station: it requires great expertise, and some poisonous
gases could be emitted, and need to be contained.
Solar power
Solar cells use energy directly from the Sun to generate electricity. Solar cells
usually generate electricity on a small scale; solar panels can be used to power
traffic signs, and we see solar panels on the roofs of houses. The panels on
houses can put electricity into the national grid. In some places there are large
scale solar ‘farms’. In 2016 the UK generated about 4% of its electricity using
solar power.
• Advantages. Once the panels are installed solar power is free at source. The
panels require little maintenance, so solar power is a good long-term
investment. Solar power is indefinitely renewable, and has no waste products.
• Disadvantages. There is an initial high investment. African countries (where
there is a great potential to use solar power) cannot afford the initial

investment. In countries such as the UK, solar power is unreliable, due to the
weather; solar power cannot operate at night, and is less effective in winter.
But, used alongside other technologies, solar power makes a useful
contribution to a country’s electricity supply.
Solar heating systems
Solar heating systems do not directly generate electricity, but they reduce the
need for electricity (or fossil fuels) by using the Sun to heat water; radiation
from the Sun transfers energy to the thermal store of the water. The principle is
that water is pumped through pipes, which are placed on the roof of a house. In
this way water is warmed; then if the water requires further heating, this can be
done using electricity or gas.
• Advantages. Solar heating provides a clean, renewable source of energy at low
cost.
• Disadvantages. Solar heating is unreliable; it depends on the weather and
cannot be used at night. However, it reduces the need to heat a house or hot
water from other sources.

STUDY QUESTIONS
1 a) Explain what is meant by a non-renewable energy resource. Give
two examples.
b) Explain what is meant by a renewable energy resource.
Give two examples.
2 Name a common fuel used in a nuclear power station. (You can refer
to chapter 7.6). State whether the fuel is renewable or non-
renewable.
3 a) Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of generating
electricity using coal.
b) Explain the energy transfers, which occur in the generation
of electricity using coal.
4 a) Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of generating
electricity using tidal power.
b) Explain the energy transfers, which occur in the generation
of electricity using tidal power.
5 a) Explain why tides provide a more reliable way of generating
electricity than using wind power.
b) The UK has 12 000 wind turbines spread from the north to
the south of the country. Explain why spreading the turbines over
a wide area improves the reliability of wind power.
6 A wind turbine is designed to produce a maximum electrical power of
4 MW. However, due to variations in wind speed, the generator only
produces this power 10% of the time.

Calculate how many wind turbines are required to replace a coal
fired power station, which produces a power of 2 000 MW all the
time.
7 This question refers to the hydroelectric power station shown in
Figure 6.4.
a) Explain the energy transfers that occur to generate
electricity.
b) Use the information in Figure 6.4 to calculate the
gravitational potential energy transferred per second when the
generators are working.
c) The generators are 80% efficient. Calculate the power
output of the station in MW.

Summary
I am confident that:
✓ I can recall these facts about energy
• The energy stores are: chemical, kinetic, gravitational, elastic, thermal,
magnetic, electrostatic, nuclear.
• Energy can be transferred by: mechanical work, electrical work,
heating and radiation (electromagnetic and mechanical e.g. sound).
• Energy can be transferred from one store of energy to another.
• The principle of conservation of energy: energy cannot be created or
destroyed.
• 
• Efficiency is expressed as a fraction or a percentage.
• Thermal energy can be transferred by conduction. Metals are good
conductors of heat. Trapped air is a poor conductor (or insulator).
• Thermal energy can be transferred by convection. Warm air is less
dense than cold air, so it rises. This difference of density causes convection
currents.
• Thermal transfers may be reduced by insulation.
• Thermal energy can be transferred by infrared radiation, which travels
at the speed of light. Black surfaces are good emitters and absorbers of
radiation; shiny surfaces are poor emitters and absorbers of radiation.
• Work = force × distance moved in direction of force • 1 joule = 1
newton × 1 metre • 
• 
• 
1 watt = 1 joule/second • There are advantages and disadvantages of the
generation of electricity using renewable and non-renewable energy
resources.
• Electricity can be generated on a large scale.
• Energy transfers occur during the generation of electricity.

Sample answers and expert’s comments
1 A commercial hovercraft service runs in the UK between Portsmouth and the
Isle of Wight.
The hovercraft has a mass of 60 000 kg and a maximum speed of 13 m/s.
a) The hovercraft approaches the beach and slows down.
i) State the equation linking kinetic energy, mass and velocity.
(1)
ii) Calculate the change in kinetic energy, in J, when the hovercraft
slows down from 13 m/s to 10 m/s.
(3)
b) The hovercraft moves along the beach as shown in the diagram.
i) State the equation which links potential energy, mass, gravitational
field strength and height.
(1)
ii) Calculate the increase in potential energy stored when the
hovercraft has moved 50 m up the beach. The gravitational field
strength = 10 N/kg.
(2)
c) Explain how the slope on the beach allows the hovercraft to save
fuel and time during its regular journeys. Include ideas about energy in
your answers.
(4)
(Total for question = 11 marks)

2 In Sweden a small hydroelectric power station has been built to provide
electricity for the local community.
The graph shows how the demand for electrical power varies though the year.
a) Explain why the demand for electrical power varies throughout the
year.
(1)
The second graph shows how the flow rate of the river, which provides water
for the power station, changes during the year.

The flow of water is greatest in summer months because the winter snow
melts from the mountains to fill the rivers.
b) Discuss the energy transfers that occur when electricity is generated
in this power station.
(3)
c) The water entering the power station is directed through pipes so that
the water falls through a height of 80 m before reaching the generators.
i) State the equation which links gravitational potential energy to
mass, gravitational field strength and height.
(1)
ii) Calculate the gravitational potential energy transferred by 1 kg of
water which falls through a height of 80 m.
(3)
The gravitational field strength is 10 N/kg.
d) Use values from the second graph to show that the maximum power
available from the river in July is 7.2 MW.
(4)
e) The turbines have an efficiency of 60% in transferring the potential
energy from the water into electrical energy.
Calculate the maximum electrical power output from the power station in
July.
(2)
(Total for question = 14 marks)


Exam-style questions
1 Which of the following is not a unit of power?
A W
B J
C J/s D MW
[1]
2 Energy is best radiated from a surface which is:
A shiny metal B matt white C shiny black D matt black [1]
3 Energy is transferred from the Sun to Earth by:
A conduction B radiation C convection and radiation D
conduction and radiation [1]
4 Energy is transferred through the air by convection currents. These
occur when air is heated because:
A the molecules moved more quickly B the molecules
expand C air become less dense D the molecules become less
dense [1]
5 A 2 kg mass is lifted through a height of 15 m. The energy
transferred to the gravitational store of the mass is:
A 30 J
B 30 N
C 300 J
D 3 J
[1]
6 Which of the following is not an energy store?
A chemical B electrical C elastic D magnetic
7 Which of the following is a renewable source of energy?
A coal B nuclear C wood D oil [1]
8 A force of 250 N moves a box along the floor a
distance of 200 cm. The work done by the force is:
A 500 000 W
B 50 000 J
C 0.8 J
D 500 J
[1]
9 A ball of mass 100 g is moving with a speed of 8 m/s.
Its store of kinetic energy is:
A 320 J
B 80 J

C 6.4 J
D 3.2 J
[1]
10 A car engine has an efficiency of 0.28. When the car
travels 1 km at 20 m/s, the engine does 420 000 J of
work against resistive forces. How much energy
must the fuel must transfer as the car travels?
A 1.5 MJ
B 120 KJ
C 8.4 MJ
D 84 KJ
[1]
11 People can take various actions to reduce thermal
energy transfers from their homes. Describe one
thing that can be done to reduce thermal energy
transfers through:
a) the gaps around the doors [1]
b) the glass in the windows [1]
c) the outside walls [1]
d) the roof.
[1]
e) The diagram shows three pieces of
aluminium, each with a different surface. They
each have a drop of water placed on them, then
they are heated by a radiant heater placed about
30 cm above them. Explain the order in which
the water drop on each piece of aluminium will
dry.
[3]

12 A conveyor belt is used to lift bags of cement
on a building site.
a) A 30 kg bag of cement is lifted from
the ground to the top of the building.
Calculate the energy transferred to the
gravitational store. (1 kg has a weight of
10 N.) [3]
b) The machine lifts five bags per
minute to the top of the building.
Calculate the useful work done by the
machine each second.
[2]
c) The machine is 20% efficient.
Calculate the input power to the machine
while it is lifting the bags.
[3]
13 A car and its passengers have a
combined mass of 1500 kg. It is
travelling at a speed of 15 m/s. It
increases its speed to 25 m/s.
a) Calculate the energy
transferred to its kinetic store as a
result of this increase in speed.
[3]
b) Explain why the increase in
the kinetic energy store is a much
greater fractional increase than the
increase in speed.

[1]
14 The diagram shows a Pirate Boat
theme park ride, which swings from A
to B to C and back.
a) As the boat swings from A to
B a child’s kinetic energy store
increases by 10 830 J. The child
has a mass of 60 kg and sits in the
centre of the boat. Calculate the
speed of the child as the boat
passes through B.
[3]
b) Sketch a graph to show how
the child’s gravitational energy
store changes as the boat swings
from A to B to C.
[3]
c) By using the idea that the store
of gravitational potential energy is
transferred to a kinetic energy
store as the child falls, calculate
the height change of the ride.
[3]
15 In the following cases explain the
energy transfers that occur.
a) You throw a ball vertically

upwards.
[3]
b) You accelerate a car, then
bring it to rest using the brakes.
[3]
c) A firework rocket takes off and
explodes.
[3]
16 A hot liquid transfers thermal energy
by conduction, convection, radiation
and evaporation. The vacuum flask
shown below is designed to prevent
hot liquids becoming cold.
a) Explain how the vacuum
between the walls reduces the
thermal energy transfer.
[2]
b) Explain how and why the
cork/plastic stopper reduces the
thermal energy transfer.
[2]
c) Explain how the silvered
surfaces reduce thermal energy
transfer.
[2]
17 a) i) Name a renewable and a non-
renewable energy resource.
[2]
ii) Explain the difference
between renewable and non-
renewable resources.
[2]
b) i) State and explain the

energy transfers, which occur in
a gas fired power station when
electricity is generated and then
used to warm peoples’ homes.
[4]
ii) Explain the advantages and
disadvantages of generating
electricity using gas as the
energy resource.
[4]
18 The next diagram shows how energy
from the Sun can be used to heat a
house.
Water from the storage tank is
pumped through the solar panel.
In the solar panel, the water passes
through copper pipes that are painted
black.
The water is then returned to the
storage tank.
a) i) Explain why the pipes in
the solar panel are painted
black.
[1]
ii) Plastic pipes are cheaper
than copper pipes. Explain why
copper pipes are used in the
panel rather than plastic ones.
[1]
b) Write down one advantage and
one disadvantage of using solar

panels rather than gas to heat a
house.
[2]
c) The solar panel takes water
from the bottom of the storage
tank. The radiator takes water from
the top of the storage tank. Explain
why.
[2]
d) The house is heated by
pumping warm water from the
storage tank through radiators. The
diagram below shows the position
of a radiator in a room. Describe
how the radiator heats the room.
Copy the diagram and add to it to
illustrate your answer.
[2]
e) i) State two ways in which
thermal energy transfers may be
reduced from a house.
[2]
ii) For each of your examples,
explain why thermal energy
transfers are reduced.
[4]
19 The diagram shows a section of track
near a railway station. The track at the
station is slightly higher than the rest
of the track. What advantage does this
give? Explain your answer in terms of
energy transfers.
[3]

20 The Eiffel Tower in Paris is 300 m
high and can be climbed using its
1792 steps. Jacques decided to climb
the tower; he took 15 minutes to do it
and he has a mass of 60 kg.
a) How much work did he do
climbing the steps?
[3]
b) Calculate his average power
output during the climb.
[3]
c) A croissant provides Jacques
with 400 kJ of chemical energy
when digested. How many
croissants should Jacques eat for
breakfast if his body is 20%
efficient at transferring this energy
into useful work?
[3]
d) Discuss the energy transfers
that occur as Jacques climbs the
tower.
[2]

EXTEND AND CHALLENGE
1 a) The diagram (below) shows a wind turbine with a rotor 100 m
across, used to generate electricity.
i) Estimate the total area of the rotor blades.
ii) The wind has a velocity of 10 m/s. The force it can cause
on a surface of 1 m2 is 90 N. Calculate the work the wind can
do on 1 m2 in 1 s. (work = force × distance) 
iii) Wind is used to turn the rotor blade. The effective work
done on 1 m2 of the blade is 50% of that calculated in ii).
State how much energy is transferred to the rotor in 1 s.
iv) Calculate the maximum electrical power, in watts, that
would be generated by this wind turbine.
v) A conventional power station generates about 900 MW
of electrical power (1 MW = 1 000 000 W). Calculate how
many of these wind turbines would be needed to replace a
power station.
b) In Chapter 4.6 you saw where a barrage could be built
across the estuary of the River Severn. This would make a lake
with a surface area of about 200 km2 (200 million m2).
The diagram below shows that the sea level could change by 9 m
between low and high tide; but the level in the lake would only
change by 5 m.

i) State the energy transfer that occurs when a cubic metre
of water falls from position A to position B.
ii) A cubic metre of water has a mass of 1000 kg. The
gravitational field strength is 10 N/kg. Calculate the force of
gravity on a cubic metre of water. (force = mass ×
acceleration)
Calculate the work that this can do as it falls from A to B.
(work = force × distance)
iii) Calculate the volume of water that could flow out of the lake
between high and low tide.
iv) Use your answers to parts ii) and iii) to determine how much
energy could be obtained from the tide.
Assume that position A is the average position of a cubic metre of
water between high and low levels in the lake.
v) The time between high and low tide is approximately 20 000
seconds (about 6 hours). Use this figure to estimate the power
available from the dam. Give your answer in megawatts.
c) Explain the advantages and disadvantages of the wind turbine and the
Severn Barrage as sources of power.

5 Solids, liquids and gases
A hot air balloon works on the principle that the density of hot air is
less than the density of cold air. So, when hot air is put into the
balloon from the burners, the cold air surrounding the balloon
causes the balloon to rise.
By the end of this section you should:
• know and be able to use the relationship between density, mass
and volume
• investigate density using direct measurements of mass and
volume
• know and be able to use the relationship between pressure,
force and area
• understand how the pressure in a gas or liquid acts equally in all
directions
• know and be able to use the relationship between pressure
difference, height, density and gravitational field strength
• be able to explain that heating a system will change the energy
stored in that system
• be able to describe the changes that occur when a solid melts or
a liquid boils or evaporates
• be able to describe the arrangements of atoms in solids, liquids
and gases
• be able to obtain a temperature-time graph to show a constant
temperature during a change of state
• know that the specific heat capacity of a substance is the energy
required to change the temperature of 1 kg of a substance by

1°C
• be able to use the equation relating the change in thermal
energy to mass, specific heat capacity and temperature change
• be able to investigate the specific heat capacity of materials
including water
• explain how molecules in a gas have random motion and exert a
pressure on the sides of their container
• understand why there is an absolute zero at − 273 °C
• be able to describe the Kelvin scale of temperature and be able
to convert between the Kelvin and Celsius scales
• understand why an increase in temperature results in an
increase in average speed of molecules
• know that kelvin temperatures of a gas are directly proportional
to the average kinetic energies of its molecules
• be able to explain, for a fixed mass of gas, the qualitative
relationship between: pressure and volume at constant
temperature; pressure and kelvin temperature at constant
volume
• be able to use the relationship between the pressure and kelvin
temperature of a fixed mass of gas at constant volume
• be able to use the relationship between the pressure and volume
of a fixed mass of gas at constant temperature.
CONSIDER • CALCULATE
1 Describe how the speed of the air molecules inside the balloon
compares with that of the air molecules outside the balloon.
2 Describe how the spacing of the air molecules inside the balloon
compares with that of the air molecules outside the balloon.
3 Do some research to find out:
a) the average temperature of the air in a hot air balloon b) the
volume of a balloon that lifts a load of 3000 kg – the typical mass
of five passengers, the basket, the burners and the balloon itself.

5.1 Density
The Eurofighter Typhoon is made from low-density materials to keep its weight
to a minimum and allow it to climb or change direction quickly. It is made up
mainly of the following materials: carbon-fibre composites such as Kevlar;
lightweight alloys such as aluminium/lithium alloy; glass-reinforced plastics.
Find out how much more expensive these materials are than aluminium and
steel. Why would steel be a very poor choice for this purpose?
What is density?
A tree obviously weighs more than a nail. Sometimes, you hear people say ‘steel
is heavier than wood’. What they mean is this: a piece of steel is heavier than a
piece of wood with the same volume.
To compare the heaviness of materials we use the idea of density. Density can
be calculated using this equation:
The Greek letter ρ (rho) is used to represent density. Density is usually measured
in units of kg/m3. Some typical values of density are in Table 1.

Experiment: measuring density of a regular solid
You can calculate the density of an object by measuring its mass and calculating
its volume. Figure 1.2 shows a regularly shaped piece of material. Its dimensions
have been measured carefully with an accurate ruler. Its mass has been measured
on an electronic balance and found to be 173.2 g.
TIP
Use the correct vocabulary – say ‘steel is denser than water’ rather
than ‘steel is heavier than water’.
Calculate the density in kg/m3.

This method has limitations:
A ruler can only measure to an accuracy of 0.1 cm, so the volume may not be
calculated exactly.
The shape of the block may not be regular.
PRACTICAL
Make sure you can describe how to take appropriate measurements so
that you can calculate the density of an object.
Follow this procedure for yourself and determine the density of a block of wood
or metal.
The volume of an irregularly shaped object can be calculated by immersing it in
water. This is illustrated in Study Question 5.
Using density in engineering
Knowing the density of materials is very important to an engineer. This allows
the mass of building materials to be calculated.

Example. Calculate the mass of a steel girder, which is 9.0 m long, 0.10 m high
and 0.10 m wide.

Steel is a very common building material because it is so strong. In aircraft
construction, low-density and high-strength materials are used such as
aluminium and carbon-fibre reinforced plastic. These materials are far too
expensive to use for building houses or bridges.
Fibreglass is an important modern material. It is made by strengthening plastic
with glass fibres. Table 2 allows us to compare steel and fibreglass. Fibreglass is
actually a little stronger than ‘mild’ steel. This means a larger force is needed to
break it. Fibreglass has a much lower density than steel. This makes it ideal for
building small boats. Fibreglass cannot be used for large boats because it bends
too much.
Experiment: measuring the density of a liquid
Method
1 Place an empty 100 ml measuring cylinder on to an electronic balance. Record
the mass of the cylinder.
2 Now pour 20 ml of the liquid provided (e.g. water or paraffin) into the
cylinder. Measure the mass of the liquid and cylinder.
3 Determine the mass of the liquid, by subtracting the mass of the empty
cylinder.
4 Make a suitable table to record the volume and mass of the liquid.
5 Add 20 ml more of the liquid, and repeat the process above. Continue adding
20 ml at a time until you have 5 pairs of values of volume and mass.
TIP
School beakers are often marked in ml or millilitres. 1 ml = 1 cm3

Calculating the density
1 Use each set of readings to calculate the density of the liquid in g/cm3.
Remember that 1 ml is the same as 1 cm3.
2 Which of your five readings is likely to be the most accurate? Explain your
answer.
3 Calculate the mean of your five results.
4 You can calculate your density in kg/m3 by multiplying your answer by 1000.
Explain where the factor of 1000 comes from.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 A student wrote the following sentence in an exam paper; read it and
correct any mistakes you see.
‘A cork floats in a pond because it is lighter than water; a stone sinks
because it is too heavy to float in water.’
2 Look at the photograph of Galileo’s thermometer in Figure 1.3. The
density of water reduces as it warms up. Each float has a slightly

different mass. As the temperature rises, do the floats rise or sink?
Explain your answer.
3 a) Describe a method to determine the density of a regular object.
Explain what measurements you would take.
b) Evaluate your method and comment on its accuracy.
4 Copy Table 3 and fill in the gaps.
5 Carole is a geologist. She wants to work out the density of a rock.
First she measures the mass of the rock, then she puts it into a
beaker of water to work out its volume.
a) Use the diagrams to calculate the rock’s volume. Give your
answer in m3.
b) Now calculate the rock’s density in kg/m3.

6 Use Table 1 to calculate the volume of:
a) 1000 kg of aluminium b) 100 kg of cork.
7 White dwarf stars are extremely dense. They have a density of about
100 million kg/m3. If you had a matchbox full of material from a white
dwarf, determine what its mass would be. (Hint: A matchbox has a
volume of about 0.000 05 m3.) 8 An aluminium/lithium alloy is
stronger than aluminium. What other advantages does this alloy
have for building aircraft? Use Table 1 to help you with your answer.
9 a) Explain why aluminium and carbon-fibre reinforced plastic are
used to build aeroplanes.
b) In Table 2, the last row is headed ‘strength/density’. Explain
why this is an important ratio in aircraft construction.

5.2 Pressure
You always choose a sharp knife when you want to chop up meat or vegetables
ready for cooking. A sharp knife has a very thin edge to the blade. This means
that the force which you apply is concentrated into a very small area. We say that
the pressure under the blade is large.

Pressure points
The unit of pressure is N/m2 or pascal (Pa); 1 N/m2 = 1 Pa.
Figure 2.4 shows a physics teacher lying on a bed of nails. How can he lie there
without hurting himself? You all know that nails are sharp and will make a hole
in you if you tread on one. The teacher has spread his body out, so that it is
supported by a lot of nails. The area of nails supporting him is large enough for it
not to hurt (too much!).
TIP
Use the correct vocabulary – pressure, weight and area – to answer
the questions in the photo captions.

When an engineer designs the foundations of a bridge, he or she must think
about pressure. In the example shown in Figure 2.6, the bridge will sink into the
soil if it causes a pressure greater than 80 kN/m2 (80 000 N/m2). Calculate the
minimum area the foundations must have to stop this happening.
The bridge has a weight of 1.2 MN, so each pillar will support 0.60 MN (600
000 N).
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 a) Describe how a drawing pin takes advantage of high pressure at
one end and low pressure at the other end.

b) Give two examples in sport or other activities in which
something is used to reduce pressure.
c) Give two examples of a device which is used to increase
pressure.
2 Five girls stand on one heel of their shoes. The weights of each girl
and the area of their heel is shown in the table. Which girls put:
a) the greatest, b) the least pressure on the floor?
3 a) When a pressure of 2.3 N/mm2 is applied to your skin it hurts.
Each nail in the bed in Figure 2.4 has a point with an area of 1.5
mm2. Determine how much weight the teacher can put on each
nail without being hurt.
b) The teacher’s weight is 690 N. Calculate how many nails (at
least) he should put in the bed.
c) Explain why he must be very careful getting on and off the
bed.
4 Use the idea of pressure to explain why:
a) a saw has a jagged edge, b) a knife cuts better when
sharpened, c) you should not walk over a wooden floor wearing
stiletto heels, d) Canadians wear snow shoes to get about in
winter, e) a tank has caterpillar tracks on it.
5 The diagram shows three boxes, A, B and C. Calculate which box
would you use and how would you position it to exert:
i) the greatest pressure on the ground ii) the smallest
pressure on the ground.


5.3 Pressure in liquids
This scuba diver is enjoying warm tropical waters, where she can see brightly
coloured fish in the coral reefs. Although the water looks clear and safe, there
are hidden dangers. One danger is the pressure of the water itself. For every 10
m below the surface of the sea, there is an increase in pressure equal to 1
atmosphere pressure. When the pressure increases on your body gases dissolve
in your blood, which can be very painful and dangerous to your health. You have
to take care to change depth slowly, as rapid changes of pressure can cause
injuries to your ears or lungs.
Increase of pressure with depth
The pressure that acts on a diver depends on the weight of water above her. As
she goes deeper, the height and weight of the water above her increase. This
increases the pressure on the diver.
For every 10 m below the surface of the sea, there is an increase of about 1
atmosphere pressure. The diver in Figure 3.1 is experiencing a pressure of 3
atmospheres at a depth of 20 m.
The diver feels a bigger pressure under 10 m of sea water than under 10 m of
fresh water. This is because sea water has a higher density than fresh water. So a

column of sea water would have a greater mass and therefore greater weight than
an identical column of fresh water.
The pressure at the bottom of a column of liquid depends on three things:
height of the column, h in metres, m • density of the liquid, ρ in kg/m3
gravitational field strength, g (g = 10 N/kg).
The pressure due to a column of liquid can be calculated using the equation:
pressure = height of the column × density of the liquid × gravitational field
strength where pressure is in pascals, Pa, or N/m2.
Measuring atmospheric pressure
Figure 3.2 shows how we can measure atmospheric pressure using a mercury
barometer. There is a vacuum above the mercury, so atmospheric pressure is
large enough to support a column of mercury 76 cm long. The pressure at x
under the column of mercury is the same as the pressure at y due the atmosphere.
The density of mercury is 13 600 kg/m3. We can now calculate atmospheric
pressure: 

This is a large pressure, but we tend not to notice this as the pressures inside and
outside out bodies are the same. However, we do notice pressure changes, when
we drive up or down a hill for example.
Transmitting pressures
When you hit a nail with a hammer the pressure is transmitted downwards to the
point. This happens only because the nail is rigid.
TIP
The answer above was rounded to 2 significant figures to make the
lowest number of significant figures in the data provided.
When a ruler is used to push a lot of marbles lying on a table, they do not all
move along the direction of the push. Some of the marbles give others a
sideways push. The marbles are behaving like a fluid.
In Figure 3.3 you can see a cylinder of fluid that has been squashed by pushing a
piston down. The pressure increases everywhere in the fluid, not just next to the
piston. The fluid is made up of lots of tiny particles, which act rather like the
marbles to transmit the pressure to all points.

Hydraulic machines
We often use liquids to transmit pressures. Liquids can change shape but they
hardly change their volume when compressed. Figure 3.4 shows how a hydraulic
jack works.
A force of 50 N presses down on the surface above A. The extra pressure that
this force produces in the liquid is: 
The same pressure is passed through the liquid to B. So the upwards force that
the surface B can provide is: 
With the hydraulic jack you can lift a load of 500 N by applying a force of only
50 N. Figure 3.5 shows another use of hydraulics.

The manometer
Figure 3.6 shows how you can use a manometer to measure the pressure of a
gas supply. The two points X and Y are at the same level in the liquid. This
means that the pressures at X and Y are the same.
Pressure at X = gas supply pressure.
Pressure at Y = atmospheric pressure + pressure due to 27.2 cm of water.

So the gas supply pressure is greater than atmospheric pressure, by an amount
equal to the pressure due to a column of water 27.2 cm high.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 a) Name the three factors that affect the pressure at a point under
the sea.
b) Explain why the pressure is greater under a depth of 5 m of
sea water, than it is under a depth of 5 m of fresh water.
c) Explain why atmospheric pressure is lower at the top of a
mountain, than it is at sea level.
2 Explain why a liquid exerts the same pressure in all directions.
3 Explain why the pressure on the diver in Figure 3.1 is equivalent to
three atmosphere pressures.
4 This question refers to the manometer in Figure 3.6.
a) On another day the manometer shows a level difference of
29.8 cm. Explain what has happened to the gas pressure.
b) Calculate the gas pressure for the supply shown in the

diagram. [The density of water is 1000 kg/m3].
c) A second manometer has oil in it, with a density of 800
kg/m3. It is attached to the gas supply (with the pressure shown
in Figure 3.6). Calculate the level differences between the two
columns.
5 a) Use the equation P = hρg to calculate the pressure acting on a
diver at depths of i) 10 m, ii) 30 m.
The density of the water is 1000 kg/m3. You will need to include
the pressure of the atmosphere at the surface of the sea, which is
100 000 N/m2.
b) Calculate the force exerted by the pressure on the diver’s
mask at a depth of 30 m. His mask has an area of 0.02 m2.
c) Explain why the diver’s mask is in no danger of breaking
under this pressure.
6 Figure 3.7 shows the principle of a hydraulic jack. Two cylinders are
connected by a reservoir of oil.
A 200 N weight resting on piston A can be used to lift a larger load
on piston B.
a) Calculate the extra pressure at x, due to the 200 N weight.
b) Explain why the pressure at y is the same as the pressure at
x.
c) Why would the jack not work if the oil were replaced by a
gas?
d) Calculate the size of the load, W, which can be lifted.
e) If you need to lift W by 0.05 m, calculate how far you need to
move piston A.


5.4 Solids, liquids and gases
Ice, water and steam are three different states of the same substance. We call
these three states solid, liquid and gas.
• Solid: In a solid, the atoms (or molecules) are packed in a regular structure.
The atoms cannot move out of their fixed position, but they can vibrate. The
atoms are held close together by strong forces, so it is difficult to change the
shape of a solid.
• Liquid: The atoms (or molecules) in a liquid are also close together. The forces
between the atoms keep them in contact, but atoms can move from one place
to another. A liquid can flow and change shape to fit any container. Because
the atoms are close together, it is very difficult to compress a liquid.
• Gas: In a gas, the atoms (or molecules) are separated by relatively large
distances. The forces between the atoms are very small. The atoms in a gas are
in constant, random motion. A gas can expand to fill any volume, and can be
compressed.
Density of solids, liquids and gases
The densities of solids and liquids are usually much higher than the density of
gases. In solids and liquids, the atoms are closely packed together, so there is a
lot of mass in a small volume. In gases the atoms are much further apart, so there
is less mass in the same small volume.

• Lead has a much higher density than lithium because the atoms of lead have a
much greater mass than lithium atoms. (The lead atoms are only slightly larger
than lithium atoms.) • The density of air is larger than the density of hydrogen,
because the nitrogen and oxygen molecules in the air have a greater mass than
hydrogen molecules.
Internal energy
Energy is stored inside a system by the particles (atoms or molecules) that make
up that system. This is called internal energy. Internal energy is the total kinetic
and potential energy of all the particles that make up the system.
We can use a model of several balls and springs to help us understand the nature
of internal energy in a solid. The balls represent the atoms and the springs
represent the forces or ‘bonds’ that keep the atom in place.
In Figure 4.3(a), the middle atom has been displaced to the right. Now potential
energy is stored in the stretched bond. In Figure 4.3(b), the atom has kinetic
energy as it moves to the left.
Heating
Heating changes the energy stored within a system by increasing the energy store

of the particles that make up the system.
• Heating can increase the temperature of a system. For example, when a gas is
heated, the atoms (or molecules) move faster and the kinetic energy store of
the atoms increases.
• Heating a system can also cause a change of state, for example when a solid
melts to become a liquid. Usually when a solid melts, there is a small increase
in volume as the solid turns to liquid. The atoms increase their separation and
there is an increase in the potential energy stored, so the internal energy
increases.
Changes of state
We use these terms to describe changes of state.
• Melting occurs when a solid turns to a liquid. The internal energy of the
system increases.
• Freezing occurs when a liquid turns to a solid. The internal energy of the
system decreases.
• Boiling or evaporation occurs when a liquid turns to a gas. The internal
energy of the system increases.
• Condensation occurs when a gas turns to a liquid. The internal energy of the
system decreases.
• Sublimation occurs when a solid turns directly into a gas. The internal energy
of the system increases. Sublimation is rare. An example is carbon dioxide
(CO2). Solid CO2 (dry ice) turns directly into the gas CO2 missing out the
liquid state at normal atmospheric pressure.
• Deposition is the reverse process of sublimation - a gas turns to a solid. The
internal energy of the system decreases.
A change of state of a substance is a physical change. The change does not
produce a new substance, and the process can be reversed. For example, a cube

of ice from the freezer can be allowed to melt into water. The water can be put
back into its container and then into the freezer. The water will freeze back into
ice. No matter what its state, water or ice, the mass is the same. So when a
substance changes state, the mass is conserved. This is because the total number
of particles (atoms or molecules) stays the same. The internal energy of the
system decreases.
PRACTICAL
Make sure you are familiar with this practical.
A cooling curve temperature against time
When you leave a cup of coffee to cool, the temperature drops gradually, as
shown in Figure 4.5. When something is hot, its temperature drops quickly.
When water is close to room temperature, its temperature drops more slowly.
In this practical, you investigate what happens when some stearic acid cools and
solidifies.
Method
1 Put on your safety glasses.
2 Set up a tripod and gauze. Fill a beaker of water with 150 ml of water.
3 Put your test tube of stearic acid into a clamp supported by a retort stand.
Include a cotton wool or mineral fibre plug in the tube neck to reduce fumes.
4 Construct a table to record pairs of readings of the temperature of the stearic
acid and the time (recorded in minutes).
5 Light the Bunsen burner and bring the water to the boil. Place your stearic acid
into the water. Do not heat the test tube directly in the Bunsen flame.
6 Put your thermometer into the stearic acid and make sure it reaches a
temperature of 100 °C.

7 Get a stopwatch ready. Start the stopwatch and quickly move the stearic acid
back to the retort stand.
8 Record the temperature every minute until the temperature reaches 50 °C.
9 Plot a graph of the temperature against time. You should produce a graph
similar to that shown in Figure 4.7.

Questions
1 Explain why the stearic acid cools more quickly over the region AB than it
does over the region CD, as shown in Figure 4.7.
2 Over the region BC, the stearic acid is transferring thermal energy to the
surroundings. Explain why the temperature remains constant.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 Draw diagrams to show the arrangement of the particles in each of
the three states of matter.
2 Explain why gases are less dense than liquids and solids.
3 a) State what is meant by a change of state of a substance.
b) Give two examples of changes of state.
4 Which of the following changes are physical changes?
• melting snow • burning a matchstick • breaking a matchstick •
boiling an egg • mixing salt and sugar together.
5 a) What happens to the internal energy of a system when the system
is heated?
b) How is it possible to heat a system without the temperature
of the system increasing?

6 a) When we exercise, we sweat. The sweat evaporates from our
skin. Why does sweating help us stay cool?
b) Even on a warm day, having wet skin can soon make you
feel cold. Explain why.
7 A solid is heated at a constant rate until it becomes a gas. Figure 4.8
shows how the temperature of the substance increases with time.
a) Explain why the temperature of the substance remains
constant over the periods:
i) B to C
ii) D to E
b) Determine the temperature at which the substance melts.

5.5 Specific heat capacity
When we exercise, energy is transferred from our chemical store to a thermal
store. If we get too hot, our bodies cannot cope and we become ill. We are kept
safe by two properties of water. First, we sweat, and evaporating water cools us.
Secondly, water has a very high specific heat capacity – this means that water
requires a lot of thermal energy to warm it up.
When the temperature of a system is increased by supplying energy to it, the
increase in temperature depends on:
the mass of the substance heated • what the substance is made of • the energy put
into the system.
Water needs much more energy to increase its temperature by 1 °C than the same
mass of concrete. This also means that when water cools by 1 °C, it gives out
more energy than the same mass of concrete cooling by 1 °C.

We say that the specific heat capacity of water is 4200 joules per kilogram per
degree Celsius (J/kg °C).
The specific heat capacity of a substance is the amount of energy required to
raise the temperature of one kilogram of the substance by one degree Celsius.
To calculate the change in thermal energy in a substance we use the equation:
Where change in thermal energy is in joules, J
mass is in kilograms, kg specific heat capacity is in joules per kilogram per
degree Celsius, J/kg °C
temperature change is in degrees Celsius, °C.
Example. A domestic hot water tank contains 200 kg of water. Calculate how

much energy is required to warm the tank from 15 °C to 45 °C.
Temperature rise = 45 °C − 15 °C = 30 °C
Energy supplied = increase in thermal energy of the water
TIP
Note that the final answer to the calculation has been rounded to 2
significant figures to match the accuracy of the data.
The table gives some examples of specific heat capacities for various substances
at 20 °C.
The specific heat capacity of water
Water has a very high specific heat capacity. This means that 1 kg of water
requires a lot of energy to heat it up, and a lot of energy must be transferred from
the water when it cools down. This high specific heat capacity is very important.

• We are made mostly of water. The high specific heat capacity of water means
that our body temperature does not increase too much when we exercise, or
cool too quickly when we go outside on a cold day.
• Water is used for keeping many homes warm. A house central heating system
pumps hot water around the house. The hot water transfers a lot of energy as it
flows through radiators. If water had a low specific heat capacity, it would cool
down before it got to some of the radiators in your house.
PRACTICAL
Make sure you are familiar with this practical.
Method
1 Measure 100 ml of water with a beaker and pour it into an insulated cup (such
as a polystyrene one). Remember that 1 ml of water has a mass of 1 g.
2 Set up the electrical circuit shown and place the heater in the water. Do not
switch the circuit on.
3 Stir the water with the thermometer and record the temperature. This is T1.
4 Switch on the heater for 5 minutes, then switch it off. Stir the water and record
the new temperature. This is T2.
5 Record the voltmeter and ammeter readings during the heating.
TIP

Most school beakers are marked in ml. 1 ml is the same volume as 1
cm3.
Analysing the results
1 Calculate the temperature rise during the heating: ∆T = T2 −T1.
2 Use the following equation to determine the energy transferred to the water by
the heater:
3 Calculate the specific heat capacity in J/kg °C using the equation:
TIP
In the two equations, E and ∆Q are the same size.
Questions
1 Explain why it is important to use an insulated beaker.
2 Discuss the errors that could occur in this experiment. Does the heater require
energy to warm it up?
TIP
An unsmoothed d.c. current varies with time. A d.c. ammeter is
calibrated to measure a constant current.
Experimental note
One error that can easily occur here is the measurement of voltage and current. If
you use d.c. from a power pack, the current is likely to be unsmoothed. This
means that the meters (which are designed to measure smooth d.c. from a cell)
will be inaccurate.
If the school has a.c. meters, you could use a.c. If your school had calibrated

heaters, you could read off their power e.g. 36 W.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 a) Define the term specific heat capacity.
b) State the unit of specific heat capacity.
In these questions you will need to refer to the information in the table
on page 172 (specific heat capacities table).
2 a) A night storage heater contains 60 kg of concrete. A heater
embedded in the concrete heats the concrete up from 12 °C to
37 °C. How much energy is transferred to the concrete?
b) A heater supplies 4180 J to a block of copper of mass 0.5
kg. Calculate the temperature rise of the block.
c) A heater supplies 21 120 J to a block of aluminium. The
temperature of the block rises from 18 °C to 34 °C. Calculate the
mass of the block.
3 a) In Figure 5.4, a block of tin is heated from a temperature of 20 °C
to 65 °C. The mass of the block is 1.2 kg. Use the reading on the
joulemeter to calculate the specific heat capacity of tin.
b) Give two reasons why the specific heat capacity calculated
in part a) is likely to be inaccurate.
4 An electric kettle has a power rating of 2.0 kW. The kettle is filled with
0.75 kg of water.
a) Calculate the energy required to warm the water from 20 °C

to 100 °C.
b) Calculate how long it takes the kettle to bring the water to
the boil at 100 °C from 20 °C.

5.6 Ideal gas molecules
When we walk past pipes in a factory or refinery we assume that they are all
perfectly safe. But someone will have calculated that they are. What factors need
to be taken into account when checking the safety of these pipes?
The particle model of gases
As a result of studying the behaviour of gases, we have built up a model (or
theory) to help us understand, explain and predict the properties of gases. This is
called the particle model or kinetic theory of gases. The main points of the
model are listed here.
• The particles in a gas (molecules or atoms) are in a constant state of random
motion.
• The particles in a gas collide with each other and the walls of their container
without transferring any of their kinetic energy.
• The temperature of the gas is related to the average kinetic energy of the
molecules.

• As the kinetic energy of the molecules increases, the temperature of the gas
increases.
Gas pressure
When the particles of a gas collide with a wall of their container, the particles
exert a force on the wall. Figure 6.2 shows three particles bouncing off a
container wall. Each particle exerts a force on the wall at right angles to it.
The pressure inside a container of gas with a fixed volume is increased when the
temperature of the gas is increased. When this happens, the average speed of the
particles in the gas increases. This means that the particles hit the walls of the
container with a greater force, and the particles hit the walls more frequently, so
the pressure increases.
Demonstrating gas pressure
Your teacher might demonstrate the effect of gas pressure as follows:
Take a tin with a close fitting lid and put a small amount of water in it. Press the
lid firmly in place.
Then put the tin on a tripod and heat with a Bunsen burner. After a while, the lid
flies off.
So why does the lid fly off?
• In Figure 6.3(a), the molecules inside the tin move at the same speed as the
molecules outside the tin. There is no resultant force on the tin lid.
• In Figure 6.3(b), two things have happened. As the tin warms up, some water
evaporates, so the number of molecules of gas inside the tin increases. The
molecules travel faster as the temperature rises (shown with longer arrows on
the molecules). The molecules inside the tin exert a force on the lid large
enough to blow it off.

Linking the pressure of a gas to its temperature
Figure 6.5 shows apparatus that can be used to investigate how the pressure of a
gas changes as it is heated up. To make it a fair test, the volume of the gas is kept
constant. The pressure of the gas is measured at several different temperatures
with a pressure gauge as the temperature of the water bath is raised.
The results of such an experiment are shown in Figure 6.4. As the temperature is
raised from 0 °C to 100 °C the pressure rises steadily from about 100 kPa to
about 137 kPa. We are able to draw a straight line through these results. If this
line is extended below 0 °C you can predict what will happen to the pressure at
lower temperatures. You can see that the pressure will be about 50 kPa at −136

°C; this is half of the pressure at 0 °C. At a temperature of −273 °C the gas
pressure has reduced to zero.
We can begin to make sense of these results when we think about the particle
model of gases described above. The theory tells us that molecules are
constantly on the move and exert a pressure by hitting the walls of their
container. We can explain the results as follows.
• At 0 °C moving molecules exert a pressure of 100 kPa because they hit the
walls of their container.
• At 100 °C the molecules are moving faster, so they hit the walls of the
container harder and more often; the pressure rises to 137 kPa.

• At −136 °C the molecules have slowed down, so the collisions with the
container walls are less frequent and less forceful; the pressure drops to 50
kPa.
• At −273 °C the graph predicts that the pressure will be zero. The conclusion we
draw from this is that at this temperature the molecules stop moving altogether.
If the molecules have stopped moving, they do not hit the walls of their
container at all, so no pressure is exerted.
PRACTICAL
Make sure you understand how to investigate how the pressure of a
gas depends on its temperature. What are the independent, dependent
and constant variables in this investigation?
This means that −273 °C is the lowest possible temperature. The temperature of
an object depends on the random kinetic energy of its molecules. At −273 °C
molecules stop moving, so we cannot cool them any further below that. We call
−273 °C absolute zero.
The Kelvin scale
We use an absolute temperature scale to help us predict how the pressure of a
gas changes with temperature. Absolute temperatures are measured in kelvin or
K. Absolute zero is 0 K; 0 °C is 273 K. The size of a kelvin is the same size as 1
°C. Note that we do not use a degree sign with kelvin: we write 77 K, not 77 °K.
We convert degrees Celsius to kelvin by adding 273; we convert kelvin to
degrees Celsius by subtracting 273.
For example:
The Kelvin scale is helpful is enabling us to see the pressure change more
clearly. If the kelvin temperature doubles then we know that the pressure of the
gas also doubles (provided the volume of the gas remains constant).

Boyle’s law
Figure 6.6 shows a very similar apparatus to that used in the previous
experiment. But now the piston is moved to allow the volume of the gas to
change; the cylinder is leak-tight so that no air can escape or enter. To make it a
fair test, the piston is moved slowly to ensure the temperature of the gas remains
the same throughout the experiment. When the volume of the air in the cylinder
is changed, by moving the piston, the pressure in the cylinder also changes.
Figure 6.7 shows in graph form how the changes between pressure and volume
are linked.
PRACTICAL
Make sure you understand how to investigate the relationship between
the pressure and volume of a gas at constant temperature.

Table 1 shows the sort of results you can expect to get if you do the experiment;
when the gas is compressed to half its volume the pressure doubles. Note also
from the values in the table that if you multiply the pressure and volume
together, you always get the same number.
So, for a constant mass of gas, at a constant temperature:
This is known as Boyle’s law.
We can also make sense of this in terms of molecular motion. When the volume
of a gas is reduced, the pressure increases because the molecules hit the walls of

the container more often.
Calculating the pressure
Here we look again at the results of the experiment using the apparatus in Figure
6.5. The results are plotted again, using only the Kelvin scale, in Figure 6.8. We
can now see more clearly the relationship between the pressure of the gas and
the Kelvin scale. The straight line drawn through the data passes through the
origin. So we can say that the pressure of a fixed mass of gas at a constant
volume is directly proportional to the kelvin temperature. This means that the
ratio of pressure to temperature (in K) for the gas is always the same.
We can use this equation to calculate the pressure or temperature:
Remember this is for a change at constant volume.
TIP
When calculating the pressure of a gas, make sure you have changed
the temperature into kelvin.
For example, the graph in Figure 6.8 shows us that the pressure is 110 kPa at a

temperature of 300 K. How can we calculate the pressure when the container is
heated to a temperature of 600 K? Using T1 as 600 K, T2 as 300 K and P2 as 110
kPa, we can substitute those numbers into the equation to give: 
Kelvin temperature and kinetic energy
A further important point that comes from the Kelvin scale is that the kinetic
energy of the molecules in a gas is directly proportional to the kelvin
temperature. We can put this the other way round: the kelvin temperature of a
gas is a measure of the average random kinetic energy of its molecules.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 Describe how the molecules of a gas move.
2 Explain, in terms of molecular motion, why a gas exerts a pressure
on its container.
3 a) Explain what happens to the speed of the molecules in a gas as
the temperature increases.
b) Explain, in terms of molecules, why the pressure of a gas
increases as the temperature rises.
4 This question refers to the experiment shown in Figure 6.6. Use
Table 1 or Figure 6.7 to determine the volume of the air when the
pressure was:
a) 300 kPa b) 800 kPa
5 a) Explain what is meant by absolute zero.
b) Why is it not possible to have a temperature of −300 °C?
6 a) Convert these temperatures to kelvin: 100 °C, 327 °C, −173 °C,
−50 °C.
b) Convert these temperatures to °C: 10 K, 150 K, 350 K, 400
K.
7 This question refers to the experiment described in Figure 6.5.

Use the graph in Figure 6.4 to predict the pressure in the cylinder
at:
a) a temperature of −200 °C
b) a temperature of 173 K.
8 Figure 6.9 shows a gas holder. It is filled with gas from the grid
pipeline where the pressure is 800 kPa. In the gas holder, the
volume of gas is 160 000 m3 and the pressure is 100 kPa. Calculate
the volume of gas when it was in the pipeline.
9 A gas in a container of a fixed volume has a pressure of 200 kPa at a
temperature of 200 K. Calculate the pressure at:
a) 100 K
b) 600 K
c) 350 K
10 A cylinder of gas has a pressure of 450 kPa at a temperature of 27
°C.
a) Express 27 °C in kelvin.
b) Now calculate what the pressure in the gas will be at:
i) 177 °C
ii) −73 °C.
11 An airtight cylinder of gas has a volume of 0.4 m3 and a pressure of
250 kPa at 20 °C.
a) The cylinder expands slightly but the temperature of the
gas does not change. State what happens to the pressure of the
gas.
b) The cylinder is then warmed to 100 °C without changing its
volume. Calculate the pressure after it has been heated.

12 a) Explain what happens to the temperature of a gas in kelvin if the
average kinetic energy of the molecules doubles.
b) Explain what happens to the temperature of gas in kelvin if
the average speed of its molecules is doubled.

Summary
I am confident that:
✓ I can recall these facts and concepts about density and pressure
• I can recall and use the equation: 
• I know that the unit of density is kg/m3
• I know and can describe how to measure density • I can recall and use
the equation: 
• I know that the unit of pressure is N/m2 or pascal (Pa) • I can recall and
use the relationship:
✓ I can recall these facts and concepts about change of state
• I understand that a substance can change state from solid to liquid by
the process of melting.
• I understand that a substance can change state from a liquid to a gas by
the process of evaporating or boiling.
• I know that particles in a liquid have a random motion within a close-
packed irregular structure.
• I know that particles in a solid vibrate about fixed positions within a
close-packed regular structure.
• know that the particles in a gas are widely separated, and that the
particles move quickly and randomly.
✓ I can recall these facts about specific heat capacity
• Specific heat capacity is the energy required to raise the temperature of
an object by one degree Celsius per kilogram of mass.
• Specific heat capacity has the unit J/kg °C
• I can use the equation ∆Q = mc∆T
change in thermal energy = mass × specific heat capacity × temperature change
can recall these facts and concepts about ideal gas molecules
• I know that molecules exert a pressure by hitting the walls of their
container.
• I understand that absolute zero is −273 °C.
• I can convert temperatures between the Kelvin and Celsius scales.
• I understand that the kelvin temperature of the gas is proportional to
the average kinetic energy of its molecules.

• I can use the relationship between the pressure and kelvin temperature
for a fixed mass of gas at a constant volume:
• I can use the relationship between the pressure and volume of a fixed
mass of a gas at a constant temperature: P1V1 = P2V2

Sample answers and expert’s comments
1 The diagram shows how steel piles are put into a river bed to make the
foundation for building a bridge. A large downward force is applied to push
them into the river bed.
The second diagram shows two types of pile, A and B, which can be used for
building the bridge.
a) The density of steel is 9000 kg/m3. Explain why the steel piles sink
when they are put into the river.
(1)
b) Calculate the volume of pile A.
(2)
c) Write an equation, which connects density, mass and volume.
Calculate the mass of pile A.
(3)
d) An engineer suggests that pile B would be better to use than pile A.
Explain why she thinks this.
(2)
(Total for question = 8 marks)

2 a) The diagram below shows a diver. He is swimming at a depth of 15 m
below the surface of a lake.
The atmospheric pressure above him is 100 000 Pa.
i) State the equation which links pressure difference, height, density
and gravitational field strength.
(1)
ii) Calculate the total pressure on the diver.
(3)
The density of the water is 1000 kg/m3. The gravitational field strength
is 10 N/kg.
b) A second diver is at a depth where the total pressure on him, from the
atmosphere and the water, is 400 000 Pa.
The face mask of the diver has an area of 0.012 m2.
i) State the equation that links pressure, force and area.
(1)
ii) Calculate the force that acts on the outside of the mask of the
diver
(3)

c) A diver inflates a balloon with 1.6 litres of air, at the surface of the
lake, where atmospheric pressure is 100 000 Pa.
i) Calculate the volume of the balloon when the diver dives to a
depth where the total pressure on the balloon is 400 000 Pa.
(3)
ii) Explain why a diver must breathe air out of his lungs when he
swims back to the surface of the lake, after diving at a depth where the
pressure is high.
(2)
(Total for question = 13 marks)


Exam-style questions
1 The correct unit for specific heat capacity is:
A J/kg °C
B J
C J/kg D J kg/°C
[1]
2 The side of a cube of wood has a length of 4.0 cm. The mass of the cube is
32.0 g. The density of the wood is:
A 8 g/cm3
B 4 g/cm3
C 2 g/cm3
D 0.5 g/cm3
[1]
3 A sheet of steel has a mass of 360 kg. The density of steel is 9000 kg/m3. The
volume of the steel sheet is:
A 3240 m3
B 25 m3
C 0.04 m3
D 0.02 m3
[1]
4 The density of sea water is 1030 kg/m3. Atmospheric pressure is 101 000 Pa.
The pressure at a depth of 30 m is:
A 310 000 Pa B 410 000 Pa C 404 000 Pa D 41 000 Pa [1]
5 A gas has a temperature of 130 °C.
This temperature in kelvin is:
A −143 K
B 27 K
C 403 K
D 1300 K
[1]
6 A gas in a cylinder of volume 0.2 m3 has a pressure of 2 MPa. The volume of
the gas is increased to 0.5 m3. The pressure changes to:
A 1 MPa B 0.8 MPa C 0.5 MPa D 0.2 MPa [1]
7 A gas is in a cylinder of volume 0.5 m3. The pressure in the cylinder is
0.2 MPa, and its temperature is 270 K. The cylinder is heated until the

pressure rises to 0.6 MPa, and the volume remains at 0.5 m3.
The new temperature of the gas is:
A 90 K
B 180 K
C 540 K
D 810 K
[1]
8 A block of metal has a mass of 2 kg and a specific heat capacity of 400 J/kg
°C. 48 000 J of thermal energy are transferred to the block. Its temperature
rises by:
A 6 °C
B 30 °C
C 60 °C
D 120 °C
[1]
9 A heater transfers 80 kJ of thermal energy to a liquid of mass 0.4 kg. The
temperature rises by 50 °C. The specific heat capacity of the liquid is:
A 500 J/kg °C
B 1000 J/kg °C
C 4000 J/kg °C
D 15 000 J/kg °C
[1]
10 A cube of metal has a side length of 10 cm. The weight of the metal is 45 N.
When the cube rests on the ground the pressure it exerts on the ground is:
A 4500 Pa B 45 000 Pa C 450 000 Pa D 4.5 MPa [1]
11 a) Write down the formula that connects density, mass and volume.
[1]
b) Explain how you would use a measuring cylinder, electronic
balance and some glass marbles to calculate the density of glass.
[5]
12 When a drop of ether is placed on the skin, the skin feels cold. Explain
why.

[3]
13 A kettle is being heated on a camping stove. Thermal energy is
transferred by burning gas from the cylinder.
a) Water in the kettle boils at 100 °C and steam is produced.
Convert this temperature to a temperature on the kelvin scale.
[1]
b) Explain one difference between the molecules in steam and
the molecules in water.
[1]
c) Explain how the molecules in the steam exert a pressure on
the kettle walls.
[2]
d) The wind blows the flame out and 520 cm3 of gas, at a
pressure of 135 kPa, escapes from the cylinder. As the gas escapes,
its pressure reduces to 100 kPa. Calculate the volume of the
escaped gas at a pressure of 100 kPa.
[3]
e) After the tap is closed to prevent further loss of gas, the
cylinder is left in the sunshine and it warms up. Explain what
happened to the gas in the cylinder.
[2]
14 The apparatus in the figure below is used to heat up a block of metal
of mass 2 kg. When the heater is turned on, the temperature of the
block of metal increases as shown in the graph.

a) Use the graph to determine the temperature rise of the metal
in the first 10 minutes of heating.
[1]
b) During 10 minutes of heating, 48 000 J of thermal energy is
transferred to the block. Calculate the specific heat capacity of the
block.
[4]
c) Use the information in part (b) and information from the
graph to show that the power of the heater is 80 W.
[3]
15 The figure below shows a heater at the bottom of a boiling tube of
solid wax. The heater is then connected to a power supply. A

joulemeter measures the energy supplied to the heater as it melts the
wax. The graph shows how the temperature of the wax changes with
the energy supplied.
a) State the melting temperature of wax.
[1]
b) The temperature of the wax remains constant as the wax
melts. Explain why.
[2]
c) i) State what is meant by: specific heat capacity.
[1]
ii) Use the graph to show that the specific heat capacity of
liquid wax is greater than the specific heat capacity of solid

wax. [3]
16 These questions are about a scuba diver and the pressure in his body.
You will need the following information to help you answer them:
The density of water is 1000 kg/m3; the pull of gravity is 10 N/kg; on
the day of the dive, the atmospheric pressure is 100 kPa.
a) The diver descends to a depth of 25 m.
i) Use the formula P = h × ρ × g to calculate the extra
pressure on his body caused by the water.
ii) Calculate the total pressure on the diver’s body.
[3]
b) When the diver is at a depth of 25 m his lungs can hold 5
litres of air.
i) Determine the volume the air would occupy at normal
atmospheric pressure.
ii) Explain why divers must breathe out as they rise to the
surface.
[4]
17 At the beginning of the compression stroke in the cylinder of a diesel
engine, the air is at a temperature of 127 °C and a pressure of 120
kPa.

a) Convert this temperature to kelvin.
[1]
b) During the compression stroke the volume of the air is
squashed to 1/20th of its original volume.
i) Show that the pressure in the air after it has been
compressed to 1/20th of its volume is 2400 kPa.
[2]
ii) The volume of the cylinder remains constant and is now
heated to 727 °C. Calculate the pressure of the gas now.
[4]
18 Cylinders of gas that are caught in the flames of a burning building
can be a significant hazard. At a temperature of 20 °C the pressure in
a cylinder of gas is 300 kPa – this is three times normal atmospheric
pressure. The temperature of a fire might reach 1200 °C.

a) Explain why the pressure rises in the cylinder, in terms of
molecular motion.
[2]
b) i) Calculate the pressure in the cylinder at a temperature of
1200 °C.
ii) Explain why this is a dangerous pressure.
[4]
19 A balloon seller has a cylinder of helium gas which he uses to blow up
his balloons.
The volume of the cylinder is 0.10 m3.
It contains helium gas at a pressure of 1.0 × 107 Pa. The balloon seller
fills each balloon to a volume of 1.0 × 10−2 m3 and a pressure of 1.2 ×
105 Pa.
a) Explain, in terms of particles, how the helium in the cylinder
produces a pressure.
[2]
b) Calculate the total volume that the helium gas will occupy at a
pressure of 1.2 × 105 Pa. You can assume that there is no change in
the temperature of the helium gas.
[3]
c) Calculate the number of balloons of volume 1.0 × 10-2 m3 that
the balloon seller can fill using the gas.
[2]

EXTEND AND CHALLENGE
1 Below you can see Boris, Vladimir and Leonid. Boris is twice as tall,
twice as long and twice as wide as Vladimir, but they have the same
density.
a) How many times more massive than Vladimir is Boris?
b) The area of Boris’s paw is greater than the area of
Vladimir’s paw. By how many times is it bigger?
c) Is the pressure bigger under Boris’s paws or under
Vladimir’s paws? By what factor does the pressure differ under
the two cats’ paws?
d) Leonid the lion is a distant cousin to Boris. Lions, as you
know, are much bigger than domestic cats. Can you use the
result of part c) to explain why a lion’s legs are proportionately
thicker than a cat’s?
2 A metal block is heated using the arrangements shown in the
diagram. It is heated for about 16 minutes then allowed to cool down.
The temperature is plotted every minute, as shown in the graph.

a) i) Explain the shape of the graph over the region AB.
ii) Although the heater was switched off after 16 minutes,
the temperature continued to rise. Explain why.
b) Determine the gradient of the graph over the regions:
i) BC
ii) DE
iii) EF
c) Comment on the connection between the three gradients.
d) When the heater is switched on the voltmeter reads 12.0 V
and the ammeter reads 4.5 A. Calculate the specific heat
capacity of the metal. Explain any assumptions you make in this
calculation.
e) i) A student measures the specific heat capacities of

several metals and notices that the metals with higher atomic
masses have lower specific heat capacities. She wonders
what the specific heat capacity is for each metal per mole. So
she designs the table below. Complete the table.
ii) Most pure metals have a very similar arrangement of
atoms. Use this idea to help you make a comment about the
molar specific heat capacities of metals.

6 Magnetism and
electromagnetism
The Sun has a strong magnetic field. This is produced by the
movement of charged particles (a plasma) caused by convection
currents in the Sun’s core. At the surface, the magnetic field
emerges from pairs of sunspots, one of which is a north pole and
the other a south pole.
By the end of this section you should:
• know that magnets repel and attract each other and attract
magnetic substances
• be able to describe the properties of magnetically hard and soft
materials
• understand the term magnetic field line
• know that a magnetic field can induce magnetism in some

materials
• be able to investigate magnetic field patterns
• be able to describe how to use two bar magnets to produce a
uniform magnetic field
• know that an electric current in a conductor produces a
magnetic field around it
• be able to describe the construction of electromagnets
• be able to draw magnetic field patterns for a straight wire, flat
circular coil and solenoid when each is carrying a current
• know that there is a force on a moving charged particle in a
magnetic field
• understand why a force is exerted on a current-carrying wire in a
magnetic field, and how this effect is applied in dc motors and
loudspeakers
• be able to use the left hand rule to predict the direction of the
resulting force when a wire carries a current perpendicular to a
magnetic field
• be able to describe how the force on a current-carrying
conductor in a magnetic field changes with the magnitude and
direction of the field and current
• know that a voltage is induced in a conductor or coil when it
moves through a magnetic field or when a magnetic field
changes through it and describe the factors that affect the size
of the induced voltage
• be able to describe the generation of electricity by the rotation of
a coil within a magnetic field or rotating magnet in a coil
• be able to describe the construction of a transformer, and
understand that a transformer changes the size of an alternating
voltage
• be able to explain the use of step-up and step-down
transformers in the large scale transmission of electrical energy
• know the relationship between input and output voltages and the
turns ratio for a transformer
• know and be able to use the relationship input power = output
power
CONSIDER • CALCULATE
Use the internet to help you to answer the following questions:
1 State the average surface temperature of the Sun.

2 State the surface temperature of a sunspot.
3 How can you tell from the photo-graph that sunspots are colder than
the rest of the Sun’s surface?
4 How long is the sunspot cycle?
5 Use the information in the photograph and text on this page to sketch the
magnetic field lines close to a pair of sunspots. The diagram at the top of the
page shows how sunspots are paired.

6.1 Magnets
If you have been walking in the mountains or in the forest, you might have used
a compass to help you find your way. Magnets are very useful to us, as a magnet
can exert a force on another magnetic object at a distance.
Write a list of at least six ways in which we use magnets in the home or in
machines.
In Figure 1.2 you can see a bar magnet that is hanging from a fine thread. When
it is left for a while, one end always points north. This end of the magnet is
called the north-seeking pole. The other end of the magnet is the south-seeking
pole. We usually refer to these poles as the north (N) and south (S) poles of the
magnet.
Poles
Some metals, for example iron, cobalt and nickel, are magnetic. A magnet will
attract them. If you drop a lot of pins on to the floor the easiest way to pick them
all up again is to use a magnet.
The forces on pins, iron filings and other magnetic objects are always greatest
when they are near the poles of a magnet. Every magnet has two poles that are

equally strong.
When you hold two magnets together you find that two north poles (or two south
poles) repel each other, but a south pole attracts a north pole (Figure 1.3).
Investigating magnetic field patterns
Method 1
1 Figure 1.4 shows a simple way to plot a magnetic field line. On a piece of
paper, place a small plotting compass near to the north pole of a magnet. Mark
each end of the compass needle with pencil dots.
2 Place a second compass in contact with the first and mark the position of the
second needle.
3 Repeat the process with more compasses so that a field line is traced from the
north pole to the south pole of the magnet.
PRACTICAL
Make sure you understand how to trace field lines near to a magnet.
Method 2
1 Place a piece of paper over the top of the magnet.
2 Sprinkle some iron filings on top of the paper and tap the paper.

3 Sketch the pattern of the iron filings – this shows the shape of the magnetic
field. (See Figure 1.5)
Taking it further
Use either or both of the methods above to investigate the magnetic field pattern
between:
a) two bar magnets which attract each other, (see Figure 1.7).
b) two bar magnets which repel each other, (see Figure 1.6)
Questions
1 Explain how the magnetic field lines in Figure 1.4 show strong and weak areas

of magnetic field.
2 Explain why two field lines can never cross each other. Hint: if two field lines
crossed, in which direction would a compass point?
Magnetic fields
There is a magnetic field in the area around a magnet. In this area there is a force
on a magnetic object. If the field is strong the force is big. In a weak field the
force is small.
We use magnetic field lines to represent a magnetic field. Magnetic field lines
always start at a north pole and finish on a south pole. Where the field lines are
drawn close together, the field is strong. The further apart the lines are, the
weaker the field is.
TIP
Magnetic field lines are not real, but they are a useful idea that helps
us to understand magnetic fields. Magnetic field lines never cross.
Combining magnetic fields
The pattern of magnetic field lines close to two (or more) magnets becomes
complicated. The magnetic fields from the two magnets combine. The field lines
from the two magnets never cross. (If field lines did cross, it would mean that a
compass would have to point in two directions at once.) Figure 1.6 shows the
sort of pattern when two north poles are near each other. The field lines repel. At
the point X there are no field lines. The two magnetic fields cancel out. X is
called a neutral point.
Figure 1.7 shows the pattern produced by a north and south pole. Notice that
there is an area where the field lines are equally spaced and all point in the same
direction. This is called a uniform field.

The Earth’s magnetic field
Figure 1.8 shows the shape of the Earth’s magnetic field. The north (seeking)
pole of a compass points north. Unlike poles attract. This means that there is
actually a magnetic south pole near the north pole, at a place we call magnetic
north.
However, magnetic north is not in the same place as the geographic North Pole.
At the moment magnetic north is in the sea north of Canada. The position of
magnetic north changes slowly over a period of centuries.
TIP

There is a magnetic south pole near the geographic North Pole.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 a) Figure 1.9 shows a bar magnet surrounded by four plotting
compasses. Copy the diagram and mark in the direction of the
compass needle for each of the cases B, C, D.
b) Which is a north pole, X or Y?
2 Draw carefully the shape of the magnetic field between and
surrounding these two magnets. Mark in any neutral points.
3 Two bar magnets have been hidden in a box. Use the information in
Figure 1.10 to suggest how they have been placed inside the box.

4 Refer to Figure 1.8 showing the Earth’s magnetic field.
a) Compare the strength of the magnetic field at the Equator
and at the geographic North Pole. Which is stronger? Give a
reason for your answer.
b) Explain why a compass is very difficult to use near to the
Earth’s magnetic poles.

6.2 Magnetising
Magnetic domains
Steel is a permanent magnet; once a piece of steel has been magnetised it
remains a magnet. Iron is an induced magnet; iron is only magnetised when in a
magnetic field. This field can be provided by a magnet or by a coil of wire
carrying a current, which also produces a magnetic field (see Chapter 6.3). A
magnetically hard material becomes a permanent magnet when it is magnetised;
a magnetically soft material will make an induced or temporary magnet.
TIP
You will not be examined on domains. But knowing about domains
helps to understand about induced magnets.
The insides of magnetic materials are split up into small regions, which we call
domains. Each domain acts like a very small magnet. In any iron or steel bar
there are thousands of domains. The idea helps us to understand permanent and
induced magnets.
In an iron bar the domains are jumbled up when there is no magnet near (Figure
2.1(a)). But as soon as a magnet is put near to the bar the domains are made to
line up (Figure 2.1(b)). So an iron bar will be attracted to either a north or south
pole of a permanent magnet.

In a steel bar, once the domains have been lined up, they stay pointing in one
direction.
TIP
Magnetically soft materials are induced magnets. Permanent magnets
are magnetically hard materials.
Magnetising
One way to make a magnet from an unmagnetised steel bar is to stroke it
repeatedly with a permanent magnet. The movement of the magnet along the
steel bar is enough to make the domains line up (Figure 2.3(a)).
TIP
An induced magnet is only magnetic as long as it is placed in a
magnetic field.
A magnet can also be made by putting a steel bar inside a solenoid. A short but
very large pulse of current through the solenoid produces a strong magnetic
field. This magnetises the bar (Figure 2.3(b)).
The apparatus shown in Figure 2.3(b) can be used as an electromagnet if an iron

bar is used instead of a steel bar in the solenoid. When a current is switched on
the iron becomes magnetised; when the current is switched off the iron is no
longer magnetised. The presence of iron greatly increases the strength of the
solenoid’s magnetic field. Electromagnets are widely used in industry.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 Pins can be attracted to a magnet but they are not permanent
magnets. Explain how you would demonstrate that something which
is magnetic is a permanent magnet.
2 a) Tracey has magnetised a needle as shown below. She then cuts
the needle into four smaller bits as shown. Copy Figure 2.5 and
label the poles A–H.

b) Tracey says ‘This experiment helps to show that there are
magnetic domains in the needle’. Comment on this observation.
3 Figure 2.6 below shows an electromagnet. As the current increases
the magnet can lift a larger load because the domains in the iron
core line up more and more.
a) Use the data provided to draw a graph of the load supported
(y-axis) against current (x-axis).
b) Use the graph to predict the load supported when the
current is:
i) 1.5 A ii) 6.0 A.
c) Sketch on your graph how the load varies with current when
each of the coils X and Y has:
i) 25 turns ii) 100 turns.
d) Suggest what happens when you reverse the windings on
coil X.
e) Make sketches to show how the domains are lined up when

the current (in the original diagram) is:
i) 0
ii) 0.5 A iii) 5 A.
f) Use your answer to part e) to explain why there is a
maximum load that an electromagnet can lift.

6.3 Currents and magnetism
The magnetic field near a straight wire
An electric current in a conductor produces a magnetic field around it.
In Figure 3.2, a long straight wire carrying an electric current is placed vertically
so that it passes through a horizontal piece of hardboard. Iron filings have been
sprinkled onto the board to show the shape of the field. If you do this
experiment, take care – the wire may become very hot. Below are summarised
the important points of the experiment:
When the current is small, the field is weak. But when a large current is used the
iron filings show a circular magnetic field pattern.
The magnetic field gets weaker further away from the wire.
The direction of the magnetic field can be found using a compass. If the current
direction is reversed, the direction of the magnetic field is reversed.

Figure 3.3 shows the pattern of magnetic field lines surrounding a wire. When
the current direction is into the paper (shown ⊗) the field lines point in a
clockwise direction around the wire. When the current direction is out of the
paper (shown ⊙) the field lines point anti-clockwise. The right-hand grip rule
will help you to remember this (Figure 3.4). Put the thumb of your right hand
along a wire in the direction of the current. Now your fingers point in the
direction of the magnetic field.

PRACTICAL
Use the right-hand grip rule at A to check that the field lines go around
the wire in an anti-clockwise direction. Take care – the wire may
become very hot. Why do they go in the opposite direction at B?
The magnetic field near coils of wire
Figure 3.5 shows the magnetic field around a single loop of wire that carries a
current. You can use the right-hand grip rule to work out the field near to each
part of the loop. Near A the field lines point anti-clockwise as you look at them,
and near B the lines point clockwise. In the middle, the fields from each part of
the loop combine to produce a magnetic field running from right to left. This
loop of wire is like a very short bar magnet. Magnetic field lines come out of the
left-hand side (north pole) and go back into the right-hand side (south pole).
Figure 3.6 shows the sort of magnetic field that is produced by a current flowing
through a long coil or solenoid. The magnetic field from each loop of wire adds
on to the next. The result is a magnetic field which is like a long bar magnet’s
field.

TIP
You are expected to know the magnetic field patterns for the following
when they carry a current: a long straight wire, a flat circular coil and a
solenoid.
Producing large magnetic fields

The strength of the magnetic field produced by a solenoid can be increased by:
using a larger current • using more turns of wire • putting some iron into the
middle of the solenoid.
But there is a limit to how strong you can make the magnetic field. If the current
is made too large the solenoid will get very hot and start to melt. For this reason
large solenoids must be cooled by water. There is also a limit to the number of
turns of wire you can put into a space.
TIP
A long solenoid and a bar magnet both produce a magnetic field of the
same shape.
Nowadays, the world’s strongest magnetic fields are produced by
superconducting magnets. At very low temperatures (about 4 K) some
materials, such as niobium and lead, become superconductors. A superconductor
has no electrical resistance. This means that a current does not cause any heating
effect. So a large magnetic field can be produced by an enormous current (5000
A) through a solenoid, which is kept cold in liquid helium.

STUDY QUESTIONS
1 Figure 3.10 shows two plotting compasses, one above and one
below a wire. Draw diagrams to show the position of the needles
when:
a) there is no current b) the current is very large (30 A) c) the
current is small (1 A). A current of 1 A produces a magnetic field

near the wire, which is about the same size as the Earth’s
magnetic field.
2 Figure 3.11 shows a long Perspex tube with wire wrapped around it
to make a solenoid.
a) Copy the diagram and mark in the direction of the compass
needles 1–6, when there is a current through the wire.
b) Which end of the solenoid acts as the south pole?
c) In which direction do the needles point when the current is
reversed?
d) Copy the diagram again, leaving out the compasses. Draw
magnetic field lines round the solenoid.
3 Figure 3.12 represents a wire placed vertically, with the current
coming out of the paper towards you. Copy it and draw the magnetic
field lines round the wire, showing how the field decreases with
distance.
4 Make sketches to show the shape of the magnetic fields near to each

of the following when they carry a current:
a) a long straight wire b) a flat circular coil c) a solenoid.

6.4 The motor effect
In Figure 4.1 you can see a piece of aluminium foil that was positioned between
the poles of a strong magnet. A current through the foil has caused it to be
pushed down, away from the poles of the magnet. Reversing the current makes
the foil move upwards, away from the poles of the magnet. This is called the
motor effect. It happens because of an interaction between the two magnetic
fields, one from the magnet and one from the current. The magnet is very strong
and could damage delicate electronics, etc., so keep watches, mobile phones and
bank cards well away.
Combining two magnetic fields
In Figure 4.2 you can see the way in which the two fields combine. By itself the
field between the poles of the magnet would be nearly uniform. The current
through the foil produces a circular magnetic field. The magnetic field from the
current squashes the field between the poles of a magnet. It is the squashing of
the field that catapults the foil, upwards in this case.

The force acting on the foil is proportional to:
the strength of the magnetic field between the poles • the current • the length of
the foil between the poles.
TIP
The deflection of a wire in a magnetic field is at right angles to both the
current direction and the magnetic field direction.
The left-hand rule
To predict the direction in which a straight conductor moves in a magnetic field

you can use the left-hand rule (Figure 4.2). Spread out the first two fingers and
the thumb of your left hand so that they are at right angles to each other. Let your
first finger point along the direction of the magnet’s field, and your second finger
point in the direction of the current. Your thumb then points in the direction in
which the wire moves.
This rule works when the field and the current are at right angles to each other.
When the field and the current are parallel to each other, there is no force on the
wire and it stays where it is.
Ammeters
Figures 4.3 and 4.4 show the idea behind a moving-coil ammeter. A loop of wire
has been pivoted on an axle between the poles of a magnet. When a current is
switched on, the left-hand side of the loop moves downwards and the right-hand
side moves upwards. (Use the left-hand rule to check this.) If nothing stops the
loop, it turns until side DC is at the top and AB is at the bottom. However, when
a spring is attached to the loop it only turns a little way. When you pass a larger
current through the loop, the force is larger. This will stretch the spring more and
so the loop turns further.

Figure 4.5 shows how a model ammeter can be made using a coil of wire, a
spring and some magnets.
An ammeter is sensitive if it turns a long way when there is a small current

through it. The sensitivity of an ammeter will be large when:
a large number of turns is used on the coil • strong magnets are used • weak
springs are used.
Deflection of charged particles
An electric current is a flow of charged particles (usually carried by electrons in
wires). You have just read that a wire carrying a current experiences a force in a
magnetic field. In the same way, a beam of moving charged particles can be
deflected by a magnetic field (Figure 4.6).
The size of the force depends on:
the strength of the magnetic field • the speed of the particles • the charge on the
particle.
The direction of the deflecting force on the particles can be predicted using the
left-hand rule. Particles that are moving parallel to the magnetic field do not
experience a deflecting force.
TIP
Remember that if the electrons are travelling to the right, the direction
of the current is to the left.

STUDY QUESTIONS
1 State two ways of increasing the force on a conductor carrying a
current in a magnetic field.
2 State how is it possible to position a wire carrying a current in a
magnetic field so that there is no force acting on the wire.
3 Use the left-hand rule to predict the direction of the force on the wire
in each of the following cases.
4 Look at Figure 4.3. Explain why there is no force acting on the side
BC.
5 a) Figure 4.8 shows: (i) a pair of magnets, (ii) a wire carrying a
current into the paper. Sketch separate diagrams to show the
magnetic fields near each of (i) and (ii), when they are well
separated.

b) The wire is now placed between the poles of the magnets.
Sketch the combined magnetic field. Add an arrow to show the
direction in which the wire moves.
c) Which way does the wire move when:
i) the current is reversed, ii) the north and south poles are
changed round?
d) Give two ways in which the force on the wire could be
increased.
6 Explain the following:
a) Beta particles are easily deflected by a magnetic field.
b) Alpha particles only show a very small deflection in a
magnetic field.
c) Gamma rays cannot be deflected by a magnetic field. [You
may have to refer to chapter 7.2 to answer this question.]
7 Figure 4.9 shows a pair of magnets. Suggest what will happen to
each of the following as they pass from left to right through the
magnets:
a) the positive ions b) the negative ions 

6.5 Electric motors
What are the advantages and disadvantages of replacing petrol driven cars with
electric cars?
The principle of the motor
In the last chapter you learnt that a coil carrying a current rotates when it is in a
magnetic field. However, the coil can only rotate through 90° and then it gets
stuck. This is no good for making a motor; we need to make a motor rotate all
the time.
Figure 5.2 shows the design of a simple motor which you can make for yourself.
A coil carrying a current rotates between the poles of a magnet. The coil is kept
rotating continuously by the use of a split-ring commutator, which rotates with
the coil between the carbon brush contacts. This causes the direction of the
current in the coil to reverse, so that forces continue to act on the coil to keep it
turning.



How the commutator works
Figure 5.3 explains the action of the commutator. The steps are explained on the
next page.
(a) A current flows into the coil through the commutator so that there is an
upwards push on side A, a downwards push on B.
(b) The coil rotates in a clockwise direction.
(c) When the coil reaches the vertical position there is no current through the
coil. It continues to rotate past the vertical due to its own momentum.
(d) Now side A is on the right-hand side. The direction of the current has been
reversed.
(e) Side A is pushed down and side B is pushed upwards. The coil continues to
rotate in a clockwise direction.
The moving-coil loudspeaker
You can check the forces on the loudspeaker coil by looking at Figure 5.4. When
the current direction in the upper side of the coil is into the paper, the current
direction in the lower side of the coil is out of the paper. If you now apply the
left hand rule to both sides of the coil, you will find that both sides experience a
force to the left. When the current is reversed, the coil experiences a force to the
right. An alternating current causes the coil (and therefore the paper cone) to
vibrate in and out. This is how the loudspeaker produces sound waves.
STUDY QUESTIONS

1 Give three ways that you can increase the speed of rotation of the
coil of an electric motor.
2 This question refers to the loudspeaker in Figure 5.4. The current
direction is into the page as we look at the top of the coil and out of
the page at the bottom.
a) State what happens to the coil when the direction of the
current is reversed.
b) Explain what happens to the coil when an a.c. current is
supplied to it.
c) Explain what happens to the sound produced by the
loudspeaker when these changes are made to an a.c. supply to
the coil:
i) the frequency is increased ii) the size of the current is
increased.
3 Figure 5.5 shows a model electric motor. In the diagram, the current
goes round the coil in the direction A to B to C to D.
a) State the direction of the force on:
i) side AB
ii) side CD.
b) State the direction of the coil’s rotation: clockwise or
anticlockwise.
c) Discuss in which position is the coil most likely to stop.
4 Figure 5.6 shows an electric motor that is made using an
electromagnet. The arrows show the direction of the forces on the
coil.

a) The battery is now reversed. What effect does this have on:
i) the polarity of the magnet ii) the direction of the current in
the coil iii) the forces acting on the coil?
b) Explain why this motor works using an a.c. supply as well as
a d.c. supply.
c) Explain why the electromagnet and coil run in parallel from
the supply rather than in series.

6.6 Electromagnetic induction
You can make the torch in Figure 6.1 work by winding the handle. Suggest how
the torch works and discuss the energy transfers that allow the torch to shine
line.
Induced voltage
When a conducting wire moves through a magnetic field, a voltage difference is
produced across the ends of the wire. A voltage produced in this way is
described as an induced voltage. A voltage will also be induced if there is a
change in the magnetic field around a stationary conducting wire.
If the wire is part of a complete circuit, the voltage will cause a current in the
circuit. This is an induced current.
Inducing a voltage or a current in this way is called the generator effect, because
this is how we generate electricity.
Investigating induced voltages
You can investigate which direction you must move the wire in to make a current
flow around the circuit in Figure 6.2. You can move the wire backwards and
forwards along the directions XX’, YY’ or ZZ’.

You only induce a voltage and make a current when you move the wire up and
down along XX’. The wire must cut across the magnetic field lines.
• Reversing the direction of motion reverses the direction of the voltage. If
moving the wire up makes the meter move to the right, moving the wire down
will make the meter move to the left.
• Reversing the direction of the magnetic field reverses the direction of the
voltage.
You can also investigate what affects the size of the induced voltage.
• Moving the wire more quickly induces a greater voltage. When the wire is
stationary no voltage is induced.
• Using stronger or bigger magnets induces a greater voltage for the same speed
of movement.
Coils and magnets
We can also induce a voltage in a coil of wire by changing the magnetic field
near it. In Figure 6.3 a north pole of a magnet is pushed into a solenoid. Note
that the induced current direction makes the end of the solenoid (X), next to the
magnet, also behave like a north pole.

When the magnet is pulled out of the solenoid, the direction of the induced
current is reversed. Now the end X behaves like a south pole.
When a current is induced in a conducting wire, the induced current itself
generates a magnetic field. This magnetic field opposes whatever the original
change was that caused it. This may be the movement of the conducting wire or
the change in the magnetic field.
Consider Figure 6.3. In each case as the magnet is moved and a current induced,
there is a force which opposes the movement of the magnet. So when you move
a magnet to induce a current you do work.
When the magnet is stationary near the coil, no voltage is induced.
An electromagnetic flow meter
Figure 6.4 shows a way to measure the rate of flow of oil through an oil pipeline.
A small turbine is placed in the pipe, so that the oil flow turns the blades round.
Some magnets have been placed in the rim of the turbine, so that they move past
a solenoid. These moving magnets induce a voltage in the solenoid which can be
measured on an oscilloscope (Figure 6.4(b)). The faster the turbine rotates, the

larger is the voltage induced in the solenoid. By measuring this voltage an
engineer can tell at what rate the oil is flowing.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 A wire is made to move through a magnetic field so that a voltage is
induced across its ends. State two ways in which the size of the
induced voltage can be increased.
2 This question refers to the magnet and solenoid shown in Figure 6.3.
a) The magnet is stationary inside the solenoid. State the size
of the induced potential difference.
b) The magnet is now moved towards the solenoid as follows.
In each case state the direction of the deflection on the meter.
i) A south pole is moved towards X.
ii) A south pole is moved away from X.
iii) A north pole is moved towards Y.
3 This question refers to the flow meter shown in Figure 6.4.
a) The poles of the magnets on the wheel are arranged
alternately with a north pole then south pole facing outwards.
Use this fact to explain the shape of the trace on the
oscilloscope.
b) Sketch the trace on the oscilloscope for these two separate
changes:
i) the number of turns in the solenoid is made 1.5 × as large
ii) the oil flow rate increases, so the turbine rotates at twice
the speed.


6.7 Generators
Find out how many power stations there are in your country.
The a.c. generator (alternator)
Figure 7.2 shows the design of a very simple alternating current (a.c.)
generator. By turning the axle you can make a coil of wire move through a
magnetic field. This causes a voltage to be induced between the ends of the coil.

You can see how the voltage waveform, produced by this generator, looks on an
oscilloscope screen (Figure 7.3(a)). In position (i) the coil is vertical with AB
above CD (Figure 7.3(b)). In this position the sides CD and AB are moving
parallel to the magnetic field. No voltage is generated since the wires are not
cutting across the magnetic field lines.
When the coil has been rotated through a ¼ turn to position (ii), the coil
produces its greatest voltage. Now the sides CD and AB are cutting through the
magnetic field at the greatest rate.
In position (iii), the coil is again vertical and no voltage is produced. In position
(iv) a maximum voltage is produced, but in the opposite direction. Side AB is
moving upwards and side CD downwards.
TIP
Doubling the speed of rotation of a generator doubles the frequency
and the maximum value of the induced voltage.
The size of the induced voltage
The size of the induced voltage can be made larger by:
rotating the coil faster • using stronger magnets • using more turns of wire •
wrapping the wire round a soft iron core.

Figure 7.4 shows the voltage waveform when the generator is rotated twice as
quickly. There are two effects: the maximum voltage is twice as large; the
frequency is doubled, i.e. the interval between the peaks is halved.
Producing power on a large scale
The electricity that you use in your home is produced by very large generators in
power stations. These generators work in a slightly different way from the
simple one you have seen so far.
Instead of having a rotating coil and a stationary magnet, large generators have
rotating electromagnets and stationary coils (see Figure 7.5). The advantage of
this set-up is that no moving parts are needed to collect the large electrical
current that is produced.

The important steps in the generation of electricity in a coal-fired power station
(Figure 7.5) are these:
Coal is burnt to boil water.
High-pressure steam from the boiler is used to turn a turbine.
The drive shaft from the turbine is connected to the generator magnets, which
rotate near to the stationary coils. The output from the coils has a voltage of
about 25 000 V.
The turbine’s drive shaft also powers the exciter. The exciter is a direct current
(d.c.) generator that produces current for the rotating magnets, which are in fact
electromagnets.

STUDY QUESTIONS
1 The circuit diagram is for a ‘shake-up’ torch. A magnet is placed in a
coil of wire, which is linked to a rechargeable battery and a light-
emitting diode (LED). The magnet is free to slide backwards and
forwards, down inside the coil.
a) Explain what a light-emitting diode is.
b) Explain why a diode is used in this circuit.
c) Explain how the battery is recharged.
2 This question refers to the waveform in Figure 7.3(a). Copy the graph
and add additional graphs to show what happens to the waveform as
each of these changes is made. Explain your answers.
a) The coil rotation is reversed.

b) An extra turn of wire is added.
c) The coil is rotated twice as quickly.
3 In the diagram below, the generator is connected to a flywheel by a
drive belt. The generator is operated by winding the handle. When a
student turns the handle as fast as she can, the generator produces
a voltage of 6 V. The graph shows how long the generator takes to
stop after the student stops winding the handle. The time taken to
stop depends on how many lamps are connected to the generator.
a) Explain the energy transfers that occur after the student
stops winding the handle:
i) when the switches S1, S2 and S3 are open (as shown), ii)
when the switches are closed.
b) Explain why the flywheel takes longer to stop when no lamp
is being lit by the generator.
c) Make a copy of the graph. Use your graph to predict how
long the flywheel turns when you make it light four lamps.
d) The experiment is repeated using lamps that use a smaller
current. They use 0.15 A rather than 0.3 A. Using the same axes,
sketch a graph to show how the time taken to stop depends on
the number of lamps, in this second case.


6.8 Transformers
Figure 8.1 is a familiar sight. The electricity is carried at very high voltages – as
high as 400 000 V. Why is the electricity transmitted at such high voltages?
Changing fields and changing currents
In Figure 8.2, when the switch is closed in the first circuit, the ammeter in the
second circuit kicks to the right. For a moment a current flows through coil 2.
When the switch is opened again the ammeter kicks to the left.
Closing the switch makes the current through coil 1 grow quickly. This makes
the coil’s magnetic field grow quickly. For coil 2 this is like pushing the north
pole of a magnet towards it, so a current is induced in coil 2. When the switch is
opened the magnetic field near coil 1 falls rapidly. This is like pulling a north
pole away from coil 2. Now the induced current changes direction. The ammeter
reads zero when there is a constant current through coil 1.
Transformers
A transformer is made by putting two coils of wire onto a soft iron core as
shown in Figure 8.3. The primary coil is connected to a 2 V alternating current
supply. The alternating current in the primary coil makes a magnetic field, which
rises and then falls again. The soft iron core carries this changing magnetic field

to the secondary coil and a changing voltage is induced in the secondary coil. In
this way, energy can be transferred continuously from the primary circuit to the
secondary circuit.
Transformers are useful because they allow you to change the voltage of a
supply. For example, model railways have transformers that decrease the mains
supply from 230 V to a safe 12 V; these are step-down transformers. The
transformer in Figure 8.3 steps up the voltage from 2 V to 12 V; this is a step-up
transformer.
To make a step-up transformer the secondary coil must have more turns of wire
in it than the primary coil. In a step-down transformer the secondary has fewer
turns of wire than the primary coil.
TIP
Transformers only work on a.c. supplies because an alternating current
produces a changing magnetic field.
The rule for calculating voltages in a transformer is:

Vp = primary voltage; Vs = secondary voltage; Np = number of turns on the
primary coil; Ns = number of turns on the secondary coil.
Power in transformers
We use transformers to transfer electrical power from the primary circuit to the
secondary circuit. Many transformers do this very efficiently and there is little
loss of power in the transformer itself. For a transformer that is 100% efficient
we can write:
The National Grid
Figure 8.4 shows how electricity, generated at power stations, is distributed
around the country through the National Grid.
You may have seen a sign at the bottom of an electricity pylon saying ‘Danger
high voltage’. Power is transmitted around the country at voltages as high as 400
000 V. There is a very good reason for this – it saves a lot of energy. The
following calculations explain why.
Figure 8.5 suggests two ways of transmitting 25 MW of power from a Yorkshire
power station to the Midlands in the UK:
The 25 000 V supply from the power station could be used to send 1000 A down
the power cables.
The voltage could be stepped up to 250 000 V and 100 A could be sent along the
cables.

TIP
Electricity is transmitted at very high voltages and low currents to
reduce energy losses.
How much power would be wasted in heating the cables in each case, given that
200 km of cable has a resistance of 10 Ω?
We waste a lot less power in the second case. The power loss is proportional to
the square of the current. Transmitting power at high voltages allows smaller
currents to flow along our overhead power lines.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 a) In Figure 8.2 when the switch is opened the ammeter kicks to the

left. Describe what happens to the ammeter during each of the
following:
i) The switch is closed and left closed so that there is a
constant current through coil 1.
ii) The coils are pushed towards each other.
iii) The coils are left close together.
iv) The coils are pulled apart.
b) The battery is replaced by an a.c. voltage supply, which has
a frequency of 2 Hz. Discuss what the ammeter shows when the
switch is closed.
2 Explain why a transformer does not work when you plug in the
primary coil to a battery. Why do transformers only work with an a.c.
supply?
3 The question refers to Figure 8.3.
a) Calculate the power used in the secondary circuit.
b) Show that the current flowing in the primary circuit is 1.2 A.
4 Table 1 below gives some data about four transformers. Copy the
table and fill the gaps.
5 Explain why very high voltages are used to transmit electrical power
long distances across the country.
6 This is about how a transformer could be used to melt a nail (see the
diagram below).

You will need to use the data provided.
• The nail has a resistance of 0.02 Ω.
• The melting point of the nail is 1540 °C.
• The nail needs 10 J to warm it through 1 °C.
a) Calculate the voltage across the nail.
b) Calculate the current flowing in:
i) the secondary circuit ii) the primary circuit.
c) Calculate the power in the secondary circuit that heats the
nail.
d) Estimate roughly how long it will take the nail to melt.
Mention any assumptions or approximations that you make in
this calculation.

Summary
I am confident that:
✓ I can recall facts and concepts about magnetism
• I know that magnets have a north and south pole.
• I understand that like poles repel and unlike poles attract.
• I understand the term magnetic ‘field line’.
• I can draw a magnetic field pattern for a bar magnet accurately.
• I can describe experiments to plot magnetic field patterns.
• I can describe how to use two bar magnets to produce a uniform
magnetic field.
• I understand that magnetism is induced in some materials when they
are placed in a magnetic field.
• I can describe the properties of magnetically hard and soft materials.
✓ I can recall facts and concepts about electromagnetism
• I understand that an electric current in a conductor produces a magnetic
field around it.
• I understand that a force is exerted on a current-carrying wire in a
magnetic field.
• I understand the action of motors and loudspeakers.
• I can use the left-hand rule to predict the direction of the force when a
wire carries a current in a magnetic field.
• I can describe the construction of electromagnets.
• I can draw and recognise the magnetic field patterns for a straight wire,
a flat coil and a long solenoid when each carries a current.
• I understand that a moving charged particle experiences a force in a
magnetic field (unless it moves parallel to the field).
✓ I can explain electromagnetic induction:
• I understand that a voltage is induced in a wire or coil when it moves
through a magnetic field, or when the magnetic field changes its strength.
• I understand the factors that affect the size and direction of the induced
voltage.
• I can describe the generation of electricity by the rotation of a magnet
inside a coil of wire.
• I can describe the construction and action of a transformer.
• I can explain the action and uses of step-up and step-down
transformers.
• I know and can use the relationship:

• I know and can use the relationship:
Vp Ip = Vs Is
for a transformer that is 100% efficient.
• I understand why very high voltages are used to transmit electricity on
the national grid.

Sample answers and expert’s comments
1 The diagram shows a bar magnet.
a) i) Copy the diagram. Add magnetic field lines to show the
direction, shape and strength of the magnetic field near the magnet.
(3)
ii) Label your diagram with the letter X to show two places where
the field is strongest.
(1)
b) i) Explain how the diagram shows where the field is strongest.
(1)
ii) Explain how you would change your diagram to show a stronger
bar magnet.
(1)
(Total for question = 6 marks)
2 The diagram shows a step-down transformer in the plug of an electric shaver,
which is used in the mains socket in a bathroom.
a) The manufacturer has written on the shaver that the output voltage of
the transformer is 6 V.
Use the information in the diagram to show that the output voltage of the
transformer is about 6 V.
(3)

b) When the shaver is working normally, the current in it is 0.9 A and
the voltage 6 V.
Calculate the input current from the mains, assuming that the transformer is
100% efficient in transferring electrical power from the input (primary) coil
to the output (secondary) coil.
(3)
(Total for question = 6 marks)
3 Plan an experiment to compare the strengths of two magnets.
(Total for question = 6 marks)


Exam-style questions
1 Which of the following is suitable for the core of a transformer?
A brass B steel C iron D copper [1]
2 Which of the following best represents the shape of the magnetic field
near to a wire that is carrying a current?
[1]
3 When S1 and S2 are closed, which of the following is true?
A The two coils repel each other.
B Both coils move to the right.
C The two coils attract each other.
D The attractive and repulsive forces cancel out.
[1]
4 The switch S is closed and left closed. Which of the following could
happen to the ammeter?
A The ammeter flicks to the right and then back to zero.
B The ammeter rises to a constant value.
C The ammeter flicks to the right, then to the left, and then back
to zero.
D The ammeter reading rises quickly, then falls to zero after about
1 minute.
[1]

5 When the south pole of a magnet is pushed into end X of a solenoid, the
ammeter kicks to the right.
Which of the following actions would also make the ammeter kick to
the right?
A moving a south pole away from X
B moving a north pole towards X
C moving a north pole towards Y
D moving a south pole towards Y
[1]
6 The diagram below shows four compasses near to a magnet. Which
compass is pointing in the wrong direction?
[1]
7 If the current flows in the direction of the arrow, in which direction will
the conductor tend to move?

A toward the north-seeking pole of the magnet B into the page
(and perpendicular to it) C out of the page (and perpendicular to it)
D toward the south-seeking pole of the magnet [1]
8 The diagram shows a step-up transformer.
Which of the following lines is correct?
9 The diagram shows a transformer.
a) Which of the following is the correct value for V2?

A 2.4 V
B 6.0 V
C 60 V
D 120 V
[1]
b) Which of the following is the correct value for I2?
A 0.2 A B 0.4 A C 2.0 A D 10 A [1]
10 When a wire carries an electric current and it is placed in
a magnetic field, a force may act on it.
a) State two ways in which this force can be made
larger.
[2]
b) State two ways in which this force can be
reversed.
[2]
c) Describe the circumstances under which no force
will act on this wire when it is carrying an electric
current and it is placed in a magnetic field.
[1]
11 The diagram shows part of a bicycle generator, which is in
contact with the wheel.

a) Explain why there is a current through the lamp
when the bicycle wheel turns.
[3]
b) Explain why the lamp gets brighter as the cycle
moves faster.
[1]
c) Explain why the lamp does not work when the
bicycle is stationary.
[1]
12 The diagram shows a transformer that is being used to
light a 12 V bulb. The bulb only lights dimly.
a) Describe three ways in which you could make the
bulb light more brightly.
[3]
b) Explain why a transformer only works using an
a.c. supply.
[3]
c) Electricity is distributed across countries using

very high voltage networks.
Explain:
i) why very high voltages are used ii) where
transformers are used in the distribution of
electricity.
[4]
d) A power station generates 50 MW of power at 25
kV, to deliver to a transformer, which links the power
station to the transmission lines. The transformer has
48 000 turns in its 400 kV secondary coil.
i) Calculate the number of turns in the
transformer’s primary coil.
ii) Calculate the current in the transformer’s
primary coil.
iii) Calculate the current in the transformer’s
secondary coil.
[6]
13 The diagram below shows a coil connected to a sensitive
meter. The meter is a ‘centre zero’ type: the needle is in
the centre when no current flows.
A student does two experiments.
First experiment
First the magnet is pushed into the coil. Then the magnet
is removed. The metre only reads a current when the
magnet is moving.
Second experiment
A second coil is brought close to the first. The student
switched the current on and off in the second coil. The

needle deflects for a brief time each time the current is
turned on or off.
a) In the first experiment:
i) State what is happening in the coil while the
magnet is moving.
[1]
ii) State how the deflection of the needle, as the
magnet is pushed towards the coil, compares with
the deflection of the needle as the magnet is pulled
away.
[1]
iii) State three ways in which the student could
increase the deflection on the meter, when the
magnet is moved.
[3]
b) Use the second experiment to help explain why
transformers only work with alternating current.
[3]
14 The waves from earthquakes are detected by instruments
called seismometers. The diagram shows a simple
seismometer.
It consists of a bar magnet suspended on a spring. The
spring hangs from a metal rod that transmits vibrations
from the Earth. When there is an earthquake, the magnet
moves in and out of the coil. A computer monitors the
voltage across the coil.

a) Explain why a voltage is induced in the coil.
[1]
b) Explain why the induced voltage is alternating.
[1]
c) Describe the movement of the magnet when the
induced voltage has its greatest value, at the point
labelled A.
[1]
d) Describe the movement of the magnet when the
induced voltage is zero, as at point B.
[1]
e) Suggest two ways in which the seismometer
could be made more sensitive, so that it can detect
smaller earthquakes.
[2]
15 The diagram shows a long wire placed between the poles
of a magnet. When there is a current I through the wire, a
force acts on the wire causing it to move.
a) Use the left-hand rule to find the direction of the
force on the wire.
[1]
b) State what happens to the force on the wire when:
i) the size of the current through the wire is
decreased [1]
ii) a stronger magnet is used [1]
iii) the direction of the current is reversed.
[1]
c) Name one practical device that uses this
effect.
[1]

16 a) A student investigates how a short copper
wire can be made to move in a magnetic field.
The diagram shows the apparatus.
The wire is placed between the poles of the
magnet.
i) Use the information in the diagram
to predict the direction of motion of the
wire.
[1]
ii) State what happens to the motion of
the wire when the magnet is turned with
the north pole to the left of the wire.
[1]
b) The diagram shows a model generator.
i) Explain why a voltage is induced
across the ends of the coil when the
magnet rotates.
[2]
ii) Explain why the voltage is
alternating.
[1]
c) The ends of the coil are connected to a
cathode ray oscilloscope (CRO). The
diagram shows the trace on the screen as

the magnet rotates.
Copy the diagram and draw new traces for
each of the following changes using the same
scale. The settings of the oscilloscope remain
the same.
i) The magnet rotates at the same speed
but in the opposite direction.
[1]
ii) The magnet rotates at the same
speed, in the same direction as the
original, but the number of turns of the
coil is doubled.
[2]
iii) The magnet rotates at twice the
speed, in the same direction, with the
original number of turns of the coil.
[2]

EXTEND AND CHALLENGE
1 In the diagrams below, explain which arrangement will produce a
larger deflection on the meter when the wires are moved between
the poles of the magnets.
2 The diagram below shows three coils connected in series to a data
logger. A magnet is dropped through the three coils. The graph
shows the voltage measured by the data logger as the magnet falls.
Explain the shape of the graph.
You should comment on these points

a) the height of the peaks on the graph b) the width of the peaks c)
the gaps between the peaks d) the direction of the peaks 
3 The diagram below shows a heavy copper pendulum suspended from a wire,
which swings backwards and forwards from A to C, between the poles of a
strong magnet. As the wire moves, a current is made to flow through the
resistor R; a data logger is used to record how the voltage changes across R.
a) Give two reasons why you would expect the current to be greatest as
the pendulum moves past B.
b) Sketch a graph to show what voltage the data logger records as the
pendulum swings from A to C and back again. Mark your graph clearly to
show the points A, B and C.
c) On the same axes sketch the voltage you would observe when:
i) the pendulum is released from a greater height ii) the polarity of
the magnets is reversed.
d) Explain the energy transfers which occur when the pendulum swings
from A to B:
i) with S closed ii) with S open.

e) It is observed that the pendulum swings take longer to die away when
the switch is open, than when the switch is closed. Explain why.
f) The pendulum is replaced by a heavier one; it is released again from
A. Predict what effect you will notice on:
i) the graph drawn in part b) ii) the time taken for the swings to die
away. Explain your answer.

7 Radioactivity and particles
The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the European Centre for Nuclear
Research (CERN) accelerates beams of protons close to the speed
of light. When protons collide with this great energy, many other
particles are produced. Nuclear physicists at CERN have discovered
quarks, W and Z bosons and the Higgs boson.
By the end of this section you should:
• describe the structure of the atom in terms of protons, neutrons
and electrons
• know the terms atomic, mass number and isotope
• know that alpha (α) particles, beta (β) particles and gamma (γ)
rays are ionising radiations emitted from unstable nuclei in a
random process
• describe the properties of α and β particles and γ rays
• describe the effect on the atomic and mass number of nuclei
caused by the emission of the four main types of radiation
• understand how to balance a nuclear equation in terms of mass
and charge
• know that ionising radiations may be detected by a Geiger-
Müller tube or photographic film
• explain the sources of background radiation from Earth and
space
• know that the activity of a source decreases with time and is
measured in becquerels (Bq)
• know the definition of the term half-life and use the concept to
carry out calculations on activity

• describe uses of radioactivity in industry and medicine
• describe the difference between contamination and irradiation
• describe the dangers of ionising radiation
• know that nuclear reactions, including fission, fusion and
radioactive decay can be sources of energy
• understand that a nucleus of U-235 can be split by collision with
a neutron (fission) and that the process releases energy
• describe how a chain reaction of fissions can be set up
• describe the role played by control rods, moderator, and
shielding in a nuclear reactor
• explain the difference between nuclear fission and nuclear
fusion
• describe nuclear fusion as the creation of larger nuclei resulting
in a loss of mass from smaller nuclei accompanied by a release
of energy
• know that fusion is the energy source for stars
• explain why fusion does not happen at low temperatures and
pressures.
CALCULATE • CONSIDER
1 In Section 1 you learnt that the braking distance of a car travelling at
30 m/s is about 75 m. If a car could travel at the same speed as
protons in the LHC, which of the following distances would you think
would be its approximate stopping distance when you apply the
brakes:
a) 7500 m b) 7500 km c) 7500 light years?
2 Explain which you think is the greatest scientific discovery in history –
the discovery of the nucleus of an atom, the discovery of DNA or the
working out of the periodic table? Or can you think of another more
important discovery?
3 A new school costs €25 million, a new hospital €100 million. Can
governments justify spending €7.5 billion on looking for a Higgs
boson?

7.1 Atomic structure
Over the last century, we have learnt how to use radioactive materials safely and
to put them to good use. The image shows the concentration of radioactive sugar
2 hours after tracer molecules were fed into a plant. The red colour shows a high
concentration of sugar in the young leaves of the plant, which are growing. The
fast growing young leaves take the sugar from the older leaves, which appear
blue. Doctors use a similar method to look at fast-growing cancer tumours with
radioactive isotopes.
Neutrons, protons and electrons
Experiments done at the beginning of the twentieth century led to the nuclear
model of the atom. We now understand that an atom has a very small nucleus, of
diameter approximately 10−15 m. Inside the nucleus there are two types of
particle, protons and neutrons. The protons and neutrons have approximately
the same mass; a proton has a positive charge whereas the neutron is neutral.
Outside the nucleus there are electrons, which orbit the nucleus at a distance of
approximately 10−10 m. Electrons have very little mass, in comparison with
neutrons or protons, and they carry a negative charge (see Table 1). Evidence for
the structure of the nuclear atom is discussed in Chapter 7.5.

A hydrogen atom has one proton and one electron; it is electrically neutral
because the charges of the electron and proton cancel each other. A helium atom
has two protons and two neutrons in its nucleus, and two electrons outside that.
The helium atom is also neutral because it has the same number of electrons as it
has protons; it has four times the mass of a hydrogen atom because it has four
particles in the nucleus (see Figure 1.2 and Table 2).

Ions
Atoms are electrically neutral since the number of protons balances exactly the
number of electrons. However, it is possible either to add extra electrons to an
atom, or to take them away. When an electron is added to an atom a negative ion
is formed; when an electron is removed a positive ion is formed. Ions are made
in pairs because an electron that is removed from one atom attracts itself to
another atom, so a positive and negative ion pair is formed. Some examples are
given in Table 3. The name ion is also used to describe charged molecules. The
process of making ions is called ionisation.
TIP
Remember that nearly all of an atom’s mass is in the nucleus.
Atomic and mass numbers
The number of protons in the nucleus of an atom determines what element it is.
Hydrogen atoms have one proton, helium atoms two protons, uranium atoms 92
protons. The number of protons in the nucleus decides the number of electrons
surrounding the nucleus. The number of electrons determines the chemical
properties of an atom. The number of protons in the nucleus is called the atomic
(or proton) number of the atom (symbol Z). So the proton number of hydrogen
is 1, Z = 1.
The mass of an atom is decided by the number of neutrons and protons added
together. Scientists call this number the mass (or nucleon) number of an atom.

The name nucleon refers to either a proton or a neutron.
atomic (or proton) number = number of protons mass (or nucleon) number
= number of protons and neutrons 
TIP
For example, an atom of carbon has six protons and six neutrons. So its atomic
number is 6, and its mass number is 12. To save time in describing carbon we
can write it as 
; the mass number appears on the left and above the symbol
C, for carbon, and the atomic number on the left and below.
Isotopes
Not all the atoms of a particular element have the same mass. For example, two
carbon atoms might have mass numbers of 12 and 14. The nucleus of each atom
has the same number of protons, six, but one atom has six neutrons and the other
eight neutrons. Atoms of the same element (carbon in this case) that have
different masses are called isotopes. These two isotopes of carbon can be written
as carbon-12, 
, and carbon-14, 
.
TIP
The symbols 
 describe only the nucleus of a carbon atom.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 a) An oxygen atom has eight protons, eight neutrons, and eight
electrons. State its:
i) atomic number ii) mass number
b) Explain why the oxygen atom is electrically neutral.
2 Calculate the number of protons and neutrons in each of the
following nuclei:
a) 

b) 
c) 
d) 
3 Write a paragraph to explain and describe the structure of an atom.
In your answer, mention atomic number, mass number and
electrons.
4 a) Explain the term ‘isotope’.
b) Explain why isotopes are difficult to separate by chemical
methods.
5 Lead-209 and Lead-210 are isotopes of lead, and they both have the
same atomic number, 82.
a) State what the numbers 209, 210 and 82 represent.
b) Explain what these two isotopes of lead have in common.
c) Explain how the two isotopes are different.

7.2 Radioactivity
Henry Becquerel discovered radioactivity in 1896. He placed some uranium salts
next to a photographic plate, which had been sealed in a thick black bag to
prevent light exposing the plate. When the plate was later developed it had been
affected as if it had been exposed to light. Becquerel realised that a new form of
energy was being emitted from the uranium salts. In his honour, the activity of a
radioactive source is measured in becquerels.
What travelled through the black bag? Where did it come from? What is
radioactivity?

Nuclear decay
The nuclei of most atoms are very stable; the atoms that we are made of have
been around for thousands of millions of years. Atoms may lose or gain a few
electrons during chemical reactions, but the nucleus does not change during such
processes.
The activity of a source is equal to the number of particles emitted per second.
This is measured in becquerel (Bq).
However, there are some atoms that have unstable nuclei which throw out
particles to make the nucleus more stable. This is a random process that depends
only on the nature of the nucleus; the rate at which particles are emitted from a
nucleus is not affected by other factors such as temperature or chemical
reactions. One element discovered that emits these particles is radium, and the
name radioactivity is given to this process.
There are four types of radioactive emission:
Alpha particles are the nuclei of helium atoms. The alpha particle is formed
from two protons and two neutrons, so it has a mass number of 4 and an atomic
number of 2. When an alpha particle is emitted from a nucleus it causes the
nucleus to change into another nucleus with a mass number 4 less and an atomic
number 2 less than the original one. It is usually only very heavy elements that
emit alpha particles, for example:
This is called alpha decay.

TIP
An alpha particle is formed from two protons and two neutrons.
• Beta particles are electrons. In a nucleus there are only protons and neutrons,
but a beta particle is made and ejected from a nucleus when a neutron turns
into a proton and an electron. Since an electron has a very small mass, when it
leaves a nucleus it does not alter the mass number of that nucleus. However,
the electron carries away a negative charge so the removal of an electron
increases the atomic number of a nucleus by 1. For example, carbon-14 decays
into nitrogen by emitting a beta particle:
This is called beta decay.
TIP
When a β-particle is emitted from a nucleus, a neutron turns into a
proton. The mass number of the nucleus increases by 1.
TIP
Make sure you can write balanced equations for alpha and beta decay.
• When some nuclei decay by sending out an alpha or beta particle, they also
give out a gamma ray. Gamma rays are electromagnetic waves, like radio
waves or light. They carry away from the nucleus a lot of energy, so that the
nucleus is left in a more stable state. Gamma rays have no mass or charge, so
when one is emitted there is no change to the mass or atomic number of a
nucleus (see Table 1).
• Neutrons are emitted from some highly unstable nuclei. The effect of this is to
reduce the mass number by 1, but the atomic number does not change. Neutron
emission is rare, but neutrons are a dangerous radiation. You will meet them
again when you learn about fission. An example of neutron emission from
helium-5 is given below:

TIP
Make sure you know the nature of alpha, beta and gamma radiations.
SAFETY
Students under 16 may not handle radioactive sources.
Ionisation
All three types of radiation (alpha, beta and gamma) cause ionisation and this is
why we must be careful when we handle radioactive materials. The radiation
makes ions in our bodies and these ions can then damage our body tissues (see
Chapter 7.6).
Your teacher can show the ionising effect of radium by holding some close to a
charged gold leaf electroscope (Figure 2.4). The electroscope is initially charged
positively so that the gold leaf is repelled from the metal stem. When a radium
source is brought close to the electroscope, the leaf falls, showing that the
electroscope has been discharged. The reason for this is that the alpha particles
from the radium create ions in the air above the electroscope. This is because the
charges on the alpha particles pull some electrons out of air molecules (Figure
2.3). Both negative and positive ions are made; the positive ones are repelled
from the electroscope, but the negative ones are attracted so that the charge on

the electroscope is neutralised. It is important that you understand that it is not
the charge of the alpha particles that discharges the electroscope, but the ions
that they produce.
TIP
Ionising radiations create both positive and negative ions.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 Explain what is meant by the word ‘radioactivity’.
2 Justify why Becquerel concluded that he had discovered a new form
of energy.

3 a) Explain what is meant by the word ‘ionisation’.
b) Explain why ions are always produced in pairs.
4 State the nature of the following:
a) an alpha particle b) a beta particle c) a gamma ray 5
Complete the following radioactive decay equations.
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
6 
 decays by emitting an alpha particle and two beta particles;
name the element produced after those three decays.
7 Explain what effect losing a gamma ray has on a nucleus.
8 Explain how a radioactive source which is emitting only alpha
particles can discharge a negatively charged electroscope.
9 Beryllium-12 is an unstable isotope which decays by the emission of
a beta particle and a neutron. Complete this equation to show the
decay:

7.3 The nature of α, β and γ radiations
In Figure 3.1 the green lines illustrate the straight paths of alpha particles in a
cloud chamber. One of the alpha particles, coloured yellow, strikes a nitrogen
nucleus and recoils. The nitrogen nucleus travels a short distance forward, and
this is shown by the red line.
A vapour trail is left in a cloud chamber where ions have been produced by the
passage of a particle. A thicker trail is left by a strongly ionising particle. A
nitrogen nucleus is more ionising than an alpha particle because the nitrogen
nucleus carries a greater positive charge.
Detecting particles
We make use of the ionising properties of radiations to detect them. This is done
using a Geiger-Müller (GM) tube. When alpha, beta or gamma radiation enters
the tube, gas atoms inside are ionised. The ions produce a pulse of current that
enables a counter, which is attached to the GM tube, to count the number of
ionising particles entering the tube.
An investigation into the range and penetration
of radiations

Figure 3.2 shows a practical arrangement for investigating the range and
penetration of alpha, beta and gamma radiations.
REQUIRED PRACTICAL
Make sure you are familiar with this practical.
Alpha particles travel about 5 cm through air but can be stopped by a sheet of
paper (Figure 3.3). Alpha particles ionise the air strongly.
Beta particles can travel several metres through air. They can be stopped by a
sheet of aluminium that is a few millimetres thick (Figure 3.3). Beta particles
ionise the air less strongly than alpha particles.
TIP
A Geiger-Müller (GM) tube is a device which detects ionising radiation.
An electronic counter can record the number of particles entering the
tube.
Gamma rays travel great distances through air and can only be stopped
effectively by a very thick piece of lead (Figure 3.3) Gamma rays ionise air
weakly.

SAFETY
For safety reasons, students under the age of 16 are not allowed to
handle radioactive materials, so your teacher will demonstrate this
experiment, or you might use a computer simulation.
TIP
Make sure you learn which absorber stops each of alpha, beta and
gamma radiation.
Radiation damage
If radiation gets into our body, our cells and tissues can be damaged. The ions
which are produced by the radiation produce chemicals which destroy the cells
they come into contact with. Alpha particles cause the most damage if they get
inside the body as they are strongly ionising. This could happen if we breathed
in a radioactive gas. An alpha source in school is less dangerous as the radiation
only travels short distances, so does not enter our body.
Although gamma rays are less ionising than alpha particles, a gamma ray source
in a laboratory is a hazard as the rays are so penetrating. A gamma ray can pass
into our body from a source several metres away from us. Your teacher will
always keep away from a source, by handling it with long tongs.
Background radiation
There are a lot of rocks in the Earth that contain radioactive uranium, thorium,
radon and potassium, and so we are always exposed to some ionising particles.
Radon is a gas that emits alpha particles. Since we can inhale this gas it is
dangerous, as radiation can get inside our lungs. We are exposed to ionising
radiations from the Sun and from outer space. These are called cosmic rays. The
atmosphere helps to protect us from cosmic rays. These are two of the sources
that make up background radiation. Figure 3.4 shows the contribution to the
total background radiation from all sources in Britain. Fortunately the level of

background radiation is quite low and in most places it does not cause a serious
health risk.
In some jobs, people are at a greater risk. X-rays used in hospitals also cause
ionisation. Radiographers make sure that their exposure to X-rays is as small as
possible. In nuclear power stations neutrons are produced in nuclear reactors.
The damage caused by neutrons is a source of danger for workers in that
industry.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 Which of the following A, B or C, is a property of beta radiation?
a) It is the most strongly ionising radiation.
b) It travels several metres in air.
c) It can easily be stopped by paper.
2 Who is most likely to receive the highest annual radiation dose?
an airline pilot a motor mechanic an office worker
Explain what is meant by the term ‘background radiation’.
b) Name three sources of background radiation

c) Explain why the astronaut in Figure 3.5 was exposed to a higher
background radiation than he was on Earth.
4 A radioactive source is placed 2 cm from a GM tube and an activity of 120 Bq
is measured. When a piece of paper is put between the source and the GM
tube the activity reduces to 75 Bq.
A 5 mm thick piece of aluminium between the source and tube reduces the
measured activity to zero.
Explain what this tells you about the source.
5 a) Radon gas is a product of radioactive decay in granite rocks. Radon is also
radioactive and emits alpha particles. Explain why radon might be a
hazard to mining engineers working underground in granite rocks.
b) Explain why a strong gamma source left in a laboratory might be
dangerous to us.
6 This question is about testing the thickness of aluminium foil. The foil
moves between a b-source and Geiger counter at a speed of 0.2 m/s.
a) Plot a graph from the data below. Explain why the count rate changes
over the first 50 s. Remember that particles are emitted randomly from a
nucleus.
b) Explain why the count rate drops and then rises again, after 50 s.
What has happened to the thickness of the foil?

7.4 Radioactive decay
The atoms of some radioactive materials decay by emitting alpha or beta
particles from their nuclei. But it is not possible to predict when the nucleus of
one particular atom will decay. It could be in the next second, or sometime next
week, or not for a million years. Radioactive decay is a random process.
Random process
The radioactive decay of an atom is rather like tossing a coin. You cannot say
with certainty that the next time you toss a coin it will fall heads up. However, if
you throw a lot of coins you can start to predict how many of them will fall
heads up. You can use this idea to help you understand how radioactive decay
happens. You start off with a thousand coins, if any coin falls heads up then it
has ‘decayed’ and you must take it out of the game. Table 1 shows the likely
result (on average). Every time you throw a lot of coins about half of them will
turn up heads.

Decay
Radioactive materials decay in a similar way. If we start off with a million atoms
then after a period of time (for example 1 hour), half of them have decayed. In
the next hour we find that half of the remaining atoms have decayed, leaving us
with a quarter of the original number (Table 2). The period of time taken for half
the number of atoms to decay in a radioactive sample is called the half-life, and
it is given the symbol t½. It is important to understand that we have chosen a
half-life here of 1 hour to explain the idea. Different radioisotopes have different
half-lives.

Measurement of half-life
If you look at Table 2 you can see that the number of nuclei that decayed in the
first hour was 500 000, then in the next hour 250 000 and in the third hour 125
000. So as time passes not only does the number of nuclei left get smaller but so
does the rate at which the nuclei decay. So by measuring the activity of a
radioactive sample we can determine its half-life.
Figure 4.2 shows how the half-life of protactinium can be measured.
Protactinium is produced in the decay of uranium, which is dissolved in an
aqueous layer in a plastic bottle. When the bottle is shaken some protactinium is
dissolved into a less dense upper layer. The protactinium in the upper layer then
decays. A GM tube, placed near to the upper layer, is attached to a ratemeter
which measures the activity every 10 seconds. The graph of the activity shows
that the count rate halves every 70 seconds, so that is the half-life of
protactinium.

TIP
After one half-life the activity of a source has halved. The activity is a
quarter after two half-lives.
PRACTICAL
Correcting for the background count
A GM tube left well away from a radioactive source will still count some
radioactive emissions; this is the background count. For example this
might be 3 Bq. If the GM tube is placed close to a radioactive source, it
will count the emissions from the source and the background count; if
the count recorded is now 43 Bq, we can calculate that the count from
the source is 40 Bq, since 3 Bq were due to the background count.
The teacher must demonstrate this experiment, ensuring the apparatus is leak
tight. Follow CLEAPSS guidance.

Dating archaeological remains
Carbon-14, 
, is a radioactive isotope; it decays to nitrogen with a half-life of
about 5700 years. All living things (including you) have a lot of carbon in them,
and a small fraction of this is carbon-14. When a tree dies, for example, the
radioactive carbon decays and after 5700 years the fraction of carbon-14 in the
dead tree will be half as much as you would find in a living tree. So by
measuring the amount of carbon-14 in ancient relics, scientists can calculate
their age (see Study Question 8).
Half-life and stability
Elements usually have several isotopes – two isotopes of an element have the
same atomic (or proton) number but they have a different number of neutrons in
the nucleus, so they have different mass (or neutron) numbers. Some isotopes are
unstable and they undergo radioactive decay. Less stable isotopes decay more
quickly, so they have shorter half-lives than the more stable isotopes. Half-lives
can be very long: for example uranium-238 decays with a half-life of 4.5 billion
years; by contrast other half-lives are measured in fractions of a second. Table 3
lists the half-lives of some radioactive isotopes.

STUDY QUESTIONS
1 Use a word from the box to complete the sentence.
count rate half-life reaction The ___________________ is the
number of alpha, beta or gamma emissions from a radioactive
source in one second.
2 The graphs in Figure 4.6 show the decay of three different
radioactive isotopes.
State which isotope has:
a) the longest half-life b) the shortest half-life c) the possibility of
being used as a medical tracer.

3 Explain the meaning of the word random.
4 A GM tube is placed near to a radioactive source with a long half-life. In three
10-second periods the following number of counts were recorded: 150, 157,
145. Explain why the three counts were different.
5 A radioactive material has a half-life of 2 minutes. Explain what that means.
Determine how much of the material will be left after 8 minutes.
6 The following results for the count rate of a radioactive source were recorded
every minute.
a) A correction was made for background count. Explain what this
means.
b) Plot a graph of the count rate (y-axis) against time (x-axis), and use
the graph to determine the half-life of the source.
7 A radioisotope has a half-life of 8 hours. At 12 noon on 2 March a GM tube
measures an activity of 2400 Bq.
a) Calculate the activity at 4.00 am on 3 March.
b) Determine the time at which an activity of approximately 75 Bq will

be measured.
8 a) Archaeologists are analysing ancient bones from a human settlement. They
discover that a sample of bone has one-sixteenth of the carbon-14 of
modern human bones. Determine the age of the settlement. (The half-life
of carbon-14 is 5700 years.) b) The limit of carbon dating is about 50 000
years. Explain why.
9 The age of rocks can be estimated by measuring the ratio of the isotopes
potassium-40 and argon-40. We assume that when the rock was formed it was
molten, and that any argon would have escaped. So, at the rock’s formation
there was no argon. The half-life of potassium-40 is 1.3 × 109 years, and it
decays to argon-40. Analysis of two rocks gives these potassium (K) to argon
(A) ratios:
Calculate the ages of the two rocks.

7.5 Uses of radioactive materials
Radioactive materials have a great number of uses in medicine and industry.
People who work with radioactive materials must wear radiation badges that
record the amount of radiation to which they are exposed.
Medicine
Radioactive tracers help doctors to examine the insides of our bodies. For
example, iodine-123 is used to see if our thyroid glands are working properly.
The thyroid is an important gland in the throat that controls the rate at which our
bodies function. The thyroid gland absorbs iodine, so a dose of radioactive
iodine (the tracer) is given to a patient. Doctors can then detect the radioactivity
of the patient’s throat, to see how well the patient’s thyroid is working. The
tracer needs to be an isotope with a short half-life.
Cobalt-60 emits very energetic gamma rays. These rays can damage our body
cells, but they can also kill bacteria. Nearly all medical equipment such as
syringes, dressings and surgeons’ instruments is first packed into sealed plastic
bags, and then exposed to intense gamma radiation. In this way all the bacteria
are killed and so the equipment is sterilised.

The same material, cobalt-60, is used in the treatment of cancers. Radiographers
direct a strong beam of radiation on to the cancerous tissue to kill the cancer
cells. This radiotherapy treatment is very unpleasant and can cause serious side-
effects, but it is often successful in slowing down the growth or completely
curing the cancer.
Industry
Radioactive tracers may be used to detect leaks in underground pipes (Figure
5.3). The idea is very simple; the radioactive tracer is fed into the pipe and then a
GM tube can be used above ground to detect an increase in radiation levels and
hence the leak. This saves time and money because the whole length of the pipe
does not have to be dug up to find the leak.

Irradiation and contamination
When a teacher brings a radioactive source into a laboratory to demonstrate to
her pupils, she irradiates the surroundings (with a very small safe dose) but does
not cause any contamination. When the source is near a GM tube, the tube is
irradiated. This means that radiation from the source is entering the tube.
However, as soon as the source is removed and put away, the GM tube will not
be radioactive because there are no radioactive nuclei inside it to emit radiation.
Radioactive isotopes cause contamination when they get into places where we
do not want them. For example, iodine-131 and caesium-137 were emitted in the
Fukushima and Chernobyl disasters. Iodine-131 has a half-life of 8 days, which
means that it is highly active for a short time. Iodine disperses in the atmosphere
and gets into the food chain. This poses a very high risk, but for a short period.
Caesium-137, however, has a half-life of 30 years. Consequently, the ground and
water in the region close to the two nuclear reactors will be contaminated for
many years to come.
TIP
Make sure you can name and explain at least three uses of radioactive
materials.
Both irradiation and contamination are potentially hazardous to us. However,
when a hospital patient is exposed to a dose of radiation, the dose will be
carefully calculated and controlled. The problem with contamination is that a
person is exposed to radiation in a way which is unknown, and it is possible that
a large and very dangerous dose of radiation is consumed by mistake.

STUDY QUESTIONS
1 Explain the meanings of the words ‘irradiation’ and ‘contamination’.
2 a) Explain what a radioactive tracer is.
b) Do radioactive tracers show any chemical differences from
other isotopes of the same element? Explain your answer.
3 Figure 5.4 shows a gamma ray unit in a hospital. Box A is a container
of the radioactive material cobalt-60 
 This isotope has a half-
life of 5 years.
a) Explain why the container is made mainly from lead.
b) The unit can be made ‘safe’ by moving the container to
position B. Explain why.
c) State how many protons, neutrons and electrons are there in
one atom of cobalt-60.
d) The activity of the source was 2 million Bq in January 2013.
Determine the activity in January 2023.
e) Suggest three safety precautions that someone should take
when removing a container of cobalt-60 from the unit.
4 The table shows information about some radioactive isotopes. You
are a medical physicist working in a hospital. Advise the doctors
which isotopes are suitable for the following tasks:
a) Checking for a blockage in a patient’s lungs.
b) Directing a strong dose of radiation deep into a patient to
treat cancer.
Explain in each case what apparatus you would use, explain why
you have chosen a particular isotope and what safety precautions
you would take to protect the doctors and the patient.


7.6 The hazards of radiation
The Fukushima Daiichi power plant in Japan was devastated by the tsunami
produced by the Tohoku earthquake of 11 March 2011. This led to the second
biggest nuclear disaster in history, producing at its peak a local activity of 400
million million Bq. While nuclear power has its risks, supporters of the nuclear
industry point out that the environmental risk posed by coal-fired power stations
is greater. There is the immediate risk posed by pollution through burning coal,
and the long-term risk of global warming due to the emission of greenhouse
gases.
In this section, you will learn about the hazards of using radioactive materials.
Radiation damage
Radiation entering our bodies causes damage in two ways.
• Direct damage is caused by a particle colliding with a cell in our body. An
alpha particle, for example, behaves like a miniature bullet and it destroys
body tissue.
• Indirect damage is caused by ionisation. Radiation produces ions which can
make strong acids in our bodies. These acids can then destroy our cells or
cause mutations in our genes.
TIP

In the early days of research into radioactivity, scientists did not
understand the hazards of radiation. For example, Marie Curie (an
early pioneer) died from an illness most likely caused by long term
exposure to radiation. We now understand the impact of radiation
because scientists have published their findings which have been
checked and validated by others. As a result, we now have clear
procedures to protect ourselves from the effect of radiation.
Types of radiation
Inside the body, the most damaging radiation is the alpha particle. This is
because the alpha particle does not travel far through body tissues and it
transfers its energy in a very small space, so damage to tissue is localised.
Beta and gamma radiations spread their energy over greater distances in the
body, so they are not as damaging as alpha radiation.
In nuclear reactors, neutrons are emitted. These particles are also dangerous to us
as they penetrate the body and collide with atoms, thus damaging cells.
Radiation dose
When we assess the dangers of radiation, we need to know how much we have
been exposed to. We measure the radiation dose in sieverts, Sv. The greater the
radiation dose, the more likely we are to suffer ill effects.
Doses are often quoted in thousandths of sieverts – millisieverts mSv.
TIP
The damage caused by an alpha particle inside our bodies is about 20
times the damage caused by beta or gamma radiation of the same
energy.
How dangerous is radiation?
In the UK, there is about a 40% chance that we will suffer from cancer at some
stage of our life. It is thought that about 1% of cancers are caused by background
radiation which sends thousands of particles through our bodies each second.
Table 1 below gives some examples of radiation doses and their risk to us.
Low doses
Low doses of radiation, below 10 mSv, are unlikely to cause us harm. However,
it is possible that any exposure to radiation will increase our chances of cancer.
We are exposed to background radiation all the time, in the air, from rocks and
from the food we eat.

Moderate doses
Moderate doses of radiation below 1000 mSv (1 Sv) are unlikely to kill
someone, but the person will be very unwell. Damage will be done to cells in the
body, but not enough to be fatal. The body will be able to replace dead cells and
the person is likely to recover completely. However, studies of the survivors
from the Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombs, and of survivors from the Chernobyl
reactor disaster of 1986, show that there is an increased chance of dying from
cancer some years after the dose of radiation.
TIP
You will not be expected to remember the size of doses from various
sources, or that the doses are measured in sieverts.
High doses
High doses of about 4000 mSv (4 Sv) are likely to be fatal, and a dose of 10 Sv
will definitely be fatal. A high dose damages the gut and bone marrow so much
that the body cannot work normally. About 30 people died of acute radiation
syndrome in the Chernobyl disaster.
Disposal of radioactive waste
Nuclear power stations produce radioactive waste materials, some of which have

half-lives of hundreds of years. These waste products are packaged up in
concrete and steel containers and are buried deep underground or are dropped to
the bottom of the sea. This is a controversial issue; some scientists tell us that
radioactive wastes produce only a very low level of radiation, and that the
storage containers will remain intact for a very long time. Others worry that
these products will contaminate our environment and believe it is wrong to dump
radioactive materials that could harm future generations.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 Name four types of nuclear radiation that are dangerous to us.
2 Explain why radiation workers are only allowed to receive a
maximum annual dose of about 50 mSv – refer to Table 1.
3 A patient receives a dose of 10 mSv from a CT scan. Use Table 1 to
work out how many years of background radiation are equivalent to
the dose from a CT scan.
4 Table 2 shows the results of research into the number of deaths
caused by various types of radiation.
a) Discuss whether the table supports the suggestion that
alpha particles are more dangerous than gamma rays.
b) What conclusion can you draw about the relative dangers of
neutrons?
c) A student comments that the table does not provide a fair
test for comparison of the radiations. Evaluate this comment.

5 Discuss the problems arising from the disposal of radioactive waste
and how the associated risks can be reduced.

7.7 Nuclear fission
Radioactive zirconium-coated fuel rods produce a blue glow in the water
surrounding them. The radiation is caused by high-speed charged particles
passing through the water. Why are there traces of zirconium in uranium fuel
rods?
Fission
You read in Chapter 7.2 that the nuclei of some large atoms are unstable and that
to become more stable they lose an alpha or a beta particle. Some heavy nuclei,
uranium-235 for example, may also increase their stability by fission. Figure 7.2
shows how this works. Unlike alpha or beta decay, which happens at random, the
fission of a nucleus is usually caused by a neutron hitting it. The 235U nucleus
absorbs this neutron and turns into a 236U nucleus, which is so very unstable that

it splits into two smaller nuclei. The nuclei that are left are very rarely identical;
two or three energetic neutrons are also emitted. The remaining nuclei are
usually radioactive and will decay by the emission of beta particles to form more
stable nuclei.
Nuclear energy
In Figure 7.2, just after fission has been completed, the tellurium 
 and
the zirconium-97 nucleus 
 are pushed apart by the strong electrostatic
repulsion of their nuclear charges. In this way the nuclear energy is transferred to
the kinetic energy of the fission fragments. When these fast-moving fragments
hit other atoms, this kinetic energy is transferred to the atoms’ thermal store of
energy.

The fission process releases a tremendous amount of energy. The fission of a
nucleus provides about 40 times more energy than the release of an alpha
particle from a nucleus. Fission is important because we can control the rate at
which it happens, so that we can use the energy released to create electrical
energy.
Chain reaction
Once a nucleus has divided by fission, the neutrons that are emitted can strike
other neighbouring nuclei and cause them to split as well. This chain reaction is
shown in Figure 7.3. Depending on how we control this process we have two
completely different uses for it. In a controlled chain reaction, on average only
one neutron from each fission will strike another nucleus and cause it to divide.
This is what we want to happen in a power station.
In an uncontrolled chain reaction most of the two or three neutrons from each
fission strike other nuclei. This is how nuclear (‘atomic’) bombs are made. It is a
frightening thought that a piece of pure uranium-235 the size of a tennis ball has
enough stored energy to flatten a town.
Nuclear power stations
Figure 7.4 shows a gas-cooled nuclear reactor. The energy released by the
fission processes in the uranium fuel rods produces a lot of thermal energy. This
thermal energy is carried away by carbon dioxide gas, which is pumped around
the reactor. The hot gas then boils water to produce steam, which can be used to
work the electrical generators.

• The fuel rods are made of uranium-238, ‘enriched’ with about 3% uranium-
235. Uranium-238 is the most common isotope of uranium, but it is only
uranium-235 that will produce energy by fission. The fuel rods are embedded
in graphite, which is called a moderator. The purpose of a moderator is to
slow down neutrons that are produced in fission. A nucleus is split more easily
by a slow-moving neutron. The fuel rods are long and thin so that neutrons can
escape. Neutrons leave one rod and cause another nucleus to split in a
neighbouring rod.
• The rate of production of energy in the reactor is carefully regulated by the
boron control rods. Boron absorbs neutrons very well, so by lowering the
control rods into the reactor the reaction can be slowed down. In the event of
an emergency the rods are pushed right into the core of the reactor and the
chain reaction stops completely.
• The concrete shielding around the reactor provides vital protection for workers.
Neutrons are a dangerous and penetrating radiation. They are stopped most
effectively by light nuclei such as carbon or hydrogen in our body. Neutrons
do a lot of damage to our body tissues. Concrete provides an effective shield
because it contains a lot of water.
Nuclear equations
Figure 7.2 showed a possible fission of a uranium nucleus. This fission reaction
can be described by an equation: 
The mass and atomic numbers on each side balance. However, very accurate

measurement shows that the mass on the left-hand side of the equation is slightly
more than the mass on the right-hand side. This small reduction in mass is the
source of the released nuclear energy.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 Name the particle that the nucleus of a uranium-235 atom must
absorb before fission can happen.
electron neutron proton alpha particle
Explain what is meant by nuclear fission.
b) In what way is fission
i) similar to radioactive decay?
ii) different from radioactive decay?
3 State what is meant by a chain reaction. Explain how the chain reaction works
in a nuclear bomb and in a nuclear power station.
4 The following questions are about the nuclear reactor shown in Figure 7.4.
a) Explain the purpose of the concrete shield surrounding the reactor.
b) Explain why carbon dioxide gas is pumped through the reactor.
c) State which isotope of uranium undergoes fission in the fuel rods.
d) Will the fuel rods last for ever? Explain your answer.
e) Explain the purpose of the graphite moderator.
f) State what you would do if the reactor core suddenly got too hot.
5 After absorbing a neutron, uranium-235 can also split into the nuclei barium-
141 
 and krypton-92 
. Write a balanced symbol equation to show
how many neutrons are emitted in this reaction.
6 Boron has two stable isotopes: 80% 
 and 20% 
.
Write a nuclear equation to show why boron is used in nuclear reactor control
rods.

7.8 Nuclear fusion
Here you can see the inside of the Joint European Torus. This is an experiment to
try to use nuclear fusion to generate electrical power. Nuclei of tritium and
deuterium are confined inside the torus by a strong magnetic field and heated to
very high temperatures.
Nuclear fission is a process whereby energy is released by the splitting of a
larger nucleus. Energy can also be released by nuclear fusion; in this process
two small nuclei combine or fuse to form a single larger nucleus.
Figure 8.2 shows the fusion of two isotopes of hydrogen, deuterium 
, and
tritium 
. The fusion process can be described by this nuclear equation:

When the two small nuclei join together, they form the large 
 nucleus, and a
neutron is ejected.
In addition, a gamma ray is produced which carries away energy from the
process. The combined mass of the 
 and 
 nuclei is slightly greater than the
combined mass of the 
 nucleus and the neutron. This is similar to nuclear
fission in that a small amount of mass has been converted to energy, which, in
this case, is carried away by the gamma ray.
Fusion at high temperatures
Nuclear fusion is sometimes referred to as thermonuclear fusion, as the process
can only occur at very high temperatures. Figure 8.3 explains why. The average
kinetic energy of a group of particles depends on their temperature – the higher
the temperature, the greater the kinetic energy.
In Figure 8.3(a), two protons approach each other at a low temperature, but their
charges repel and they do not collide. In Figure 8.3(b), the protons have a high
enough kinetic energy to overcome the electrostatic repulsion of their charges,
and fusion takes place.

Fusion occurs because there is a very short-range attractive force between the
protons called the strong nuclear force. This nuclear force does not extend
outside the nucleus. At a short range, the strong nuclear force is much stronger
than the electrostatic repulsion of the protons, but at a long range, the
electrostatic repulsion is stronger than the strong nuclear force.
Nuclear fusion is the energy source for the Sun and all other stars. Although our
Sun has a surface temperature of about 5800 K, the temperature of the core is
about 15 000 000 K. At such high temperatures, fusion can take place, and
hydrogen nuclei are fused to make helium nuclei. The energy released by fusion
in the core is then dissipated at the Sun’s surface. The pressure in the core of the
Sun is very high – about 500 million times larger than the Earth’s atmospheric
pressure. At such high pressures, collisions between the nuclei are very frequent,
and fusion is more likely to occur.

Nuclear fission and nuclear fusion
Nuclear fission and nuclear fusion are similar because:
they are both sources of energy • both release energy due to a small loss of mass.
Nuclear fission and nuclear fusion are different because:
fusion is the creation of a larger nucleus from smaller nuclei • fission is the
creation of smaller nuclei from a larger nucleus • fusion occurs only at very high
temperatures and pressure • fission is triggered by the collision between a
neutron and a large nucleus • fission releases neutrons which can cause further
fissions and then a chain reaction • the products of fission have kinetic energy
which can transfer energy to other stores • fission can be controlled and used to
generate electricity in power stations • fusion cannot be controlled by us, and
only occurs naturally in stars.
STUDY QUESTIONS

1 a) Explain what is meant by nuclear fusion.
b) Discuss what nuclear fusion has in common with nuclear
fission, and how the processes differ.
2 Explain why nuclear fusion does not occur at low temperatures and
pressures.
3 Much research has been done to try to make nuclear fusion a source
of energy to try to generate electricity. Discuss the advantages and
disadvantages of this idea.

Summary
I am confident that:
✓ I can describe the structure of the atom
• The atom is electrically neutral: each proton in the nucleus carries a
positive charge, which is balanced by the negative charge on an equal
number of electrons.
• The mass of the atom is concentrated in the nucleus: a proton and a
neutron have approximately the same mass – an electron has a very small
mass by comparison.
✓ I can recall definitions and use symbols correctly
• Atomic (proton) number: the number of protons in the nucleus.
• Mass (nucleon) number: the number of protons and neutrons in the
nucleus.
• An ion is formed by either adding or removing electrons from a neutral
atom.
• An isotope of an atom is another atom that has the same number of
protons, but a different number of neutrons.
✓ I can explain radioactivity
• An alpha particle is a helium nucleus 
• A beta particle is a fast-moving electron 
.
• A gamma ray is a short-wavelength electromagnetic wave.
• An alpha particle travels 5 cm through air and is stopped by paper.
• Beta particles travel many metres through air and can be stopped by
aluminium sheet a few millimetres thick.
• Gamma rays travel great distances through air and can only be
absorbed effectively by very thick lead sheets – several centimetres thick.
✓ I understand nuclear transformation
• On ejecting an α-particle, a β-particle, or a neutron, a nucleus is
transformed into another nucleus (a γ-ray makes no change to the mass or
charge of its nucleus). Three examples are:
✓ I can calculate radioactive decay
• Radioactive decay is a random process – like throwing a lot of dice or
tossing a lot of coins.

• In one half-life, half of the radioactive nuclei will decay. In a further
half-life, a further half of what is left will decay.
• After 1 half-life, ½ the sample is left
• after 2 half-lifes, ¼ of the sample is left
• after 3 half-lifes, ⅘ of the sample is left, and so on.
✓ I can discuss hazards of radiation
• Alpha particles, beta particles and gamma rays are ionising radiations.
These radiations knock electrons out of atoms thereby making ions.
✓ I understand nuclear fission
• A large nucleus can split into two; this is called nuclear fission. This
process releases a lot of energy, which can be used to generate electricity in
power stations.
• Unlike radioactive decay, fission can be controlled.
• Fission can be triggered by a neutron. The neutrons released in the
fission reaction trigger further fissions in other nuclei. This is a chain
reaction.
• The fission reaction can be controlled in a nuclear reactor by boron
rods.
✓ I understand nuclear fusion.
• Two small nuclei can fuse together to form a larger nucleus. This is
called nuclear fusion and the process releases a lot of energy.
• The energy is released as a result of a loss of mass from the smaller
nuclei.
• Fusion is the source of energy in stars.
• Fusion only occurs at very high temperatures and pressures due to
electrostatic repulsion between nuclei.
• I can explain the differences between nuclear fission and nuclear
fusion.

Sample answers and expert’s comments
1 a) When an atom of fermium-257 decays an alpha particle is emitted from the
nucleus. An atom of californium is left behind. The alpha particle is a
helium nucleus.
i) Copy and complete the equation below which describes this decay.
(1)
ii) Calculate how many neutrons there are in a nucleus of fermium-
257.
(1)
b) When an atom of caesium-137 decays a beta particle is emitted from
the nucleus. An atom of barium is left behind. The beta particle is a fast-
moving electron.
i) Copy and complete the equation below which describes this decay.
(1)
ii) How many protons are there in a caesium nucleus?
(1)
(Total for question = 4 marks)
2 Phosphorus-32 is a radioactive isotope, which decays by emitting beta
particles.
a) State the nature of a beta particle.
(1)
b) The graph shows how the count rate for a sample of phosphorus-32
changes with time.
i) Use the graph to determine the half-life of phosphorus-32. To get
full marks you must show your working.
(2)
ii) Use your answer to i) above to calculate how long it takes the
count rate to reach 80 counts per minute.
(2)

(Total for question = 5 marks)
3 The diagram below shows the process of nuclear fission.
a) Name the particles which are labelled X, Y and Z.
(3)
b) Once the process of fission has been started it continues with a chain
reaction.
i) Explain what is meant by a chain reaction.
(2)
ii) Copy the diagram and add the next stage of the chain reaction.
(2)

(Total for question = 7 marks)

Exam-style questions
1 The diagram represents an atom of beryllium-9. Which of the following is the
atomic number of beryllium?
A 4
B 5
C 9
D 13
[1]
2 Beryllium-10 is radioactive isotope of beryllium. Which of the following
statements is true?
A Beryllium-10 has one more proton and one more electron than
beryllium-9.
B Beryllium-10 has one more neutron and one more electron than
beryllium-9.
C Beryllium-10 has one more neutron than beryllium-9.
D Beryllium-10 has one more proton than beryllium-9.
[1]
3 Beryllium-10 decays by emitting beta particles. Which of the following
equations correctly describes this radioactive decay?
A 
B 
C 
D 
[1]
4 Gadolinium-159 has a half-life of 18 hours. A sample of mass 64 g is prepared
in a laboratory experiment. How much gadolinium-159 remains after 3 days?
A 48 g B 24 g C 8 g D 4 g [1]
5 Fresh strawberries are sometimes irradiated before being exported to
another country. Which of the following statements is true?
A The strawberries are contaminated by the radiation.

B The strawberries cannot be eaten for a few days after
irradiation.
C Irradiated strawberries do not become radioactive.
D Radioactive particles settle on the strawberries.
[1]
Several people who work in industry and hospitals are exposed to
different types of radiation. Four ways to check or reduce their
exposure to radiation are:
A wearing a badge containing photographic film.
B wearing a lead apron.
C working behind a thick glass screen with remote handling equipment.
D having a medical check-up every month.]
6 Which of the above should be used by a hospital radiographer?
[1]
7 Which of the above should be used by a nuclear power worker?
[1]
8 Alpha, beta, gamma and neutron emission are types of radiation. Which has
the shortest range in air?
A Beta B Alpha C Neutron D Gamma [1]
9 What type of particle must a uranium-235 nucleus absorb before nuclear
fission can happen?
A Neutron B Alpha particle C Proton D Electron [1]
10 Which of the following statements about nuclear fusion is not
true?
A Fusion occurs in stars.
B Two small nuclei join together to make a larger nucleus.
C Two uranium nuclei can fuse to form a larger nucleus.
D Fusion only occurs at very high temperatures.
[1]
11 a) Copy and complete the table about atomic particles.
[2]
b) Read the following passage about sodium.
Sodium is an element with an atomic number of 11.
Its most common isotope is sodium-23, 
.

Another isotope, sodium-24, is radioactive.
i) State the number of protons, neutrons and electrons in
sodium-23.
[2]
ii) Explain why sodium-24 has a different mass number
from sodium-23.
[1]
iii) What is meant by the word ‘radioactive’?
[1]
iv) Atoms of sodium-24 change into atoms of
magnesium by beta decay. Write an equation to show the
atomic and mass numbers of this isotope of magnesium.
[2]
v) Give the name, or symbol, of the element formed
when an atom of sodium-24 (proton number = 11) emits
gamma radiation.
[1]
c) i) Name a suitable detector that could be used to show
that sodium-24 gives out radiation.
[1]
ii) Name a disease that can be caused by too much
exposure to a radioactive substance such as sodium-24.
[1]
12 The table shows the half-life of some radioactive isotopes.
a) Which one of the isotopes shown in the table is the most
suitable for use as a medical tracer? Explain your choice.
[2]
b) Sketch a graph to show how the number of radioactive
atoms present in the isotope cobalt-60 will change with time.
[3]
13 a) Copy and complete the following table for an atom of
actinium-225 
.

[1]
b) Explain what is meant by the terms ‘atomic number’ and
‘mass number’.
[2]
c) An atom of actinium-225 
 decays to form an atom
of francium-221 
.
i) What type of radiation – alpha, beta or gamma – is
emitted by actinium-225?
[1]
ii) Why does an atom that decays by emitting alpha or
beta radiation become an atom of a different element?
[1]
14 The radioactive isotope, carbon-14, decays by beta (β) particle
emission.
a) Plants absorb carbon-14 from the atmosphere. The graph
shows the decay curve for 1 g of modern linen made from a
flax plant. The radioactivity is caused by a small fraction of
carbon-14 in the linen sample.
Use the graph to find the half-life of carbon-14.
[2]

b) Linen has been used to make clothes for thousands of
years. It contains radioactive carbon-14, which decays. An
old sample of linen has a smaller fraction of carbon-14 than a
new sample of linen. A museum has a shirt that may be 2000
years old. The carbon-14 in a 1 g sample of the shirt
produces 300 counts in a day.
Is the shirt really 2000 years old? Justify your answer.
[3]
c) Suggest why carbon dating is unsuitable for dating
samples thought to be:
i) 100 years old ii) 50 000 years old.
[2]
15 The table gives information about some of the radioactive
substances released into the air by the explosion at the
Fukoshima nuclear plant in 2011.
a) State how the structure of a caesium-134 atom is

different from the structure of a caesium-137 atom.
[1]
b) Explain what beta particles and gamma rays are.
[2]
c) A sample of soil is contaminated with some iodine-131.
Its activity is 40 000 Bq. Calculate how long it will take for
the activity to drop to 1250 Bq.
[2]
d) Which of the three isotopes will be the most dangerous
50 years after the accident? Justify your answer.
[2]
16 Radiation workers wear a special badge to monitor the radiation
they receive.
The badge is a lightproof plastic case containing a piece of
photographic film. Each worker is given a new badge to wear
each month. Part of the film is covered with a thin sheet of
aluminium foil.
a) Explain how the badge can show:
i) how much radiation a worker receives each month [2]
ii) what type of radiation a worker has received.
[2]
b) Explain why workers in the nuclear power
industry monitor their levels of radiation exposure.
[2]
17 A radiation detector and counter are used to measure
the background radiation. The background activity is
10 counts per minute. The same detector and counter
are then used to measure the radiation from some
radioactive gas. The graph shows how the number of
counts per minute changes with time.

a) Although the readings on the counter are
accurately recorded, the points do not exactly fit a
smooth curve. Explain why.
[2]
b) Explain why the count rate is almost constant
after 20 minutes.
[2]
c) Use the graph to estimate the half-life of the
radioactive gas.
[2]
18 a) The diagram shows what can happen when the
nucleus of a uranium atom absorbs a neutron.

i) What name is given to the process shown in
the diagram?
[1]
ii) Explain how this process could lead to a
chain reaction. You may copy and add to the
diagram to help your answer.
[3]
iii) State how the mass number of an atom
changes when its nucleus absorbs a neutron.
[1]
b) Uranium-235 is used as a fuel in some nuclear
reactors. The reactor core contains control rods
used to absorb neutrons. Explain what happens
when the control rods are lowered into the reactor.
[3]
19 A radioactive source is placed close to a Geiger-Müller
tube, and the count rate is recorded as 520 Bq.
Various absorbers are placed between the source and
the Geiger-Müller tube, and the count rate is recorded
in the table.

Use the data to identify the radiations emitted. Justify
your conclusions.
[5]

EXTEND AND CHALLENGE
1 The diagram shows the piston in the cylinder of a car engine. When
the car engine is running, the piston moves up and down inside the
cylinder many times each second, which causes the cylinder wall to
become worn.
A car manufacturer wants to run tests to measure the wear of the
cylinder wall due to the piston movement. A radioactive isotope of
chromium with a short half-life is used.
a) Explain what is meant by an isotope.
b) A very thin layer of the radioactive isotope is placed on the
inside wall of the cylinder and the car engine run continuously. A
detector is placed outside the cylinder to measure the count rate.
i) Which type of emission from the radioactive isotope
would be needed to reach the detector through the metal wall
of the cylinder?
ii) State the name of a detector that could be used to
measure the count rate.
c) The half-life of the emitter is 23 hours and the count rate
taken at the start of the test was 600 counts/hour.
i) Predict what you would expect the count rate to be after
46 hours.
ii) The count rate measured after 46 hours was actually 120
counts/hour. This was explained by assuming that part of the
layer of radioactive isotope on the cylinder wall had been
worn away. Calculate the fraction that had been worn away.

State one assumption you have made in your calculation.
iii) Explain why the half-life of the radioactive isotope has to
be short but not too short.
2 All elements have some isotopes which are radioactive.
a) State what is meant by the terms
i) isotopes ii) radioactive.
b) The graph shows how the count rate for a sample of the
radioactive isotope curium-243 changes with time.
Use the graph to determine the half-life of curium-243.
Show clearly on the graph how you obtain your answer.
c) Space scientists plan to send a spacecraft to the planet
Mars to investigate its two moons. The voyage will last 10 years.
The electricity to power the instruments on the spacecraft will be
generated using thermal energy transferred from the decay of a
quantity of curium-243. The total power generated will be 500 W.
i) Curium-243 decays by emitting alpha particles. Describe
what an alpha particle is ii) During the voyage the output from
the generators will decrease from the initial value of 500 W.
Explain why the power will decrease.
iii) Show from the graph that the power generated will fall to
about 310 W after 20 years.
d) One scientist said it would be a good idea to use the isotope
americium-241 to power the generators. Americium-241 emits
alpha particles and has a half-life of 432 years.

Explain why americium-241 is not as good a choice as curium-
243 for this voyage.

8 Astrophysics
The Andromeda Galaxy and its two dwarf companion galaxies are
2.5 million light years away from our galaxy, the Milky Way.
Andromeda contains approximately 1 trillion (1012) stars, and is
bright enough to be seen by the naked eye. Andromeda and the
Milky Way are amongst billions of galaxies in the Universe.
By the end of this section you should:
• know about galaxies and their distribution in the Universe
• know that our Sun is part of the Milky Way galaxy
• understand why gravitational field strength, g, varies, and that g
is different on other planets and moons
• be able to explain that the gravitational force causes planets and
other bodies to orbit
• be able to describe the differences in the orbits of comets,
moons and planets
• be able to use the relationship between orbital speed, orbital
radius and time period
• understand how stars can be classified according to colour
• know that a star’s colour is related to its surface temperature.
• be able to describe the evolution of stars
• understand the idea of a star’s absolute magnitude

• be able to draw the main components of the Hertzsprung-
Russell diagram
• be able to describe the evidence for the Big Bang theory
• describe that if a wave source is moving relative to an observer
there is a change in observed frequency and wavelength
• know the equation relating the change in wavelength to the
velocity of a galaxy
• be able to explain why red shift provides evidence for the
expansion of the Universe.
CALCULATE • CONSIDER
1 Explain why the moon changes its shape throughout a month.
2 Name two constellations of stars you have seen.
3 The mean mass of a star is about 1030 kg. Calculate the mass of the
Andromeda Galaxy.

8.1 Earth’s place in the Universe
We live in an enormous universe that contains billions of moons, planets, stars
and galaxies. In the daytime, the sky is dominated by our Sun, but at night you
can see lots of stars and our moon, and with a telescope you can identify planets
and galaxies.

The Solar System
Figure 1.2 shows the familiar orbits of the eight planets that travel around our
Sun. There are also five dwarf planets (Ceres, Pluto, Haumea, Makemake and
Eris), many comets, and other fragments of rock of various sizes, all of which
are in orbit around the Sun. A dwarf planet is a very small planet – still spherical
in shape. The pull of gravity also keeps moons in orbit around the six outer
planets.
Stars and galaxies
Our Sun is one of billions of stars. The force of gravity acts over great distances
to bring stars together into a large group called a galaxy. The Sun is part of the
Milky Way galaxy, which contains about 200 billion stars. On a dark night, you
can see the Milky Way stretching across the sky. (Figure 1.4).
The Milky Way is a spiral galaxy. Figure 1.5 illustrates the position of our Sun in
the galaxy and the distribution of stars.

Groups of galaxies
Our galaxy is part of a group of galaxies called the local group. The Andromeda
Galaxy (see Chapter introduction page) is one of our near neighbours in a group
of about 50 galaxies. Our nearest cluster of galaxies is the Virgo Cluster, which
is about 50 million light years away from us. This sounds a long way, but the
most distant galaxies are over 13 000 million light years from us. The Virgo
Cluster is much larger than our local group; it contains some 1500 galaxies
(Figure 1.6).

TIP
Make sure you know these facts:
• A galaxy is a large group of stars.
• A star is a body which emits energy powered by nuclear fusion.
• A planet orbits a star.
• A moon orbits a planet.
Note: you will not be examined on light years, for example question 3.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 Explain what is meant by each of the following terms:
a) moon b) planet c) dwarf planet d) star e) galaxy f) group of
galaxies
2 a) Name our galaxy.
b) Which of the following best describes the number of stars in
a galaxy:
• lots • thousands • millions • hundreds of billions.
3 a) A light year is the distance light travels in one year. Calculate a
light year in metres, using the speed of light 3 × 108 m/s.
b) Proxima Centauri is our nearest star at a distance of 4.25

light years. Calculate this distance in metres.
c) Proxima b is a planet in orbit around Proxima Centauri,
which is thought to have a similar temperature to the Earth.
Modern spacecraft fly at 30 km/s. Calculate how long it would
take to travel to Proxima b.
d) Discuss the viability of space travel. Include both time and
energy in your considerations.

8.2 Orbits
How is it possible for something to travel at a constant speed and to be
accelerating all the time? This happens when something follows a circular path.
Although the speed is constant, there is a change of direction. So the velocity
changes and therefore there is an acceleration.
Gravitational field strength
Every planet, moon or star has a gravitational field at its surface. On the surface
of the Earth, the gravitational field strength, g, is about 10 N/kg. This means
that a mass of 1 kg is pulled downwards with a force of 10 N. This force is the
object’s weight.

The strength of the gravitational field for a planet depends on its radius and
density. A larger field is produced by a planet with a larger density and larger
radius.
Table 1 shows some examples of gravitational field strengths for various objects
in our Solar System. The gravitational field strength is different for each planet
and moon.
Throwing the hammer
Figure 2.2 shows an athlete preparing to throw a weight – this event is called
throwing the hammer. He spins the weight up to a large speed before releasing it.
While the weight is moving in its circular path, the athlete exerts a force, F,
towards the centre of the circle. When he lets go of the weight it flies off,
landing a large distance away.

The pull of gravity and orbits
You understand that gravity acts close to the Earth to pull things to the ground.
However, gravity is also a force that stretches an enormous distance out into
space. Gravity acts on all stars, planets and moons.
• Gravity causes planets and comets to orbit the Sun.
• Gravity causes the Moon and artificial satellites to orbit the Earth.
• Gravity causes stars to orbit the centre of their galaxies.
Figure 2.3 shows the pull of gravity from the Earth, which keeps the Moon in
orbit. In position M1, the Moon has a velocity v1. The pull of gravity deflects its
motion. Later, it has moved to its new position M2, with a velocity v2. The force
of gravity does not make the Moon travel any faster, but the force changes the
direction of motion. The Moon will stay in its orbit for billions of years.
Speed of orbit
Figure 2.4 shows the importance of the speed of orbit. S is a satellite travelling
around the Earth.
• If its speed is too great, it follows path C and disappears into outer space.
• If its speed is too slow, it follows path A and falls to Earth.
• When the satellite moves at the right speed, it follows path B and stays in a
steady circular orbit.

Planets and moons move in elliptical orbits. However, many of the orbits for
planets and moons in our Solar System are nearly circular. The speed of orbit of
a moon, planet or satellite can then be related to the radius and time of orbit
using the following equation.
The equation is a special example of the more familiar equation:
The distance travelled in one orbit is the circumference of a circle, which is 2 ×π
× r.
Orbits near and far
If a planet is close to the Sun, the pull of gravity from the Sun is strong. This
causes the speed of the orbit to be high. For a planet further away, the Sun’s
gravity pulls less strongly and the planet moves more slowly.
We can use data to calculate the orbital speeds for Earth and Mercury: the Earth
orbits the Sun with an orbital radius of 150 million kilometres, and
TIP

Note that Mercury takes 88 days to orbit the Sun.
Mercury orbits the sun with an orbital radius of 58 million kilometres.
Geostationary orbits
Figure 2.5 shows three satellites in geostationary orbits above the Equator.
When the radius of the orbit is about 42 000 km, the time of orbit is 24 hours.
This means that a satellite always appears in the same position above the Earth’s
surface. This is important for satellite communication. Positions A and B on the
Earth’s surface, on the opposite side of the Earth, can always keep in contact by
sending signals via satellites S2 and S3.

Comets
Comets, like asteroids, are rocks that orbit the Sun. However, comets have very
elongated elliptical orbits (Figure 2.7). We think that at the edge of the Solar
System there is a cloud of such comets. Occasionally, one is disturbed in its orbit
so that it falls inwards towards the Sun. We notice a comet as it gets close to the
Earth and Sun. Energy from the Sun melts ice contained in the rocks. The Sun
emits a stream of charged particles called the Solar wind. This wind blows the
melted ice away from the Sun, producing the comet’s tail; the tail always points
away from the Sun.


Elliptical orbits
If a planet orbits the Sun in a circular orbit, it moves at a constant speed. In
Figure 2.8(a) you can see that the Sun’s gravitational pull is always at right
angles to the planet’s path.
TIP
You should be able to explain how the speed of a comet changes in its
orbit.
However, a comet or asteroid in an elliptical orbit does not move at a constant
speed. In Figure 2.8(b), the gravitational pull of the Sun on a comet at A is not at
right angles to its path. The force does two things: it deflects the comet towards
the Sun and speeds it up. At C, the pull of the Sun slows the comet down again.
At D, the comet has low kinetic energy but high gravitational potential energy.
As the comet falls towards the Sun it increases its kinetic energy to a maximum
at B, and decreases its gravitational potential energy.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 a) Name the force which keeps the Moon in orbit around the Earth.
b) Explain how this force keeps the Moon moving in a circular
orbit.
2 Describe how a comet’s orbit differs from that of a planet.
3 a) Make a sketch to show the orbit of a comet around the Sun.
b) Mark the points on the orbit where the comet has:
i) the most kinetic energy ii) the most gravitational potential

energy.
c) Show on your diagram where the pull of the Sun is strongest
on the comet.
d) Show where the comet travels most slowly.
4 In Figure 2.5 the satellites have an orbital speed of 3054 m/s. Their
orbital radius is 42 000 km.
a) Calculate the time it takes the satellites to orbit the Earth
once.
b) Explain why this time period is useful for communication.
c) Some satellites go in low orbits over the poles, some 100 km
above the Earth’s surface.
i) Suggest how the time period of these satellites compares
with the ones in Figure 2.5.
ii) Explain a use for such satellites.
5 A minor planet is an irregularly shaped rock in orbit around the Sun.
There are about 300 000 minor planets. Some of these are only
about 1 km in diameter. Others are larger, with diameters of about
1000 km.
The table shows the distances from the Sun and the time periods for
the orbits of the planets Uranus and Neptune, and some minor and
dwarf planets in orbit close to them. The orbital radii are quoted in
Astronomical Units (AU). 1 AU is equal to the Sun–Earth distance,
which is 150 million kilometres.

a) Plot a graph of time period of the orbits against the radius of
the orbits.
b) An astronomer has made a mistake in recording radius of
orbit for one of the planets. Identify which one. Suggest what the
radius of the orbit should be.
c) Astronomers think they have discovered a new minor planet
with a radius of orbit 55 AU. Use the graph to predict its time
period.
d) Sedna is a minor planet thought to orbit the Sun at a
distance of 519 AU, with a period of about 11 400 years.
Calculate Sedna’s orbital speed in:
i) millions of km per year ii) m/s.

8.3 Stellar evolution
The stars shown in the photo are millions of times more luminous than our Sun,
but they live for a much shorter time.
Star temperature and colour
Our Sun is classified as a yellow dwarf star. This makes the Sun sound rather
small, and whilst it is in comparison with some stars, the Sun is actually brighter
than about 95% of all stars. The amount of energy emitted per second by a star is
called its luminosity. The Sun has luminosity of about 4 3 1026 W. The brightest
stars have a luminosity of more than a million times that of the sun, and the least
luminous stars are nearly 10 000 times duller than the Sun.
Stars can be classified according to their colour. The colour of a star is linked to
its temperature; the hottest stars are blue and the coolest stars are red. Table 1
shows how the temperature of a star is linked to its colour.

The diameters of stars also vary considerably. The largest stars have diameters
1000 times that of the Sun, whereas the smallest have diameters about 100 times
smaller than the Sun’s. See Figure 3.2.

Table 2 gives some examples of stars with surface temperatures and the
luminosities, masses and diameters relative to the Sun.

Life cycle of a star
Our Sun is a star which was formed about 4.6 billion years ago. The Earth and
planets were formed at about the same time. Figure 3.3 illustrates how we think
stars are formed.
Birth of a star
TIP
A protostar is a large ball of gas that contracts to form a star.
Figure 3.3a) shows the Eagle Nebula. This is a cloud of cold hydrogen gas and
dust which is collapsing due to the pull of gravity. As the cloud collapses, the
atoms and molecules move very fast. As molecules collide with each other, their
store of kinetic energy is transferred to the internal energy store of the gas, and
the temperature rises to several million degrees Celsius. The contracting and
heating ball of gas is called a protostar.

The temperature in the gas becomes so high that hydrogen nuclei (protons) begin
to collide, and fusion begins. Now a star has been born which releases energy for
millions of years from nuclear fusion. Figure 3.3b) shows a star which has just
begun to shine out from its cloud of dust and hydrogen.
The stable period of a star
The Sun is about half way through its life of about 10 billion years. For most of
its life, the Sun will release a constant output of energy. The Sun is described as
a main sequence star, which means that it releases energy from the fusion of
hydrogen to form helium. The inside of a star is a battleground (Figure 3.4). The
inward forces of gravity, which tend to collapse the star, are balanced by the
outward forces created by the pressure inside the hot core. The pressure at the
centre of the Sun is about 100 billion times greater than atmospheric pressure.
Main sequence stars vary considerably in their masses and their brightness. The
brightest main sequence stars are a million times brighter than the Sun, and the
dullest about 1000 times duller.
TIP
A main sequence star releases energy by fusing hydrogen to form
helium.
A red giant is a very large star which fuses helium into heavier
elements.
At the end of its life, after fusion stops, a main sequence star collapses
into a white dwarf.

Stars about the size of the Sun
Towards the end of a star’s life as a main sequence star, the supply of hydrogen
begins to run out. The star becomes unstable. Without the fusion of hydrogen,
the pressure inside the star drops, the outward forces decrease, and the star
begins to collapse. As the star collapses, the temperature of the core increases
even further, reaching as high as 100 million kelvin. At such high temperatures,
helium begins to fuse to make heavier elements such as carbon and oxygen. The
hot core causes the star to swell up into a red giant, which has about 100 times
the radius of our Sun and about 1000 times the brightness. It is possible that the
Sun might grow so large that it swallows up the Earth.
Eventually, the star is no longer able to fuse helium and its core cools down. At
this stage, the star collapses into a white dwarf star, not much larger than the
Earth. The surface of a white dwarf is hot, with a temperature of 50 000 K or
more. Fusion stops and the star’s life is over. At this stage, the white dwarf star
cools down and it will eventually become a dark cold star known as a black
dwarf.

TIP
A supernova is caused by runaway fusion reactions in a very large
star.
A neutron star is a very dense small star made out of neutrons.
A black hole is the most concentrated state of matter from which even
light cannot escape.
Stars much larger than the Sun
Large stars with a mass of over 10 times that of the Sun have much more
dramatic ends to their lives. When such a star reaches the end of its main
sequence stage, it too begins to collapse.

But now the star grows into a red super giant, which could have a radius 1000
times that of the Sun and be 100 000 times brighter than the Sun. The fusion
energy in red super giants is sufficient for heavier elements to be made in the
fusion process. Iron is the heaviest element made inside stars due to fusion.
After millions of years as a red super giant, the star runs out of its nuclear fuel.
The core cools down and the inwards forces of gravity overcome the outwards
pressure from the centre of the star. There is a very rapid collapse of the star and
two things happen:
The rapid collapse heats the inside of the star to such high temperatures that there
is a runaway nuclear reaction. The star explodes like a cosmic nuclear bomb.
Such is the energy that elements heavier than iron are made. The remnants of a
supernova are spread out into space. Eventually these remnants form part of
another cloud of gas, which collapses to form new stars. Our planet has elements
heavier than iron, so it must have once been part of a large star.
At the same time, the great gravitational forces cause the centre to collapse into a
highly condensed form of matter. The core might be left as a neutron star a few
kilometres across, which is made only of neutrons. The collapse can be so
complete that the star disappears into a microscopic point and it has become a
black hole. A black hole is so dense that nothing, including light, can escape
from it.

STUDY QUESTIONS
1 a) The various stages of the life cycle of a star like the Sun are listed
below. Put them in the correct order.
A main sequence star B white dwarf C red giant D protostar
b) i) Name the current stage of the Sun’s life cycle.
ii) Name the final stage of the Sun’s life cycle.
2 Name the process that provides the energy for a star to emit its own
light.
3 a) Explain what is meant by the term main sequence star.
b) Name the two forces which act on a main sequence star to
keep it stable.
4 Explain why a white dwarf eventually becomes a black dwarf.
5 a) Explain why a red super giant collapses to produce a supernova.
b) Discuss what may happen to the core of a star after a
supernova.
6 Justify the suggestion that the atoms in the Earth were once part of a
very large star.
7 Refer to Table 2. From this table, identify one of the following types of
star, justifying your choice.
A red dwarf B white dwarf C red giant
8 Describe the life cycle of a star much larger than the Sun.

8.4 Brightness of stars and absolute
magnitude
When you go outside on a dark night, well away from street lights, you can see
thousands of stars. If you look at the night sky with binoculars, you can see
thousands more stars. The stars you see have a wide range of brightness.
Apparent magnitude
Hipparchus was a Greek astronomer who lived about 2200 years ago; he was the
first person to classify stars by brightness. Hipparchus called the brightest stars,
first magnitude stars. Then he listed stars as second magnitude and so on down
to sixth magnitude stars, which were the dullest that could be seen (by eye – of
course he did not have binoculars). Modern measurements show that a first
magnitude star turns out to be about 2½ times brighter than a second magnitude
star, and a second magnitude star is 2½ times brighter than a third magnitude
star. This works out that a first magnitude star is 100 times brighter than a sixth
magnitude star.
This scale has now been adopted in modern times. However, the scale extends
beyond 6 for dull stars which can be seen with telescopes, and below 1 for very
bright stars or planets.
For example, Venus might have an apparent magnitude of −4 at a particular time;
this means Venus is 5 magnitudes brighter (100 times) than a magnitude 1 star.
Table 1 lists the apparent magnitudes of some bright stars.

Absolute magnitude
How bright a star appears to us depends on two things; first how much energy
the star emits per second, and secondly how far the star is away from us. Figure
4.2 illustrates how distance affects the apparent brightness of a source. In this
figure light is spreading out from a candle. The light spreads out on to a larger
area at a distance of 2 m than it does at a distance of 1 m; so the candle appears
brighter at a closer distance.

To help us classify stars more consistently, astronomers use the idea of absolute
magnitude which measures how bright the star would appear at an agreed set
distance away from us. The agreed distance is 10 parsecs, which is equivalent to
32.6 light years.
TIP
A parsec is an astronomical distance equivalent to 3.26 light years.
The absolute magnitude is the apparent magnitude that a star would
be if placed a distance of 10 parsecs (32.6 light years) away from
Earth.
The idea of absolute magnitude allows us to draw comparisons between stars.
Our Sun is very bright because it is so close to us, but it has an absolute
magnitude of 4.6. Table 2 shows some stars with their absolute magnitudes,
together with their brightness relative to the Sun (if placed the same distance
away from us).

TIP
You will not be expected to recall the standard distance of 32.6
parsecs, nor the absolute or apparent magnitudes of any stars.
Hertzsprung-Russell diagram
The variation in star brightness can be shown using the diagram shown in Figure
4.3. This diagram is called the Hertzsprung-Russell (HR) diagram.

The y-axis of the HR diagram shows the absolute magnitude of a star and its
luminosity. The x-axis of the HR diagram shows the star’s temperature and
colour.
There are three important branches of the diagram.
• Main sequence stars. Any star which is generating its energy by fusing
hydrogen to helium is a main sequence star, including the Sun. These stars
have a great range of brightness or luminosity. The brightest stars have surface
temperatures of 50 000 K, and the dullest surface temperatures of 2500 K.
Main sequence stars can be a million times brighter than the Sun or 10 000
times duller. The main sequence runs from the top left hand side of the
diagram to the bottom right.
• Giant and supergiant stars. These stars are found at the top right hand corner of
the HR diagram. These stars can be relatively cool, with temperatures of 3000

K, but they are very bright because they are so large. In these stars, nuclear
fusion of helium and larger nuclei occurs.
• White dwarfs. These stars are found at the bottom left hand corner of the HR
diagram. Although these stars have very hot surfaces, they are relatively dull
because they are so small. These stars are at the end of their lives: nuclear
fusion has stopped, the stars have collapsed and are now cooling down. (Note
that some white dwarfs are actually blue in colour.)
The Sun’s evolutionary path
In Section 8.3, you read about the evolutionary path of stars. The evolutionary
path of the Sun is marked on to the HR diagram.
• At A, the Sun begins to condense from a cold cloud of gas.
• At B, the cloud of gas has collapsed to be a main sequence star. Its life in this
phase is about 10 billion years.
• At C, after the main sequence phase, the Sun will expand into a giant phase.
• At D, the Sun collapses to be a white dwarf after fusion reactions cease in its
core. The Sun will cool down over billions of years, eventually becoming a
black dwarf.
TIP
Luminosity is the total power of a star, and this measures the energy
released in all wavelengths. The Sun has a luminosity of 4 3 1026 W.
We use the word brightness to describe what we can see – this is a
measure of energy emitted in visible wavelengths.
Some hot stars emit energy in ultra-violet and X-ray wavelengths,
which we cannot see. And cold stars emit infrared radiation, which is
also invisible to the eye.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 a) Explain what is meant by the terms:
i) apparent magnitude of a star ii) absolute magnitude of a
star.
b) State the factors that affect:
i) apparent magnitude ii) absolute magnitude
2 a) Make a sketch of the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram and label the
main branches of the different categories of star.
b) The brightness of a star is affected by its radius and
temperature. Explain how this can be used to explain the
positions of the giant and dwarf branches in the Hertzsprung-
Russell diagram.


8.5 The evolution of the Universe
Light from the galaxies in the Abell 1689 supercluster of galaxies has taken two
billion years to reach us. The Universe has been evolving for about 13.8 billion
years.
The Big Bang Theory
The most widely accepted theory for the origin of our Universe is that it started
with a ‘Big Bang’ about 13.8 billion years ago. This theory suggests that all of
the matter in the Universe originated from a point, and that ever since that
primordial explosion, matter has been moving outwards in an ever-expanding
Universe.
The origin of our existence has fascinated mankind since the dawn of
civilisation, and our interest is as great as ever today. Cosmologists have theories
that allow them to understand the Universe as close as 10−36 s after the Big
Bang. However, what happened right at the start of the Universe remains an
unsolved mystery.
• Up to 0.1 second: the temperature of the very early Universe was in excess of
1012 K. At these temperatures the building blocks of today’s Universe, protons
and neutrons, did not exist. The early Universe was populated by highly
energetic particles and photons (particles of electromagnetic energy such as
gamma rays). Research being done in the large Hadron collider at CERN
attempts to replicate conditions in the early Universe: by accelerating and

colliding protons at very high energies, physicists are able to discover other
particles that existed just after the Big Bang.
• After a few seconds, the Universe had cooled sufficiently for the familiar
protons, neutrons and electrons to exist.
• After a time of 3 minutes the Universe had expanded sufficiently to cool to a
temperature of 109 K, and over the next 30 minutes it cooled further to 108 K.
While these temperatures are still very high, such temperatures exist today in
the cores of very large stars. During this brief period of time nuclear fusion
occurred, so that protons fused to form deuterium and helium-4 nuclei. At the
end of the period of fusion, the Universe’s nuclear material comprised 75 %
protons and about 25 % helium nuclei.
• For the next 700 000 years the Universe continued to expand and to cool down.
The next important step in the evolution of the Universe was that the
temperature decreased to a point where nuclei could attract and keep orbiting
electrons (at about 4000 K), so rather than protons, helium nuclei and

electrons, the Universe filled with hydrogen and helium gases.
• Over the next billion years, gravity acted on the clouds of expanding gases.
Gradually, the force of gravity pulled the expanding clouds of gases into large
clumps, which condensed to form stars and galaxies. Some of the most distant
objects seen in the Universe are galaxies which formed a few billion years
after the Big Bang.

• Now the Universe continues to expand and evolve. New stars are formed out of
clouds of gas in the Milky Way and other galaxies. Our Sun is about 4.6 billion
years old.

This chapter has briefly summarised the evolution of the Universe from its origin
to the present state. In the next chapter, you will meet the evidence that allowed
this theory to be developed.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 A few seconds after the Big Bang, there was an abundance of
protons and electrons. Explain how some further nuclei were also
produced in the first few minutes of the Universe.
2 Explain why there was no hydrogen and helium gas until the
Universe was about 700 000 years old.
3 Discuss why early stars and galaxies were not formed until a few
billion years after the Big Bang.

8.6 The evidence for the Big Bang Theory
This photograph shows Edwin Hubble in front of his telescope. No great theory
in science has been produced without years of hard work. Hubble’s study of the
redshift of galaxies provided the evidence for an expanding universe.
The brief account in the last chapter of the evolution of the Universe produces a
consistent theory which is widely accepted. The two most important pieces of
evidence to support the Big Bang Theory are explained in this chapter.
Cosmic microwave background (CMB) radiation
When a hot body emits radiation, it does so with a range of wavelengths. The
wavelength of the radiation depends on the temperature of the body. For
example, our Sun, which has a surface temperature of 5800 K, emits radiation
with the greatest power density at the wavelength of green light, as shown in
Figure 6.2.

The Figure also shows that cooler objects emit radiation with the greatest power
density at longer wavelengths.
When the Universe was young, it was very hot. At an age of 700 000 years, the
temperature of the background radiation was about 4000 K. As the Universe
expanded over billions of years, it cooled and the wavelength of the background
radiation increased.
For the Big Bang Theory to make sense, astronomers needed to find this colder
background radiation. In 1964, Penzias and Wilson detected background
radiation, using a radio-receiver, which appeared to come from all directions of
space. The peak wavelength of the radiation is about 1 mm, which is in the
microwave region – hence the name: cosmic microwave background radiation.
The CMB radiation corresponds to a background temperature of 2.7 K. This is
the temperature of space between the stars and galaxies.
The CMB radiation is a distant echo which confirms that a long time ago, the
Universe was very hot and full of short wavelength radiation produced by the
Big Bang.

Red-shift
We have all heard an ambulance coming towards us and then speed past. As the
ambulance goes past us and moves away, we hear the pitch of the sound from the
siren become lower (fewer waves per second). The frequency of the sound
waves we hear has decreased and the wavelength increased.

A similar effect happens with light waves, but it is only noticeable if the wave
source is moving very quickly. When a source of light is moving away from us,
the wavelength of the light that we see becomes longer. So the light moves
towards the red end of the spectrum. We say the light has been red-shifted. If
the source of the light moves even faster, the wavelength increases even more,
producing a greater red-shift.
TIP
The recession of the galaxies shows us that the whole universe is
expanding. Space expands as the galaxies move apart.
In 1929, Edwin Hubble began to study the light arriving from distant galaxies.
He discovered three important facts about this light:
The light emitted from distant galaxies is red-shifted – the wavelength is longer
than expected. This tells us that distant galaxies are moving away from us.
Galaxies appear to be moving away from us in all directions.
The further away from us a galaxy is, the bigger the red-shift. This tells us that
the further away a galaxy is, the faster it is moving.

Hubble’s work on the red shift also helped to support the Big Bang Theory, as
explained in Figure 6.6. In this diagram, you can see galaxies moving away from
our galaxy, the Milky Way. The galaxies further away move faster. This suggests
that at one instance in the past, all the galaxies (or the particles in them) were in
the same position. The outward movement and speeds of the galaxies are
consistent with this theory.

Calculating the speed and distance of galaxies
Figure 6.5 shows how light emitted by a galaxy moving away from us is red-
shifted. The greater the speed, the greater the red shift or the change in
wavelength. We can calculate the speed of a galaxy using the following
equation:
TIP

Example
In Figure 6.5 (a), you can see light emitted by the Sun which is crossed by black
lines. The same pattern is seen in a moving galaxy, Figure 6.5 (b).
The thickest black line (the reference) has a wavelength of about 400 nm in (a).
For the moving galaxy, this wavelength has red-shifted to about 420 nm.
Therefore
Figure 6.7 shows how we can link the speed of a galaxy to its distance. Hubble
discovered that the speed of a galaxy is proportional to its distance from us. In
this graph, the red dots show the distances and speeds of some galaxies. It is
very difficult to determine the distance to very far away galaxies, but their red
shift helps us.

Example. A galaxy has a speed of 60 000 km/s. Calculate its distance from us.
Using the graph, we can show the galaxy is about 3600 million light years away.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1 Explain the terms:
i) cosmic microwave background radiation ii) red shift.
2 Explain two pieces of evidence to support the Big Bang Theory. Treat
both pieces as long answers earning 4 or 5 marks each, giving
detailed explanations.
3 A spectral line seen in the Sun has a wavelength of 280 nm. The
same line is seen in the spectrum of a galaxy and is measured to
have a wavelength of 370 nm.
Calculate the speed of the galaxy in km/s.

Summary
I am confident that:
✓ I understand and can describe these facts about astronomy
• The Universe contains billions of galaxies.
• A galaxy is a large collection of billions of stars.
• Our Solar System is in the Milky Way galaxy.
• Gravitational field strength is different on other planets and moons.
• Gravitational force causes moons to orbit planets, and planets and
comets to orbit the Sun.
• There are differences between the orbits of planets, moons and comets.
• Stars can be classified according to colour.
• A star’s colour is related to its temperature.
• The brightness of a star at a standard distance can be represented by an
absolute magnitude.
✓ I can recall and describe
• The evolution of a star the mass of the Sun.
• The evolution of a star with a mass larger than the Sun.
• The Hertzsprung-Russell diagram.
• The past evolution of the Universe.
• The evidence for the Big Bang theory (red shift and cosmic microwave
background radiation).
• The red shift in light received from galaxies at different distances from
the Earth.
✓ I have the mathematical skills and understanding to use these
equations
• 
• 

Sample answers and expert’s comments
1 Saturn has 62 moons. The time of orbit of a moon depends on its distance from
Saturn.
The table shows radius of orbit of some of the moons of Saturn, and the time
of orbit.
a) Plot a graph of the radius of orbit (y-axis) against the time period (x-
axis)
(5)
b) An astronomer discovers a new moon with a time of orbit 3.5 days.
Use the graph to find the radius of the moon’s orbit. Show your working
on the graph.
(2)
(Total for question = 7 marks)

2 This satellite is in orbit round the Earth. The satellite is used for observation,
and takes photographs of the Earth’s surface.
a) Name the force that keeps the satellite in orbit round the Earth.
(1)
b) The satellite moves in a circular orbit. The satellite is in orbit 1600
km above the Earth’s surface.
i) The radius of the Earth is 6400 km. Calculate the radius of the
orbit of the satellite.
(1)

ii) The satellite completes one orbit in 120 minutes. Calculate the
speed of the satellite in m/s.
(3)
c) A second satellite also orbits the Earth. Its distance from the Earth
changes in the orbit.
i) Name the shape of this orbit.
(1)
ii) The satellite travels fastest when it is closest to the Earth. Use
ideas about energy stores to explain why.
(1)
(Total for question = 7 marks)
3 Explain how the discovery of cosmic microwave background radiation
supports the Big Bang Theory.
(4)

Exam-style questions
1 The name of our galaxy is:
A Andromeda B The Great Cluster C The Milky Way D The Local
Group [1]
2 Which of the following supports the Big Bang Theory?
A The number of stars in our galaxy B Cosmic microwave
background radiation C The brightness of the Sun D The diameter
of the Universe [1]
3 At present the Sun is:
A A main sequence star B A red giant C A white dwarf D A
variable star [1]
4 Which of the following phrases correctly describes what
happens to the pitch of a siren as a fire engine drives past
you?
A The pitch decreases B The pitch increases C The
pitch stays the same D The pitch goes down and then
up [1]
5 Which of the following statements is true about the
Big Bang Theory?
A It has been proved correct by mathematical
calculations.
B It is the only way to explain the origin of the
Universe.
C It is based on scientific and religious facts D
It is the most satisfactory explanation of present
scientific knowledge.
[1]
6 An astronomer discovers that light from a galaxy has
been shifted to the blue end of the spectrum. What
can you deduce from this discovery.
A Blue stars have exploded as supernovas.
B The galaxy is moving towards us.
C The galaxy is moving away from us.
D The galaxy is not moving relative to us.
[1]
7 A satellite is in orbit above a planet, with an orbital
radius of 8000 km. The time of one orbit is 80
minutes. The orbital speed of the satellite is:

A 10 500 m/s B 8000 m/s C 1050 m/s D 100
m/s [1]
8 A moon orbits a planet with an orbital speed of
430 m/s. The time of one orbit is exactly 15
earth days. Which of the following is the
orbital radius of the moon?
A 44 000 km B 89 000 km C 6450 km D
1000 km [1]
9 Which of the following best describes the
numbers of stars and galaxies in the
Universe?
A There are too many stars and
galaxies to count B There are
thousands of galaxies and millions of
stars C There are millions of galaxies
and billions of stars D There are
billions of galaxies and hundreds of
billions of stars in each galaxy.
[1]
10 Which of the following does not affect
the absolute magnitude of a star?
A The star’s colour B The star’s
temperature C The star’s diameter D
The star’s distance from us.
[1]
11 Describe what these objects are:
a) A main sequence star [2]
b) The Milky Way [2]
c) A supernova [2]
d) A neutron star [2]
12 Stars go through a life cycle of
change.
a) Explain how a star is
formed.
[4]
b) Explain why the amount
of hydrogen in a star
decrease as time goes on.
[2]

c) Describe what happens to
a star much larger than the
Sun from the time it runs out
of hydrogen.
[5]
13 Our Solar System contains atoms
of the heaviest elements.
a) State where these
elements were formed.
[1]
b) Explain how these
elements are formed.
[2]
c) Justify what this tells you
about the age of our Solar
System compared with the
age of most stars in the
Universe [1]
14 The table shows
information about the
radius, surface
temperature, colour and
the luminosity of some
stars relative to the Sun.
The luminosity is a
measure of the energy
emitted per second by the
star.
a) From the table
above, identify a star
in each of the
following categories:
main sequence, red
dwarf, red giant, white
dwarf.
[4]

b) Stars A, D and E
have lower absolute
magnitudes than the
Sun. Justify this
statement.
[2]
c) When viewed from
the Earth, star F
appears brighter than
star A. Explain why.
[2]
d) Star G has a green
colour. Is its surface
hotter than the Sun’s?
Explain your answer.
[2]
15 The diagram shows the
orbits of the Earth and
two other bodies about
the Sun.
a) Which body could
be:
i) the planet
Mercury [1]

ii) a
comet?
[1]
b) i)
Describe
the shape of
the orbit of
B.
[1]
ii)
Describe
how the
speed of
B
changes
in its
orbit [2]
16 The
table
below
show
the
gravi
field
streng
on
the

surfa
of
some
plane
a)
A
m
m
is
80
kg
C
hi
w
on
th
su
of







EXTEND AND CHALLENGE
1 satellite is in circular orbit around the Earth.
a) The speed of the satellite remains constant. Explain why the
velocity of the satellite changes during the orbit.
b) Explain why the satellite is accelerating constantly while it is
in orbit around the Earth.
c) In which direction is the acceleration of the satellite, and
what force is responsible for this acceleration?
2
The photograph shows the giant galaxy M87, which lies at a
distance of 54 million light years from us. In the photograph, you can
see some small star clusters which are in orbit around the giant
galaxy.
a) Explain why the star clusters orbit the giant galaxy. Why can
the clusters not remain stationary in space?
b) A star cluster orbits the galaxy with an orbital speed of 560
km/s with an orbital radius of 120 000 light years. Calculate the
time of orbit in millions of years.

Index
A
absolute magnitude 259–60
absolute temperature scale 177
absolute zero 177
a.c. generator (alternator) 204
acceleration 5, 16–17, 19, 26
units of 5
air resistance on an object 19
alpha decay 222
alpha particle 222
alpha radiation 224–5
alternating current (a.c.) 52
ammeter 58–9, 73, 197, 207
sensitivity of 197
in series 62
ampere (A) 50
amplitude of vibrations 115
analogy of refraction 99
angle of incidence 105
angle of reflection 105
apparent magnitudes of stars 259
atmospheric pressure 164–5
atomic (or proton) number of the atom 220
average speed 2
B
background radiation 225
bad absorbers 136
bad emitters 136
balanced force 13, 15
balancing of force 36
batteries 71
Becquerel’s film 221
beta decay 222
beta particles 222
beta radiation 224–5
Big Bang theory 262–4
black dwarf 257

black hole 258
boiling 169
boron control rods 237
Boyle’s law 177–8
braking distance 20–1
C
cell in an electrical circuit 50, 71
centre of gravity 34–5
chain reaction 236
changing current 207
changing fields 207
charge 66–7
investigating 77
source of 75
chimneys 133
circuit breakers 53
circuit diagram 58
circuit symbols 60–1
CLEAPSS guidance 228
coal-fired power station, electricity generation in 205–6
cobalt-60 230
comets 253
compressions 112
condensation 169
conductors of electricity 77–9, 131
metals 131
conservation of energy 129
conservation of momentum 29
contact force 11
contamination, irradiation and 231
continuous circuits 58
convection currents 132
energy transfer 132
sea breezes 133
cooling curve for temperature against time 169–70
cosmic microwave background (CMB) radiation 264–5
coulomb (C) 66–7
Crab Nebula 258

cranes amount of diesel used by 140
chemical energy used in 130
counterbalance load 36
energy transfer 139
forces acting on 36
lifting heavy loads with 34
load table for a crane operator 34
critical angle 110–11
crumple zones 27
current 50, 66
changing 207
path for 69–70
rules 70
current–voltage graph 63
current–voltage graph for a diode 64
D
data loggers 9, 30, 116
dating archaeological remains 228
decay alpha 222
beta 222
nuclear 221–2
decompressions 112
deflection of charged particles 197–8
density 159
of air 168
in engineering 160
of gases 168
of liquid 160–1, 168
measuring 159–61
of solids 168
values of 159
deposition 169
diode 64
direct current (d.c.) 52
displacement 12
disposal of radioactive waste 234
distance-time graph 2–3
domains 191

Doppler effect 99
double glazing 134
double insulation 54–5
E
ear 112
earthing 54
Earth’s gravitational field 18
Earth’s magnetic field 190
earth wire 54
efficiency 130
elastic deformation 22
electrical charge 75
electrical circuits brightness and 50
cell in 50
continuous circuit 58
controlling of current 58–9
current in 52
resistance, voltage and current calculations 73
voltage and current 50–1
electrical hazards 51
electrical heating 53
electrical power calculating 56, 73–4
household appliances with a mains voltage of 230 V, used by 56
low-voltage applications, used by 56
paying for energy 57
electrical transfer of energy 50
electric field 101
electricity at home 53–5
electricity generation 145
electric motors commutator, working of 199–200
principle of 199–200
electromagnet 192
electromagnetic flow meter 202–3
electromagnetic induction 201
electromagnetic spectrum 101
electromagnetic waves 101
electrostatic paint spraying 81
electrostatic precipitator 79–80

elliptical orbit 254
endoscope 111
energy changes 141–2, 168
conservation of 129
counting 128–9
efficiency 130
heating effect on 168
nuclear 235–6
stores and systems 127–9
useful and wasted 129
energy transfer 129, 145
of gravitational potential energy in water 148
potential energy transferred 143
preventing unwanted 133–4
by radiation 136–7
work and 138–9
equation of motion 9–10
evaporation 169
extension of a spring 23
investigating relationship between force 23–4
F
fibreglass 160
filament lamp 63
fission 235
force (s) 139–40
adding 13
balanced 13, 15
balancing 36
on beams 37–8
change of momentum and 26
contact 11
defined 11
drawing 12
equation 17, 26
friction 12
for lifting loads 34
non-contact 11
normal contact 12

resultant or net 13, 16
size of 11
tension 12
turning 33
unbalanced 16
weight 12
fossil fuels 146
freezing 169
frequency of a wave 95
frequency of mains supplies 52
friction 12, 75
fuel rods 236
fuses 53
choosing 57
G
galaxies 249–50, 266
calculating speed and distance of 267
group of 250
gamma radiation 224–5
gamma rays 104, 222, 225, 238
gas-cooled nuclear reactor 236
gas pressure 175–6
Geiger-Müller (GM) tube 224, 228, 231
geostationary orbits 253
geothermal power 148–9
gold leaf electroscope 76–7, 223
good absorbers 136–7
good emitters 136–7
gravitational acceleration 18
gravitational field strength 251
gravitational potential energy (GPE) 141
gravity, pull of 251
H
half-life of atom 227–8
stability and 228
hard magnetic material 191
heating a system 168
helium atom 199

Herschel, William 104
hertz 52
Hertzsprung-Russell (HR) diagram 260–1
higher-pitched sound 115
Hooke’s Law 24
Hubble, Edwin 266
hydraulic machines 165
braking system 165
jack 165
hydroelectric power 148
hydrogen atom 199
I
incident ray 105
induced voltage 201
investigating 201–2
size of 204–5
inelastic deformation 22
infrared photography 102
infrared radiation 136
infrared rays 104
infrared waves 102
insulator 54, 78–9, 131
internal energy 168–9
ionic solutions 67
ionisation 220, 223
ions 199–200
irradiation 231
isotopes 220
J
joules (J) 138
joules per second (J/s) 56
K
keeping warm 131
kelvin (K) 177
Kelvin scale 177
Kelvin temperature 179
kilowatt (1 kW) 56
kinetic energy 141, 146

Kelvin temperature and 179
kinetic theory of gases 175
L
left-hand rule 196–7
lifting loads 34
light-dependent resistor (LDR) 65
light emitting diode (LED) 145
lights 64
light gates 8–9
light waves 103
limit of proportionality 24
live or hot wire 53
loft insulation and carpets 134
longitudinal wave 94, 112
loudness of the sound 115
loudspeaker, moving-coil 200
luminosity 255
M
magnetic domains 191
magnetic energy 129
magnetic field 101
around a magnet 189
combining 189–90, 196
Earth’s 190
investigating patterns 188–9
near a straight wire 193
near coils of wire 194
near single loop of wire 194
near solenoid 194
producing large 194–5
strength of 194
magnetic poles 188
magnetising 192
magnets coils and 202
magnetic field around a 189
poles of 188
superconducting 195
main sequence star 256

mains supplies 51–2
manometer 166
mass 18–19
mass (or nucleon) number of the atom 220
megawatts (MW) 56
melting 169
mercury barometer 164
metals, conductivity of 131
meters in a simple circuit 62
microwave cooking 102
microwave ovens 102
microwaves 102
Milky Way galaxy 249–50
moderator 236–7
moments in action 36–7
momentum after collision 30
change of 26
before collision 30
conservation of 29
safety issues 27
as a vector 30
motion 3–4
equation of 9–10
resultant force and state of 13
moving-coil ammeter 197
moving-coil loudspeaker 200
N
National Grid 208–9
negative charge 75
negative ion 77, 219
net force 13, 16
neutral wire 53
neutrons 75, 219, 222, 237
neutron star 258
newton (N) 11
Newton’s law first 15
second 16
third 31, 37

non-contact force 11
non-ohmic resistor 63
non-renewable energy 146
normal contact force 12
north-seeking pole 188
nuclear decay 221–2
nuclear energy 235–6
nuclear equations 237
nuclear fission 239
nuclear fusion 238
at high temperatures 238
vs nuclear fission 239
nuclear power 146–7
nuclear power stations 236–7
nuclear reactor 236
nucleus 75
O
ohmic resistor 63
Ohm’s law 63
ohm (Ω) 62
optical fibres 111
orbits Earth, of 253
elliptical 254
geostationary 253
Mercury, of 253
near and far 252–3
pull of 251
speed of 251
oscilloscope 116
P
parachutes 19
parallel circuit 69
uses of 71
particle model of gases 175–6
particles, detecting 224
Pepper’s Ghost 106
photocopying 80
physical change 169

picking up litter 76
pitch 115
positive charge 75
positive ion 77, 219
power defined 143
distribution 208
producing on a large scale 205–6
in transformers 208
pressure calculating 178–9
at a depth of underwater 164
gas 175–7
points 162–3
temperature vs 176–7
unit of 162
protons 75, 219
Q
quality 115
R
radiation 136
background 225
cosmic microwave background (CMB) 264–5
damages 225, 232
dangers of 233
disposal of radioactive waste 234
dose 233
high doses of 234
low doses of 233
moderate doses of 234
types of 232–3
radioactive decay of an atom dating archaeological remains 228
half-life of atom 227–8
random process 227
radioactive emission 222
radioactive iron 230
radioactive tracers medical uses 230
used in industry 230
radioactivity 221
detecting particles 224

investigation into the range and penetration of radiations 224–5
summary of radiation properties 224
radio waves 102
ray box 105
reaction time 20
red-shifted light 265–6
red super giant 257
reflected ray 105
reflection 97–8
reflection of light rays 105–6
refraction 98–9
refraction of light 107
by prisms 109
by a rectangular block 107–8
refractive index 108, 111
of glass 109
renewable energy 146
residual-current circuit breaker (RCCB) 55
resistance to current 53
adding 65
changing 64–5
resistor 53
non-ohmic 63
ohmic 63
resultant force 13, 16
right-hand grip rule 193
Ritter, Johann 104
S
safe driving braking distance 20–1
investigating collisions 30
reaction time 20
seat belts 27–8
stopping distance 20
visibility while driving 21
Sankey diagram 130
scalar quantities 11–12
sea breezes 132–3
seat belts 27–8

series 58
series circuit 58, 69
uses of 71
short circuit 69
sieverts (Sv) 233
soft magnetic material 191
solar heating systems 150
solar power 149–50
solar system 249
Solar wind 253
solenoid 194
sound energy 129
sound waves 112
making and hearing sounds 112
south-seeking pole 188
spark hazards 79
specific heat capacity of a substance 172
of water 172–4
speed 2, 11
and air resistance on an object 19
speeding up 5
speed of sound 112
measuring 113–14
speed–time graph for a parachutist 19
split-ring commutator 199
stars 249
about size of Sun 257
apparent magnitudes of 259
birth of 256
larger than Sun 257–8
life cycle of 256–8
main sequence 256
temperature and colour 255
stearic acid, cooling curve for 170
step-down transformers 207
step-up transformer 207
stopping distance 20
stretching elastic deformation 22
inelastic deformation 22

a spring 23
sublimation 169
Sun’s evolutionary path 261
superconducting magnets 195
supernova 258
system changes 127
T
tension 12
terminal velocity 19
thermal energy 129
change in 172
thermistor 64
thinking distance 20
throwing the hammer 251
ticker timer 9
time period of a wave 95
toner 80
total internal reflection 110
in prisms 110
transformers 207–8
power in 208
rule for calculating voltages 207
transmitting pressures 165
transverse wave 93
turning moment 33–4, 36–7
U
ultrasonic depth finding 114
ultrasound waves 114
ultraviolet light 103
ultraviolet waves 103–4
unbalanced force 16
235U nucleus 235
unwanted energy transfer 133–4
useful energy 129
V
vacuum flask 137
vector quantities 11–12
velocity 2

velocity–time graph 5–6
area under 6
gradient of a 6
vibrations 112
amplitude of 115
measuring frequency of 116
Virgo Cluster of galaxies 250
visibility while driving 21
volt 67–8
voltage 50, 62, 66
adding 70–1
rule for calculating 207
rules 71
voltmeter 62, 73
in parallel 62
volt (V) 51
W
wall insulation 133–4
wasted energy 129
water power (hydroelectric power) 147–8
watts (W) 56
wave equation 95
wavefront 95, 97
waves describing 94–5
frequency of 95
longitudinal 94
in solids and liquids 93
time period of 95
transfer of energy 93
transverse 93
wave speed 95, 102
weight 12, 18–19
white dwarf 257
wind power 147
work 138
energy transfer and 138–9
paying for fuel 140
working radius 34

X
X-rays 103–4

