
Titles by Piers Anthony
From Mundania Press
ChroMagic Series
Key to Havoc
Key to Chroma
Key to Destiny
Key to Liberty
Key to Survival
Incarnations of Immortality Series
Under a Velvet Cloak
Dragon’s Gold Series
with Robert E. Margroff
Dragon’s Gold
Serpent’s Silver
Chimaera’s Copper
Orc’s Opal
Mouvar’s Magic
Of Man and Manta Series
Omnivore
Orn
OX
Pornucopia Series
Pornucopia
The Magic Fart
Other Titles by Piers Anthony
Tortoise Reform
Macroscope
Piers Anthony Interview on Video
Conversation With An Ogre


Under a V
Under a V
Under a V
Under a V
Under a Velv
elv
elv
elv
elvet Cloak
et Cloak
et Cloak
et Cloak
et Cloak Copyright © 2007 by Piers Anthony Jacob
All rights reserved under the International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions.  No
part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic
or mechanical including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval
system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
The scanning, uploading and distribution of this book via the Internet or via any other means
without the permission of the publisher is illegal, and punishable by law. Please purchase only
authorized electronic editions, and do not participate in or encourage the electronic piracy of
copyrighted materials. Your support of the author’s rights is appreciated.
This is a work of fiction.  Names, characters, places and incidents either are the product of the
author’s imagination or are used fictitiously, and any resemblance to any actual persons, liv-
ing or dead, events, or locales is entirely coincidental.
A Mundania Press Production
Mundania Press LLC
6470A Glenway Avenue, #109
Cincinnati, Ohio 45211-5222
To order additional copies of this book, contact:
books@mundania.com
www.mundania.com
Cover Art © 2007 by SkyeWolf
SkyeWolf Images (http://www.skyewolfimages.com)
Book Design, Production, and Layout by Daniel J. Reitz, Sr.
Marketing and Promotion by Bob Sanders
Edited by Daniel J. Reitz, Sr.
Based on a summary by Stephen Smith, used with permission.
Signed Limited Numbered Hardcover Edition ISBN: 978-1-59426-251-7
Signed Limited Lettered Hardcover Edition ISBN: 978-1-59426-039-1
Trade Paperback ISBN: 978-1-59426-294-4
eBook ISBN: 978-1-59426-295-1
First Edition • December 2007
Warning: The unauthorized reproduction or distribution of this copyrighted work is illegal. Criminal
copyright infringement, including infringement without monetary gain, is investigated by the FBI and is
punishable by up to 5 years in federal prison and a fine of $250,000.

CHAPTER 1
ON VELVET
It was the time of a great king who ruled from a shining city. He had
been trained in statesmanship by a powerful mage, and had united the war-
ring clans to form a kingdom that would be long remembered. He had gath-
ered a prominent group of knights under his banner of chivalry. They met at
a table in the shape of a circle, so that there was no seeming order of rank
among them. But this is not that story.
In a small village in this kingdom was a family with two daughters. The
lack of a son might have been unfortunate, but the elder sister was beautiful,
outgoing, talented in the arts, intelligent, and good natured. She would in-
evitably be courted by many eligible young men, fall in love with the hand-
somest and wealthiest, marry, and have many excellent children. Some of
her distant descendants would become Incarnations of Immortality, and oth-
ers would marry them. But this is not that story either.
The younger sister was fair of feature, but slow to develop, so that at age
thirteen she still lacked breasts. This was awkward, as other girls her age
were already fascinating young men. She was quiet, introspective, obser-
vant, and sometimes given to flashes of intuition. That would have been
acceptable, had she not made the error of expressing them. She was simply
too smart and nervy for a girl. Her prospects were bleak.
This is her story. As seen by a ghost.
rs
Jolie quested until she found the correct girl. She could tell by the feel of
her. She had to get it right, because once she entered, she would probably be
confined to that body, until her long mission was done. She couldn’t just flit
about, because she was out of her timeline and could readily get lost.
This second sister was the one. She fit the description, and she felt right.
She had vastly more potential than she knew, and she was the pivotal figure
in the divergence of realities. What others did didn’t matter; only this girl’s

actions were responsible for the key changes.
Jolie entered the body and was subsumed. Her awareness became the
girl’s awareness, but Jolie retained her own identity to the extent she wished.
She could assert herself any time she needed to, but it was too much of an
effort to bother with routinely.
Kerena did not know what to do. She was so much in her elder sister
Katherine’s shadow that she was in effect invisible. She seemed destined to
remain a drag on her parent’s household. There was barely enough to go
around as it was; they could not afford to feed her indefinitely.
That’s what you think, girl. Your life is about to change significantly.
Jolie was not really talking to Kerena, who was not aware of her presence.
But the pretense made her feel better. She could influence the girl’s thoughts,
and thus her actions, but it was essential that she not do that unless it was
absolutely necessary. Anonymity was golden.
Then a Seer visited the village, really just passing through on his way to
somewhere more important, and Kerena suffered a flash. If she could some-
how persuade him to take her off their hands, that would be almost as good
as marriage. They would be free of the burden, and she would get to travel.
Of course it would not be a completely pleasant existence, but she could
gather herbs, scrub pots, and do whatever else a servant girl did. Men trav-
eling alone were always in need of such services; they were incompetent
housekeepers.
That’s it, girl. He is a good man. Do it. If for some obscure reason the
girl didn’t do it, then Jolie would have to encourage her, because this con-
nection was vital.
In fact vital rather understated the case. There were a seemingly infinite
number of timelines, alternate realities, each slightly different from its neigh-
bor, the differences growing as they progressed. The tiniest deviance could
generate massive change farther down the timeline. If a girl was walking at
dusk to a love tryst, and made it, and conceived and birthed a baby, that baby
could grow up and have descendants of lesser or greater significance. But if
that girl happened to see a large spider and took a fright, and fled home
instead of making her tryst, there would be no baby, and all of what that
new person did in life would be lost. All because the maiden happened to see
the spider instead of missing it. The change of the direction of one glance
could alter the fate of that entire timeline.
This was not academic. In Jolie’s timeline the Incarnation of Good had
made a study of adjacent and nearby alternate timelines, and discovered that
only one achieved salvation: her own. All the others, as far as the Incarna-
tions had fathomed, expired in hellfire, chaos, or some other dreadful doom.
It was hardly possible to discovery why, as that would require in-depth stud-
ies of an infinite number of variants. God—the Incarnation of Good—could

not check directly, because few folk could cross between timelines. Only those
who had no similar selves in the others, and there were not many of those.
Instead they had sought the closest variant, and prepared Jolie to go
there, to its earliest point of divergence, so she could in effect change the
girl’s glance and salvage the situation. Jolie could not affect her own timeline,
because of the paradox of changing her own existence, but she could touch
this adjacent one. They called it Timeline Two, or T2, the original being T1.
There might not be a Jolie here, but by the time she brought it into alignment
there would be a Jolie. That would be a different person from herself, with
an independent existence, but very similar in all the ways that counted. In-
cluding, unfortunately, her tragically early death. That was uncomfortable to
consider. Suppose the Jolie of this timeline survived, and she had to change it
to make her die? She hated the very notion, yet knew she would do it if she
had to.
The hope was that in this straightforward manner a second timeline
could be saved. Then the Jolie of that universe could do the same for the
third timeline, and so on in a chain, saving many that were otherwise doomed.
T1 to T2, T2 to T3, and so on, in theory. Perhaps there were many routes to
salvation, but the only pattern they could be sure of was the first one. They
had to make the second align with the first, at least until it was close enough
to achieve salvation on its own.
Thus her mission was literally to save a universe. She had no certainty
of success, but it was something that had to be tried. The folk of this timeline
did not deserve the cruel fate that awaited them otherwise. Meanwhile she
was learning things about the prior course of her own timeline, because of
the alignment. These supposedly dull details were thus made fascinating.
Here was an innocent girl proceeding to a tryst of a sort. Let her not see a
spider!
Kerena walked to the verge of the commons where the Seer had made
camp. He was a man of middling-early adulthood, halfway handsome de-
spite his worn clothing. His great velvet cloak was hanging from a tree branch;
it was decorated with stars. She came to stand before him, unspeaking, for
respectable maidens did not address strangers.
“Hello, child,” the man said.
She looked up, meeting his gaze, though this was another unmaidenly
thing to do. “I am not a child. I am thirteen.” There was something about his
eyes she found compelling.
Trust him. He is your early love. Jolie could see some distance along the
girl’s life. This was necessary to be sure of alignment.
“My apology for misjudging you,” he said jovially. “I was not using my
Sight.” He focused, and Kerena felt the special power of it. “Well!”
“You need a helper,” she said. It was hardly a guess, and she knew it

was especially true for him.
“And you need training, to become what you can be.”
“You will take me, then.” She was not asking.
“Of course.” He considered. “But you must understand, it is not en-
tirely for routine chores.”
“As an apprentice.”
“That also.”
There was too much to assimilate. “Please, tell me in simple words.”
“You have marvelous potential as a Seer; I recognize it in you as you
recognize the reality of this power in me. But you are also a lovely young
woman. This complicates it.”
Kerena shook her head. “I am not.”
You are.
“I see you as you are two years hence, grown. I will fall in love with you.
That is not wise.”
She caught another flash. “And I with you. Is that bad?”
“Not bad in the sense of evil. But it will interfere with both our powers,
especially with respect to each other. That could be dangerous.”
“What have I to lose? I have no future at home.”
“Your comfort. Your reputation. Your life—all are at risk.”
“You risk much also.”
He sighed. “I have tried to warn you, but your coming beauty over-
whelms the foolish male in me. So we are decided. I had better talk to your
parents.”
And we are on our way.
“This way.” Kerena was somehow not even surprised; her flash vision
of the future was not a picture so much as a feeling of rightness. This was
her destined course.
“Perhaps now we should exchange our names,” he said as they walked.
“I am Morely.”
“Kerena.”
“Already I like the name too well.”
She understood. Never before had she related so swiftly and completely
to a strange man. But he had ceased being strange the moment their eyes
met. She recognized in him the power she sought, though she had not known
until now that she sought it. He would complete her.
They came to her house. Her father emerged, scowling. “What is going
on here?”
“I am Morely the Seer. I wish to take this young woman as my appren-
tice. In accordance with standard practice, I proffer these three pieces of
silver.”
The scowl faded. The silver would see them through the winter with far

greater comfort, especially considering that they would no longer have to
support her. It might be that the real nature of her service would be as a
child mistress; it was nevertheless a very good deal for the family.
No, he is not a child molester. But Kerena already recognized that, thanks
to her Seeing. In any event, she did not consider herself to be a child, as she
had said. Whatever this man wanted of her, she was ready to give. It was
part of the bargain.
Her father accepted the silver. Thus was the contract made.
Kerena gathered her few belongings. Katherine came to hug her. “Send
word,” she said tearfully. They had always gotten along reasonably well to-
gether, in significant part because Kerena had Seen the futility of showing
her jealousy.
“I will.”
Kerena spent the night at Morely’s camp, sharing his meager food by
the fire. “I had no idea you would pay so much.”
“The expectation is that you will be bonded to me until you work off
that amount. That is academic; you owe me nothing.”
“I will nevertheless try not to disappoint you.”
“Take my bed. I will sleep on the other side of the fire.”
She did not argue, though she was nervous about sleeping alone out-
doors. What monsters did the darkness conceal? Yet this was a price of her
commitment; she would endure.
He had made a bed of pine needles with a blanket above and his volu-
minous velvet cloak below. The fire had driven off most of the bugs. It was
sufficient.
The situation reminded Jolie strongly of her own introduction to the
realm of the Incarnations of Immortality. She had been a terrified French
girl, seven or eight centuries hence, associating with a Sorcerer’s apprentice.
It had taken her so long to trust him, but when she did, she had loved him.
This girl Kerena had the gift of Seeing, so understood such a process much
more rapidly. Still, it would require much work before she had full use of
her talent, instead of occasional flashes.
Next day they traveled. As they walked, Morely explained the business.
“Part of the power is real, but most of it is showmanship. People have to be
persuaded to part with their wealth. We need sustenance; it is a complica-
tion of mortality. So we dazzle them with incidentals to satisfy them. What is
real will take time to develop, but the other is readily learned.”
Kerena was pleased that already he was saying “we.” It confirmed her
legitimacy as his companion.
She learned. Divination with dice or entrails was largely a matter of
fathoming what the subject wanted to hear, and providing it with enough
vagueness so as not to be directly caught in an error. If true Seeing was

negative, a way had to be found to make the news palatable. If a love potion
was desired, caution was recommended: potions did not work perfectly in
every case, as they could incline the recipient to the wrong person. So there
was no guarantee, but the one who bought one could take a small sip to
verify its effect. Since folk truly wanted such magic to work, they generally
felt a rush of passion when they sipped, verifying it to their eager satisfac-
tion.
“And some merely like a diversion,” Morely said. “When you fill out,
you will dance in clothing that proffers tempting glimpses of your young
flesh. This will attract a group of prospects.”
Who will slaver at the titillation of those glimpses. Men are typically
crude. You’ll get used to it.
“I will do what is expedient,” Kerena agreed, not entirely pleased. She
had never respected the way males of all ages acted toward her sister. Nor,
for that matter, the way her sister responded, liking the attention.
“Think of it this way: you are controlling them, without being affected
yourself. It is a worthwhile ability.”
“And will you be slavering too?”
Oops. That thought must have slipped through.
Morely glanced at her, and for a moment Jolie feared he had perceived
the ghost. Then he chuckled. “I will be enchanted by your presence.”
“Thank you.”
“A lesson in observation and judgment: what just occurred?”
Kerena considered. “You just lulled me by saying the same thing in pal-
atable language.”
“Very good. All things are as they are, but perception is largely guided
by language. Never be fooled unless you want to be.”
“When should I ever want to be fooled?”
“When I tell you I love you.”
Oh, this man is sharp!
Kerena considered again. “Because that would justify giving myself to
you.”
“Exactly. Always be guided by reality rather than passion. But at such
time as you desire it, let the passion flow.”
“But when you speak of love, it will be true.”
“Not necessarily. I will speak love to you, but I will say it to others too, so
my words are not to be trusted. Men speak of love when they want sex. They
are not at all the same thing. So heed your own feelings, understanding the
deceptive conventions. Words and feelings differ, even when they are the
same.”
Kerena wrestled with that. “As the word for a stone is not the stone
itself, the words of love are not love itself?”

“Correct. The words are merely a guide, and can be true or untrue.
Always be aware of the distinction.”
“I will try.”
And that awareness will be one of your defining aspects.
“You are an apt student.”
Kerena felt a thrill. Then she quelled it. She might be apt, but should not
believe it merely because he said it. “Thank you for those words,” she said
carefully. “I appreciate the compliment without necessarily believing it.”
“Exactly,” he repeated, seeming pleased.
“But please, what is the distinction between love and sex? I have heard
of sex as making love.”
“Love is an emotion. Sex is an action. Love can’t be forced. Sex can be,
either by violence or seduction. The two can overlap, but their underlying
natures differ. Love cherishes the welfare of the other person; sex is for one-
self. A man demands sex of a woman; a woman grants it to a man. You must
learn and heed the signals of friendship and desire, and always know them
apart, for you own comfort and safety.”
“My comfort? My safety?”
He shook his head, nevertheless pleased with her again. “Use your See-
ing. You are or soon will be sexually desirable. You must anticipate a man’s
approach in time to escape it, lest you be caught victim of molestation.”
Kerena used her Seeing, and was amazed by the graphic accuracy of the
warning. What he said was absolutely true. She was in potential danger from
any man, except Morely himself. He desired her but would not force her. Not
that he would need to.
Still, she slept alone, on his velvet cloak. Her nervousness about the
night diminished but did not entirely fade. She wished he would join her
there, and not merely for that reason. She was thoroughly smitten with him.
Morely also taught her the value of logical thought. “Most people be-
lieve in magic, but they are too credulous. Real magic is hard to come by, and
it accomplishes little that could not as readily be accomplished by ordinary
means. You must learn the techniques of extrapolation and interpolation,
then how to go beyond their boundaries through inspiration and intuition.
Form a solid basis of logic and sense, then build on that as necessary. You
must always be rational at the root. Fool the others if that is necessary; never
fool yourself.”
“I love your mind. You know so much.” Kerena was not trying to flatter
him; she was speaking her thought as it occurred, a liability she would have
to learn to control.
“You are able to understand. That is a significant part of what makes
you worthwhile to train.”
“And you will love my body, soon.”

Stop that, girl! But Jolie was already becoming fond of her innocent
directness.
“Soon,” he agreed. “It is not too early for you to learn the ways of flirta-
tion. They will work only partially now, but when your body arrives, they
will be extremely effective.”
“Teach me!”
He nodded. “When you walk, move your hips, so.” He demonstrated.
She laughed. “That’s ludicrous!”
“To be sure, on a man.” He fetched the blanket and draped it around
him. “Picture me as a woman.” He moved his hips again. Masked and exag-
gerated by the draping, they suddenly exuded sexuality.
Kerena appreciated the effect. She imitated the walk, thinking of her
sister, who did it whenever in the presence of a man, even one she didn’t
want.
Morely nodded. “Practice it when alone, but avoid it when in public.”
“Avoid it?”
“It is already effective. I don’t want you attracting men until you are
ready to handle them.”
“But no one ever notices me.”
“Past tense, girl. No one noticed you when your sister was near. But we
will encounter groups of men. They will notice you as the only person of the
female persuasion, and some are more than ready to relate to a girl your age.
Be a child, for now.”
Oh. “Only when with you,” she agreed, walking in a circle, moving her
hips so.
“I spoke of two years,” he said sharply. “Do not make me think of one
year.”
Oh, again. Her Seeing and his Seeing saw their future, and already it
seemed much like the present. It tempted her, as a challenge. She pondered,
and decided to see if she could make him think of less than a year. He would
know what she was doing, but might not object. Why wait unduly for the
inevitable?
Faulty logic, girl. Death is also inevitable. But Jolie read the determina-
tion in the girl: she wanted to impress Morely, and fancied this was a way.
Yet there was a reservation. It was sex she would use to capture his
fancy. She wasn’t sure she knew how to do it. Oh, she knew the motions, but
what about the essence? Suppose she stiffened involuntarily, turning him
off? She wanted very much not to have an initial failure.
Ask him, girl, Jolie thought, amused.
“Morely, when—when the time comes—how can I be sure to please
you?”
He laughed. “Be assured you will please me, just by being you.”

“But because of my inexperience—”
“Inexperience is a virtue, in a maiden.”
“Still—”
“You are really concerned,” he said, frowning.
“I confess it. I want—your love—yet I fear it. I don’t want to scream or
cry and make you regret it.”
“I think this is unnecessary,” he said, rummaging in his pack. “But it’s
something you need to know anyway, to help girls who have similar con-
cerns.” He brought out an object. It was a small figurine, a plump bare woman.
“This is an amulet, an ancient love goddess, carved from a mammoth bone,
imbued with magic. I suspect women have used it to facilitate love for twenty
thousand years.”
“An amulet? Is this a matter of faith?”
“Faith never hurts, but no, this is real magic. A woman puts it in her
love channel at night, and it matures her internal configuration, so to speak,
making her capable of handling almost any size or shape of male member.
Try this tonight, and you will have complete confidence.” He handed it to
her.
Kerena studied it. The thing was, yes, about as long and thick as an erect
male member; it would no doubt fit, if she applied it firmly. But it was hard
and irregular, surely uncomfortable. She distrusted it. “I don’t know.”
He shrugged. “There is surely no need. I was wrong to suggest it.” He
reached for the amulet.
She snatched it away. “No, I’ll try it. I want to know. As you say, if I am
ever to advise a wary girl.”
“As you wish.” His mild amusement remained.
That night she tried it. She put the figure to her cleft, expecting discom-
fort, but discovered that its touch in that region generated immediate warmth
and moisture. Encouraged, she poked it at her vagina, and it slid inside, sum-
moning further warmth and moisture. Soon it was all the way in, with only
the base outside, not uncomfortable at all. She had more room in there than
she had thought, or it had caused her to expand.
She left it there, basking in the muted pleasure of it. And dreamed of
having sex, over and over. The amulet not only made her ready, it made her
want it for itself.
She removed it in the morning, cleaned and pocketed it. Morely seemed
to have forgotten the matter, as he did not ask for it back. The hell he’s for-
gotten, girl! You have already made him desire you, but he doesn’t want to
demand it, so he’s letting you come to him when you’re ready. This will make
you ready sooner.
The fact was, Kerena was already more than ready; she was eager, thanks
to the amulet. But she fathomed that Morely was not yet ready, perceiving

her as still a bit young. So she bided her time, awaiting the right moment.
They traveled from village to village, entertaining and educating the
villagers, making a living. Kerena learned the multiple minor ways of magic
and superstition, making sure she knew them apart even if the villagers
didn’t. Meanwhile Morely did teach her the techniques of extrapolation and
interpolation he had mentioned, broadening her mind. She soon discovered
that when she learned a fact, she pleased him somewhat; when she learned
a technique, she pleased him more; and when she learned a better way of
reasoning, she pleased him greatly. He liked her to be savvy as well as tal-
ented.
Men like him are rare treasures, Jolie remarked.
He also taught her rudimentary magic of the elements: fire, water, air,
and earth. Her nature as a Seeress hinted at her larger potential, and this was
part of that: the talent for invoking the inherent magic of nature. She was an
eager student.
The right combination of focus and spell could ignite tinder. “But mask
it with a spark from a stone,” he advised. “Do not let others know you can do
such invocations. Some have very negative attitudes about it.”
“Like the church,” she agreed. “Though I don’t understand why.”
“Because it wants to have control of magic,” he said. “If too many oth-
ers learned to do it, they would no longer need the church for spot healing or
miracles.”
Another focus and spell would cause water to flow from the ground.
“But say you have talent in finding springs,” he said. “Find it, do not openly
make it.”
“Maybe that’s what the spell actually does.”
He tapped the top of a projecting stone. “Perhaps.” Water spouted from
a hitherto unseen crack.
With air, it was a swirl that could stir up fallen leaves and dust, making
a little funnel shape. With earth, it was a vibration that could shake founda-
tions. “Do not overdo any of these,” he said. “Keep them limited, for they are
dangerous when overdone, apart from branding you as a sorceress.”
“I can see how fire can spread and become dangerous,” she said. “And
too much water could make a flood. But where’s the harm in a little swirl or
vibration?”
“A big swirl can fling cows around and destroy huts. A big vibration can
shake down all the houses in a town.”
She was amazed. “All that?”
“If you have enough power. Not many do, but you have such aptitude
you may. Never test your limit except when the need is dire.”
She was happy to agree.
There was immediate application for the things she was learning. At

one village, there was a problem with fire; several houses had burned, yet
the people were not at all careless with their hearths. Morely was busy with
others, as the villagers flocked in to demand his services, so Kerena tackled it
alone.
Her Seeing gave her the hint, and her new technique confirmed it. “You
have a salamander,” she told them. “This is an elemental fire spirit that plays
joyously in natural fires, and shows sometimes as the Will-o-the-Wisp. This
one is a rogue, spreading unnatural fires. You can see it if you focus prop-
erly.” She showed them how to do that, taking deep breaths, observing the
tongues of flame closely, listening for the salamander’s crackling smoky voice
in the singing embers. Once observed, it could be dealt with, either tamed or
banished. Soon the villagers were seeing it, and knew their problem would
be solved.
At another village there came a messenger from the estate of a wealthy
trader: “Master wants to know do you interpret dreams?”
“Of course; we are expert,” Morely said with his public air of confi-
dence. “My girl will handle it.”
Thus rapidly, and not quite confidently, Kerena found herself following
the boy to his master’s house. She had memorized the dream symbols and
standard interpretations, because Morely had impressed on her the impor-
tance of dreams in the popular mind. “I think they mean nothing, other than
fragments glimpsed as the mind sorts out feelings,” he said. “But there is
extensive literature, and belief is strong.” So she was prepared, but not at all
sanguine about tackling it alone.
“I dreamed I was in a garden surrounded by marvelous blooms,” the
merchant said. “But when I went to take one, lo, it was an arrow. Then it was
a thread, which wrapped around and bound my hands, and I felt horribly
helpless and afraid. I woke sweating and uneasy, but I have no idea why.”
Kerena’s apprehension faded. There were symbols here, and she could
work with them. “I will not presume to question your business,” she said. “I
know nothing about it. But I can tell you that blooms indicate productivity.”
“Of course,” he agreed. “I am quite successful.”
“But an arrow means sending a letter which you may rue.”
He winced. “I did write a letter to a prospective client, but it was very
positive. I have new exotic cloth from afar that is not only better than local
cloth, but cheaper. He can do very well with it.”
“And thread means tangled situations. Tied hands is difficulty in getting
out of trouble.”
He looked stricken. “I just remembered: his wife weaves similar cloth.
He will not be pleased by this competition. He may cut me off entirely. Why
didn’t I think of that before?”
“Your dream knew,” Kerena said, seeing the rational explanation. “It

was unable to warn you until you slept.”
“I must get that letter back. I sent it only yesterday, and my messenger is
not a swift traveler. I’ll send a faster one to intercept him.” He looked at
Kerena. “Thank you, apprentice. Here is silver for your master’s fee.” He
gave her a piece that would readily cover Morely’s normal charge.
She was exhilarated as she returned. She had done a professional dream
interpretation and the client was satisfied. She was a success!
Another time a woman approached her in tears. “I was away too long
and my hearth fire went out!” she wailed. “That means terrible bad luck.
What can I do?”
“Go check her situation,” Morely told Kerena, because as usual he was
tied up with another client.
She went to the woman’s house. There was no doubt: the fire was com-
pletely out, and incapable of being revived. If she had to light it again, the
bad luck would be locked in, because it would no longer be the original fire.
Kerena wanted to help her, and not just for the fee. The woman was in
great distress. But what could she do?
She looked around somewhat desperately. In the corner of the room
was a small dim lamp. That gave her an idea. “That lamp—how did you light
it?”
“Why, from the hearth, of course—a brand from it.”
Exactly. Fire was not that easy to make, so was spread about as conve-
nient. “Then that’s a trace of the original fire. Use the lamp to restore it, and
it will be as if it never expired.”
An expression of pleased wonder crossed the woman’s face. “Are you
sure?”
This was the place for proper confidence. “Yes. The fire knows its ori-
gin. There will be no bad luck.”
Soon it was done, and the woman was overjoyed. Since luck was mainly
in the mind of the person, as Morely had told her, this was a fair fix.
“You are doing very well,” Morely told her, pleased. “Many clients are
asking for you instead of me, and not just the horny young men.”
“I am but a reflection of your genius.”
He shook his head. “It’s a shame to have such lovely false flattery wasted
on a non-client.”
Kerena didn’t argue, but neither did she agree. It wasn’t false, and it
wasn’t, she hoped, being wasted.Six months into her apprenticeship Kerena
lay on the velvet cloak and stared up at the night sky. It was unusually clear,
and the stars were bright in their myriads. Jolie knew the girl was ready to
make her move. For one thing, she had the love goddess figurine in her chan-
nel. Her passion was mounting.
“Please, speak of the stars,” she said. “I am sure you know of them.”

She was not guessing; he had evinced fascination with the stars, and of course
they were on his cloak.
“That is a subject larger than the world we know, and less believable,”
he demurred.
“I am restless with curiosity. What is that one there?” She pointed.
“Describe it; I can not see which one you mean.”
“Come here so you can follow my gaze.”
Jolie had to admire the way the girl got him to come close. If he was not
amenable to what she had in mind, he would avoid it.
Morely came and lay beside her on the cloak. He put his head next to
hers. “Where?”
“There.” She pointed again, so he could sight along her arm. “That bright
triangle to the north.”
“Ah. That is Cepheus.”
“Who?”
“By Greek legend, he was the king of Ethiopia. The triangle forms his
loin, abutted by additional stars to fill out the rest of his figure. Beside him is
his wife, the vain and heartless Queen Cassiopeia.”
“You were among the Greeks?”
“I have known some in my day.”
“What is their story?”
“She annoyed the powerful Nereids, or sea nymphs by boasting of the
beauty of her daughter Andromeda as greater than theirs. They persuaded
the god of the sea to send a sea monster to ravage the coast. The only way to
stop it was to sacrifice Andromeda to it. So the queen did so, chaining her
lovely daughter to a rock by the shore. Fortunately a hero came to rescue and
marry her. Now they are all stars in the sky.”
“They are represented by stars in the sky.”
“True,” he agreed, pleased by the distinction she had made.
“Even as you rescued me from my pointless life,” she said, catching his
hand.
“If you see it so,” he agreed tolerantly. He was well aware she was flirt-
ing with him, and pleased that she was doing it well.
“And will you also marry me?”
Hoo! Jolie thought. That was too direct. But of course the girl lacked
experience.
“The subject seems to have shifted.”
“That is not an answer.”
“That is an avoidance,” he agreed, pleased again.
She rolled over, lifted her head over his, and kissed him. “I would like
an answer.”
Still too direct. The girl was in danger of losing it.

“You are being presumptuous.”
“That is not an answer.”
“We are not two years along, or even one year.”
“Is that relevant?”
“You are not yet a woman.”
“Yes I am. I have come upon the Curse. That marks the shift.”
“You are not breasted.”
“Yes I am. They are small as yet, but growing.” She caught his hand and
guided it.
Jolie marveled again. Boldness had its merits, but this was too much of
a gamble. The love amulet was driving her.
Morely tried to withdraw his captive hand. “This is not appropriate.”
“You questioned my development. Now you must allow me to make my
case.”
Her logic was impeccable. He allowed her to set his hand on one small
breast, then the other. “You are a woman,” he agreed.
“So it can be at any time.”
“At any time. Not necessarily now.”
“Such a thing must be mutually voluntary,” she said. “I am advising you
that I have volunteered. Would it help if I said I love you?”
Clever, girl! But a more subtle approach would have been more likely to
catch him.
He laughed. “You are learning too well!” But he remained reluctant.
She had made a point, not won a battle. He was not a man to be persuaded by
mere availability and willingness. She appreciated that, because many of the
villages had girls who expressed both, some of them quite fetching, yet he
had courteously demurred. He was saving himself for her.
Back off, girl. You can’t push him farther.
“I must learn the other legends of the stars,” Kerena said. “But I ques-
tion them.”
“There are variants. Mine can not be regarded as definitive.”
“I question all legends, as you have taught me. It does not seem reason-
able that a man, or his wife, or their lovely daughter could sail up into the
sky and become stars. Assuming there exists a mechanism, what is the point?”
“So that others will remember them.”
“Are they alive or dead?”
“As far as this mortal realm is concerned, I should think they are dead.”
“Then do they care about memories?”
“Perhaps not.”
“So it may be that the stars have some other origin.”
“It may be,” he agreed. He was waiting to see where she was going on
this.

“As I walk past a tree, my perspective shifts. Near things change more
than distant things. But the stars do not shift when I walk; they follow their
own limited courses, completely indifferent to my motions.”
“True.”
“I must conclude that they are very far away. Since distance makes things
look smaller, the stars must be larger than they appear. Could they be the
size of the sun or moon, only more distant?”
Even Jolie was impressed. The girl was on the right track.
“If they are, how can they keep pace with the sun?” he asked. “Their
perspective should shift with respect to it.”
“Perhaps it does, if we could but see them at the same time as the sun.
But the sun itself is too far away to show any shift of perspective as I walk. I
am wondering—this may be heretical—whether the sun does travel around
us. Could we instead be traveling around it?”
“You have come across another notion of the ancients: that our Earth is
not the center of the universe.” She could feel the radiation of his pleasure
with her. She had demonstrated a new type of intelligent questioning.
“Does it need to be the center?”
“Not to my mind.”
Now was the time. Kerena reached down and removed the figurine from
her body. “I love you.”
He saw it. “You vixen! You are courting me.”
You rogue! How can you pretend surprise? But of course he couldn’t
hear her any more than Kerena could.
“Take me now, while you are in the mood. You know I am.”
As if he hasn’t been in the mood throughout.
He laughed. “How prettily she springs the trap. First the body, then the
mind.” He gazed into her eyes, his amusement phasing into desire. “You
didn’t even try to conceal your use of the amulet, so I would know your state.
I am unable to resist your blandishments.”
“If you take me now, you will love me too.”
“I already do, from the moment you first met my gaze and I felt your
power. I remained clear of you at night so as not to be overwhelmed, but
now you have done it anyway.”
“Take me,” she repeated hungrily.
“There is one more thing. You do not wish to conceive my baby.”
“I don’t?”
“Not at this time. A child is a lifelong commitment. You are not ready.”
She had to agree. “How do I prevent it?”
“There is a spell you must invoke every month. Now would seem to be
an excellent time to learn it.”
“Teach me.”

He taught her. It was merely an utterance, with the force of will behind
it. As she spoke it she felt her body shifting in an obscure manner. She was
now immune to getting with child, for this month.
“I am ready,” she said.
He did not protest further. “There may be some pain, this first time.”
“I know. It is a pain I want of you.”
Jolie found herself crying. She couldn’t help it. There was just some-
thing about conquest that got to her.
Morely kissed Kerena avidly. He had accepted her prior kiss without
real response; now he had passion. He stroked her slight breasts, evoking
special feeling in them. Then he mounted her and set himself, trying to pen-
etrate her slowly so as to minimize the discomfort.
Vain hope.
“Forgive me,” he gasped. “I can’t wait!”
“Forgiven,” she breathed. Her heart was beating hard.
He drove into her. His member was thicker than the figurine, and not
angled the careful way she had done. There was sharp pain, as of flesh tear-
ing. Then she felt the balm of his substance coming into her, and forgot the
pain in the joy of her accomplishment. She had won him! She had com-
pleted the definitive ordeal of womanhood.
Womanhood is a good deal more than that, girl. But this will do for
now.
He subsided, and soon got off her and lay beside her on the velvet cloak.
“You made me do it,” he said. “I tried so hard to wait.”
“I wanted your commitment.”
“You always had it.”
“Now I am sure of it.”
“Next time I will make sure you have pleasure too.”
He was as good as his word. Now they were lovers, and she discovered
far more physical pleasure in the act than she had ever expected. She had
supposed that the woman’s part was merely to hold and satisfy the man, her
pleasure deriving mainly from accomplishing his pleasure.
Some men would have it so.
And her fear of darkness was forever abated. The starry night was her
friend, enabling her to win her desire. Now she slept in Morely’s embrace,
but she could have slept alone without fear.
She tried to return the love figurine to him, but he declined. “Now you
know how it works; at some point you may have to recommend it to another
woman.”
After that, Kerena got a dress that flared out when she twirled, and
revealed curvature when she leaned forward. She danced, at first showing
mostly her legs, but as her breasts filled out she showed them too. She had

become the temptress, and business increased handsomely. She reveled in
her apparent power over men, but she was interested in no man’s touch
except Morely’s.
You’ll get over that, Jolie thought sadly.
One morning they approached a fork in the trail. Morely took the left
one, and Kerena accompanied him. He was the one who knew the way, as
this was his familiar route.
Jolie came alert. Something was wrong!
In a moment she realized what it was. The realities were diverging. Her
own track was no longer congruent with this track; there was a small but
definite difference.
In Jolie’s realm, Morely and Kerena took the right fork. Both trails led to
the next village, in a similar difference. Why should this matter? Jolie didn’t
know, but knew that it had to be corrected. She had to keep the two tracks
aligned.
She jumped back to the time just before the fork. She put a thought into
Kerena’s mind, emulating her Seeing ability so as to conceal it’s true source.
Take the right fork.
Morely started left. “This way,” Kerena said.
“But I took that last time. I like to vary the route in inconsequential
ways.”
“But it’s new to me,” Kerena said firmly. “Humor me.”
He shrugged and did so. After all, they were lovers, inclining him to
cater to her whim. They took the right fork. The tracks converged. Jolie
breathed a ghostly sign of relief.
In time, well supplied with money, they came to Morely’s private resi-
dence. Here he had something no one else was equipped to understand: a
mounted tube with glass at either end. When Kerena looked in the small
end, she saw the night sky in greater detail than was possible with the naked
eye. This was Morely’s greatest secret: a way to look more thoroughly at the
stars. She promised not to tell, for ignorant villagers were superstitious about
what they did not understand, and might destroy it if they learned of it.
The man’s an early astronomer!
It was a discipline the girl eagerly embraced. Soon she was spending as
much time looking at the stars as he was. This, too, pleased him. She was an
apt match for him.
Kerena occasionally went to the village to purchase staples; this was
part of her duty as apprentice and maidservant. The villagers were readily
able to accept her presence, and surely assumed she was being sexually used.
Why else would a man keep a pretty girl servant? That didn’t matter; she
was as much user as used.
One day she was late returning, because it had taken unwonted time for

a farmer to fetch the grain she needed. It was dark as she made her way
back, but she was confident she could handle it. The night was not her en-
emy; it was her friend. If anyone should follow her, she could readily elude
him in the darkness. Sometimes village louts tried; that was a penalty of
beauty. She had a knife, and Morely had made sure she knew how to use it,
but had also impressed on her that avoidance was far superior. Knowledge,
confidence, and darkness were all she needed. She could slip silently into
shadow, like a forest sylph.
She came into sight of the house. There was no light, which was odd;
normally he left a lamp in the window, a signal that he was waiting for her
return. Morely himself was often out peering through his star-tube, espe-
cially on a clear moonless night. The stars were endlessly fascinating; she
shared his constant amazement.
She went to the house, found the lamp, and lit it from a fireplace ember.
“Morely?” she inquired, concerned that he might have overslept or suffered
some accident. But he was not in the house.
I have a bad feeling about this.
She took the lamp and looked outside. She made a search pattern, care-
fully spiraling outward from the house. Such efficiency was typical; she had
learned it from Morely and took pride in it. He had to be somewhere; she
would find him.
She did not. Instead she found the velvet cloak, with its starry pattern,
lying on the ground. Blood spattered it.
She stifled a scream of horror. Something dreadful had happened to
Morely.

CHAPTER 2
LADY OF THE EVENING
Kerena wasted little time weeping. She analyzed the situation and planned
her approach, exactly as she had been taught to do in any emergency. Morely
was gone, but surely not dead, for his body was not there. His Seeing ability
and general knowledge should have protected him from almost any ugly
surprise. So what had happened?
Obviously he had been tricked in some fashion. Kerena used her Seeing,
which had progressed less rapidly than her body or her practical expertise; it
had refused to be hurried. But it did enable her to pick up recent physical
and emotional events in the area, in a general way. She moved about the
house, extending her awareness. Morely had been there, unconcerned as
dusk approached. Then he looked out and saw Kerena coming. He went out
gladly to meet her.
Uh-oh, Jolie thought.
But Kerena had not arrived back at dusk. She had been a good hour
later. That arrival could not have been her.
She went to the cloak, still on the ground. Why had he put it there?
Normally he wore it, or spread it on the ground when they lay outside gazing
up at the stars. But the dusk today was overcast; there were no stars to be
seen.
Or when they made love. They had a good bed inside, but still liked to
do it out on the cloak, reenacting their first tryst. She liked to pretend to be
seducing him for the first time, and he liked to play along. She even winced
at his penetration, though it never hurt later. Somehow the reenactment never
got dull.
Along with the drops of blood on the cloak was a fresh stain of sex.
His presence was there by the cloak, along with someone else. Kerena
could not fathom the other; it was strange and magical, resistive to her See-
ing. Female, but otherwise obscure.
But Morely would not have done it with a strange woman. He had been

resolutely loyal to Kerena, even before she seduced him. Especially not on
their cloak. Had his business required him to bed a female client he would
have done it; she understood about that. She herself might someday have to
bed a male client, as business. But never in this manner.
Yet it seemed he had. How could that be?
Think magic, girl.
The answer came in a blinding nonmagical flash of insight. Morely had
gone out to meet Kerena, and had spread the cloak. He had sought to love
her. He had thought it was her.
Someone had timed it for when Kerena should normally have arrived,
and somehow emulated her, and indicated she was ready for love. He would
not have questioned that; he did love her, and making love (now sex and love
really did merge) was their chief joy together. He had gladly joined the im-
poster—and she had drugged him or enchanted him and taken him away.
The drops of blood on the cloak—perhaps a poisoned needle, stabbing him,
drawing blood, then paralyzing him. He would not have been wary while
clasping Kerena; he would have embraced her, and maybe hardly felt the
prick of the needle as he climaxed within her.
“I betrayed him!” she exclaimed, appalled. “My semblance deceived him,
made him unwary. He walked blithely into the only trap that could have
snared him. Because of me.” Tears of outrage and guilt flowed.
Not your fault, girl.
Kerena picked up the cloak. She shook it and brushed it off, but did not
go after the stains. Whatever there was of Morely was there, and she valued
it.
There must have been more than one person, because a woman petite
enough to emulate Kerena would not have had the strength to carry away an
unconscious man. Indeed, someone must have carried him, because now
she found indentations in the ground beside the spot the cloak had lain,
leading away from the house. She tried to follow them, but the ground turned
hard and they disappeared. Her Seeing was blocked; she could not divine the
trail. They must have known she would try to follow, and prevented it. They
had had time to get well away; there could have been a horse nearby.
Why had they done it? Possible reasons abounded. The husband of a
client could finally have discovered the connection, and come to extract re-
venge by imprisoning and torturing Morely. A rival Seer could have sought
to enslave him, making Morely’s powers his own. Some town or village might
have wanted a Seer, and known he would not remain there voluntarily. Ob-
viously they had known about Kerena, and not wanted her; she was the
apprentice, as yet only the shadow of the master.
Where could they have taken him? Not to any nearby village; the locals
knew and respected him, and in any event his abduction would be immedi-

ately known in the area, so no nearby village would be able to get away with
it. Where, then?
That perhaps gave her a clue. Most folk remained close to home; travel-
ers stood out. Any local villager anywhere could spot and remember a stranger.
It was like perspective: the closer it was, the more obvious the change. They
would have to take Morely far away to make him anonymous, for he was
known throughout this region. If she could track the motions of travelers,
maybe she could find him.
How could she track travelers? She needed to find a contact, someone
who knew how to do it. A trader, perhaps, in a big town or city. Meanwhile,
she had to make her living while remaining uncommitted. She knew how to
do that, though she did not relish the prospect.
She spent a lonely night. In the morning she closed up the house and set
off with her meager belongings and the cloak. She had hidden Morely’s gold
where only he was likely to find it, should he return. She took only enough to
get her where she had to go. She would never steal from him.
In due course she arrived in the shining capital city. Naturally it had a
rotten underbelly. This was where she could be anonymous yet in touch.
At dusk the streetwalkers came out. Kerena approached one. Her Seeing
demurred; this was not a good contact. She veered away and went on along
the street. Her Seeing did not inform her whether another person was of
good or ill character, only whether association would benefit her.
The third streetwalker was good. Kerena addressed her. “I am new here.
Where is the best house?”
The woman eyed her appraisingly. “You look young and clean. Do you
have experience?”
“Only with one man.”
“Ideal. Come with me.”
Kerena started to. Jolie came alert. The tracks were diverging.
Jolie skipped back to the time before the approach. Not this one, she
thought firmly.
Kerena hesitated. Her seeing was divided; it indicated that this woman
was good, yet that she was not.
She’s a good woman, but there’s a better one ahead, Jolie thought strongly.
Reluctantly, Kerena passed the woman by.
Several women farther along she found another good one. She spoke to
her. The dialogue was similar to the first, and they walked together.
The two tracks remained converged. Jolie relaxed. She had gotten them
through another crisis point. This time had been more of a challenge, be-
cause now it was apparent that Kerena’s Seeing was not identical to the align-
ment.
The woman led her to the back entrance to an ordinary-seeming house

jammed in amidst many. A forbidding woman appeared. “Here is a pros-
pect,” the streetwalker said, holding out her hand.
The madam sized Kerena up with a single glance. She put a piece of
silver into the streetwalker’s hand, and the woman vanished. “You’ll start
with Blake. He’ll decide your value. Understand?”
“Yes.”
“Wait here.” The madam deposited Kerena in a small waiting room and
departed.
“Oh, you’re new.” The speaker was a sweet-faced girl barely older than
Kerena.
“New,” Kerena agreed. “I am Rena.”
“I’m Molly. Let’s be friends.”
There was a certain charm about the girl’s straightforwardness. Her
Seeing suggested it was honest. “All right. Is this a good place to be?”
“Oh, sure. They don’t cheat you here, and if a client roughs you up,
they’ll do something about it. But you do have to perform.”
“I expect to.” She had never wanted to practice her studied wiles on any
man but Morely, but now she would have to. She knew he would approve,
ironically.
“Do your very best with Blake; his report counts.”
“I will try.” They talked further, and Kerena learned that Molly was a
local girl whose family could not support her, so had sold her to the brothel.
She was in the process of earning out her stake. In time she would make it,
and be free, because this house was honest.
The madam reappeared. “Molly—take the lord to your chamber now.”
The girl jumped up. “Fare well, Rena,” she said as she went to intercept
her client. “I’ll see you again soon.”
“Come with me,” the madam said to Kerena. “Blake is ready.”
Blake was a gruff swarthy man who turned out to be surprisingly com-
petent as a sexual partner. He stripped her and tried her in several positions,
which she accommodated immediately. He did not climax; this was not plea-
sure but business. “Fair face. Good young body,” he remarked. He had not
even removed his clothing, baring only his business member. “Age?”
“I’m fourteen.”
He lay back on the bed. “Seduce me.”
Kerena smiled at him, then put her face to his and kissed him linger-
ingly on the mouth. Then she unbuttoned his shirt and kissed his hairy chest.
She took his hands and set them on her breasts. She took down his trousers
and kissed his member, bringing it erect. “I want you,” she whispered. “Take
me.” It was all an act, as he knew; the question was how appealing it would
seem to a client.
He clasped her, put her face down on the bed, and straddled her from

behind. He plunged into her, stroking until he climaxed. Then he got off her,
turned her over, and smiled. “You’re good. Pretty, plush, malleable, skilled.
You made me enjoy it.”
“Thank you.”
“Dress. You’re done here.”
The madam reappeared. She had probably been watching. Blake gave
her an emphatic thumbs-up.
“You’ll get our top room,” the madam said. “That’s an avenue to outside
work with wealthy clients. Treat them well and you will do well. We take
half your earnings in-house, none out-house. We provide your costumes,
food, private bed during your time off. No sadism; if anyone hurts you, yell
for Blake and be sure it won’t happen again. What’s your name?”
“Rena.”
They were at the assigned room. It was well appointed, with curtains,
cushions, a couch, and pictures on the wall. It was obviously meant to make
a wealthy or high class man feel comfortable. There was a covered potty
discreetly in an alcove. “Put this on,” the madam said, taking a glittering
dress off a hook. “We have a high class clientele. Your first client is a lord of
the king’s court.” She winked. “Low-level, but with money. We call them all
lords. Lord X, anonymous, though we know who they are. Make them feel
big. Never hurry them; if they stay overtime, they pay more. If they want to
talk, listen attentively, but keep their secrets. Discretion is invaluable. If they
like you, word will spread. Some of our girls have married their clients and
become ladies. We keep their secret; they will never be blackmailed. Keep
that in mind.”
Kerena barely had time to clean up after Blake and don the glittery dress,
which had no underclothing, before Lord X appeared. He looked like a fop,
but he was extremely potent, having at her three times in half an hour.
Kerena suffered a wave of doubt. What was she doing here? This was
not her proper way of life!
The thought caused the tracks to blur. But you want to question the men
about their travels, Jolie thought. This is the way to meet many men, and to
get them to talk.
Kerena nodded internally. She was not one to make commitments, then
renege. She would stay the course.
The blurring ceased. Alignment had been maintained.
Kerena got a break. Molly found her and guided her to the kitchen for
bread and jam. “We have to eat when we can; the clients always come first.”
“So I gather.”
Another girl was there, older and somewhat worn. “How come you got
the best room, new bitch?” she demanded of Kerena.
“Shut up, Nix,” Molly snapped. “You know Blake decided, and new is

what the old clients like, for the novelty.”
Nix shut up, effectively refuted. Molly’s friendship was already paying
off.
That day she accommodated three lords, then got to eat with several
other girls, and sleep. Molly helped her throughout, introducing her, de-
fending her, showing her around. It would have been far less comfortable
without the friendly girl. It wasn’t much of a life, but it would do until some-
thing better offered.
Word did spread. “We have three waiting in line for you,” the madam
informed her in the morning. “Don’t hurry; I will space them. I suspect you
will not be with us long.”
Kerena knew that it was her youth and dawning beauty that constituted
her appeal. But she intended to augment it with personality, and begin her
search for news of travelers. She talked with her clients between bouts of
sex, and they responded, flattered by her interest. She handled eight clients
that day.
Muted jealousy of her early success showed in the other girls, but Molly
fended them off. “They hate anyone new and young,” she confided. “Be-
cause you make them look old and the men notice.”
Obviously Molly knew exactly how it was, being the youngest and pret-
tiest of the other girls. “But aren’t you jealous?” Kerena asked.
“No. I decided not to let them do to you what they did to me.”
Kerena resolved then to see that Molly never regretted befriending her.
The third day there were so many clients the madam had to turn some
away if they couldn’t be diverted to other girls. Kerena’s share of the money
was posted as an account from which she could draw when she chose. She
could spend it on her day off. One of the benefits of a high class house was
that it did not need to cheat its girls.
Jolie was halfway bemused. When Kerena had sex, so did she, for she
had the girl’s awareness. This life really was as new to her as to the girl. But
not actually a bad life, all things considered.
Kerena went out shopping with Molly when they had time, and the girl
was as adept at showing her around the town as around the brothel. They
had a fine time.
The procession of men was in one sense numbing, as there were too
many to remember as individuals, even if they had had real names. But Kerena
used the experience to practice her wiles. There were differences, and what
subtly turned on one man had little effect on another. She made it a point to
attune to each as an individual, the brief time she was with him, making
each feel special. On occasion she wore a long-hair wig to change her aspect,
looking like a different woman. She was mastering the nuances of appeal
and seduction. Soon she was getting repeat business, as prior clients asked

for her again.
Sometimes the liaisons verged into something approaching affection.
One repeat client was late for their agreed appointment, but she delayed,
knowing he would be there. “Thank you,” he said when he hurried in. “I
would never want to miss my date with you. This damned incontinence held
me up.”
She hadn’t known of that. She drew on her knowledge of folklore. “It is
just a story, a superstation, but some believe there is a cure.”
“I believe in anything,” he said. “What is it?”
“Those who suffer from a weak bladder must stand astride at the head
of an open grave, after the coffin is lowered but before the dirt is filled in.
Then walk backwards to the foot of that grave, bestriding it. But I am not
sure of the logic, unless it is that the malady is thus passed along to the dead
person, who won’t notice.”
“I’ll try it,” he said eagerly. “Even if it doesn’t work, I’ll be thinking of
you.”
“Don’t do that,” she cautioned him with mock seriousness. “You’ll get
stiff and annoy the corpse.”
He laughed heartily. “How true!” Then he completed the act, in a good
mood.
Thereafter she developed a reputation for clever advice and humor, and
was more in demand than ever. It seemed the men really liked having some
small relationship along with the sex.
“You’re really good,” Molly said. “You’re bringing extra business to the
house. That means more for the rest of us, too.”
That explained the grudging acceptance by the other girls. They real-
ized that they were better off with Kerena participating than they would be
without her.
She made sure to invoke her non-baby spell each month. This had a
convenient side effect: it suppressed her periods, so she was able to service
men continuously. If the madam noticed, she did not object.
“I’m in a hurry, but I had to see you,” one client told her. “How fast can
you do me?”
“Give me the lead and we’ll see.”
“Done.”
“Stand where you are.” She opened his shirt and his trousers without
removing either. She embraced him, pressing her bare breasts against his
chest as she kissed him. His member came erect, and she guided it in and
closed her thighs below it. She squeezed internally, applying a technique
Morely had taught her. He erupted. When he was spent, she dismounted,
used her hand to milk his member of remaining fluid, wiped him off, and
put his clothing back together. It had taken perhaps two minutes.

“You are amazing!” He departed, in good time for his business.
Even the madam was surprised. “He paid for an hour, and demanded
no refund,” she said.
“I gave him what he asked for.”
“I am going to give you to our most important client. He has special
tastes, but if you can accommodate him, you will not regret it.”
“I can accommodate him.”
“We shall see.”
“You’re getting Lord H!” Molly said. “He can make your fortune, but
he’s a challenge.”
“How so?”
“He’s fine for the first fuck. It’s the second one that freaks the girls out.
It’s always different, but weird. He’s never taken the same girl twice, and
they don’t mind.”
They talked, and Kerena began to get a glimmer of the problem, though
Molly herself did not quite fathom it. She prepared herself emotionally.
The man turned out to be portly, of middle age, and quite well dressed.
The moment she approached him, Kerena’s Seeing flashed. This was a sig-
nificant contact.
He took her in the normal fashion, almost causing her to wonder why
the madam had cautioned her. But Molly’s discussion kept her alert. They
talked, remaining naked, and he was well read and intelligent, with opinions
on many subjects. Kerena did not try to conceal her fascination.
“You seem smart,” he remarked. “Are you literate?”
“Oh, I wish I could read!” she exclaimed. “I know there is so much to
learn from books.”
“Perhaps it will come to pass.” He glanced at her with a certain hesita-
tion. “There is an aspect of me that some women have difficulty adjusting
to.”
“You have aroused my curiosity.” Whatever it was, she would accom-
modate it, because she needed to be with him. Jolie agreed; the tracks re-
mained aligned.
“I like reversals.”
“My apology, Lord X. I don’t think I understand.” But she was closer to
understanding than she let on.
“Call me Hirsh. I need no personal anonymity, as I do not work for the
king.”
“Thank you for giving me your name, Hirsh. I am Rena.”
“I wish to exchange roles, for a time.”
She acted perplexed. “Please explain this further.”
“I would like to put on your clothing, and vice versa.”
She was careful not to smile. “I think the fit would not be perfect.”

“True. It is a temporary expedient.”
“Then let’s do it.” She was curious where this would lead; Molly’s in-
formation had not gone beyond this point. Merely exchanging clothing should
not freak out experienced whores.
Hirsh donned her dress, which fit better than might have been expected,
and she put on his fine clothing. When she set his hat on her head, he asked
her to tuck her hair out of sight under it, to make her look more masculine.
She obliged, then risked an initiative: “If I may, Hirsh.” She took the wig and
put it carefully on his head, then held up the polished metal mirror for him
to see his reflection.
“Perfect!” he exclaimed. He lay on the bed. “Take me.”
Role reversal: now she understood. The girls were schooled to be the
objects of men’s passions, not to take the initiative. But Kerena could play
this game. “Woman, you are mine,” she said as gruffly as she could manage.
“Spread your legs.”
He spread his legs, feigning reluctance. She was reminded of her games
with Morely, as she pretended pain on penetration.
She got down on hands and knees, straddling him. “Let me see your
stuff, you bad girl.” She drew up the skirt to show his reviving member. “Just
as I thought: you haven’t been fucked enough. I’m going to plumb you to the
core, wench.”
“I beg you, master, no,” he whimpered, his member stiffening.
She opened her trousers, then threaded the needle, as it were, making
the awkward connection. She jammed down on him, bouncing. It could not
be entirely comfortable for him, but it was as close as she could come to
emulating the masculine brutality. Then she brought her body down, put-
ting her weight on him, and forced a hard kiss. “Put out, girl!”
He did. She felt his reaction as she pushed against him, still kissing his
mouth bruisingly. His passion was greater this time than it had been in the
normal mode.
He lay unmoving for a while after it was done. When she judged it time,
she disengaged, got off him, and removed his clothing. She was uncertain
whether she had pleased him or pushed it too far; it was a new experience
and she was not attuned. But her Seeing suggested that it was good.
Jolie agreed. She had not before reversed roles either, but it seemed harm-
less.
Finally he stirred. “I like sex twice a day, the second time as a variant.
Would you like to come home with me? I will provide a stipend.”
Home duty, instead of servicing ten or more men a day. “What would
be my duties?”
“This, in several forms. No household drudgery; I have servants. They
are circumspect.”

She appreciated how that would be important. “Would I be free to go
about, when not with you?”
“Of course. Anything you wish.”
“I have an interest. I am trying to discover where my former lover went—
he was abducted—by tracking traveling.”
“I will help you track. I have resources.”
“Then yes, I would like to go home with you.”
He smiled as he removed her dress. “Very good. I will notify my wife.”
Kerena froze. “Your wife!” It had not occurred to her that he could be
married, though she could have divined it by Seeing. She had been careless
in that respect.
“Do not be alarmed. She understands. She merely does not care to ac-
commodate my tastes.”
Maybe that made sense. “I will not want to stay, if she objects.”
“She won’t. Inform the madam; I will send a cart for you this after-
noon.”
“He’s taking you home!” Molly exclaimed. “Congratulations.”
“I will visit you when I can,” Kerena promised. She liked Molly, and did
not want to lose her friendship.
Thus it was arranged. Kerena explained to the madam, who took it in
stride. “He is a man we want very much to please. He provides goods we
can’t get elsewhere. If he tires of you, you will be welcome to return here.
You have been excellent for business. Here is your gold.” She presented a
bag.
Kerena could tell by its size and heft that everything was there: her half
share of all the payments for her liaisons. Morely had taught her to weigh
copper, silver, and gold by hand. Only gold weighed this much in such small
size. She had half expected to be cheated despite assurances, but did not care
to say so. “Thank you.”
The cart arrived, drawn by a single horse guided by a horseman. Kerena
got on, and rode through the streets of the city in bumpy style.
Hirsh’s house was at the edge of the city, with a yard filled with attrac-
tive trees. A woman came out to meet her. “I am Ona. You will have a cham-
ber adjacent to Hirsh’s room, so as to be readily available at night. His needs
can be erratic.”
So she gathered. “I will accommodate.”
“You will need a better wardrobe. Come with me.”
“First, I really ought to meet his wife. I am concerned lest she not ap-
prove.”
The woman smiled. “I am his wife.”
Kerena smiled ruefully, blushing. “I took you for a servant.” Again, she
should have Seen. This remarkable shift of situation was making her

unpardonably thoughtless.
“You are charming. This way.”
Kerena went with Ona to the kitchen, evidently the center of household
activity. “This is Rena, who will be with Hirsh,” Ona said to the fat cook.
“She is not a servant.”
The cook nodded.
Ona took her to a room with many hanging dresses. “Some of these
should fit you. Try them on. The seamstress will make adjustments.”
Kerena was increasingly nervous. “Please, I think I don’t understand.
Why are you helping me?”
“My husband is a good man and an excellent provider, and we love
each other in our fashion. But sex is uncomfortable for me. I tried to amelio-
rate it with balms, but they are not sufficient. Hirsh has the desire twice or
thrice a day. It is entirely beyond me. I told him to get it elsewhere until we
could find one to accommodate him here. Other girls have not been able to
keep the pace. He believes you can. I hope that is the case.”
“And what is to be the relationship between the two of us?” Kerena
asked. “Should I try to stay out of your sight?”
“By no means. You will do what I would do for my husband, were I able.
We will introduce you to outsiders as a young relative temporarily in our
care. The rest is no one else’s business.”
“But do you resent the—the need? I do not wish to be the source of
dissension.”
The woman smiled. “This, too, becomes you. I shall be glad to have the
company. Hirsh says you are a bright girl in search of a lost lover.”
“Yes.
Hirsh appeared. “Go with him now,” Ona said, with no sign of rancor.
Kerena went with him. “Can your wife really not resent me?”
“She dreads my need. As long as you abate that, she will be your friend.”
“This is not a thing I am well equipped to understand.” Yet her Seeing
suggested it was so.
“It is an unusual situation.”
They entered his room. It was richly appointed, with an enormous plush
bed.
No need to confuse the purpose. “How do you want me?”
“As you are, this time.”
They stripped and lay on the bed. To her surprise, Hirsh was not in a
hurry. He kissed her, stroked her breasts, squeezed her bottom, and talked. “I
have collected recent reports on groups and people that travel. Is there any
particular area you wish to verify?”
“You have me naked, and you wish to talk of travel?” she asked, be-
mused.

“I have you naked, and I want to please you.”
It fell into place. He required more than the body; he wanted her plea-
sure. That was one of his turn-ons.
“Locating the one I lost would please me,” she agreed. “I did not think
that you would want to address this subject at this time.” Men could be
possessive about their women, even when they had more than one.
“I love my wife, and would have her here with me if it were possible
without her pain. I am not here to love you, and you are not here to love me.
I need sex, you need to complete your search. There is no conflict.”
She nodded, seeing it. “It means everything to me to recover the one I
love.”
He asked about the details, and she told him what she knew. “I believe I
can help you,” he said. “It may take time, but if there have been any unusual
travels, we shall become aware of them.”
“Thank you!” she said gratefully.
Then he took her for sex, seemingly relishing her appreciation for his
help as much as the physical act.
Later in the day they had sex again, this time one of the weird variants.
She found it challenging and instructive, but was able to handle it. It was not
painful, just different.
Kerena settled into a comfortable situation. She was treated well by Hirsh,
Ona, and the household staff. The sex was tolerable and often interesting
and challenging. She was free to go into town when there was time, and she
did visit Molly, who was amazed and gratified by her success. And Hirsh
started teaching her to read.
The reading sessions were typically after sex; it seemed he did not like to
spurt and run, but to have more of a relationship. He gave her a handmade
alphabet book that illustrated each letter with a picture. A was for Apple,
with the A in color, matching the apple. B was for Bum, with a maid’s plush
bare bottom showing. It was fun. He showed her how the letters combined to
form words, which could be sounded out, though many seemed to follow no
reasonable rules and simply had to be memorized. It was a challenge, but she
loved it, and he in turn liked her ready aptitude.
“You are destined for higher things than being a man’s mistress,” he
remarked.
“What could be higher than being your mistress?” she asked playfully.
And the scene wavered, assuming that fuzziness of outline that indi-
cated a divergence of the timelines. Jolie, on the verge of napping, came
alert.
Yet no choice was being made here. Kerena was merely expressing her
satisfaction with her present existence.
Which suggested that this was the wrong path. But what else offered?

Jolie scrambled for alternatives, testing each by sending the thought to Kerena.
Return to the brothel? The lines fuzzed worse. Seek other employment? Still
the fuzz. Disagree with Hirsh? Worse. Agree with him? The lines clarified.
Why should that be? She would have to play it through to see where it led.
She returned to Hirsh’s statement. “Well, I hope so,” Kerena said
smoothly. “Though being your mistress is hardly a chore.”
“You are kind. Ona really appreciates your effort.”
“I am glad of that.”
The lines wavered.
Again, Jolie was in a quandary. What was wrong with this amicable
discussion? Kerena was glad; she knew how difficult Hirsh’s wife could have
made her existence, had she chosen. Instead she was supportive, and a nice
companion. Should she be otherwise?
The lines clarified somewhat. This was the right track.
Jolie returned to the point of divergence. “I am glad of that,” Kerena
said. “But surely she would be happier if there were no need for my ser-
vices.”
“Surely,” he agreed. “But I am as I am, and she is as she is, so we must
make the best of it. We are excellently matched in other respects.”
The alternates aligned, but now there was a thought in Kerena’s mind.
They were making the best of a difficult situation, but wouldn’t they be bet-
ter off if the situation improved? So that there was no need for a mistress?
After the session, Kerena went to Ona. “Please, I do not wish to cause
you distress, but there is something on my mind.”
Ona looked at her with alarm. “The work is too much for you?”
“No, not at all. I have learned Hirsh’s ways and they are challenging but
not onerous. Betweentimes he is teaching me to read and write. I like it here.
But—” She broke off.
“There is ever a ‘but,’ ” Ona said sadly.
“But I fear I am causing you distress merely by the need for my pres-
ence. You should be with Hirsh, no one else.”
“Agreed. But I am long since resigned. It is hardly your fault.”
“He—I—I do not know how to say this without risking offense.”
“No offense, dear,” Ona said patiently. “Say what you must.”
“Hirsh is teaching me to read. It is difficult, but I am very glad to learn,
knowing it will surely help me later in life. You—if I could teach you how
to—”
“Now I appreciate your gist. I know how, but there is pain. As I told you,
balms do not suffice. Despite your youth, you have had experience I have
not, but this is a physical rather than a knowledge limitation. I could never
perform as you do.”
“Yet if you could—”

Ona smiled with her habitual sadness. “If I could, I would. But I can’t.”
“I—when I was new, I feared something similar. That I would hurt, or
be wrongly responsive, so as to alienate my lover. But he gave me a remedy,
and perhaps it would work for you also.”
“Fear is one thing. Confirmation is another. You had the former, I the
latter.”
Kerena brought out the love figurine. “If you will, sleep with this in
your channel, then see what happens. It worked for me.”
“I am long past superstition, dear.”
“So am I. But this is genuine magic, used by women for countless gen-
erations. Please.”
Ona sighed. “I will try it one night, then return it to you. Does that seem
fair?”
“Yes. One night should be enough to verify or refute its power.”
Ona took the figurine, and Kerena returned to her study of the letters
and words. She was laboring to make her writing quite clear, so no literate
person could misunderstand it. She was adding words to her vocabulary
every day. And the realities remained aligned.
In the morning, early, she went to Hirsh’s bedroom, as often he liked sex
first thing. He nighted alone, as Ona was too much of a temptation when
present in dishabille. She did not like to refuse him, and he did not like to
hurt her, so they slept apart, with mutual regret. Once Kerena finished with
him, it was safe for husband and wife to be together as they dressed. They
liked being together, when it was feasible. They were after all in love.
Kerena entered quietly, intending to join him in the bed as usual, to be
there as he awakened. She paused, looking at the bed. There was already
activity there. Hirsh was having at a woman with gusto, and she was clasp-
ing him and moaning with delight. What was going on? Had he brought in
another mistress, without telling her?
They rolled over, and the woman came on top, still connected. It was
Ona! She was kissing him as her body struggled to squeeze the last of his
passion from him. How had this come to pass?
Then Kerena remembered the love figurine. It had worked! Ona must
have felt such strong desire that she had come to Hirsh’s bed and seduced
him, following through with the kind of passion Kerena remembered expe-
riencing with Morely.
Ona lifted her head and spied Kerena. “There you are, on schedule,”
she said. “I apologize for preempting you. I simply couldn’t wait.”
“That’s all right,” Kerena said, half bemused.
“What did you say to her?” Hirsh asked.
“She gave me her magic,” Ona said. “It abolished my pain. Now my
vulva matches my passion.” Then, to Kerena: “You must sell it to me, dear. I

have to have it.”
“Oh, I wouldn’t sell it,” Kerena said.
The lines blurred. Jolie focused.
“I will give it to you,” Kerena continued, and the lines clarified.
“But there will be no further need for your services here. You must have
substance to make your way elsewhere.”
“I will find her another position,” Hirsh said. “A better one.”
“See that you do,” Ona said. “She has given me what I most desired.
Now let’s have at it again.”
“But I am spent!”
“Don’t make excuses, wretch! I demand performance, or I will bite off
your tool and soak it in vinegar and pepper sauce to strengthen it.” She lifted
the errant member, threatening it with her teeth.
“Please, not that,” he begged.
Ona huffed up in simulated anger. “Do you prefer the whip, you lag-
gard? No more excuses!”
They were going into the alternate mode. Ona clearly was competent,
now that her pain was gone.
In due course they joined Kerena for breakfast, glowing. The servants
were agog, well aware of the change. Jolie was satisfied, as the timelines
remained aligned; this change was necessary.
“It is an irony that your kindness costs you your position,” Hirsh said.
“You will of course remain here until I find the right position. I also have not
forgotten the quest for your lost man. Unfortunately no word has reached
me on that score.”
“Which suggests that a physical search is not enough,” Ona said. “Magic
may be required, as was the case for me.”
“Magic,” he echoed. “Are you hinting what I fear?”
“I believe she could handle it. She’s smart enough.”
“Am I missing something?” Kerena asked.
“There is a woman who has use for talented women,” Hirsh said.
“A woman? Not a man?”
“A woman,” Ona said. “In the sense that the brothel madam is a woman.
This one is far more talented and powerful, and dangerous when thwarted.
Perhaps this is not a good idea.”
“But she could help me find Morely?”
“If anyone can, she can,” Hirsh said. “She could do more good for you
than anyone else in the kingdom. But she could also do you more harm. Her
temper is unpredictable. This may after all be too dangerous to risk.”
Kerena was intrigued. “Who is she?”
“Morgan le Fey. The king’s sister.”
Kerena felt a chill of premonition. Danger, indeed. “I have heard of her.

Is it true she can cut the heart out of a man without remorse?”
“She can do it without even touching him,” Ona said. “No, this is a bad
idea. We will find you some other position.”
“Agreed,” Hirsh said.
Kerena was relieved. She had no idea what use the Fey would want to
make of her, but it surely would not be comfortable.
“So that’s decided,” Ona said. “We will not send you into that lion’s
den.”
A servant appeared. “A coach is here, asking for the Lady Rena.”
“What?” Hirsh asked. “Who has the temerity to claim a member of my
household?”
“The Lady Fey,” the servant replied.
The three of them exchanged glances, similarly appalled. How could
the Fey have known of Kerena’s presence here, let alone that she was about
to be let go? The situation had changed only this morning.
It had to be magic. Kerena knew with a sinking feeling that it would not
be denied.

CHAPTER 3
CLOAK AND DAGGER
The coach conveyed her to a hidden castle in the center of town. It
looked like a seedy neighborhood, but as the coach entered its decrepit gate
it shifted to become a glorious edifice overlooking a lovely estate. This was of
course the magic of illusion. But which was more truly the illusion: the run-
down collections of hovels seen from afar, or the massive ramparts seen
from close in?
Did it matter? Probably it was some of each. The point was that few
would think to look for such a stronghold here. The faerie sister of the king
could not be found unless she wanted to be.
The coach halted. Kerena stepped out onto a stone platform and stood
there. The coach moved on. Now she saw with surprise that the horse that
had drawn it was actually a harnessed griffin: part lion, part eagle. That had
to be more illusion, as griffins were too wild to be tamed or harnessed. It was
probably the original horse clothed with illusion. Still, the magic was apt.
The coach itself was probably mostly illusion too, and was really a wagon
with a token covering. What did it matter, as long as the appearance was
proper?
No one else was there. Maybe the coach was early and she wasn’t ex-
pected yet. Uncertain where to go, she decided to find someone and inquire.
She mounted the steps of a winding stone stairway that led up to a high
door nestled between rounded turrets. But when she got there, the door was
closed and bolted, and no one answered her knock and call. The stair contin-
ued up, so she ascended further, around a turret and beside a deep inner
court. She peered down to see shrubs growing therein, and perhaps some
small trees. But still no sign of human presence.
Jolie was impressed. This was quality magic, of a level she hadn’t thought
existed this far back. Fortunately the timelines aligned; she wasn’t sure how
she would have changed them otherwise.
At last the stair brought her to the top of a turret. She stood in this and

gazed around the countryside, spread out like a map below. Now there was
no town; fields and forests surrounded the castle. The illusion had changed
again.
“Welcome, Kerena.”
She jumped; the voice was right behind her. She turned to discover a
breathtakingly lovely woman wearing a crown-shaped tiara and a gown that
hardly concealed her voluptuous form. “Queen Morgan le Fey,” she said,
curtsying.
Jolie ducked down as low as she could go. She was afraid of the sorcer-
ess and did not want to be discovered.
“I will allow one question a day. The rest is business.”
“How much is illusion?”
“All of it.” Abruptly they were standing in an ordinary room with no
view. The Fey, too, was changed, and was now a moderately dull woman of
perhaps forty.
“Thank you. I have expended my question, so will not ask what you
want of me.”
“Smart girl. I have need of information. You will obtain it. In return I
will teach you how to locate your lost man, which will require magical arts.
Perform well and you will be rewarded.”
She did not need to add that failure to perform well would bring pun-
ishment. “I am ready.”
“Men have secrets, but they will often betray everything to women they
desire enough. I can no longer fascinate men to that degree, because illusion
alone won’t do it. But you are young enough to have the body, nervy enough
to use it effectively, and that is most of what matters.”
“I understand.”
“Sometimes silence is necessary, and the only way to be sure of it is with
the dagger’s point. You will learn to handle that aspect too.”
Kerena stared at the woman, horrified. “I don’t think I can do that.”
“Not now. But in time you will.”
Her first assignment was to seduce a young knight of the king’s court,
and to learn where a particular cache of silver was hidden. Kerena sus-
pected that the Fey already knew the answer, but was using this as a test case
to see how apt Kerena was in this kind of interrogation. Well, she would try
her best; she wanted to learn what the Fey could teach her.
The Fey took her to the edge of town just before the knight was due to
pass, and faded out. That was a nice trick of illusion; Kerena made a mental
note to learn it when she could. Meanwhile she disposed herself in peasant
clothing and waited.
The knight was in plain clothes, anonymous, as he was coming into
town for a session at the brothel. He was barely 21 and seemed more like

fifteen. Kerena had to remind herself that she was only fourteen, though she
felt far older in experience. Morely, the brothel, and Hirsh had done that for
her.
She stepped out to block his horse. “Kind sir,” she called. “Are you going
my way?”
He reined in the animal, contemplating her. Kerena’s hair was silken
long, her face was innocent, and her shift was snug at the waist, accenting
her bosom and hips. “That depends.”
“I live on market street, near the center of town.” That was near the
brothel district; he surely was well familiar with the area. “I am a poor maiden
afoot, and it is a long walk. I would be most grateful for a ride.”
He decided it was a chance worth taking. After all, if she didn’t work
out, he still would be close to where he was going anyway. “Come on up.” He
reached a hand down.
She took his hand, and lifted a leg to join her foot to his in the stirrup. In
the process, of course, she flashed her bare leg well toward the juncture. The
knight’s pupils dilated.
It was a bit of a scramble getting up before him, during which her shift
got pulled around to show rather too much flesh, and her breasts scraped
across his arm. Finally she was there, her bottom pressed against his crotch,
and one of his arms around her body just below her breasts. It was not an
elegant mounting, but it had familiarized him with all the aspects of her
body that might have interested him. Exposive dishabille was a special art.
She engaged him in dialogue, properly impressed by his every remark.
By the time they reached the brothel district, he had lost interest in them.
They went on to her house, which was at the edge of the Fey’s premises, and
turned out to be rather nicer inside than it appeared from the outside.
There was no need for him to make known the nature of his interest.
They fell on the bed together, their clothing wedged out of the way in the key
regions. He was on her and in her before (it seemed) either of them realized.
Then she let him lie there, while she got up and poured him a cup of
strong mead. He glugged it appreciatively, not thinking to inquire how it was
that a peasant girl possessed such potent brew. Soon he was pleasantly tipsy.
“You must be a really important person,” she said enthusiastically. “You
have such an authoritative way about you, as well as being handsome and
awesomely virile.” The approach was transparently obvious, but probably
all that was required in this case.
Perhaps in a more sober state he would have realized the shallowness
of the flattery. As it was, he became expansive. He confided that he did have
key duties in the king’s court.
“Oh, you must know all the wonderful secrets,” she said, removing her
shift as she paced before him. He watched, his interest stirring again. She

made sure that her moderate breasts bounced with each step.
By the time she joined him, nude, for the second round of sex, he had
told her about the cache of silver, and where it was hidden. She plied him
with more mead, and gave him such an experience that it was unlikely that
he would remember anything of his evening except that wild business on
the bed. That was important: that he not realize what he had blabbed. The
Fey did not like to leave her handprints on her mischief.
The Fey was pleased. “You have the touch,” she said. “However, some
men are resistive to straight seduction, and must be captured subtly.”
“Subtly? In my experience, they are all eager for young bodies.”
“Not all. Some prefer other men; they are difficult to seduce by flaunt-
ing female attributes. Some are interested, but wish to be the initiators; for
them, maidenly diffidence is best. Some are old and slow, but do not wish to
be reminded. Some are dangerously smart. It is important to ascertain their
types before committing. And, on occasion, it is necessary to seduce a woman.”
“A woman!” Kerena was amazed. The Fey had been making excellent
sense up to that point.
“Women have secrets too. Some are amenable to the gentle suasion of a
lovely woman, rather than the crude directness of a rough man. You must
be ready to relate to anyone.”
“I don’t think I could—relate—to a woman.”
“Then learn. Try to seduce me.”
“I couldn’t!” She was appalled.
“Then learn,” the Fey repeated evenly. “I will seduce you. Thereafter
you will know.”
And as Kerena stood bemused, the Fey became fascinating. She engaged
her in pleasant dialogue, flattering her, then slowly embraced her and kissed
her. Her manner was so exquisitely smooth and enticing that it seemed in
order. Before she knew it, they were naked on the bed, stroking each other’s
breasts and buttocks. The kisses became passionate, first on the mouth, then
the breasts, and finally the cleft.
Only when Kerena found herself gloriously climaxing did she appreci-
ate what had happened. She had been completely seduced—and the Fey had
used no magic, not even illusion. Everything was technique. There were in-
deed ways in which sex was better with another woman than with a man.
“Now what did I do?” the Fey asked.
The question reminded Kerena of Morely’s efforts to acquaint her with
reality rather than impression. That caused her to focus. “You seduced me.
We did not make love; you made me be fulfilled. You were not.”
The Fey nodded. “I practice sex for business reasons, rather than for
pleasure. But if I wanted pleasure, I would take a virile man. The rest is art.”
“And I did not realize it until it was done,” Kerena said, awed in retro-

spect. “Now I understand.”
The Fey smiled, pleased in much the way Morely would have been by an
apt pupil. “But if my taste happened to be in women, you would be the type
I preferred. You have a marvelously fresh young body and face. Hone your
skills; you should be good with women when that time comes.”
“I will try to be,” Kerena agreed.
There were other men, and she crafted her skills, managing the marks
precisely. She almost invariably gleaned the information desired, and seldom
did the men realize what they had revealed. Sometimes the object was not to
gain information, but to gain influence. She cast her spell on key men, so
that they would act as the Fey desired, resulting in modifications of court
procedure that benefited her. It seemed that the Fey never approached her
brother directly; in fact he was unaware of her presence at the capital town.
She preferred subtlety, and was remarkably successful in accomplishing her
designs. Kerena wasn’t certain what those designs were; they seemed ob-
scure. But the Fey definitely had an agenda of some sort.
Kerena mused on what that agenda might be. Power? Perhaps, in part.
More likely power was but a means to some other inscrutable end. The Fey
was said to be half faerie, and once to have seduced her brother the king and
conceived a quarter faerie son by him. There were other stories. Kerena knew
she could ask, but she doubted that was wise, and in any event she had more
than enough other questions to tackle day by day. Such as her quest to find
Morely.
“First you must master your cloak,” the Fey said. “That will require
time. It is a marvelous device, exceptional magic.”
“It is Morely’s cloak, not mine. I merely hold it until I can return it to
him.”
The Fey turned a disturbingly intense gaze on her. “Perhaps. Neverthe-
less, it is the key to your quest. Only when you master it will you be able to
locate him.”
“You will teach me?”
“It will require several questions and much practice to unriddle it. Mean-
while, of course, you will continue to serve me.”
“If the cloak is so valuable, and you understand it so well, I am sur-
prised you do not simply take it from me for yourself.”
The Fey made the Morely type of smile. “You are learning to phrase
questions correctly. I would of course take it from you if I could. But it is
crafted to resist the faerie element that is the source of my power. It is bound
to you; the man surely loves you. Were I to seize it, it would crumble into dirt
and be useless. If I am to have use of it, I must do so through you. You will be
more useful using its powers, until you learn the last of them; then you will
go your own way and I will not be able to stop you. So my hold on you is

limited. But we can do each other some good in the interim.”
Kerena knew the woman spoke literally: she had no love for Kerena or
anyone else, but did have use for her. If the cloak helped her be more useful,
the Fey would encourage its use. But the cloak would eventually free her
from the Fey. So the Fey would be careful about the lessons, and not give the
last one until she had to. Meanwhile, they were indeed doing each other
some good: the Fey was gaining much information and influence, and Kerena
was learning what she needed. It was a worthwhile association. They under-
stood each other.
Kerena normally slept alone when not using her sexuality for business
purposes. One night she discovered a dark figure in her room. Had someone
sneaked in? “Who are you?”
The figure did not speak. He extended his shadowy hand and touched
hers. She was both amazed and thrilled: that touch had more sheer mascu-
line presence than she had felt from anyone in the past.
She didn’t speak again. She joined the figure in her bed and they made
phenomenal love. Whoever he was, he was the best sexual partner ever. He
made her float like a flower on a pool, sail like a leaf in the wind, and quake
with the intensity of her pleasure. It was as though they had known and
loved each other forever.
Flushed, panting, feeling like an innocent girl, she lay in his embrace
after the first session, marveling at the event. “Have we met before?” she
asked.
He merely stroked her hand. Even now, that touch sent a thrill through
her body. She was a thoroughly experienced woman, yet compared to him
she felt amateur.
They made love again, and again, and each episode radiated pleasure
though her being. Then he departed, leaving her to sleep and dream of end-
less rapture.
In the morning she pondered her experience of the night. She had no
idea who her visitor had been, but she longed for his return. She did not
speak of this to anyone else, somehow knowing that this was a secret she had
to keep, lest she lose any continuation.
Alas, her nocturnal lover did not return. Apparently she had been a
mere stop on the way to wherever he was going. Her loin ached for lack of
his presence. Almost, she was tempted to ask the Fey about him. Almost. It
might be some mischief the Fey had wrought, in which case a question would
play into her design. But if the Fey did not know of the man, that was surely
significant in another manner. How could anyone enter her premises, and
she not know?
Jolie had misgivings about this. The identity of the man was a mystery
to her too, and she did not like a mystery of this nature. Yet the lines had not

blurred, so it had to be a legitimate part of the girl’s existence.
Between assignments Kerena visited Molly. The brothel was close to the
Fey’s castle, so this was convenient. The girl was a pleasant contrast to the
mature cynicism of the Fey. Kerena said nothing of her missions, of course,
only that she was now being kept by another client.
The cloak’s first revealed property was invisibility. This had to be in-
voked by a special spoken spell, after she related to the cloak itself. “These
things are fairly standard,” the Fey explained. “You must get close to the
cloak, wrapping it about you naked. You must court it.”
“Must what?”
“Court it. Profess your love for it. It will respond if it knows you care.”
“But it’s just a piece of material.”
“Hardly that. It is enchanted material, imbued by a sorcerer I would
like to meet; he clearly knows his magic. Disrespect it at your peril.”
Kerena saw her point. “I do respect it; I first made love upon it.”
“That’s a good start. Remind it of that. Then when you have its atten-
tion, solicit its power by drawing an analogy and forming a triple rhyme
with it. Once you invoke it that way, you must always use that specific form;
it will not respond to any other, or to any other person.”
“An analogy,” Kerena repeated, not getting it.
The Fey frowned. “I thought you were a bright girl.”
And the lines of reality started to fuzz.
Jolie moved back a minute. Invisible like the air. Make me glare like the
air, with my fair hair. Something like that, only less clumsy.
“An analogy,” Kerena said. “Now I understand.” The lines clarified.
Kerena went to her room and tried it. She stripped naked, wrapped the
cloak around her, and whispered “Cloak of night, I love you. Make me part
of you.” She kissed it.
The cloak writhed, clasping her. It was responding! It had never done
that before. But of course she had never tried to invoke its magic, not realiz-
ing its nature.
“Cloak, hear my prayer,” she whispered. “Make us fair, like the air.”
Something changed. For a moment she wasn’t sure what, then realized
that she couldn’t see her legs. She couldn’t see any part of her body, or the
cloak. That was weird.
She walked to the mirror and looked. There was nothing. She was invis-
ible.
She opened the door and walked out around the house. It was actually
fairly small; the appearance of the great castle was merely to impress visi-
tors, such as herself, the first time. The Fey didn’t bother to generate the
illusion at other times, as it required magical energy she didn’t care to waste.
She went to see the cook, who wasn’t aware of her, and the coachman. He

was working on a wagon wheel, and suddenly stepped across the room for a
nail. And collided with Kerena.
“What?” he asked, amazed as his arms swung around her. “Am I going
blind? I see nothing.” One hand closed on her left buttock, through the cloth;
the other found her right breast, similarly.
“You rogue!” Kerena exclaimed. “You heard me coming!”
“Aye, miss,” he agreed, letting her go. “And got a good feel, too.”
She had to laugh. “You’re used to magic, around here. But suppose you’d
done that to the Fey?”
“She’d have sprouted spines and stabbed me. But I know you apart by
your tread and smell.”
Here was a learning opportunity. “Teach me to mask those, and I’ll give
you more than a feel.”
The man was happy to cooperate. Soon she was managing to step with-
out sound, as she could do in the dark forest, and knew that a thorough body
wash would diminish her smell for several hours if she didn’t sweat much.
She rewarded him with an invisible sexual clasping that left him more than
satisfied. It was after all her stock in trade. The coachman had left her alone,
surely on the Fey’s order, but would not have been a man had he not had a
serious hankering for her body.
She returned to her room, and tried to remove the cloak. And failed; it
would not come off. She realized that she did not know how to turn off the
spell. She remained cloaked and invisible.
She went to the Fey. “Please, I need to know how to end the invisibility.”
“You have had your question for today,” the woman snapped. “Save it
for tomorrow.”
“But I’m stuck this way!”
“You should have considered that before invoking it, you silly girl. Never
get into something you don’t know how to get out of.”
It was excellent advice, albeit a bit late. Also a stiff lesson. She would not
make that mistake again. Kerena returned to her room. She used her cham-
ber pot, and saw that when she left it, her refuse was visible, no longer masked
by the cloak. But she herself could not leave it similarly.
She slept imperfectly, angry with herself for making such a stupid er-
ror. But the cloak was comfortable enough, keeping her warm. In the morn-
ing she tried to put something on beneath it, but was unable; it clung too
tightly to her body. She would have to remain nude until she nullified the
spell.
She went back to the Fey. “Repeat the invocation, exactly as you made
it,” the woman said, not waiting for the question. “It is an on-off latch.”
“Thank you, mistress.” Kerena retreated to her room, repeated the in-
vocation, and became visible. Now she was able to remove the cloak.

“Next, master protection,” the Fey told her later that day. “It should
shield you against arrow, blade, or club. That can be useful on occasion.”
Kerena went to her room, romanced the cloak, then whispered her im-
promptu ditty: “Wield a shield, yield the field.” It didn’t make a lot of sense,
but she trusted the cloak to respond to her meaning.
It did. She did not disappear, and the cloak felt no different, but when
she went to the coachman she verified it. “Strike me and you can have me,”
she told him.
“Magic?”
“I hope so.”
He curled his fist and tried a cautious punch, not wanting to hurt her. It
sheered off harmlessly. He tried again, with greater force; his fist bounced
back at him. He tried a third time, with a carriage stay; it jarred from his
hand as if caught on an invisible rail. “Can’t touch you,” he said. “Too bad
for me.”
“Let’s find out.” She opened the cloak, exposing her nude body, and
stepped into him. Now there was contact. It was the cloak that fended him
off, not her body. “Take me anyway; I appreciate your assistance.”
He did not argue. In a moment his member was out and in, as it were, as
she stood against the wheel of the coach. She had not had to null the invoca-
tion; the cloak repelled intrusion only where its fabric was. “You’re a nice
girl,” he gasped. “Not a tease like those others.”
“I can tease when I choose. But I might need a ride sometime.” She had
long since established that the coach was authentic; it seemed the Fey had
found it simpler to get a real one, rare and expensive as it was, than to main-
tain sufficient illusion to fake it.
“Anytime!”
Unfortunately the impromptu tryst mainly served to remind her of the
extent to which this man, and any other man, fell short of her lover of the
night. She had been spoiled for ordinary men, just as she spoiled ordinary
men for other women. Perhaps it served her right, but her loin still ached.
The third power of the cloak was to make solid substance permeable to
her progress, even stone. The ditty she worked out seemed stupid, but it was
the best she could do at the moment. “Let me jog through fog, unclog the
bog.”
Nothing seemed to happen, but she tried walking through the bed. There
was no resistance; her cloaked lower portion passed through the bed as if it
were, yes, a bank of fog.
She tried the wall, and it seemed like illusion. But why wasn’t she sink-
ing through the floor? She kneeled—and suddenly was dropping down
through the floor and ground. Oops!
She straightened her legs and came to a halt, well below ground level.

She was entirely surrounded by rock. She felt claustrophobic. She didn’t dare
null the spell, lest she be crushed by the rock. How could she get back to the
surface? Her walking produced only forward motion, which didn’t solve the
problem.
She felt as if she were suffocating. She had to get out of here! But how?
The timelines began to blur. Jolie was already alert; now she knew her
concern was justified. Kerena had gotten herself in over her head, literally,
and needed help if she was not to perish here. She was running out of air; it
seemed that all she had was what had accompanied her inside the enclosure
of the cloak. There was not much time left.
Jolie remembered that it had been possible to embrace the coachman
while the protection spell was on, because it repulsed only where the mate-
rial was. If that was the case here, how did it relate? Could the girl open the
cloak and—what, be buried in solid rock? Still no good.
She had kneeled, and plunged, as the material made the ground below
her pervious. Her feet weren’t similarly covered, so found the rock solid as
usual. That meant, in turn—
Jolie had it. Stair steps! Lift your feet and ascend.
Kerena responded. She lifted one foot, poked her toe forward, and found
purchase at the higher level. She lifted the other and leaned forward for
balance, achieving the higher level. Where the feet projected beyond the
enclosure of the cloak, they found solidity. It was like climbing a hill.
Encouraged, the girl adjusted her stepping to become more efficient.
She was gasping from lack of air, but was determined to fight her way up
and out. If she collapsed, Jolie would have to step back, perhaps preventing
her from dropping below the ground level, but that might cause the timelines
to separate. So it was better to let her get through herself, if she could.
At last her head poked out of the ground. She panted, sucking in air,
recovering. She was in a cellar, having traveled some distance from her point
of entry. Fortunately no person was there to see her.
After a time she climbed the rest of the way out, and stood on the cellar
floor. Then she walked through the wall toward the Fey’s house. This had
been another stiff lesson, and another mistake she would not make again.
The magic of the cloak had almost killed her, because she had used it im-
properly.
Meanwhile the Fey had another assignment for her. “I have my own
designs,” she said seriously. “But there are villagers who once did me a favor,
and I do not wish them ill. They are about to be tricked, trapped, killed,
raped, and enslaved, depending on their ages, genders and physical appeal.
You must prevent that.”
“Of course!”
“They mean to travel to Ireland, where greener fields beckon. This is in

order. But a pirate slaver ship means to represent itself as their legitimate
transport. Once they are aboard it will be too late; any who try to resist will
be summarily beaten or killed. The pirates will publicly gang rape the women.
Any children who cry will be hurled overboard. It is necessary to prevent
this from happening.”
“Yes!”
The Fey’s smile suggested that she did not share Kerena’s feeling. To her,
this was merely another business item. “The legitimate ship is sailing from
the south, tacking slowly against the winds. The pirate ship is sailing from
the north, with the wind. It will arrive a day ahead, and its representative
will approach the people to persuade them it is their intended ship. He is
silver-tongued and they are trusting; he will succeed. You must intercept
him and divert him that day. If you fail, you must kill him. It is the only way.”
“But I’m not a killer!”
“What is your preference: to spare the lives of a hundred innocent vil-
lagers, or the life of one criminal?”
“There must be another way.”
The Fey shrugged. “Perhaps you will find it.”
rs
Kerena arrived at the village inn by coach. This was near the Port of
Patrick in southern Scotland, where ships sailed for Ireland. “I have come to
catch the ship to Ireland,” she told the innkeeper. “Am I in time?”
“You are,” he agreed.
“How much for a room and a meal?”
He gave an inflated price.
“Oh, I can’t afford that,” she said. “My family perished of plague in
England, and I have barely enough for food and passage to get me to relatives
in Ireland. I will have to sleep on the floor.” Her nervous voice could be
heard throughout the room.
A dapper man rose from a table. “As it happens, I have a room with a
bed big enough for two, if you would care to share it.”
She gazed at him with large innocent eyes. “My mother told me not to
share a bed with any strange man.”
“Then come to my table for some food, and we shall talk. Soon you will
be satisfied that I am not strange.”
She considered, evidently not picking up on the suppressed smirks of a
number of other men. This was almost too easy! “Why thank you, kind sir.
That seems fair.”
They sat at the table, and the innkeeper brought lamb and ale. Kerena,
clearly unused to such brew, was soon pleasantly tipsy. Meanwhile she learned
that her companion was called Joiner. He made arrangements for things. He

was on his way to make a deal for a village traveling to Ireland to obtain
passage on the same ship she sought. “Oh, that seems so important!” she
exclaimed, much impressed.
In due course, she accompanied him to his room, trustingly and not
completely steady. He was soon kissing her and running his hands over her
body. She removed her cloak, then her traveling dress. They had urgent sex.
Then, as they relaxed, she engaged him in further dialogue. He had taken a
fair amount of ale himself, and that and her wonder-filled interest loosened
his tongue. He confessed his real mission: to trick the villagers into boarding
the pirate ship that had arrived before the legitimate one.
“But that is not nice,” she protested. She was playing her role, but she
agreed with it. She did not like malicious mischief. “What have those people
done to you, that you should treat them thus?”
“Nothing. They are merely marks. They deserve what their idiocy brings
them.”
Kerena decided to distract him until it was too late to meet the villagers.
She was pretty sure she could do it, because she had hardly begun to show
him what she could do with her bare body.
The lines blurred.
Jolie moved back a few seconds, revising the thought.
“I must warn them,” Kerena said, rising from the bed. The lines clari-
fied.
Joiner realized that he had said too much. “I can’t let you do that.”
She ran to the door, swooping up her cloak and drawing it about her,
lacing it at the neck. “You can’t stop me.”
He laughed. “I don’t need to. You will not make it out of the inn. The
others here are pirates on leave from the ship. They will make gang sport of
you, and take you with them to the ship so their fellows can finish the job.”
“Oh!” she cried in maidenly dismay. “I thought you were nice.”
“I was, until you made me talk too much. Now I must kill you. But first
I mean to have my way with you again, because you are a really nice morsel
with a tight little bum.”
“You can’t kill me,” she said desperately. “That would be murder.”
He caught her arm and hauled her back to the bed. “You have no family,
and are in a foreign country. So one will miss you until long after my mission
with the villagers is done. You should have heeded your mother’s advice.”
“Oh, I am undone!” she wailed helplessly.
“Therefore I will do you,” he said, pressing her down on the bed. Her
cloak fell open below the neck, providing access to her breasts and belly.
She tried to resist, but her flailing arms had no power against his re-
stored urgency. She wept as he brutally penetrated her. It was evidently way
too late to distract him the necessary time.

“Delightful,” he said as he concluded. “I am truly sorry to waste such a
beautiful body. But business is business. Now fare well in the other realm.”
He caught the ends of his kerchief, which he had laid conveniently under
her neck, and twisted them together in front, slowly throttling her. Her face
reddened as her breathing was cut off. The pirate had no mercy.
Then her hidden dagger plunged into his side, severing blood vessels
near his heart. “Aaahh!” he groaned, falling over. The wound was not imme-
diately lethal, but there were no good treatment facilities here, and he would
die in a few days. His condition would serve as a distraction so that the other
pirates would not think to find another man to tackle the villagers.
Kerena got out from under him. “You should have allowed me to dis-
tract you longer,” she said. She had not actually been choked; the laced cloak
had protected her neck, and she had faked it by holding her breath. She had
hoped he would reconsider, then acted when it was clear the hope was vain.
Jolie was also sorry the man had not allowed himself to be distracted
longer. Yes she had been the one to prevent that. Why had she had to put
Kerena into such a brutal alternative?
The man’s warning about the other pirates was surely well taken. Kerena
did not risk it. She invoked the cloak’s permeability power and walked through
the wall. Outside, she canceled it and invoked invisibility. When she was
well clear of the inn she returned to normalcy.
The coach was waiting in a secluded glade. The coachman was snooz-
ing as the horse grazed.
“I am done,” she said, not loudly.
He came awake. “Miss Rena! How was it?”
Suddenly it struck her. “I killed him! I stabbed him to death.”
“Remove your cloak, Miss, and I will comfort you.”
She took off the cloak and put it in the coach. Then she accepted his
embrace. Of course it would lead to sex, but he had become something of a
friend, and did care for her to a reasonable extent. She did need the comfort.
“It was awful,” she sobbed. “I wanted to distract him, to talk him out of
it, but I messed it up and he raped me and I had to kill him.”
“You didn’t use the cloak?” the coachman asked alarmed.
“Only to protect my neck when he throttled me. I wanted to occupy him
for a night and day, so he would forget, but somehow I didn’t. So I had no
choice. I am devastated.”
“Miss, can you keep a secret?”
What was on his mind? “Yes.”
“It’s like that, working for the Fey. I have had to do things I didn’t like. I
know how it is. She forces you not only to do her bidding, but to do it in the
way she wants. She makes people fit her moral compass. You couldn’t help
it.”

“I could have distracted him longer. I know it. Somehow I didn’t.”
Jolie felt guilty.
“I don’t think so. Pirates like to rape, loot, and kill; they get almost as
much satisfaction from the one as the other. He wouldn’t have let you play
him along any further than he wanted. The Fey knew that.”
“She said I might find another way.”
“She knew there wasn’t. She let you try your way and fail, so you had no
choice but her way. She wanted you to be blooded. To learn to kill. Don’t
blame yourself; blame her. But don’t tell her I told you.”
Kerena considered that, and realized it was true. She had been put into
a situation with but one likely outcome. Indeed, it had not really been her
fault. Still, it hurt.
Yet Jolie knew there had been an alternative. That knowledge hurt her
too.
“Cry,” the coachman said. “It helps. I know.”
She cried into his stout shoulder. It did help.
Then she lifted her face. “You haven’t tried to seduce me.”
“It doesn’t seem right. You are in pain.”
“You are a decent man. You deserve your reward. Take me.”
He took her, gently, on the coach seat. She kissed him repeatedly, appre-
ciating his concern for her. She had long since learned that though sex was
the first thing most men thought of when they saw a figure like hers, they
did have other dimensions.
Except, perhaps, for her anonymous lover of the night. He had shown
no other interest than sex, yet that had proved to be more than sufficient.
The journey back took time, and she obliged the coachman frequently.
It was her main coin, and she realized that his friendship could be useful.
Once they got back, the Fey would have other things for both of them to do,
so there was a convenient limit to the affair. Meanwhile, it did help distract
her from the awfulness of her blooding.
Yet there was worse. Back in town, Kerena went to visit Molly, and learned
that the girl was dead. She had been brutally murdered by a client. Blake had
gone after the man with a knife, but too late to catch him. Her friend was
gone.
“The girl was cursed,” the Fey said matter of factly.
“Cursed?”
“Destined to die young and violently. Didn’t you know?”
“She never spoke of such a thing.”
“Why would she? Her destiny was fixed.”
Kerena was hurting from the loss of her friend so soon after the loss of
her own innocence about killing. It was as though she had stabbed her friend.
“Couldn’t the curse have been stopped?

“The time to abate a curse is before it strikes. Or better, before it is
made.”
Of course it was too late. But Kerena still hurt. Why couldn’t she have
seen it coming with her Seeing? Maybe she could have, and prevented it, had
she just thought to. Had she been there when her friend most needed her.
“What can I do now?”
“After she is dead? Reanimation of the dead is beyond my powers and
yours, I think.”
Surely true. But she still couldn’t let it rest. “Where is she now?”
“The victims of such curses normally can’t rest, even after death. Not
until they manage to abate their curses. She will be a ghost until the final
kingdom comes.”
Kerena thought about that. If Molly remained here, albeit as a ghost,
maybe there was still a chance for her. If there were a way to reanimate her.
If Kerena could find it. She had learned much magic; could she somehow
learn this?
She didn’t know. But she intended to keep it in mind.

CHAPTER 4
SIR GAWAIN
“This case is special,” the Fey informed her. “You must corrupt a good
man.”
“Corruption is easy, if I don’t have to kill him.” Kerena made no secret
of her distaste for killing, but also didn’t try to hide the fact that she had
killed. Her training was proceeding according to form.
“Not in this case. He must not be killed, and he must not know my hand
in this. He is intelligent and honorable, dreadfully difficult to sway. Succeed
in this, and I will teach you the last great power of your cloak: the ability to
orient on its master.”
“Morely!”
“You can find him, and with what you have learned, it may now be safe
for you to do so. After this mission.”
“I will accomplish it,” Kerena said, thrilled by the prospect of finally
locating her beloved. She was now fifteen, and thoroughly practiced both in
the seduction of men and the use of the magic cloak.
“My benighted brother the king seeks the grail.” The Fey spoke of Arthur
as if he were a dullard, her jealously of his status showing. She surely would
have preferred to rule herself, but women weren’t allowed at this stage of
history.
“The what?”
“It is an ornate cup, said to be the chalice used by Jesus Christ to drink
his wine at the Last Supper, and in which some of his blood was caught
when he died on the cross. Surely superstition, but my brother believes in it,
and has set his knights of the round table to seek it and fetch it to him. The
real origin of this talisman is as a female sex symbol whose blood relates to
that of the curse of women. Thus men are drawn to it as they are to women,
but regard it as pure in a way no women can be. So if there is such a cup, it
is unattainable by any man who is not quite pure. In short, a male virgin.”
“Those exist?” Kerena asked, surprised.

The Fey smiled. “There are a number of boys below the age of ten who
are pure in that foolish manner, and a few retain it to adulthood, if they are
not comely. This does not relate to their inevitable experimental spilling of
their seed on the ground, only to their genital contact with women. But a
handsome, manly virgin is a rarity indeed. Sir Lancelot was one, before the
queen corrupted him; that was perhaps her noblest deed, though she got
little thanks from the king. Now the leading candidate to find this article is
the king’s younger cousin Sir Gawain.” She accented the name on the first
syllable: GA-win.
“Sir Gawain! I have heard of him.
“Everyone has,” the Fey agreed wryly. “But no one has seduced him.
That will be your chore.”
“But he is a famous knight! I couldn’t even aspire to touch him.”
“He is a man. You are a beautiful young creature. You need not touch
him; get him to touch you. Get close to him, and let the chemistry percolate.”
The term she used was not exactly “chemistry,” as that word had not yet
come into play, but it was the way Jolie heard it.
“Oh, I couldn’t,” Kerena said, awed.
“You little fool, what do you think I have been training you for? Those
other missions I could have done more expediently with other personnel. I
was preparing you for this. Remember the reward I offer.”
Kerena remembered. “I will try,” she agreed.
The Fey nodded, satisfied to have corralled her balky mare. “It will take
time, because he is proof against all ordinary suasions. Do not push it; he
must approach you in his own fashion. But when at last his burgeoning
desire can no longer be contained, accept it. At that point your work for me
will be done.”
“That would really deny him the Grail?” Kerena asked dubiously. “Why
should an inanimate cup know or care about the sexual status of the man
who takes it?”
“As I said, this is mostly superstition. But there is always the chance
there is genuine magic there. I will accept it either way: that it can’t be touched
by other than a virgin, or that the men believe it can’t be. Then even if Gawain
were able to take it after all, my brother would not believe in its authenticity,
and would not use it to enhance his power.”
Kerena nodded. Like Morely, the Fey knew the distinction between ap-
pearance and reality, and was not fooled by the mere semblance of magic.
She was out to nullify that cup regardless, thus curbing the power of her
brother. The king would never have the use of it, even if it came to sit upon
his table.
rs

Sir Gawain liked to gaze at the stars. Other knights thought he was a bit
tetched, but Kerena understood; the wonder of so many brilliances still trans-
fixed her when she allowed it. She couldn’t help liking a man who liked the
night sky, regardless of his status. So she went in the evening to the spot the
knight preferred, some distance from the royal town, and joined him in star-
ing raptly at the dark sky.
“Maiden,” he said. “Shouldn’t you be home?”
“Home is drudgery,” she replied. “I prefer to travel. Since I can not safely
do it alone, I do it in my imagination, moving among the myriad stars.”
“This is an unusual attitude for a young girl. Surely your prospects for
achievement and marriage are of greater concern.”
“Perhaps, in time. But first I wish I could fathom the world, or as much
of it as may be within my reach. There are so many things to know, and a
lifetime seems too little to learn them all.”
“I agree.” He looked at her in the wan starlight, surely able to see no
more than her dark silhouette. “However, you can admire the stars from
almost any location where there is no nearby lamplight to interfere. Why did
you come here?”
Thus did he let her know she wasn’t fooling him. “I would like to travel
with you, bold knight.” She was being easy on the flattery, as he was not the
type to be deceived by false words.
He sighed. “For a moment I almost hoped you were not that sort. I have
nothing for you.”
“I am not approaching you as that sort. I really do want to travel, and
believe it would be most safe and rewarding in your company.”
“Perhaps I was not clear. I am a chaste knight. I do not wish to dally
with the distaff gender, however much I may respect it as a class.”
“I am not chaste. I am but fifteen years of age, but have seen solid ser-
vice in the town brothel district. I would like to be known for something
other than my body.”
“You are Rena!”
“So you recognize me,” she said ruefully. “Though I am sure you never
frequented that district.”
“I have friends who do. They have reports of a girl who not only in-
dulges their carnal appetites excellently, but also engages their minds. I had
not heard tell of her in the past year, however, and assumed she had gone
elsewhere.”
“Gone to wealthy households.”
“Ah. But even if I had that kind of interest, I lack wealth. The acquisi-
tion of material value is not for me.”
“Consequently on occasion you go hungry.”
“That is the way it must be.”

She phrased her offer carefully. “I do not wish to affront you with any
unkind implication, knowing it would be unfair. But wouldn’t it be more
convenient for you to travel if there were someone along who was less scru-
pulous than you are in the practical matters of obtaining food and lodging
for you?”
“I am satisfied to endure what fate intends for me.”
“And your horses?”
Sir Gawain made a little sigh. “I hate to have them suffer on my behalf.”
Jolie knew that this was before the time of real squires; knights had to see to
the needs of their steeds themselves. In fact they were hardly knights in the
manner of legend; they were more like loyal supporters of the king, there to
do his will in major or minor ways. They had no metal armor or brightly
polished shields blazoned with their shields-of-arms; tough weathered leather
sufficed.
“There might be no need, if someone were there to make arrangements
for their comfort.”
“It is true what they have said: you have an uncanny knack for discov-
ering a man’s weaknesses.”
“Let me accompany you, and I will devote myself to the sustenance of
your horses.”
He was silent for a time. “As it happens, I am about to embark on what
may be an extended quest. Provender for my horses is uncertain. I would be
gratified to be assured of their welfare. Yet I must repeat that I have no
intention of treating any young women as anything other than parallel spir-
its.”
“This was my understanding of you. Were I to travel with any other
man, I would have to be his mistress.”
“Surely true,” he agreed. “Even Lancelot—” He broke off, unwilling to
speak unkindly of another knight.
Jolie knew what he was thinking of. Sir Lancelot had become notorious
for his passion for the king’s wife, and it seemed she returned the interest. It
was a scandal that somehow had simmered below the awareness of the king.
Yet how could the king not have known? The answer, it seemed, was that
Lancelot was a very skilled knight the king needed by his side, and the king
was willing to overlook certain irregularities to ensure that Lancelot stayed.
The queen was the best guarantee of that. It was not as if the king himself
had never strayed. So as long as the two were circumspect, the matter was
ignored. For now.
“I have a few coins,” Kerena said. “I can obtain some feed for your
horses. But that will soon be gone. Then I will need to garner more coins, but
I don’t think it would be appropriate to do that in the manner I have prac-
ticed in the past.”

“I agree emphatically. Fortunately there is a protocol. I will do some
knightly service for a farmer, who will in turn provide some sustenance. The
details do not concern me, other than the need to be assured that no one is
treated unfairly.”
“Of course. I will be glad to dicker with farmers. You will see that the
terms are mutually fair.”
“Then I believe we have an agreement. Tomorrow I start my quest. If
you will join me then—do you know where I reside?”
“Yes. I will be with your horses. I trust your spare will allow me to ride
him?”
There was a smile in his voice. “If you feed him, he will allow you
anything.”
“Thank you. I will be there.” She got up and departed without ado. It
was a private pleasure to interact with such a clearly honorable man, so
different from the great majority. She was sorry she would have to corrupt
him.
rs
Kerena went to a grain merchant who was working late and bought two
bags of oats. “You can have extra portions, if,” he said as he got a fair look at
her.
“These are for Sir Gawain’s horses.”
He said no more, recognizing the name. Everyone in town knew that the
knight did not make untoward deals. The same surely went for his maidser-
vant. But she realized it would be better if she concealed her gender hereaf-
ter.
She made her way to the stable, found a dry corner, and used the bags as
pillow and footrest, the cloak covering all. It was a reasonably comfortable
night.
In the morning she found a refuse trench for natural functions, ate the
stale bread she had saved, wrapped the cloak closely about her body and
head, and brought the bags to the horses. “Who are you?” the stable boy
demanded, appearing from a shed.
“I am Sir Gawain’s servant, bringing feed for his horses.”
“Give it to me. I’ll take care of it.”
And sell some of it to another knight, she knew. “Thank you, I will
handle it myself.”
“No you won’t,” he said, putting a rough hand on her shoulder.
So much for concealment. She turned, let her hood fall back to reveal
her face and bosom, and smiled at him. He fell back as if struck. “I thought
you were a—a boy.”
“I have not recently been mistaken as such.” It was such an obvious

understatement that he had no response. He went about his business, leav-
ing her to hers.
She opened one bag and held it up to the nose of the lead stallion, a
magnificent creature. He munched contentedly; they were good oats. When
he was done, she proffered the other bag to the auxiliary horse, a lesser
stallion but still a fine animal. If there was one thing a knight was known for,
it was the quality of his horses.
Sir Gawain arrived as the second horse was finishing. “Very good,” he
said. “I trust you know how to ride?”
“I have never been on a horse alone, only when guided by another rider.
I hope it is not difficult.”
He paused. “Perhaps, then, we should best begin slowly. If you fall, try
to get your feet under you. I will put you on Service.”
So that was the name of the horse. Sir Gawain led the horses out, and
Service stood still while Gawain put his hands on her elbows and lifted her
to the blanket saddle. She was surprised by how readily he did it; he had
enormous strength of arm.
Then he mounted his lead horse, and they set off. A cord reached back
from the lead saddle to Service’s halter, and the horse followed without ques-
tion. So she had no need to guide him. That was a relief.
They walked slowly away from town. Kerena adjusted to the rolling
gait, gradually getting comfortable with it. The horse felt the difference, and
moved up to walk parallel to the other.
“Service says you are learning,” Sir Gawain remarked.
“Service is a good teacher.”
They moved more rapidly, and she adjusted to the faster gait. She dis-
covered that there was a certain pleasure in riding. It was somewhat like
floating in air, except that she wasn’t floating.
They came to a public water trough, and both horses drank deeply. Sir
Gawain dismounted, fetched the ladle, and drank. Then he refilled it and
brought it to Kerena where she sat, uncertain how to dismount alone.
“But you must not serve me,” she protested. “I must serve you.”
“Only if you view yourself as servant rather than companion.”
“I do.”
“As you wish.” He took the empty ladle back.
“If I may inquire,” she said as they resumed travel, “where are we go-
ing?”
“I would answer if I could, but I don’t know. I seek the Holy Grail. No
one knows where it resides.”
“Then how will you find it?”
“I will simply look until it reveals itself to me. That is why this quest
may take some time. If you wish to change your mind, I will take you back to

town.”
“No,” she said quickly. “I was not expressing impatience, merely doubt.
I am not familiar with this sort of search.” But as she spoke, she realized that
she was: it mirrored her own search for Morely.
In late afternoon they came to an extensive farmstead. The farmer came
out to meet them. “Welcome, Sir Gawain! Have you come for a visit?”
“I have, for one night. What service may I do you, in exchange for food
and lodging for myself, my servant, and my horses?”
“There is no need of service. Your fame is known here.”
“There is need. I prefer to pay my way.”
“Well, if you insist. There are some ruffians camping in my kindling lot
that need to be rousted out. I am not a fighting man, so have been unable to
do it myself.”
“It shall be done,” Sir Gawain said.
The farmer showed them where the lot was, and they rode to it. Several
surly vagabonds were camping there. “The farmer requests your absence
from these premises,” Sir Gawain informed them politely. “Please depart.”
“Yeah?” one demanded, lifting a wicked looking club. “How would your
nag like a clout on the snout?”
Kerena kept her face straight. The lout had threatened the wrong mem-
ber of the party.
“I see I have not spoken clearly,” Sir Gawain said, dismounting. “I apolo-
gize, and shall try to rectify the lapse.” He drew his sword from a sheath on
the horse that Kerena had not noticed before. The bared metal looked long
and sharp. “Depart, or I shall be forced to chastise you.”
The men stared at the sword. Then the leader suddenly charged, swing-
ing his club.
Sir Gawain’s sword flashed. The club flew from the man’s hand. Then
Kerena saw that this wasn’t exactly the case: most of the club had flown. The
stub of the handle remained in the man’s hand. He was staring at it.
“I hope it is not necessary to draw blood,” Sir Gawain said. “I dislike
having to clean my blade. Depart forthwith, and do not return, lest my ire be
roused.”
The squatters had finally gotten the message. They fled.
“You could have cut off his hand—or his head,” Kerena said, amazed.
“Fortunately that was not necessary. The warning sufficed.”
It had, indeed. Kerena’s knees felt weak; it was just as well that she was
mounted. She had just seen another side of this supremely polite knight.
There was iron under that courteous demeanor.
They returned to the farmer, who had seen the action from a distance.
“You didn’t kill them.”
“I dislike pointless bloodshed. Send a messenger after me, should they

return, and I will destroy them. But I doubt it will be necessary.”
The farmer nodded, agreeing.
They had an excellent night, beginning with a feast of a meal. Kerena
was given a bed in the servant’s quarters, while the knight had a room to
himself. The horses were well fed and stabled. Her only problem was that
her inner thighs were sore from the unaccustomed riding.
“I do see the way of it,” Kerena said as they resumed travel next day. “It
was a fair trade.”
“That is as I prefer.” He glanced across at her. “How are your legs?”
“Stiff,” she said. “But I will handle it.”
“Is there abrasion?”
“Some.”
“I regret not realizing. I have some balm that should help.” He dis-
mounted, reached into a saddlebag, and produced a glob of something. “Raise
your leg.”
She lifted her right leg. He mashed the gob between his hands, then
smeared it on her inner thigh, reaching up almost to the juncture of her legs.
Then he walked around to the other side and repeated the process for her
left leg.
Kerena sat and let him do it. Any other man would be slavering at such
intimate touching, but he was methodical. Almost immediately the discom-
fort diminished; the balm was helping. “Thank you.”
“Now you must learn to guide the horse.” He set a cloth bit in the horse’s
mouth with reins coming back to her hand. “Be gentle, always; Service knows
the signals. Draw right to turn him right, left to turn him left. Draw both to
make him halt. Shake them to make him start.”
She tried the signals, and they worked; the horse was well trained and
responsive. She was in charge now, at least to the extent the horse allowed.
As afternoon came, they sought another farmstead. An old woman came
out to meet them. “Let me handle this,” Kerena said. She slid off the horse,
utilizing a maneuver she had recently learned by observation, and approached
the woman. “My master the knight would like food for us and the horses.
What is there we can do for you to earn it?”
“I am a poor widow. I have no wood for my hearth. My food is unwor-
thy. All I have is beans.”
“Maybe we can bring in some wood from the forest. Beans will do. May
the horses graze the night in your fields?”
“Welcome. The fields are part of the commons.” The commons was
land held in common, available to anyone for use. But locals could get an-
noyed if folk not of their village made too free with it.
They went into the forest and tied small dry fallen branches together so
the horses could drag them. By dusk they had a considerable pile beside the

house. The widow was thrilled.
They turned the horses loose to graze on the rich weeds, and settled
down to a big pot of beans. They were good enough, but had a gastric effect.
They endured it. They spent the night comfortably in the widow’s haybarn.
Kerena’s legs were tired, but the balm had alleviated the soreness. She re-
membered Sir Gawain’s strong, competent, gentle hands stroking them. He
had not even looked at their juncture. That impressed her as much as any-
thing else.
Next day they moved on through the forest. Things were fine until a
sudden thunderstorm came up. They barely had time to get off the horses
and huddle under a tarpaulin Sir Gawain produced. It wasn’t quite water-
tight, but was a lot better than the drenching rain outside it. It also wasn’t
really large enough for two; she curled up and he put his arms around her,
holding the tarp in place. Again, there was no untoward contact; the man
was either saintly or sexless.
It became routine as the days passed. They traveled around the coun-
tryside, doing chores for sustenance. When they camped out, she would fetch
wood, make a fire and heat or cook something for them to eat. Kerena began
to doubt that there was any Grail to find, but didn’t say anything. After all, if
it didn’t exist, then her mission had already been accomplished.
Then at dusk, as they were making camp near a forest, close to a town,
something happened. Kerena saw a glow hovering at about head height.
“What is that?”
Sir Gawain looked. His jaw dropped. “That is the Grail!”
Now she made out some detail. It seemed to be a shining cup, floating
not far ahead of them. Sir Gawain walked toward it, and so did Kerena. They
did not dare remove their eyes, lest the amazing vision be lost. The cup drifted
back, but they were gaining on it, mesmerized.
Then they slipped as they stopped into some sort of pit. They slid down
into a large trough filled with—
“Shit!” Kerena exclaimed. She was speaking literally.
It was the town refuse pit. The people dumped their buckets of human
manure here, to decay into new soil.
They scrambled out, but the damage was done. Both were soaked in
kitchen garbage and fecal matter. They stank.
The image of the Grail, of course, was gone. It occurred to Kerena that
it could have been a will-o-wisp, sponsored by the miasma rising from the
rotting substance.
“We have to wash,” Kerena said urgently. “Everything.”
He did not argue.
They spied a river close enough to reach. They hurried to it and plunged
in. They removed their sodden clothing and rinsed it repeatedly in the flow-

ing water. They ducked their heads and washed their hair.
Eventually they emerged from the water, naked, chilled, and embar-
rassed. Night was closing, and their soaking clothing was no good to wear
until it dried on the morrow.
“Maybe the horses will share their warmth,” Kerena said.
“They need to be free to graze.”
“I don’t think I can make it through the night like this,” she said, shiv-
ering violently. “I’ll make a fire.”
She did so, but there wasn’t enough fallen wood in the vicinity to make
a big blaze, and they were still shivering.
“We must share body warmth,” Gawain said. He fetched the tarpaulin
and blankets from the horses and made a bed on the ground next to the
small fire.
“I’m not sure this is wise,” Kerena said. “You are chaste; can you clasp a
naked woman, however innocently?”
“You are suffering; I do not wish that. I will endure.”
They lay close together within it, clasping each other for scant warmth.
She curled up facing the fire, and he cupped her from behind. It did help;
gradually her shivering became less violent. But she knew she was tempting
him. One of his arms passed over her and held her close, and one of her
breasts touched it. Her bottom was against his groin, and his groin got hot.
He desired her, which was hardly surprising; she had grown into a com-
pletely seductive young woman. She could probably seduce him now, but
she didn’t try; it would be a betrayal of his trust in her.
She pondered that in her waking moments. Here she was within reach
of her mission, to make this man unchaste, yet she was not grasping it. Why
did she care about his trust? Because, she realized with surprise, she was
becoming smitten with him. He was a truly noble man, and she respected
that and liked him. She did not want to be responsible for his loss of chastity.
Which was a crazy attitude, considering her mission.
In the morning they separated. She had hung their clothing on nearby
bushes to dry by the fire, and that had been effective. They dressed, and she
fixed a breakfast, and checked the horses.
“I have a confession to make,” Gawain said as they rode on, circling the
dump.
“There is no need.” She had a notion of its nature, and preferred to
avoid the subject.
“I believe there is, for I value my integrity. Last night as we shared
warmth, I had untoward awareness of you.”
“You did nothing. I would have known.”
“That is not enough. I prefer to be chaste in mind as well as body. I
apologize for being mentally unchaste with you.”

“Sir Gawain, I am long since unchaste; you cannot wrong me in such
fashion, mentally or physically. Had anything happened, it would have been
my fault for tempting you unduly. Please have no concern.”
“I suppose that is the case. Yet you have been perfect as I have known
you, temperate and useful. I would not know your history had you not told
me your identity.”
“I wish I had no history, so as to be as you would like to see me.”
“As far as I am concerned, you are as I see you.”
She felt an unaccustomed tear. “I hope never to disappoint you.” And
what of her mission? Now she hated it.
They traveled, exchanging good deeds for sustenance, and when that
was not feasible, camping out. Kerena made sure always to see to the horses,
conjuring water when the landscape was too dry. Unfortunately, one day
Gawain caught her at it.
“How came you by that water?”
“I have a talent for finding springs.”
He merely gazed at her with disappointment.
“A magic talent,” she said, amending it. She was unable to lie directly to
him. “I have a—a way with the dark arts. I did not want to embarrass you
with that information.”
“I have known it,” he said. “You can strike fire from nothing.”
“Yes. But my ability need not sully you; I had it before I knew you, and
you have never asked me to practice it.”
“You have used it only at need, to serve me or the horses.”
“I promised to be useful.”
He considered. “I do not consider magic to be unclean, any more than
sex is. I am aware that they are common for most people, and often useful. I
merely prefer to retain the benefits of abstinence from things that can inter-
fere with my mission.”
“That is worthy.”
“You are beautiful.”
She wasn’t sure how to react, and not just because she was in ill-fitting
brush-dried apparel, with her hair clumsily knotted and dirt on her feet.
“You are kind.”
“I am not referring to your appearance, though that is outstanding. In
the things that matter, you have been the ideal maiden.”
Again she felt the tear. “I am not.”
“You believe that your past sullies you. I do not see it that way.”
Now tears flowed in earnest. “I am what my history makes me. I can
never be ideal.”
He put his arms about her, comfortingly. “I apologize for bringing you
grief.”

“Don’t apologize to me!” she flared, pulling away. “I am not worthy of
it.”
“But you are.”
“I am not!” She was in full dismay. That made her reckless. “I will prove
it. I am not here on my own. I was sent by Morgan le Fey to seduce you so you
could not find the Grail.”
That set him back. “I did not know this.”
“Now you do. I must leave you, lest I corrupt you.” Now she had be-
trayed her mission. What possessed her?
“You could have done this before now. Why didn’t you?”
“Because I love you.” Oh, damn! She had let her emotion govern her
sense. But that did answer her own question: love possessed her. She couldn’t
stand to hurt this man, and further silence was bound to do that.
“But don’t you have a man you seek?”
“I love him too,” she said, bemused by her own state. “I would not hurt
either of you. So I must go.”
“I know something of the Fey. She is not a nice person. She will punish
you if you fail your mission.”
“I know. But so it must be.”
“I can not allow this. You must stay.”
“I want to, but not for proper reason.”
“Damn proper reason!” he swore, surprising her. “It is in any event too
late.”
“I don’t understand. If I leave now—”
“I am already corrupted, in my heart. I can not continue my mission
without you.”
“Oh, Sir Gawain! I am sorry.”
“So am I. We have no future together. I could never marry you; my
family would not allow it. They would not see the qualities in you that I see.
So I have nothing to offer you. But neither can I let you go.”
“I must go, for that reason.” Kerena came to her difficult decision.
But now the time lines began to blur. Jolie had to intercede. She moved
back to just before that decision, suppressing it.
“Then what are we to do?” Kerena asked.
“We must continue. Perhaps I can achieve the Grail before I do with you
what I so desperately desire.”
That was playing it very fine. But what else was there? “I will try to
support you in this.”
“Thank you. Do not let me touch you, lest I be overwhelmed.”
“I could not resist your touch.”
“We must stay apart,” he agreed.
They continued to travel, without touching so much as a finger to each

other. But Kerena knew this could not continue indefinitely. Not since Morely
had she truly wanted to clasp a man in love; all between had been business
and convenience. Yet that clasp would ruin his mission. They both knew it.
They came to a broad plain overgrown with tall dried grass. It was fine
for the horses to graze on, but there was no water. So Kerena tapped a stone
to make it issue water, and caught enough for both animals to drink. Then
they moved off, contentedly grazing.
“I don’t think I should make a fire,” Kerena said. “It is so dry here, the
grass might catch, and we might not be able to get it out.”
“I agree. We can do without a fire.”
They ate what they had, and made ready for the evening. The horses
would graze through the night and return in the morning; they required no
supervision.
Then Kerena sniffed the air and felt something. “There is fire,” she said
nervously. “Not of my doing.”
“There is,” he agreed. “And wind. I fear this is bad news.” He tended to
understate things.
The fire flared up, racing toward them, consuming the dry grass. They
could not outrun it; it was crossing the field in a broad swath, incited by the
wind. Flames flew ahead, to ignite grass ahead. It was a thorough conflagra-
tion, with smoke roiling above.
“Forgive me,” Kerena said. “I must use stronger magic.”
“Forgiven!” He was after all a practical man.
She returned to the rock she had evoked to water the horses. This time
she intensified the spell. A fountain appeared, jetting up beyond head-height
and spreading out. The water splashed back to the ground, forming an ex-
panding puddle. As the fire closed in on them, surrounding them, the water
spread out to intercept it. There was a great hissing and an awful smell, but
the fire could not reach them.
Yet all through the field it was burning. They could not leave their puddle.
“Pray that the horses found a river,” Sir Gawain said.
“Surely they did. They are fast enough to outrun it, and smart enough
to avoid it.”
There was nothing to do but settle for the night. But their bedding was
sodden, and though she had let the fountain subside as the fire burned itself
out, all they had to lie down on was mud.
“I would not have you sleep on that,” Sir Gawain said gallantly. “I will
lie on it, and you may use me as a bed.”
“That must not be. We would be touching.”
“But fully clothed. That needs must suffice.”
“Better we sleep apart. I can survive mud.”
“I mislike it. Allow me to do this much for you, Rena. You are precious

to me.”
“And you to me. That’s why we must sleep apart.”
“Your mission is to seduce me, yet you oppose it.”
“Yes. I want you to have the Grail.”
“Though that will cost you the Fey’s enmity.”
She smiled. “I appreciate the irony.”
“Yet if I touch you, you will not oppose me.”
“I can’t. I desire you intensely, though I curse the cost of you.”
“Your diffidence appeals to me as much as your body.”
“Oh, this is awful! I am tempting you even as I try to spare you.”
“The game is lost. I must have you, though hell betide. Only your nega-
tion can stop me, for I would not cross a maiden’s will.”
“I can’t deny you. Stay clear.” The words seemed contradictory, but they
both knew what she meant.
“I am a man of realism as well as aspiration. You have become more
vital to me than the Grail.”
“Don’t say that!”
“You exist. That may be more than can be said for the famed goblet.” He
removed his clothing.
Kerena knew she shouldn’t, but she couldn’t help herself. She removed
her own clothing.
They stood facing each other, a small distance apart, mutually naked.
Her body was quivering with yearning; his was rampant. Desire suffused
them like invisible fire. Then they came together, embracing, kissing, strok-
ing, struggling for closer contact. And slipped and fell to the mud.
It didn’t matter. He was on her and in her, and she was on him and
around him, and they were ardently kissing through the mud that quickly
coated them. Taken as a whole, it was glorious.
They spent the rest of the night clasped. There was no counting the
times he penetrated her, or the times she took him in. It was seemingly end-
less passion.
In the morning the fire had burned out, the horses had returned, and
they were so mud-caked as to be virtually unrecognizable. “We shouldn’t
have done that,” Kerena said ruefully.
He laughed. “If I had to become unchaste, this was the appropriate way
to do it. Filthy sex.”
She joined in, almost hysterically. They certainly looked the part. Yet she
was deeply saddened by it too; he had lost his prime mission in life.
She evoked the fountain again, and they took turns stepping into it and
rinsing themselves off. It required several rinsings to thin the mud and wash
it out of their hair and body crevices.
And of course the sight of their clean wet nudity aroused renewed in-

terest, and they stepped into the fountain together and made love standing
amidst the flowing water.
“My emotion is mixed,” Sir Gawain said. “Yet I think my joy of possess-
ing you is greater than my grief of losing the Grail.”
She did not remind him that he might have had both, had they been
able to wait.
In due course they started back the way they had come, as there seemed
to be no further point in pursuing the Grail. The journey would take many
days, and they did not hurry. Instead they camped out often, and made love
more often, catching up on previously suppressed passion. It was the glori-
ously open expression of their love, which would have to end once they got
home. That was why they were satisfied to go slowly.
About two days distant from the capital town, they had another vision.
This time there was no garbage pit; the divine Chalice was floating above the
middle of the road. There was no doubt of its nature; it was an ornate golden
goblet that glowed of its own volition. It was so lovely that both of them
stared raptly.
“Do you see it?” Sir Gawain whispered.
“I do see it,” she whispered back. “It’s the Grail, come to you after all.
Take it, beloved!”
Sir Gawain strode forward, reaching for the scintillating cup. It floated
away, avoiding him. He could not catch it. “I knew it,” he said, crestfallen. “I
am not worthy.”
It floated toward Kerena. In sudden ire, she picked up a stick and smashed
at the goblet. To her amazement, her blow connected. The cup shattered into
myriad shards.
Appalled, she stared. Then she stooped to pick up a shard, but it was
gone; there were no fragments on the ground. “It was illusion,” she said.
“To show me what I lost,” he said. “My shame.”
“My fault. If I had not—”
“Never your fault,” he said quickly. “You were candid about your mis-
sion, and tried to depart. It was solely my weakness.”
“Still, I’m so sorry.”
He held her and kissed her. “I am not. My weakness of character was
always within me, and had to be exposed some time. I was never destined to
take the Grail. I deceived myself about that. I am glad to have known and
loved you, however briefly. You are a treasure.”
“I’m the one who corrupted you!”
“You’re the one who made me recognize my true nature.” He kissed her
again.
They found a place and made love beside the road, in full daylight. It
was wonderful, as always.

The two days distance somehow took three days, and they made love so
many times it felt like five days. Then at last the turrets of the capital town
came into view. They used the horses as a shield against discovery and made
love once more.
“I will always love you, Rena,” he said.
“And I you.”
“I think we must see each other never again.”
“Never again,” she agreed.
They kissed one final time, then reluctantly separated. They rode the
horses on toward the town.

CHAPTER 5
VAMPIRE
“So you were successful, and he did not take the Grail,” the Fey said
with satisfaction as Kerena concluded her report. The woman had demanded
every detail.
“Not because I wanted to be,” Kerena said sadly.
“You fell for him, of course. I thought that would make you more eager
to clasp him.”
Evidently the Fey did not appreciate the self sacrificing quality of true
love. Kerena did not argue the case. “Teach me the final secret of the cloak.”
The woman nodded. “Your usefulness to me now is ended. It is this: you
must wear it and focus exclusively on the thing you most desire. Then speak
a standard invocation, and it will orient on that thing. You will feel it turning
you to face that direction. When you are distant, it will be a faint impulse; as
you get near it will become stronger. It will inevitably lead you there.”
So simple, now that she knew. Why hadn’t she figured it out for herself?
Perhaps because she had not felt quite ready. But now she was more than
ready. She had been denied Sir Gawain, but Morely remained. “Thank you.”
“I doubt we shall ever meet again,” the Fey said. “But if we do, it is likely
to be as enemies.”
“Enemies? I have never opposed you.” Not successfully, at any rate.
“Because you will have too much power. You may not as yet realize your
full strength, but I see it, and will not tolerate it in my vicinity. Go from here
and do not return.”
“But I hardly did any magic, and was clumsy at that.”
“You made a dry rock geyser a fountain that flooded the area enough to
put out a prairie fire. Most practitioners can manage only a thin squirt.”
“Well, the need was great.”
“And you rose to it without thinking. What other unrealized potentials
do you possess, awaiting your unthinking need? But that was the least of it.”
“The least?”

“The Grail. You saw the Grail.”
“Well, I was with Sir Gawain. It was his quest.”
“He was chaste. You were not. How could you see it?”
Kerena’s jaw dropped. “I don’t know.” Actually Sir Gawain had no longer
been chaste by then, but certainly he was far closer to purity than Kerena.
“Not only that, you touched it.”
“Only with a stick. Anyway, it was illusion.”
“Maybe. You shattered it with a blow. No one ever did that, in or out of
illusion. You banished it. It should have been impossible for you to affect the
image at all.”
“I didn’t know.”
“Here is some advice, in appreciation for the service you have done me:
never tell of that episode in this town. They would stone you to death after
eviscerating you.”
She realized it was true. She had defiled a holy image.
“You may be sure I will not tell,” the Fey continued. “They would do the
same to me, for sending you. So it is to our mutual advantage to have you far
from here. You may become a marvelous sorceress, once you realize your
full abilities, but you have no future here.”
Kerena nodded. The Fey was surely correct.
She bid parting to the cook and coachman, who expressed genuine re-
gret at her departure. Then she set off afoot. Now that her usefulness to the
Fey was done, she rated no privileges such as transportation. She could have
prevailed on the coachman, but that would have gotten him into trouble.
She had a secret cache she had put away during the Sir Gawain mission,
knowing that money was not the key to its success. Now she fetched it.
She rented a room at the edge of town while she considered her pros-
pects. She did not want to return to the brothel, but was not yet ready to
commence her major search. She needed time to herself to weather the loss
of Sir Gawain. She was being a foolish girl, she knew, but she couldn’t seek
and face Morely while in the throes of love for another man. She had to let
the edge wear off so she could assert emotional control. Then she could do
what was necessary.
Two months later she was ready. The memory of Sir Gawain still pained
her, but she could handle it. Now she was ready to seek Morely.
She had become familiar with the seedy side of town while working at
the brothel. Little there had changed significantly. She walked to a house
where several out of work soldiers shared costs. She knocked on the door.
It opened, and a brutish man gazed out at her. “Hey—aren’t you Rena?
We don’t have the coin.”
A year after she had retired from the business, they still recognized her.
Another girl would have been thrilled. “I am Rena. I come to buy, not to sell.

I want Gordon.”
“You don’t want Gordon.”
“I do.” Her Seeing had informed her of the man’s nature. It hadn’t mat-
tered to her until now.
He rolled his eyes. “Have it your way.” He turned his head. “Gordon!
Rena wants you.”
“The hell she does,” Gordon called back.
“Tell her yourself.”
Gordon appeared. He was a huge ugly man, massively muscular. “You
don’t know me,” he said gruffly.
“I want to hire you to guard me as I travel. You will pose as my man. I’ll
pay you and cover costs.”
“I’m trying to tell you—”
“I don’t want sex. I want to keep the other men off me. You’re honest
and not for a woman.”
His mouth fell open. “You sure?”
She brought out her purse. “You will handle the money. Pay yourself
what you’re worth.” She put it in his hand.
He hefted it, then opened it to peer inside. “Lady, you need to hide this.
You’re carrying gold.”
“Who’s going to take it from you?”
“You trust me that far?”
“Yes.”
He shrugged, amazed. “When?”
“Now.”
“I’ll get my weapons.”
Jolie was privately impressed. The girl was efficient, once she decided
on her mission. She had whipped her own formidable feeling into submis-
sion.
They hired a coach and rode out of town. “There is more,” Kerena said.
They were in the privacy of the passenger chamber. She had not wanted to
be seen departing with him.
“I figured as much. I know about you; everybody does. But I didn’t think
you knew about me.”
“Men talk. I listen. I got a notion who was who in this town. I’m not sure
whether you’re a greater oddity because you don’t rape, or because you don’t
steal. They marvel at your restraint.”
“It’s just the way I am. I don’t need a woman, and I can earn my keep.”
“You will have to sleep naked beside me, to make it persuasive. On oc-
casion I will kiss you in public. I will never demand more of you than that,
sexually. But others must know that any sexual approach to me will enrage
you.”

“Got it. That’s it?”
“No. I have magic.”
“No offense, ma’am, but I don’t much believe in magic.”
“Call me Rena. I will show you.” She drew the cloak closely about her,
romanced it, and invoked invisibility. “Find me.”
Gordon looked. He smiled, thinking she had slipped aside and hidden.
He reached to touch the seat where she had been. His hand was balked by
her body, which had not moved. His eyes widened. He felt around her, form-
ing her outline with his roving hands. “That is you, Rena?”
“Yes.”
“Now I believe in magic.”
She nulled the spell and was visible again. “I have other powers. They
are associated with this cloak. If it should ever be stolen, I would be largely
bereft of magic. See that it is never stolen.”
“Got it.” Another man might have tried to steal it for himself. This one
would not.
“And try to see that no one else knows about this.”
“Now I know why you hired me.”
“Why?”
“If you used that magic on your own, you’d be known for a witch. And
you’d have to, to protect yourself from rapists and thieves. I can cover for
you.”
“In several respects,” she agreed. “With luck, there will never be any
suspicion.”
“I don’t want to pry, but it would help if I knew where we’re going and
what you’re looking for.”
“I am looking for my long lost lover, a Seer named Morely. I do not know
where he is, but soon I will invoke my cloak’s search utility and orient on
him. It may be a long or difficult quest.”
“Got it.”
The coach stopped. They were out of town. They got out, and it re-
turned they way it had come. More than a short ride in an expensive coach
would have invited suspicion.
“I will now invoke the cloak.” She kissed the velvet. “I must wreak the
unique,” she whispered. “Let me speak what I seek.” She concentrated on
Morely the way she remembered him.
The cloak writhed uncomfortably, as if unable to settle. Something was
wrong. Could the Fey have misinformed her?
“Problem?” Gordon asked.
“The cloak seems to be trying, but not orienting.”
“How long since you saw him?” Gordon asked.
“Two years.”

“You must have changed some in that time.”
“From girl to woman,” she agreed. Her body had been dawning, with
him; it had achieved full daylight thereafter.
“Maybe he did too.”
“He was already a grown man.”
“People can change other ways.”
She considered that. “How?”
“Maybe if he got in a fight, and lost a hand, or something.”
“Or something?”
“Sometimes they castrate enemies.”
She was appalled. If Morely had been tricked, and ambushed, and cut
like that—it would account for why he had never returned to her. He would
be ashamed. “I couldn’t face that,” she said.
“Maybe some other way. It can’t find him as he was, but maybe can find
him as he is now.”
She re-invoked the spell, this time focusing on Morely in a broader
manner, allowing for significant change. The cloak rippled, then oriented.
“It got the fix,” she said, gratified. “Faintly.”
“Which direction?”
“That way,” she said, pointing.
“Far away?”
“I think so.”
“Then we’d better veer a little to pick up inns to stay in for several days,
travel.”
“Got it,” she said with a smile.
They walked. She had gotten used to riding, but didn’t mind walking
again. It reminded her of all the walking she had done with Morely. She
might have to build up her stamina again, but that was no problem.
In the evening they detoured to find a village and inn. Gordon turned
out to be a shrewd negotiator, getting them a good room and good food, with
several pieces of silver in exchange for the small gold piece he proffered.
One of the patrons stared at Rena. “Say—I’ve seen her before.”
Gordon faced the man, frowning, his hand touching the hilt of his sword.
“Saw who?” he asked menacingly.
“Nobody,” the man said quickly.
“Thank you,” Kerena said when they were alone in the room.
“If a man wants to night with a pretty woman, it’s nobody else’s busi-
ness what’s she done in the past.”
“Exactly.” She stripped and washed at the basin. Then he did. He was
not aroused, confirming his lack of interest in women.
By the time he was done, the water was almost black. “We’ll need fresh
water,” Kerena said. “Stay naked as they fetch it.”

“Got it.” Gordon opened the door. “Hey innkeep! More water.”
In a moment the man’s plump wife came with a large pitcher and bucket.
Gordon opened the door, naked, while Kerena lay on the bed, similarly ex-
posed. The woman said nothing as she dumped the dirty water into the bucket,
and refilled the basin with fresh. She departed without looking, closing the
door silently.
“Now the whole inn knows we are lovers,” Kerena said, satisfied.
“You could have any man you wanted for that.”
“Wanted: that’s the key. Morely is the only one I want.”
“So all that business in the brothel was—”
“Just business.”
“Sometimes I wonder what it’s like, to want a woman.”
“I could evoke your passion, if you wish.”
He shuddered. “Please, no. I’d be disgusted.”
“You look sexually normal. What do you like?”
“Boys.”
“But isn’t an undeveloped young woman much like a boy, except for the
one organ she lacks?”
“Much like,” he agreed. “But neither girl nor grown man appeals to me.
Only a boy.”
“It’s not a thing I understand, but it’s your business.”
They slept beside each other, naked. If anyone peeked in—and it was
likely someone did, for there were crevices in the walls—their status as lov-
ers remained.
Their travel became routine. They left England and moved north into
Scotland. Gradually the focus of the cloak grew stronger; Kerena hoped that
meant they were getting closer to Morely. She also hoped that Morely was
somewhere on the isle, and not beyond it. She didn’t want to wrestle with
boat passage. It was bad enough roughing it outdoors where there was no
human habitation near. They had to use the cloak as cover and share human
warmth, as she had with Sir Gawain, but now there was no question of
seduction.
Sometimes bands of robbers came at them. Now Gordon showed his
mettle. He laid about him with his sword and killed those who refused to
flee. Once when there were too many, backed up by archers, Kerena invoked
the invulnerability aspect of the cloak and draped it on him so that he could
not be struck. It hampered his arms somewhat, but when he saw the arrows
bouncing off it he was reconciled. “That’s some shield.”
“Magic has its uses,” she agreed.
Then came a complication. It started with some inexplicable sickness.
Kerena would vomit in the morning, then feel better in the afternoon. Once
or twice could be a consequence of bad food, but when it continued for ten

days, they had to take stock. “It is not good for you to travel this way,” Gor-
don said. “You need to get better.”
She paced around their camp as the sun set. “I can’t explain it. It is not
my way to be like this. I haven’t eaten anything poisonous; I know what
plants do that.” Indeed, she had made a considerable study of medicinal
herbs of all types. What was poisonous in large dose could be medicinal in
small dose.
Gordon squinted at her. “Oops,” he murmured.
“What’s the matter?”
“I saw your silhouette in the low sunlight.”
“Oh, now you care about female silhouettes?”
“No. That’s why I haven’t been looking. Your waist has thickened, and I
think not from overeating.”
“My waist?” Then it came to her. “Oh, no!”
“You are with child.”
“I can’t be! I haven’t—and when I did, I used a spell.”
“What about five months ago?”
“I was with Sir Gawain.” And it came to her. “I forgot the spell! I was in
love and never thought of it.”
That slowed them further. Kerena had not sought Sir Gawain’s baby,
but now that it was inside her, she wanted very much not to hurt it in any
way she could avoid. She dared not overstrain herself, or risk going without
food in uninhabited territory. Sometimes Gordon carried her across rough
terrain. They had to pause to gather food reserves, sometimes for several
days at a time, before advancing, and the amount of travel they accomplished
in a day was severely diminished. It was further complicated by her urgent
desire not to have her pregnancy known by the people they encountered.
Thus a distance they might have covered in a week before, now took a month.
It was frustratingly inefficient.
“I wouldn’t blame you for going home in disgust,” she said.
“I am being paid for my time,” he reminded her. “And I find I like taking
care of you. It is as close as I will ever get to having a family.”
“You have had none of the fun part, only the chore part.”
“This is the fun part, for me. I like you; I’m sure if I were normal, I
would be in love with you. You are pleasant to be with.”
“You’re such a decent man. It was a great loss to womankind when you
were made differently.”
He laughed. It was evidently true: he liked the camaraderie, and he even
liked her increasing dependence on him. He simply had no interest in ever
having sex with her, and love was out of the question. He was a good man, in
most of the ways that counted.
At last, as they neared the cold northern coast, the signal grew strong.

“We are almost there,” she announced.
Gordon looked around at the empty countryside. “Few people here. Just
sheep.”
“I’ll be satisfied to find just one person.”
They came to a rocky slope. A cave penetrated it. The cloak led them to
the cave. They would not have found it without guidance; the entry was
hidden behind a jagged outcropping of rock, masked by bushes. The open-
ing was small, barely sufficient for a human body to wriggle through.
“Bad things can be in caves,” Gordon said.
“I don’t want to put you at unnecessary risk. If I don’t emerge within a
day, go home; all that remains in the money pouch is yours.”
“Rena, I can’t do that! That would be deserting you.”
“You have delivered me where I was going. That is enough.”
“Not until you find your man. This is only a cave.”
“The cloak will protect me. You will be vulnerable in the confined dark-
ness. That isn’t fair to you.”
“Even so, I’d rather see you to your man. You don’t know what you will
find in this cave. He could be a prisoner, or badly injured, near death. Or he
may object to your baby, which isn’t his. You need to know, before I leave
you.”
He was making sense. “Very well. Stay with me. I hope things are readily
resolved, so you can go home.”
They made torches and entered the cave. It slanted deep into the moun-
tain before leveling. There were no stalactites, and the floor was level, once
they got past the twisting tunnel of the opening. Now there was room for
them to walk upright, abreast.
“This is one weird cave,” Gordon said.
“It must be artificial,” Kerena said. “It was drilled, or maybe a natural
cave was cleared of all irregularities. It’s certainly not natural now.”
They came to an intersection. Passages went left and right as well as
forward. “Where now?” Gordon asked nervously.
Kerena pondered briefly. “This has to be the work of man, and Morely
is here. He’s down the main hall. But maybe it will be faster to call him.”
“And attract attention we may not want.”
She nodded. “And our torches will soon gutter out. We’d better go back
out. Then I will return here and call.”
He shook his head. “If you’re going to do it, do it now, while I’m here.”
“Morely!” she called. “Kerena is here.”
There was a stir. A slender nude woman appeared, shielding her eyes.
“Who is Kerena?”
“Morely’s beloved, come to reclaim him.”
“Impossible. I am his beloved.”

Kerena took stock. She realized that it was warm down here, so that a
person could go without clothing; in fact she herself was becoming uncom-
fortably hot. She remembered that Morely had said he would tell a girl he
loved her, if that was the expedient thing to do. It was a standard way for a
man to obtain sex or whatever else he wanted from a woman. Mainly it
confirmed that he was here, and evidently not a prisoner.
It was time to set things aright. “Bring him here to choose.”
The girl retreated down the passage. Her posterior view was as shapely
as her forward view; she certainly had the figure that Kerena now lacked.
“Were I normal,” Gordon murmured appreciatively.
“She would certainly do for incidental passion,” Kerena agreed sourly.
Morely appeared, naked, shading his eyes as the girl had done. He looked
healthy. “Kerena! I feared Vanja was mistaken.”
Her pain poured out. “Why did you leave me?”
“That is a difficult story. Please, put out the torches; they pain me.”
“We need them to see our way out.”
“Then go out now; I will follow, and talk to you at length outside.”
That seemed best. She followed Gordon back up the passage, and, in due
course, to the surface. It was just as well, for the torches were guttering
dangerously. They put them out.
It was dusk. Morely emerged, now clothed in a cloak. He swept Kerena
into his embrace, kissing her avidly. “Oh my love, how I have longed for you!
But I couldn’t come to you.”
She was thrilled to be in his embrace again, but now her anguish at
being deserted asserted itself. “You seem healthy and well served.”
Gordon chuckled. That reminded her. “This is Gordon, who guarded
me on my long trek here.”
Morely eyed the soldier. “The usual coin?”
“No. Gold. He has no use for women.”
“So?” he asked, glancing again at Gordon.
Gordon nodded. “I’m for boys. It seems you aren’t.”
“Oh, you mean Vanja. That’s part of my story.”
“So it would seem,” Kerena said coldly.
Morely smiled somewhat sadly. “Know this: I do love you and use her.
But that is only a scratch on my situation. I doubt that you will like what I
have to say.”
“Acute observation.”
“It was to spare you pain I left you. It grieves me to hurt you now with
the news. Kerena, I believe you would be happier departing now, with no
further information, and never seeing me again. I urge you to do that.”
“And you know I will not.”
“I do know, you wonderful creature. I will always love you for your

resolve as well as your ability. I wish I could make love to you right now.”
“That would be awkward.”
“With Vanja watching, yes.”
That made Kerena realize two things: the sultry girl had joined them,
and Morely did not yet realize Kerena was five months pregnant. “So tell me
why you left me.”
“I will tell you and show you. Focus so you can see my illusion.” A patch
of light appeared before them, against the background of the closing dark-
ness. It showed a cloaked figure. “That is me, on that fateful afternoon when
you were in town shopping. But then you returned, and I went out gladly to
meet you.” A second figure appeared: a lovely young woman.
She had not returned at that time, but she already knew it had seemed
she had. Her Seeing had shown her that much.
Then his words seemed to merge with the illusion, and the scene re-
played itself.
Morely hurried to the Kerena figure, who met him with open arms.
They embraced and kissed. “I want you, I need you,” she said. “Now!”
He obliged by spreading out his cloak on the ground and doffing his
clothing. She got naked with him, and they lay on the cloak, embracing closely.
Then he lifted above her, and she brought him into her with arms and legs.
In a moment it was done, and he rolled to the side, breathing heavily.
“I love you so much,” she said. “I wish I could enter you as you enter
me.”
“That is not the way of it,” he said tolerantly.
“Let me try. Open your mouth.”
He did so. She brought her mouth close, then stuck out her tongue. It
reached far out, beyond the ability of a human tongue, a long extension. She
thrust it into his mouth. He was evidently surprised by the extent of this
penetration, but held still for it. She drew it back slightly, then thrust it in
again, deeper.
Kerena, watching the illusion, was both amazed and impressed. That
was indeed much like a man plunging into a woman, working up to his
climax.
After several oscillations, the woman thrust so deeply that their mouths
were jammed together. Then she lifted her upper hand, and jammed the heel
of it hard against his jaw. That forced him to bite down on her tongue.
He struggled, then, but she clung, keeping her mouth plastered to his. It
was only with difficulty that he finally got his face away from hers. Then
blood flowed; her tongue had been badly bitten. It had to be extremely pain-
ful.
“I’m so sorry!” he said, swallowing and wiping his blood-soaked lips.
“Somehow my jaw got knocked, and I bit you. I never meant to do that.”

“It will heal,” she said complacently. “I do not feel much pain.”
“Come into the house,” he urged her. “I have balm. I am mortified to
have done such a thing.”
“No need. Plumb me again; I like it better after a bleeding.” She tried to
draw him back onto her body.
Now at last he caught on. “I have been blind! You’re not Kerena! You’re
a succubus, a seductive nocturnal spirit.”
“Not exactly. I am Vanja, a vampire.” Her appearance changed, becom-
ing her own: an extremely shapely strange woman.
“A vampire! But you did not try to suck my blood.”
“True. I do not wish to deplete my future husband.”
“Husband! I’ll not marry you, vamp!” He was scrambling back into his
clothes.
“Let me explain,” Vanja said patiently. “Meanwhile you might as well
plumb me, for we can provide each other much incidental pleasure. Unlike
mortal women, we enjoy it as much as the men do, though we cannot make
babies.”
“Never!”
“It is too late to protest. You have been blooded. You will crave my body
increasingly as you become like me. Fighting it will only make you suffer.”
He brandished a knife. “If you try to bite me, I will cut your head off!”
“You really should have researched vampires better. Popular supersti-
tion is wrong; it is not our bite that converts mortals to our kind. If that were
the case, the whole world would soon be vampire. It is the other way around:
it is when mortals taste our blood that they are transformed. That keeps it
under control. We convert only those we choose. You have tasted my blood;
now you are mine.”
“I am doomed,” he said, reluctantly accepting it. “I feel the changes
occurring in my body. I do desire you, though I just had you, and now know
you are poison.”
“Actually there are considerable benefits,” she said. “We live virtually
eternally, as long as we have regular sips of mortal blood. We suffer little
pain, and heal rapidly. We can see well in darkness.”
“And can’t face the light!” he retorted. “Direct sunlight will kill you.”
“Not immediately, but it would blind us and cause our skin to blister. So
we prefer to go about by night, which is more convenient for feeding any-
way. Now come into me again, before we go home.” She reached for him
once more.
His reluctance was manifest, but he seemed unable to resist her hold.
She drew him down again on the cloak, and in a moment they were having
ardent sex, his clothing no hindrance. It was true: her passion equaled his.
“But what of Kerena?” he asked as their mutual joy faded. “The real

Kerena? She does not deserve this betrayal.”
“Then we must go before she arrives. She would not care to know about
the manner you have changed.”
“Damn you vixen, it’s true. She must not know.”
“Come with me. We have a long way to travel.” She drew him along,
and he remained unable to resist her. They walked away, leaving the cloak on
the ground, forgotten.
Now Kerena knew exactly how it had happened. “So you are now a
vampire.”
“I am.”
“Yet if conversion is only by the choice of the vampire, you could have
remained with me without converting me.”
“I was sorely tempted. But it would have been horribly unfair to you.
You would not have liked living with a vampire, and if anyone had learned
of it, both of us would have been burned at the stake. I could not stand to put
you to that risk.”
“And there was Vanja,” she said shrewdly.
“Yes. What she said is true. The taste of her blood not only made me a
vampire, it attracted me to her personally. I must have sex with her often, or
suffer. I love you, but I think you would not long have tolerated my having
such a mistress in addition. So it was kinder to end it at the outset.”
It was some trap the vampiress had sprung on him. By the time he knew
he was not making love to Kerena, he was locked into the new order. He had
indeed tried to be kind.
“Why did she want you? She could have done the same to any other
man with less difficulty, if not satisfied fornicating with her own kind.”
Now Vanja answered. “We are few in number, deliberately, and our
society is hierarchical. I was a lowly member, converted at a young age by a
man I thought would marry me. He did not; all he wanted was an esthetic
mistress. He is Vichard, the current chief of our clan, already married. I
seethed when I learned, but I could neither stop being a vampire nor resist
his sexual interest, for my desire for him was as strong as his for me. The
blooding does it to both. His wife despises me, of course, but she too is locked
in.”
“So you decided to wrong another innocent person the same way you
had been wronged?” Kerena asked acidly.
“Yes. It is the only way out. But I also craved vengeance. So I searched
long and hard for a natural leader—one who could displace Vichard as chief.
I found Morely, a skilled Seer and magician with excellent qualities of char-
acter. I took him. Now he is Vorely.”
“The initial letter of a person’s name is changed to a V, for vampire,”
Morely explained. “It is a convenient convention.”

Kerena appreciated the situation. In fact, she was compelled to admire
Vanja’s nerve and strategy. The girl had spunk.
Still, that did not mean Kerena had to accept the situation completely.
She still loved Morely, and meant to win him back.
“I have had my own history in the interim,” she said carefully. “Bereft
of you, but determined to find you, I became a lady of the night, then the
mistress of wealthy traders and notable knights. This had a consequence. Put
your hand on my belly.”
Morely did so. “You are gravid!”
“A love child, yes, but I can not marry the father.” she glanced at Vanja,
unable to see her now in the darkness, but knowing the woman could see
her, Kerena. “Similar in respects to your situation, vampiress. I need to marry,
and Morely is the man I want. I did not make the arduous journey only to be
lightly balked. I will take Morely back.”
“I will kill you!” Vanja said. There was the sound of her motion.
But Gordon, forgotten for the moment, intercepted her. “Let her be, or
we shall discover whether vampires can die of conventional causes,” he said.
That did make the girl pause. “We can,” she said. “We are not immortal
if damaged sufficiently. Then let us compromise: he can have you as mistress
after your babe is birthed.”
“Or you as mistress after he marries me,” Kerena said evenly. “I am the
one he loves.”
“He must choose,” Vanja agreed.
“I choose Kerena,” Morely said immediately. “I will always love her. It
was for love of her I left her.”
“Then it is decided,” Kerena said, relieved.
The time frames wavered. Jolie reacted almost automatically. She moved
back a few seconds, sending a suppressing of Kerena’s comment. This time
she said nothing, and the frames aligned.
Vanja considered, realizing that she held the losing hand. “Though she
birth a baby not yours?”
“Yes. I can’t sire a baby now, nor can a vampire woman conceive one.
That’s a vampire liability you forgot to enumerate when you converted me.”
So he felt bitterness too. That gratified Kerena. “I know you love me.”
“But the connection with Vanja remains,” he said. “I can not eliminate
my desire for her. You have to understand and accept this.”
“Not necessarily. Didn’t Vanja lose Vichard’s hold on her when she con-
verted you?”
“Yes, that is the only way,” Vanja agreed. “To blood another mortal.”
“So if Morely converts me, you will lose your hold on him.”
She knew the vampire woman was staring at her. She had analyzed the
system rationally and found its weakness. Morely was surely proud of her.

Jolie wondered whether that was the reason the timelines had started to
separate: to stop Kerena from converting in order to win Morely back?
“You don’t want to be a vampire, Kerena,” Morely said. “I would love to
have you with me again, but you should remain mortal. That way you have a
future in the realm of mortals.”
“Yet you would convert me if I asked.”
“Yes. I love you. That’s why I ask you not to ask me.”
Much as Kerena had asked Gawain not to clasp her, though she longed
for it. Love was like that. “I will think about it. Where can Gordon and I
stay?”
“Not in the warren,” Vanja said. “Your stupid torches are a menace.”
“In a human village,” Kerena said.
“They can’t stay there either,” Vanja said. “They would reveal our loca-
tion, and the mortals would invade and destroy us.”
“Then we’ll camp out,” Kerena said.
“But your baby!” Morely protested.
“Isn’t due yet. I’ll make up my mind before then.”
The two vampires left them, and Kerena went with Gordon to find a
comfortable camp for the night. It wasn’t easy in the darkness, but they man-
aged.
“Do you have an opinion, Gordon?” she asked as they lay under the
cloak.
“Vanja is your enemy, but she doesn’t know about the cloak. I inter-
cepted her so she wouldn’t discover that you are invulnerable.”
She smiled. “Thank you. But I mean about my becoming a vampire.”
“I don’t think you want to become any more like him than like me. Why
sacrifice either your mortality or your sexuality?”
“I love him.”
“What of your baby?”
“I don’t want that to be a vampire. I’ll have to take it back to Sir Gawain.”
“He may not like that.”
“I don’t know what else to do.”
“Then I will wait until you birth it, then accompany you back to Sir
Gawain.”
“That is more than you should do. If I turn vampire, you should con-
sider your service over. Is there enough gold left to sustain you?”
“Three times as much as that.”
“It is all yours.”
“I will keep it—after I finish with you.”
“Were you normal, I would be suspicious of your motive.”
“I think I do love you, Kerena, in my fashion.”
“You wish to kiss me?”

“No. Just to take care of you.”
Love was like that too. “So many women would settle for that.”
“You will have to settle for my loyalty.”
They slept.
Kerena pondered for a week while they camped out. Morely brought
them supplies. “Vampires do eat other than blood,” he said. “In fact, very
little is blood. We need it only every month or so to maintain our vigor. We
take it mostly from sheep, and not those grazing close to here.”
“You don’t seem to have fangs.”
“We don’t. We make a small cut near a vein, and lick the blood up as it
flows. An ounce or so is enough. The sheep hardly misses it.”
In the second week Vanja came, bringing the supplies. Kerena was sur-
prised. “Morely let you come?”
“He asked me to come.”
“Asked you!”
“He does love you. I come to make a deal.”
Kerena distrusted this. “What do you have to offer?”
“I can help you to help him, if you decide to convert.”
This was interesting. “Speak your mind.”
“I am bound to him regardless what he does. I could break that by con-
verting another mortal man, but we prefer to keep our number low, and I
don’t think I could find a better man than Vorely. If you convert you will take
him. Let me be his mistress. I am ready to settle for that. In return I will show
you how he can become chief of the clan, an advantageous position that
would benefit us both.”
“Better to be the mistress of a chief, than the wife of an ordinary vam-
pire?”
“Equivalent. And if you approved it, he would agree.”
Kerena considered. “So it’s power you want.”
“No. First I want Vorely. I chose him in part because I knew I could love
him, and I do. Second I want vengeance on the man who brought me into
this. I could have done very well for myself among the mortals.”
Kerena knew that with her figure and determination, Vanja could in-
deed have done very well. Her motives rang true. She had realized that if she
hurt Kerena, Morely would turn on her. So she had to make the best of it by
making an alliance with her rival. Could she be trusted?
Kerena focused her Seeing, and discovered to her surprise that the
vampiress could be trusted, for her motives were straightforward. She knew
what she wanted and how to get it. She was actually a person Kerena could
have liked, had circumstances been different.
“I will consider it,” she said at last. “Tell me how you would help him
become chief.”

“Each year the vampires vote on which among them will be chief for
the next year. Vichard has been elected the past twenty years, but dissatisfac-
tion is growing, and now there are only two more votes in his camp than
against him.”
“Twenty years?” Kerena asked. “How long have you known him?”
“Eighteen years.”
“But you look eighteen total!”
“I look as I did when he converted me. I was that age as a mortal.”
“So it is true that you retain youth indefinitely.”
“It is true. But I would have preferred to remain mortal, had a man and
family, and grown children by now. That has been denied me. I do not pre-
tend it is fun to be a vampire. It is merely a different state, with compensa-
tions. Vorely gives my limited life meaning. I will do for him what I can.”
“So you are of Morely’s generation, rather than mine.”
“Generations don’t much matter, with our kind.”
“I am nearing sixteen,” Kerena said. “If I converted, I could remain that
age, physically.”
Vanja smiled. “Yes. You look eighteen, and stunning, but for your preg-
nancy.”
“And if I converted, I would represent one more vote for Morely to be
chief. But that would still be one short, not victory.”
“I have hitherto voted for Vichard.”
Now it came clear. Vanja had been loyal despite her ire, as there was no
point in aggravating her lover when there were not enough votes to oust
him. But now she had a better prospect, so her change in vote could make
the difference. If Kerena joined.
“Let me talk with Morely about this,” Kerena said. “If I convert, you can
be mistress of the chief. If I do not, I will depart, and you will be wife of the
man you love.”
“Talk with Vorely,” Vanja agreed. She departed.
Alone again, Kerena discussed it with Gordon. “Should I ally with her?”
“I think you should birth your baby, take it to its father, and ask him to
marry you.”
“He might do that, but I would be a millstone on his neck. I will not do
that to him.”
“And giving him his bastard child would be no millstone?”
That stung. “Less of one, I think. Siring bastards is a knightly thing to
do; many women are enthralled by knights. But marrying a harlot is beyond
the pale. I would not ask him to do that.”
“Why not raise your baby here among the vampires, then?”
“It is not a choice I care to make for it. I can make it for myself, but my
baby must have its chance at mortality.”

“Then ally with Vanja and win back your man.”
That was the way she was leaning. The idea of remaining her present
age forever had a certain appeal, too.
Another night she talked with Morely. “Vanja proffered me a deal: con-
vert, help you become chief, marry you, and let her be your mistress.”
“If I converted you, I would have no further compulsion to sexually
indulge her. I would want only you.”
Kerena was surprised. “Can she be ignorant of that?”
“Maybe she forgot.”
Kerena was not sure of that. She would have to discuss it with Vanja. “I
never thought it would be so complicated, once I found you. It was difficult
enough finding you. I never would have made it without your velvet cloak. It
is past time to return it to you.”
“Keep it; I am glad it warmed you in my absence.”
“And protected me, and guided me,” she said. “Why did you not tell me
of its marvelous properties?”
“What properties?”
“Invulnerability, for one.”
“It is merely a cloak. It provides no invulnerability. If you believed that,
you were putting your life in danger.”
This was odd. Her Seeing indicated he was not joking. “I will demon-
strate.”
She invoked invulnerability and wrapped the cloak closely about her.
“Now strike me.”
“I would not do that.”
“Gordon, strike me.”
Gordon drew his sword.
“Don’t do that!” Morely protested. “This foolishness has gone far
enough.”
“It’s no foolishness, sir,” Gordon said. “That cloak has protected me
too.” But he sheathed the sword. “Try it yourself, with a stick. You will see.”
Morely picked up a stick and poked it at Kerena. It shied away. He tried
again, with no better success. Surprised, he tried a light blow. It didn’t land.
“It’s true!” he said, astonished. “There is magic.”
“You didn’t know?” Kerena asked. “How could you not know?”
“That cloak never protected me like that. I have been buffeted by ruffi-
ans many times.”
“Well, you have to invoke it, of course.”
“It had no such power before. I would have known.”
“You are a Seer,” she agreed. “You should have known.”
“An amazing notion occurs to me,” he said. “You are doing it, not the
cloak.”

“But how could I have any such power?”
“As an extension of your power with the elements. You showed much
aptitude there, mastering them much faster than I did. I may have seriously
misjudged your potential.”
“All that I am, apart from my Seeing, I owe to your instruction or your
cloak,” she said.
“I think not. I think the Fey took you farther than I ever could.”
“She merely taught me how to invoke the properties of the cloak. I think
she envied you the power you had to invest it with such powers.”
“I think she told you that, to limit your awareness of you own poten-
tial.”
“I can’t believe that.”
“More experimentation is in order. What other properties did you dis-
cover in the cloak?”
“Invisibility, permeability, and orientation on you, its master.”
“Doff the cloak. Make yourself permeable.”
She humored him. She set aside the cloak, then invoked the permeabil-
ity spell on herself. “See—I am unchanged.”
“Now walk through me.”
She shrugged and walked into him, expecting a collision. And through
him without resistance. It was as if she had become a ghost.
“Oh, my,” she breathed, feeling faint.
“Reverse the spell, so I can comfort you.”
She did, and he did. “I never dreamed of this,” she said, awed.
“Nor did I. I recognized great potential in you, but never that. I curse
myself for my neglect.”
“Sir,” Gordon said. “You did not recognize it when she was younger
because it had not yet developed. It surely came with her maturation.”
“Perhaps that explains it,” Morely said. “This does somewhat change
the picture. Kerena, you must not waste yourself by turning vampire. You
have so much more to accomplish in the mortal realm.”
“But I want to be with you.”
“And I with you. But I tried to train you to be rational. Is it rational for
you to handicap yourself this way, when you have so much future elsewhere?”
“No,” she whispered.
“It grieves me to come to this conclusion, but it does seem best.”
“I have not yet decided.”
He paused. “In that case, be sure to let me know when you do. I would
at least like to bid you fond parting.”
Another night Vanja came again. This time the moon was bright; that
light did not bother the vampires. Kerena braced her forthrightly: “If Morely
converts me, he will lose his passion for you. That could cost you your asso-

ciation, even if he becomes chief. Had you not thought of that?”
“I had thought of it. But I love him and want what is best for him. If that
is to be chief with you, then so it must be. I will still have my vengeance of
Vichard, and maybe Vorely will still find me appealing on occasion even if
not compelled. You have but to allow it.”
Kerena’s respect was growing. “I hated you for what you did to Morely.
Then I came to understand, without approval. Now I am coming to respect
you. You are true to your lights.”
“I do what I must.”
“Let me study you.”
The woman was perplexed. “I will tell you what you want to know.”
“This is more than that. I am a Seeress. I can fathom things beyond what
others know.”
“Yes, that is why Vorely loves you. I can not compete with that.”
“I want to look at you with my magic. That may reveal more than you
care for.”
Vanja shrugged. “I am concealing nothing.”
Kerena stood before her, placed her hands on the girl’s shoulders, and
gazed into her eyes. She extended her awareness.
And was amazed. “Oh,” she gasped, falling back.
Gordon leaped to support her. “What did she do?” he demanded an-
grily.
“Nothing,” Kerena said. “I merely saw a path I never expected. I don’t
understand it, but can’t doubt it.”
“What path?” Vanja asked. “I felt a jolt, but it wasn’t an attack. You
have strange power.”
Kerena laughed weakly. “So I am coming to appreciate. Here is the way
of part of it: you will marry Morely, and I will be his mistress.”
“This is humor?”
“This is my Seeing. The proper course to follow. I said I didn’t under-
stand it.”
“But you have the superior hand. Why should you sacrifice that to give
me better status?”
“Because you will convert me.”
“Convert you! That’s for Vorely to do.”
Kerena shook her head, bemused. “It seems not. That is the other part
of my Seeing. You must do it.”
“But then you and I would be bound to each other. It wouldn’t affect
Vorely, just us. It wouldn’t even change our feelings for him. It would just
make us like sisters.”
“And lovers, perhaps.”
“And lovers,” Vanja agreed. “But not strongly, because it does not change

sexual orientation, just commitment.”
“He would still love me and crave you,” Kerena said, working it out.
“But we would not betray each other’s interests. We could trust each other,
and share him.”
“We could. This is a much better situation for me. But it makes no sense
for you.”
“It surely makes sense. I have but to understand it.”
“Vorely would say not only not to handicap yourself by converting, but
not to give me such an advantage. You are the one he wants to marry.”
“It seems that is not to be. I am not gratified.”
“You have shaken me with your Seeing. You need to think about it fur-
ther.”
“I shall.”
Morely, too, was amazed. “How can you consider such a thing?”
“My Seeing shows it best. What of yours?”
He focused. His jaw went slack. “It agrees. I could not have fathomed
this on my own, but guided by your suggestion, I confirm it. It is a proper
course. Yet I would prefer to marry you.”
Jolie was similarly amazed. She had thought the alignment required
Kerena to avoid becoming a vampire. Now it seemed otherwise. What a de-
vious course this was turning out to be!
“One question remains for me,” Kerena said. “What of my baby? I do
not want it raised among the vampires, but if I convert now, will it also
convert?”
“I do not know. I doubt the question has ever arisen before. It may be
best to wait until after the birthing.”
“Yes. That is sensible.”
The frames blurred.
Jolie stepped back, blocking that response.
“Does that make sense?”
“Try your Seeing,” he suggested.
Kerena tried it. “I should not wait.”
The timelines aligned. Jolie wondered about that, knowing that there
was a complication. But it was her job to keep the timelines aligned, regard-
less of complications. The lines were no longer blurred.
“Still, this is such a significant decision, you must not hurry.”
“It is time. I will do it tonight, with Vanja.”
“It is of course your decision,” he said with deep regret. “I shall be glad
to have you with me in whatever capacity you choose. But I think I will never
understand why we can’t marry.”
“I hate that aspect,” she agreed. “But I trust my Seeing.”
He kissed her and departed.

“What should I do when you convert?” Gordon asked. “You will join
them in the warren.”
“Let me see.” She put her hands on his shoulders and focused. “You
must wait in the nearby village until I come for you. So I can take my baby to
its father.”
“Of course,” he agreed.
That evening Vanja came. “Do I have to bite your tongue?” Kerena asked
distastefully.
“No. Merely sip a drop of my blood. I will scratch my arm.” She paused.
“Are you sure? Once done, this can not be undone.”
“My vision says I must. Otherwise I would never do it.”
“As I never would have done it,” Vanja said. “Had I known.” She scratched
her forearm with a sharp fingernail. Blood welled out. “Quickly, before it
heals.”
Kerena put her mouth to the scratch and licked up the blood. It had a
pungent quality. She swallowed the drop.
Immediately it reacted in her stomach. A curious warmth spread out,
suffusing her belly, then her entire being. In fact, she felt good.
“This is not what I anticipated,” she said. “I thought it would be like
dying. It feels more like truly living.”
“It does,” Vanja agreed. “But do not be deceived: it does not render you
invulnerable to injuries.”
“Invulnerable.” The word reminded her of her other powers. Did she
still have them? “I must try something.”
“It will not be complete for an hour or more. It takes time for the body to
adjust.”
“I will know if it is changing my powers.” Kerena invoked the spell of
permeability. “Touch my hand.”
Vanja did. Their two hands passed through each other. “Oh!” she said,
amazed.
“I will test again in an hour. But I think I am retaining my magic.”
“I think so.”
When the hour was done, Kerena verified all her special abilities. Con-
version had cost her nothing in that respect. She was ready to join the vam-
pire community.
Gordon departed for the village, making his way by moonlight. He had
plenty of gold to pay his way. He agreed to go out from the village for a walk
through the fringe of the forest every day at dusk, so that she could contact
him without being known to the villagers. She expected to make that contact
in about five months, after the baby was birthed and she had had time to
recover.
Kerena’s existence as a vampire turned out to be rather dull. She was

now Verena, accepted because she was indubitably a vampire and Vorely’s
beloved. The sipping of the blood of live creatures turned out to range from
ten days to a month, and little was needed. The rest of the time she con-
sumed normal food, for which they foraged in the countryside. She ate less
than she had before, as the vampire form seemed to be more efficient in
processing it, and in conserving energy. This was partly because they rested
and slept most of the day, preferring to go out in the cool night. The need for
clothing was similarly reduced; they used it only when going out into the
cooler nocturnal world. Within the warren all were normally nude.
There was a good deal of sexual activity, as married and “dating” couples
entertained themselves. This was fairly open, as there were only ninety resi-
dents in this clan and most of them had known each other for decades or
longer. They tended to be tolerant about spot liaisons outside established
couples, and many liked to travel to neighboring villages to patronize broth-
els and lonely men. The mortals, of course, did not know the nature of their
partners; there was no physical evidence to mark the vampires. They tended
to seem young and healthy and highly sexed; few ever thought to question
that. They made excellent sexual companions. Kerena, not participating, stud-
ied the matter with an experienced eye. It was actually a good deal for the
mortals, who were seldom charged much if anything.
Vorely’s accession to be chief turned out also to be routine. The votes
were tallied, and Kerena’s new one, together with Vanja’s change of sides,
gave it to him by one. That was it; no one argued. If Vichard was disap-
pointed, he was gracious. There was always next year, or next decade. Vam-
pires, it seemed, took the long view.
Soon after becoming chief, Vorely married Vanja. It was a small cer-
emony in the warren, mainly a mutual statement that they both wished this
association. They kissed, and had ritual public sex. Now Vanja’s inducement
for changing sides was clear, it seemed. Why Verena had agreed to it was less
clear, but it was her business. Her obvious pregnancy explained her lack of
participation in sexual activity with Vorely. Vanja was clearly willing and
able to take up the slack.
Then Verena birthed her child. Here, too, her new state seemed to help;
she had little difficulty or pain, and produced a healthy baby boy. He was
mortal, not vampire. She nursed him, and this did not convert him. She had
been concerned, but her Seeing had suggested it was all right. She named
him Gawain.
A month after the birthing she was fully recovered and ready to make
the long trek to deliver the boy to his father.
Unfortunately there was something her Seeing had not Seen, because it
had never occurred to her to look. She had extended regret ahead.

CHAPTER 6
TAINT
Gordon was in the village, taking evening walks as he had promised.
“Rena!” he cried gladly when she appeared before him. “Is all well?”
“All is well,” she agreed. “Here is my baby, Gawain the Second.”
“He’s darling. May I hold him?”
She hesitated, remembering the man’s predilection for boys. But her
Seeing showed no trouble. She passed the baby over.
“I saw you pause,” Gordon said. “The boys I go for are six to eight years
old, not babies. Have no fear.”
She forced a laugh. “I trust the trip will not take that long.”
He handed Gawain back. “Let me pay off my landlord and clear out my
things, and I will be with you.”
“I will accompany you to the village.”
“Is that wise? A woman and baby suddenly appearing?”
“We could be invisible. But do they know your nature?”
“No. As with your kind, I practice my nature elsewhere. Here I am a
wealthy widower recovering from bereavement, so not interested in remar-
riage.” He smiled. “However, it has been five months, and the local women
believe that six months suffices for mourning. It is about time for me to move
on, lest I be openly courted.”
“Then I will be your daughter and her child, come to take you to my
home, now that I have found you.”
“I didn’t want to burden you with my morose presence,” he agreed.
“But it seems Family will not be denied.”
“The local women will surely understand.”
“They may be annoyed, but know the way of it.”
She nodded. “It would be a shame to let your wealth go to waste, when
you have a grandchild to spoil.”
They both laughed, liking the fiction that served their purposes so well.
She walked with him to the village. They paused to purchase traveling

goods, incidentally spreading the story. Then they repaired to his small rented
abode.
“How was it with the vampires?” he asked. “You do not seem changed
in that manner.”
“I am changed, though. I eat less, tolerate light and heat less, and will
live indefinitely, as long as I take a sip of fresh mortal blood within every
month. I also have a greater desire for the pleasures of sexual congress.”
“But you had many such pleasures before.”
“No. I gave endless pleasures to men, for pay. That was business, amass-
ing the gold that now is yours. My desire was only for the two men I loved.
Now my desire is as strong as theirs. That is quite a different thing.”
Gordon looked alarmed. “I hope you do not look to me for such plea-
sure.”
“No more than you look to my baby for yours. We understand each
other. But if we should need to persuade a man along the way to do some-
thing, I will enjoy that persuasion as much as he does.”
“So among the vampires—”
“Vanja and I took turns at Vorely, this past month. He became surfeit,
even for a vampire.”
“And when you have left the baby—”
“I will return to have at Vorely again, and perhaps other men of the
warren.”
“That does not seem like much of a life.”
“Maybe that’s why my Seeing steered me away from marrying him.
This leaves me free to wander, at such time as I choose. An eternal life with
the same small group surely palls in time.”
“Even mortal life can pall. This past year has been more interesting for
me than the prior time.”
“But now you have gold. That should make a difference.”
“It should,” he agreed, sounding not quite certain.
They traveled south. When an innkeeper had no room remaining, Kerena
put Gawain in Gordon’s care and took the man aside for remonstrance. She
was so persuasive that he made room for them in his own apartment. When
his wife objected, she lent her the baby to coddle while she saw to the man
again. Gawain was a little charmer, handsome and friendly, making the
woman satisfied with the deal.
“You can twist women as well as men around your finger,” Gordon
remarked as they trekked next day.
“Persuasion is a useful art. I am always learning.”
Another time they were waylaid by three outlaws who blocked the path
ahead and behind. “Invoke your cloak,” Gordon said grimly. “I will try to
tackle them singly.”

“That is risky. Let me try persuasion, again.” Of course she knew now
that it wasn’t the cloak it was her, but she could imbue the cloak with the
same magic properties.
“They mean to rape you anyway.”
“They can’t. Take Gawain and the cloak and stand back.”
Then, alone, she walked boldly toward the two men ahead. “I will make
a deal with you,” she said. “I will take you on, all three. When you can no
longer fight, you will let us move on without further challenge.”
“Fight?” he asked, surprised by her audacity.
“Not with your club,” she said, opening her clothing to expose her torso
from breasts to crotch.
“Oho!” He embraced her, took her to the ground, and quickly com-
pleted the act. Then his companion was on her. Then the third man.
Kerena got up and went for the first man again. “Raise your weapon,”
she said, stopping into him.
Thus challenged, he did his best, and in due course completed the sec-
ond act. Then the second man did the same, and the third one.
Kerena went after the first one again. “Where is your weapon?” But this
time he was unable to raise it. “Then I am done with you, and shall be mov-
ing on.”
At this point, bemused, they did not challenge her. Gordon joined her
and they left the outlaws behind.
“I never saw the like,” Gordon said.
“Wasn’t it better than your way?”
“But suppose they had reneged, and tried to hurt you?”
“I would have castrated them.”
He was taken aback. “You could do that?”
“Yes. I have magic powers I did not know of before, and know the use of
the knife. As it was, I got a nice dose of sex, and you did not have to fight.”
“Your way was better.”
“Yes, as long as I did not have to use the magic. Had that been necessary,
it could have been ugly, as I prefer that my nature not be known.”
“So do I!”
The trek to central England took them a month and a half. When they
reached the capital city, Kerena went to the spot she had first met Sir Gawain
as he gazed up at the stars. He was there, as before, in the early evening.
“Sir Gawain,” she said.
He knew her voice instantly. “Rena!”
“You may not like my present mission.”
“I still love you, though it damns me.”
“But you still can’t marry me.”
“That is the curse of my existence. Oh, to hold you again.”

“That you can do. But first you must know this: I have a son by you.”
He was stunned. “You never said!”
“I didn’t know. Not until after I left you. I can’t keep him; he must be
with you. You can give him the life he deserves.”
He hesitated hardly a moment. “Of course. If I can’t have you, I can at
least have him.”
“I named him Gawain, after you. Gaw for short. Here he is.” She set the
baby into his hands.
“There is something about him.”
“He relates well to people. He charms the ladies. Can you get a wet
nurse?”
That sat him back. “It is not the kind of thing I know about.” Then he
got an idea. “Would you serve? Until he is weaned? I would pay you.”
Somehow Kerena hadn’t thought of that. The idea of being with her son
longer appealed, as well as that of being with Sir Gawain again. “I would be
anonymous,” she said.
“Yes, to all others. But to me—Rena, if you would also consent to—”
“I would,” she said. “I love you too.”
So it was that she dallied longer with Sir Gawain than she had antici-
pated. She became his hired wet nurse for the son he had discovered, and his
secret mistress. If others suspected her dual role, it hardly mattered; pretty
wet nurses were fair game for knights, and often they were amenable apart
from the pay. This was certainly the case here.
Her status as a vampire didn’t matter. She used her magic to direct light
around her body so that only part of it actually struck her, making her feel as
she were walking in dusk. The diversion made a subtle sparkle around her
that others remarked on, on occasion: it was as if she were a bright jewel,
scintillating. Meanwhile she was able to tolerate broad daylight, while still
able to see well at night.
Gordon departed with the gold. “But if you ever need me again—”
She kissed him on the cheek. “I will find you. You have been wonder-
ful.”
He kissed her back. “Now at least I know some of what I am missing.”
She stayed with the elder and younger Gawains a year, until the time for
weaning approached. Every so often she went out in the evening, found a
sheep, cut its skin, and sipped the bit of blood that flowed. The sheep hardly
noticed, and healed soon enough. She appreciated the way her Seeing had
guided her, so that she was free to do this. It allowed her more time with Sir
Gawain and son, and she knew that Morely was well attended.
“Soon your job will no longer be necessary,” Sir Gawain said as they lay
together after a typically torrid love session. “Then I will lack a pretext to
keep you here.”

“And I will go,” she said. “That was always our understanding.”
“Maybe I should renounce my position and marry you. That at least
would make me happy. You have such remarkable passion I can barely keep
up with you, yet it is a joy trying.”
“You owe it to the kingdom to keep your place,” she reminded him.
“Not to throw it away for a harlot.”
“I will slay the man who calls you that.”
“Then I had better get me gone before anyone speaks the truth.”
“You are entirely too rational.”
It was time to change the subject. “I must nurse Gaw.”
“That reminds me. There is something about him.”
This was new. “I thought you liked him.”
“I do. He is bold and beautiful, like you. But there is something eerie,
too, like a sour note in a symphony.”
“Maybe I should do a Seeing on him.”
“Maybe you should. Maybe it can be fixed.”
She went to Gaw, nursed him, then set him down and focused her See-
ing.
Sir Gawain was right: there was something subtly out of line. It wasn’t
physical; the boy was supremely robust. It was spiritual. A psychic taint that
could cause him mischief.
“What is it?” Sir Gawain asked, seeing her expression.
“There seems to be a kind of curse on him,” she said. “Something that
will make him unlucky, so that he will die before his time.”
“Luck is as a man makes it.”
“Perhaps I have the wrong word. There is a spiritual guidance to all our
lives. Some of us are destined for great things, some for failure, regardless of
our physical or mental potential. Gaw has great potential, but his destiny is
compromised. I wish it were not so.”
“How can that be? Tell me what ill is fated to befall him, and I will set
him on another course.”
“This seems to be beyond what human beings can influence. He will
ultimately fail in life, and we can not prevent it.”
“I can’t abide this! My son must succeed.”
“Nor can I,” she said, her anguish growing. “Yet I don’t know what to
do about it.”
“Your Seeing—can it be focused on a particular aspect? Such as the
origin of the curse?”
“I can try.” She hadn’t thought of that, but it was a good suggestion.
She focused, orienting on the origin. Half to her surprise, she discov-
ered a time when Gaw’s fate had changed. Four months before his birth. He
had been cursed before ever leaving her body.

Four months. That would have been when—
“Oh, no!” she cried.
“You have found it,” Sir Gawain said.
“I have found it. It is my fault.” For it was when she became a vampire.
She had not told Sir Gawain about that, and did not plan to; the news would
not please him, and she thought did not relate to his interests.
“How can that be? You are devoted to him, and have never played him
false.”
“Not knowingly. But this—it was something I did that affected him while
he was still in my belly. I had no idea.”
“You ate something poisonous?”
“In a manner of speaking. I ate—something tainted. It affected him.
Now the taint is on him. It is too late to take it off.”
“Then he is doomed?”
“He can’t be doomed!” she cried in tears. “Not because of me!”
“Yet if we can’t change it—”
Her desperation summoned a bold idea. “There are spirits we little know.
They have powers that can affect us. I will go to them and plead for Gaw. I
will save our son.”
“I know you will do your best,” Sir Gawain said comfortingly.
In due course she weaned Gaw and with deep regret left him and his
father. It was time for her to go, lest others wonder why the wet nurse stayed
beyond her time. But now she had a mission: to find and address the spirits
that could help her.
She went north to the vampire enclave. Vorely remained chief despite
the loss of a vote; it would take a majority to displace him, and he was doing
a good job, so had actually gained support. He was glad to see her, and not
merely for her ardent presence in his bed. “I feared something had hap-
pened to you.”
“I stayed to nurse Gaw to the weaning. Then I learned he was tainted by
my conversion. He will fail in life and die early. I must abate that curse, as it
is my fault.”
“You didn’t know,” he reminded her.
“Yet I did it. I should have birthed him before converting. I must change
that.”
“You can’t change the past.”
“Can’t I? You know so many things; you must know of a way.”
He considered. “There is a story, but I have never fully credited it. Ratio-
nal analysis suggests it is fantasy.”
“Tell me that story.”
“In the beginning the earth was void and chaos ruled. Then it separated
into day and night. Day fragmented into seven major Incarnations of Im-

mortality and many more minor ones, while Night remained inchoate. The
Incarnations of Day assumed several major tasks, such as collecting con-
flicted souls after Death, organizing Time, and manipulating the threads of
Fate. They have powers that mortals hardly dream of, but they remain mostly
clear of mortal affairs and are difficult to approach. Yet sometimes they do
intervene in mortal affairs.”
Kerena found this fascinating yet barely credible. “Fragments of Day
supervise mortal affairs? That suggests they have minds and awareness.
Whence come such consciousness?”
“A rational question,” he said, kissing her and proceeding to another
round of love. “I bless the day I met you, though your potential extends well
beyond mine.”
“You are avoiding the question,” she said, participating with full vigor.
“Merely remarking on my delight of you. We are near the limit of my
knowledge of the Incarnations. I think at some point human beings merged
with some or all of them, lending human intellect to their nebulous powers
and giving them direction. Thus Death was personified as Thanatos, Time as
Chronos, and so on. I know no more.”
“So there are people there to deal with. How do I find them?”
“I do not know. It is certainly beyond my power, assuming the story is
true and that such folk exist. Perhaps it is not beyond your power.”
“There is my challenge. I shall go to meet it.”
“Now you are losing rationality.”
“How so?”
“How can you go anywhere, when you have no idea where or if they
exist? Remain here while you contemplate this challenge; you can do as much
in the security of the warren as elsewhere.”
“And you will have me in your bed longer.”
“Exactly.”
“It’s so nice to be desired.”
“Thank you.”
Yet his suggestion made sense. Her desire matched his, and she had
nowhere else to go. She remained while she struggled with the question, and
bit by bit between horrendous bouts of sex she worked out an approach.
She would use the velvet cloak. By itself it had no power, but it had good
associations for her, and she was comfortable with it. It helped her to focus
on it, imbuing it with the powers she chose, as she had done while traveling.
But what kind of focus should she apply? That was easy: whatever
worked. She tried focusing on life, and found it all through the forest; no
differentiation there. She tried focusing on spirits, and after a month or so
was able to detect them, but they too were omnipresent: every person and
every plant had a spirit of some sort. She adjusted the intensity, and that

filtered out most, but still didn’t locate anything special.
She was frustrated. Time was frittering away, and while it was fun mak-
ing out with Vorely, sometimes in tandem with Vanja, her mission to help
her baby was getting nowhere. Yet what else could she do?
She discussed it with Morely, but he had exhausted his inspiration on
that. It was Vanja who came up with the most promising lead: “They are
aspects of Day, you say? So they must draw their power from what we can’t
face, the light of day. The burning energy of the sun. Can you fix on that?”
“Surely I can,” Kerena agreed. “But since that unfiltered energy would
destroy me, what is the point?”
“You must denature it, as you do when going abroad by day. Then maybe
you can address it.”
Kerena tried it. She deflected the light so sharply as to become almost
invisible, and went out at noon. She oriented the cloak on the sun itself,
aligning with its savage energy, sorting out its special qualities. Most was
sheerly physical, the kind that heated ground. Some was nutritious energy
that encouraged plants to grow. Some was deadly, destroying qualities of
flesh. Step by step she filtered out the irrelevant or dangerous elements and
concentrated on the rest. And discovered the underlying component of magic.
That was surely what she wanted. She set the cloak to nullify the rest,
allowing only the magic to penetrate. It was everywhere, because sunlight
was everywhere by day, but there were areas of special concentration. A
high intensity of daylight magic. She tuned it and retuned it, getting the filter
just right so that she would be able to orient on such a phenomenon and go
to it. If she were correct, the several Incarnations of Day would be found
amidst exactly such energy swirls. If.
Finally she was able to narrow it down to seven manifestations, the stron-
gest. Those were the ones she wanted. She hoped.
She realized that she would have to travel far distances, and not want to
do them afoot. What alternative was there? She had heard of magical de-
vices like floating carpets or transformation into swift birds, but didn’t trust
them; she preferred to keep her own form and footing. How could she walk,
yet not take a month to pass from Scotland to England? The world was much
larger than that, and she had to be prepared to chase the Incarnations
throughout the world.
She struggled with this, and finally devised a compromise: she would
remain afoot, but phase out most of her mass to enable her to move rapidly
through mountains and towns with very little energy expended. Taken to its
extreme, she might even magnetize the cloak so that it was attracted by the
energy swirls and would carry her there with minimal effort on her part.
This might be dangerous, but it would be under her control so she could
slow or stop it at any time.

Another year had passed. “I am going after them,” she said. “They may
be dangerous, so I can’t promise to return. But I hope the vampires will
welcome me if I do.”
“As long as I remain, we will,” Vorely said. “You are a remarkable woman,
and I will always love you.”
“I, too,” Vanja agreed.
Kerena kissed them both and departed. She went abroad by night, not
because she had any further difficulty with day, but because the swirls of
energy were clearer by night because of the contrast.
She stood in the forest, orienting. She was eighteen years old, looking
slightly younger physically, but rather older in experience. Much older in
information and power. Was it enough? It had to be.
She tuned in on the swirls of energy. They were widely scattered, but
one was relatively close. She oriented on that, adjusting the cloak to ignore
the others. She phased out most of her mass, and started walking toward it.
She passed through trees with only fog-like resistance. She turned on
the cloak’s attraction, and it started urging her forward. She phased out fur-
ther, and allowed herself to be carried forward, her feet no longer walking.
She was on her way.
The cloak carried her roughly southwestward, through Scotland. But it
didn’t stop there. It took her on to the shore and across the heaving sea. This
startled her, but she realized that she no longer needed solid ground to walk
on; she could walk on water if she needed to. She lightened further, and her
body moved faster. She wanted to get where she was going.
She came to another shore. That would be Ireland. She forged giddily
though its trees, houses, and mountains. She hoped she didn’t have to go
beyond Ireland, because she knew there was nothing but broad ocean be-
yond the isles in this direction. She would go the distance she needed to, but
she preferred this first excursion to be short.
The direction changed. This alarmed her; had the cloak lost track? No,
she realized; it was that the energy swirl was also moving, so was no longer
where it had been when she started. Soon it changed again, but only slightly.
Her awareness of the energy swirl intensified. She was getting close.
She increased her mass and decreased the attraction, slowing. When she
was very close, she returned to full mass and walked, regaining her equilib-
rium. She had of course practiced this mode of travel before, but only for
very short local hops; this time she had gone vastly faster and farther than
ever.
Ahead of her was a vaguely human figure in an encompassing black
cloak. Beside it stood a magnificent pale horse with a huge scythe strapped to
its side. The figure was leaning over a man lying on the ground. It looked as
if the fallen man had had some kind of internal failure, and lost conscious-

ness.
Consciousness? He had died! That was why the Incarnation of Death
was here. This was the sudden grim confirmation of Vorely’s story: the In-
carnations of Immortality existed. They were real, and operating in exactly
the way conjectured. Or so it seemed.
Death reached down with one hand. The hand swept through the body,
pulling something out. Kerena realized that this would be the man’s soul
being drawn from his body. She shuddered.
Now she was close. “Hello, Thanatos!” she called, feeling vaguely fool-
ish. What did one say to an Incarnation?
Death turned to face her. Within the cloak’s dark hood was the fleshless
visage of a human skull.
Appalled, Kerena simply stood there staring. This was Death, the taker
of souls, of life. How could she face him, let alone make any demand of him?
“You see me,” Death said, his voice sounding surprisingly human.
“I see you,” she echoed numbly.
He glanced at his wrist, where there was what Jolie recognized as an
anachronistic timepiece. “You are not on my schedule. Who are you?”
There was nothing to do but answer. “I—I am Kerena. A mother. I come
to ask—a favor.”
“No.” Death turned, mounted the stallion, and murmured a word to it.
The horse leaped—and disappeared.
Kerena was left standing alone, amazed. Thanatos hadn’t even consid-
ered. He had simply denied her.
Her feeling shifted slowly to anger. The Incarnation didn’t have to grant
her favor, but he should have listened. Her enormous effort to locate him
warranted at least that much.
All she had wanted to ask Death was to postpone Gaw’s death until a
more timely age, so that he would have a chance to live out his life and
accomplish whatever great deeds were otherwise destined. Death had re-
jected her plea without even the courtesy to hear it.
Then her rationality took hold. There were other Incarnations. She could
achieve her desire with one of them.
She adjusted the cloak, eliminating the signal that was the Incarnation
of Death. Now there were six. She oriented on the closest of those. She re-
sumed traveling.
Now the cloak did take her out across the larger sea. She accelerated,
wanting to get clear of the endless water. She zoomed heedlessly across the
Atlantic.
Then, suddenly, the energy swirl was close. There was a large island,
with the ocean extending on beyond it. What was this?
What, indeed, Jolie wondered. This was the center of the Atlantic, in

the vicinity of the Mid-Atlantic mountain range, deep below the surface. She
knew her geography. There was not supposed to be any such island here. Yet
the timelines were straight.
Kerena slowed, coming to land on the beach. This appeared to be a
garden paradise, warm and fair, with plants of every imaginable type. There
were animals too, of every species, predators and prey, mingling without
fear of each other. Strange indeed.
Jolie’s mental jaw dropped. The Garden of Eden! It existed here near the
Equator, between the continents. Or was it Atlantis? Here until it suddenly
sank into the sea, as the great rift shifted. She had not realized that calamity
was so recent, barely before European ships started crossing to the New World.
No wonder there were persistent legends.
Kerena walked toward the energy whorl. She approached an elegant
twentieth century mansion.
But this is the fifth century! Jolie protested. This can’t be here! Yet obvi-
ously it was.
Kerena found the architecture odd, but wasn’t concerned, as this was
far from England. She knocked on the door.
A man of middle age opened it. Behind him hovered a glowing hour-
glass: The Hourglass that controlled time. “Will I summon you?” he asked.
“I summoned myself,” Kerena said boldly. “You are Chronos?”
“You are esthetic, for an undead,” he said, eying her.
So even the Incarnations noticed her body. “I come to ask a favor. You
must enable me to return to the point when I inadvertently tainted my son,
so I can avoid it. He—”
“No, of course not,” he said. “I never interfere with a timestream on the
whim of a denizen of the mortal realm; it disturbs the flow.”
Kerena was taken aback. “The flow?”
“The flow of time. It is my position to ensure that it is even. A change
affects everything following it. I would be aware of such an effect if I am to
make it. There is no change; the flow is undisturbed.”
Jolie remembered: Chronos lived backward. From the future to the past.
Thus he knew the consequences of any act; they were in his memory. So he
spoke of what he would do, though it was what had already been done, in
the awareness of all the folk of the world. Kerena didn’t understand that,
but didn’t need to.
“But my son,” Kerena said. “I must save him!”
Chronos focused on her. “You are a half mortal. How did you come
here to Purgatory?”
Purgatory! But that was not on Earth. It was—Jolie didn’t know where
it was, though she had been there. An alternate dimension, maybe. What
was it doing as an island in the Atlantic?

“Purgatory is becoming more primitive as the religion that spawned it
approaches its infancy,” Chronos said, answering her. “Now it is on this isle,
which is near its termination, and in a few mere centuries purgatory will not
exist as a separate entity.”
“I didn’t ask about that,” Kerena said. “I am here on behalf of my son.”
Chronos focused on her. “What is a ghost from my past doing in you?”
he demanded. “This disturbs the flow. I must deal with it.” He reached up to
grasp the Hourglass.
The timelines blurred badly.
Distract him! Jolie thought violently. The Incarnation of Time had de-
tected her temporal nature, and surely had the power to drive her away from
this timeline. He was receiving her thoughts.
Kerena did not understand the sudden urge, but obeyed it. “I am no
ghost,” she said, opening her clothing. “Let me prove it to you.”
“But there is a ghost within you. It—”
Kerena cut him off with a kiss, and bore him back into his mansion. She
was extremely good at what she knew how to do. Her body was exquisite,
buttressed by her magic Seeing and her considerable experience. In a mo-
ment he was indeed distracted. He was after all a man. From the future,
living backward when away from Purgatory, but still a man. Now there was
nothing in his mind but the divine unmortal body so avidly seducing him.
By the time she was done with him, Chronos had completely forgotten
about the ghost. Now get out of here.
Kerena got out of there, leaving Chronos blissfully sated. She reduced
her mass and oriented the cloak on the next closest energy swirl. She was on
her way to the next Incarnation, whatever that might be.
“What is this ghost in me?” she asked. “That forces me to protect its
secret?”
Jolie tried to prevent it, but now that she had the hint, Kerena was de-
termined, and she had considerable psychic power. She oriented on the mys-
tery within her, and in a moment had it. “A foreign spirit!”
Jolie considered moving back to just before the girl’s discovery, but knew
that was no good. Chronos had given it away, and there was no way to avoid
that interview, because that would change the timelines. She had done what
she had to, and that had worked: the lines were clear again. She would have
to face the revelation of her presence, and hope she could manage it in such
a way as to maintain the alignment.
A friend, she thought.
“Those other times I changed my mind—that was your doing?”
Yes. But never to harm you. To guide you.
“For what purpose?”
This is complicated to explain.

“Make it simple.”
Jolie tried. This world is headed to a bad end, unless guided to a good
end. I am Jolie, from a world just like this one, except it achieved a good end.
You are the key to the difference between them. My job is to guide you along
the correct course so that your world, too, achieves salvation.
“What bad end?”
Satan wins control and leads it into destruction. Jolie did not try to ex-
plain that the Incarnation of Satan at that time in her world was not an evil
man, and wanted to save the world as much as the other Incarnations did.
But in the alternate world the Incarnations were different, with God incom-
petent and Satan truly evil. Kerena could change that.
“How can I believe that?”
Use your Seeing.
Kerena did. “It is true. You are beneficial, and I need your guidance. But
there is something else odd about you. What is it?”
I do not yet exist. I will not be born until the year of our lord 1191, in
France. But I am independent of time in your world, which I am visiting.
“You feel young, like me. What is your personal history?”
At age fourteen I was sent to serve a powerful man, a sorcerer named
Parry. I became his apprentice, then his wife when I was fifteen.
“So you are like me! You loved and married young. I feel grief in you;
did he die?”
No. I did, when I was seventeen. I was murdered by Crusaders sent by
Evil’s minion Lucifer. I came to inhabit a drop of blood on Parry’s wrist, so I
could appear to him as a ghost. He became an influential cleric. Satan sent a
demoness to corrupt him, and she did, but she also fell in love with him.
When he died she helped him defeat Satan and assume his office as the
Incarnation of Evil.
“You are like me!” Kerena repeated. “Forever younger than eighteen.
And I made an ally of Vanja so Morely could become chief of the vampires.”
Good men have that effect on women. There may be a further parallel:
the other Incarnations treated him with contempt, as they seem to be treat-
ing you, and he swore vengeance on them. He tried to wrest ultimate power
from the Incarnation of Good, and in the end succeeded, in his fashion.
“This is your good end? Satan wins?”
I said in his fashion. He fought to prevent the Incarnations from declar-
ing the office of the Incarnation of Good to be vacant. When he lost that, he
made his own nomination, and his candidate became the new God.
“Isn’t that the same thing? That man is one of Satan’s creatures.”
No, it was a good ghost woman named Orlene, related to all the Incar-
nations in some manner so they could not oppose her. She is doing her best
to make the world better.

“A ghost woman! You’re a ghost woman!”
A different one, Jolie agreed. Orlene’s friend. It is really at her behest
that I came here. So that she will be the Incarnation of Good in this world
too. This is vastly better than the alternative.
“She’s trying to take power here too.”
No. She is not power hungry. She merely wants to save this world from
the doom that otherwise awaits it.
Kerena considered. “I know you through my Seeing. I like you. But my
mission is not yours. I must save my son from the taint on him, so that he can
thrive normally.
This is more difficult than you imagine. But there is no necessary con-
flict with my mission. If your world aligns with mine, you will rescue your
son, in a manner.
“In a manner? What manner?”
It will happen many generations hence, when—
The timelines blurred.
Jolie tried to move back a step, but could not. Kerena had taken control.
That was amazing and alarming.
“What is that?” Kerena demanded. She was now aware of the alternate
frames.
What I am telling you is changing the course of your reality. I must not
do it, lest the alignment be lost. You must let me revert, to eliminate that
telling.
Kerena considered again. “I believe you. My Seeing confirms it. But I
mislike this. Am I to be a puppet on a string?”
That is an unkind way to look at it. It is more like a course that will in
time achieve what you desire, that you must confirm, lest you lose the way.
Kerena decided. “Go back only the minimum required.” She loosed her
grip on her timeline.
Jolie moved back to the key question.
“In a manner?” Kerena demanded. “What manner?”
I must not tell you, lest the rescue be compromised. I ask you to trust
me.
Kerena considered, in this alternate dialogue. “I do trust you, because
of my Seeing. But I do not like not knowing.”
I understand. It seems your knowing would cause you to change course,
and the timelines would no longer align. It is possible that the alternate one
would enable you to accomplish your purpose also, but I would not be able
to help. I can guide you only toward conformity with my own reality.
Kerena sighed. “So it must be.” Then she thought of something else.
“Won’t Chronos mess with my timeline anyway, now that I have broached
him?”

I doubt it, because he said the flow is smooth, and he doesn’t want it
changed. Also, our contact with him is in his future, as he lives backward. He
won’t remember it because he hasn’t experienced it yet.
“I find that utterly confusing!”
So did Jolie. Maybe that is imprecise. We are going one direction, he the
opposite direction. If we were to meet him again tomorrow, our first meet-
ing would be in his future. He is now going toward our past, and must re-
member our first meeting as in his past. But surely he will not interfere with
your past, because that would stop you from having that encounter with
him, denying him what was surely his best amorous outing in centuries.
Men are funny about sex.
Kerena laughed. “Well, I hope it was his best, as a matter of profes-
sional pride. But I won’t seek him again.”
That is safer, Jolie agreed.
Then Kerena thought of something else. “If Chronos lives backward in
time, does he exist before his mortal self was born?”
Sharp question! No, unlike the other Incarnations, his term is limited to
his natural lifespan. He must pass the Hourglass on to another before he
reaches the date of his birth.
“Then how could I have given him his best outing in centuries? He
would not live that long.”
Because he is a vampire, like you. You didn’t notice?
“I didn’t!” Kerena said, surprised, realizing it was true. No wonder
Chronos had recognized her nature.
You were distracted. He’s an excellent lover, of course.
They were coming to another shore. “You know geography?” Kerena
asked. “Where is this?”
I am not sure I should give you information unknown to your genera-
tion.
“Try it. If it fuzzes the lines, untry it.”
That made sense. This is the continent of America, which has had no
known contact with Europe in twelve thousand years.
“No wonder I never heard of it.”
Now that Jolie was known to Kerena, and the timelines remained aligned,
it was less lonely for each of them. They had much to talk about. Kerena was
interested in just about everything, especially secrets of any nature. Jolie told
her about America, including the way it had been settled by several waves of
colonization from northeast Asia, with the later waves finally obliterating
the earlier ones. The first were sea folk, using their boats as homes, never
penetrating far inland. Most of their artifacts were covered by the rising sea.
Their boats limited their numbers. The later ones were land dwellers, unlim-
ited, so they prevailed.

“It would have been better had they just shared the land.”
Humans were never much for sharing with other cultures.
They came to the next energy vortex. A mature woman was sitting on a
high rocky slope, gazing down at a small village. Kerena came to a stop be-
side her. “Are you Nature or Fate?”
The woman glanced at her, shifting to old, then young. “Who are you,
nymph?”
That’s Fate, with three aspects: Clotho, who spins the Threads of Life,
Lachesis, who measures them, and Atropos, who cuts them.
“Kerena of England. I have come to beg a favor.”
The woman shifted to her middle-aged version, Lachesis. A large color-
ful tapestry appeared before her. “Kerena,” she murmured, her finger hov-
ering over a single thread, which brightened. “My, my: a pretty vampire. But
this thread is not due for cutting at this time.”
“My son, Gawain, is tainted. Please change my thread so that I do not
taint him. That is all I ask.”
“You seek to change your fate, you foolish freak?” Lachesis demanded
irritably. “Begone!”
“But you see—”
But the woman had changed into a large spider. The spider climbed an
invisible line and vanished. Fate was gone.
“Damn it!” Kerena swore. “Why won’t they listen?”
It’s the arrogance of power. They don’t like being pestered by folk of the
mortal realm.
“I will not give up,” Kerena said with tearful determination. She ori-
ented the cloak on the next vortex.
This took them, in due course, to a battlefield in east Asia. An armored
man with a giant red sword stood contemplating the action. This of course
was the Incarnation of War, known by many names.
“I don’t think this one can help me,” Kerena said, disappointed.
I’m not sure. The relations between vampires and mortals could be con-
sidered a war between types. If so, Mars might affect it.
“Maybe so,” Kerena agreed, recovering hope.
She approached the warrior. “Excuse me, War. I have a favor to—”
“Begone, rabble!” the Incarnation snapped without looking at her. “I
am busy.”
“But if you could just—”
The Incarnation drew the red sword, turning toward her.
Kerena made herself begone.
“This isn’t going well,” she said as she oriented on the next vortex.
These are not the Incarnations I know. They seem to have no sense of
responsibility to others.

Kerena was grim. “I noticed.”
The next vortex was in what Jolie recognized as Africa. It was a huge
thick-trunked tree with such thick foliage it seemed like a forest in itself.
Within that foliage was a surprisingly capacious residence. A solid woman
was there, watching a collection of termites building a small mound.
Nature, Jolie said. She could surely fix the taint.
“Madam Nature,” Kerena said. “I need a favor—”
“And I need food for my flesh-eating termites,” the woman said. “How
nice of you to volunteer.”
Get out of here!
Kerena was already on her way.
“I didn’t think they would do it for nothing,” Kerena said. “I’m ready to
serve some onerous duty. But they have no interest at all.”
Two remain, Jolie reminded her. But whatever faith the might have had
in the Incarnations of this time was fading.
“I will query them.”
The cloak went south. Jolie was amazed when it left Africa and went out
across the cold southern ocean. There was nothing down there but frozen
Antarctica.
But it turned out that under the mountain of ice was a hot subterranean
realm: Hell. As with Purgatory, this was at this time a physical location, not
yet refined into an alternate realm. That meant that they should be able to
leave it as readily as they entered it.
Kerena came to Satan’s office. This was a crude chamber somewhat
isolated from the flames of the main portion. Satan was relaxing in an easy
chair, watching the activity through a window.
“Satan,” Kerena said. “I—”
He faced her, smiling. “Of course, you lovely creature. What can I do
for you?”
For a moment she was silent, caught off-guard by this response. He was
ready to help?
Ask him to erase the evil of the taint, Jolie prompted.
“Please erase the evil of the taint,” Kerena said. “My son Gawain—”
“Certainly,” Satan said. “Come sit on my lap, beautiful vampire.” His
clothing disappeared.
I distrust this. He may seek to use you, then renege. Remember, he is the
Incarnation of Evil. Deception and cheating are natural to him.
“Naturally, ghost,” Satan said. “But it seems you will just have to gamble
on my fidelity, since the other Incarnations won’t help you.”
Kerena made a quick compromise. “You can have me once now, and
again after you eliminate the evil from my son.”
“So you really are a whore.”

Kerena refused to be shamed. “Whatever it takes.”
“Very well. Step into my bedroom.” He indicated a doorway to an adja-
cent chamber that was filled by a huge bed.
Kerena took a step toward it.
Don’t go there! That’s a trap. You’ll never get free.
“But I can phase through solid rock,” Kerena said.
That’s not rock. It’s the boundary of Hell proper, constructed to prevent
tortured souls from escaping. I recognize it.
“Ghost, you are becoming obnoxious,” Satan said.
The warning was sufficient. “Here, in this office,” Kerena said.
“As you wish.” Satan approached her. His masculine member swelled
hugely, becoming a thick knobby club.
That’s illusion. He’s trying to freak you out, so you’ll renege. Then he’ll
have pretext to incarcerate you in Hell.
Satan sent a ball of fire at Jolie. But she was familiar with this trick too,
and didn’t budge. She had, after all, associated with a later Incarnation of
Evil, and learned as he learned. Why don’t you just oblige her request, and
trust to her gratitude to oblige you in turn? she asked him.
“That would be no fun. I want her unwilling.”
“She’s right,” Kerena said. “Give me what I want, and I will give you
what you want, within reason.”
“Within reason. There’s the rub. I am not reasonable. I want to rape
you, and have my top demons rape you, until you scream for release.”
“Abolish the taint from my son, and I will enter that room,” Kerena said
evenly. “Then you can torture me all you want.”
“But that makes it voluntary, ruining it. No deal.”
“Then I will gamble by trusting you,” Kerena said. Before Jolie could
stop her, she marched into the bedroom and threw herself down on the bed.
On, no! You fool!
Satan shook his head. “It is the foolishness of nobility. I can’t touch
her.”
“Touch me!” Kerena cried. “I am in your power.”
He can’t, Jolie thought. Your motive is pure, unselfish, without decep-
tive intent. There is no evil for him to exploit.
“Therefore no deal we can make,” Satan agreed. “Begone, vampire. Re-
turn when you have some evil for me to indulge.”
Kerena got up. “Then will you cure my son?”
“Of course not. I’ll merely use you mercilessly. You can never glean
good from evil.”
“Damn!”
Satan laughed. “Even your swearing doesn’t taint you, luscious crea-
ture. Your frustration is justified.”

Kerena walked out of the chamber, and out of Hell, disappointed. “I
would have done it, for Gaw,” she said tearfully.
Exactly.
One swirl remained. “Surely the Incarnation of Good will heed my plea.”
Jolie was deeply uncertain of that. In her time, God had tuned out, pay-
ing no attention to the affairs of the world. That was why he had been re-
moved. This was fifteen hundred years before then. Was God more respon-
sive now?
They slid north. Of course any direction was north from the south pole,
but they were roughly retracing their course to Africa, then on to Asia Mi-
nor. Jolie was curious to know where the Incarnation of Good might be at
this time, since the other Incarnations were not where she had known them.
Was there a true Heaven?
They stopped at eastern Turkey, as Jolie remembered it from the time
she had left. Now it was—she concentrated, remembering history—part of
the Eastern Roman Empire, or the western edge of the Persian Empire. And
this was—Mount Ararat, where Noah’s Ark landed after the Flood.
“Where is this?” Kerena asked, confused.
Jolie explained. It seems that this early in Christianity, the several loca-
tions are not as far removed from the Earthly sphere as they are in my time.
The Incarnation of Good is still in this vicinity, liking mountain tops.
Kerena stood atop the mountain. “Incarnation of Good,” she called.
“Where are you?”
There was no answer.
She extended her Seeing, searching for the swirl. It was there, in space;
this was merely a local connection, as it were. But it seemed to be a vacant
number.
God has tuned out, Jolie explained. That was true in my time too. It
seems He hasn’t been paying attention for a long while. We finally replaced
Him.
The lines wavered. It seemed she was telling too much about the future,
and that would influence Kerena wrongly.
Jolie hastily backtracked. It seems he’s not interested, she thought in-
stead, and the lines firmed.
Kerena was disappointed and disgusted. “None of the Incarnations of
Immortality will help me. I’m going home.”
Maybe there is some other way to remove the taint. But Jolie was almost
certain there wasn’t. This was pain this woman was destined to suffer.
“Whatever it is, I’ll find it.” They were on their way back to Scotland,
moving rapidly. Kerena had gained skill with practice.
Soon they were there. Kerena phased back in beside the outcropping at
the entrance to the vampire warren. And paused. “There’s something odd.”

The trees are larger.
“That’s it. How can that be?”
Jolie suddenly remembered something. Purgatory—the Incarnations—
the passage of time can become different. We may have been absent longer
than we thought.
Kerena entered the warren. “Vorely! Vanja!” she called. “It is Verena,
returned.”
Almost immediately both appeared, looking the same. “We feared you
dead,” Vorely said, embracing her.
“How long has it been?”
“Thirty years.”
“Thirty years! I thought it was a day or two.”
“Where were you?” Vanja asked.
“I visited the Incarnations of Immortality, seeking help for my loss, as I
planned.”
“We knew you were going to try,” Vorely said. “But when you did not
return, we feared that Death found you before you found Death, as it were.”
Kerena settled in for the day, talking with them both while she had avid
sex with Vorely. She acquainted them with her excursion and failure. “So
now I need to find another way,” she concluded.
“But thirty years,” Vanja said. “Your son is a grown man.”
Somehow Kerena hadn’t realized that. “Yet still my son.”
Next day she traveled to England, doing it in minutes. She checked, and
confirmed that Gordon had died several years before. “But you would not
have had much luck with him,” the man said, smirking. He took her for her
apparent age of eighteen.
“Of course not. I’m his daughter.” That left the man silent.
The kingdom had suffered a calamitous defeat, and the knights were
scattered or dead. Sir Gawain was dead. So, it turned out, was his son. That
stunned her. Even had she gained the intercession of an Incarnation, she
was too late to save him.
Kerena’s Seeing located his widow, a comely woman of twenty five.
Kerena introduced herself as a woman who had once known him passingly:
her mother had wet-nursed him. “How did he die?”
“Oh, he was a bold and wonderful man,” the widow said. “All the ladies
loved him, and I most of all. But he was cursed by bad luck. He was killed last
year by a rogue horse. Fortunately I have somewhat to remember him by.”
“He left you a token?”
“Not exactly.” The woman went to a covered crib and lifted out a healthy
baby boy. “Meet Gaw Three.”
Kerena was amazed. Her Seeing should have picked up on this, but she
hadn’t thought to check. Gaw had sired a son! “Oh, he looks just like his

father!”
“Yes he does,” the woman agreed fondly. “But there’s something awry.”
Kerena used her Seeing now. The taint was there! It had been passed
along from father to son.
She said nothing of this to the widow, and soon departed. Her emotions
were whirling. She had lost Gaw Two, but now there was Gaw Three, just
like him even in the curse. What was she to make of this?
She couldn’t decide, but the pain continued. She had lost many of the
things that had been dear to her, and had nothing to show for it. What re-
mained for her in life?
Her pain slowly converted to seething anger. The Incarnations of Im-
mortality could have helped her save Gaw, but had dismissed her plea con-
temptuously. None of them had considered it fairly; all had rejected it out of
hand. They had simply let it happen.
They had been derelict, and it had cost her. Even her effort to plead with
them had sacrificed any further contact she might have had with her son.
The Incarnations had by that avenue deprived her of her motherhood.
They deserved to pay for their arrogant neglect. “I swear to have ven-
geance on each of the Incarnations of Immortality,” she said with true feel-
ing.
It might have been laughable, for what could a lone vampire do to make
any impression on the mighty Incarnations, let alone punish them? But what
shook Jolie was that the timelines never wavered. This was no empty threat.

CHAPTER 7
GHOSTS
Kerena returned to the warren. She had made her oath; now she needed
to figure out how to implement it. She needed advice, and Morely was the
one she most trusted.
“You need a base,” he told her. “Something equivalent to an Incarna-
tion, but apart from the existing ones.”
“What could that be? The greater and lesser Incarnations make up the
full complement, as I understand it.”
“Maybe there is an alternative,” Vanja said.
Kerena was ready to grasp at any straw. “What one?”
“Vorely said the first separation was into Day and Night. All known
Incarnations are aspects of Day. What of Night?”
Kerena considered that. “There may be one more Incarnation I can ap-
peal to!”
“There may be,” Morely agreed. “But I have never heard of that one. I
assumed that Night remains inchoate.”
Kerena focused her Seeing. The Incarnations of Day were there, scat-
tered about the world, but there was no similar swirl of power for the night.
“It seems so,” she agreed, disappointed.
“You have great power,” Vanja said. “Maybe you could draw on Night
to smite the fragments of Day.”
Kerena liked the way Vanja’s mind worked. “Let me study Night for a
while.”
She did. She remained at the warren, sharing Vorely with Vanja, and on
occasion making love with Vanja directly, while she tried to discover a key to
the power that might reside in night. But it was elusive, if it existed at all. She
walked out in the night, extending her awareness, but it was unable to fix on
anything specific.
Vanja helped again. “Where does your power come from, when you
bend light around you or wade through rock?”

“I don’t know. It just seems to be there.”
“It must have a source.”
“What are you thinking of?”
“Could your power come from Night? As the Incarnations draw from
Day, could you be drawing from Night?”
“It seems possible. If Night is inchoate, that power may be there to be
drawn on.”
“So if you could discover the specific source of your power, you might
then know how to address Night.”
“And there may be as much power in Night as in Day,” Kerena said. “If
I could only harness it. Then I would be in a position to counter the Incarna-
tions.”
“Then you might,” Vanja agreed.
“You are being very helpful.”
“Vengeance is a thing I understand. You helped me obtain mine against
Vichard.”
“What happened to him? He is no longer here.”
“He left the warren, and was killed elsewhere. I am not sorry.”
“So your vengeance is complete.”
“I suppose. I would be an old woman in my sixties now, had he let me
be.”
“Instead of a lovely creature.”
“I would have children and grandchildren.”
Kerena sighed. “There can be imperfect satisfaction in that.” Yet she
understood Vanja’s disquiet. She had been denied the conventional life, and
what she lacked had the appeal of lost fancy. People generally did favor what
they lacked more than what they had.
She focused on the source of her powers. When she guided light around
herself so as to tolerate full day, or to become invisible, what did she draw
on?
She found it impossible to focus on that; she was too busy achieving the
effects themselves. If she focused on the process, she lost it. She needed a less
direct way.
“The library,” Vanja said.
“The what?”
“The vampire library of the occult. It has existed as long as vampires
have, all the ancient information preserved. There should be answers there.”
Kerena found herself getting to like the vampire girl for more than her
body, just as she had once gotten to like Molly in the brothel. “The library,”
she agreed.
The library consisted of many ancient scrolls, maintained by a dedi-
cated vampire named Keeper. He was enormously gratified to have the fa-

cilities used. “So few care, any more,” he said. “All this arcane knowledge
going to waste. We have scrolls rescued from Alexandria before the Arab
conquest, cuneiform tablets from Sumerian times—”
“Alexandria hasn’t been sacked yet,” Vanja reminded him gently. “Not
for another century, at least.”
“Pardon, I do lose track. But they are worthy documents.”
“You have scrolls from the future?” Kerena asked, surprised.
“No, they exist today, or they wouldn’t be physical. But they are des-
tined to be lost, so we rescued them. Such things have to be done before the
fact.”
“Just as curses have to be nulled before they take effect,” Kerena said,
seeing a parallel.
“Exactly. Now how can I help you?”
“I’m sure you will be able to guide me in apt directions,” Kerena said,
stepping close and kissing him. Vanja had warned her that his assistance
was much more useful when he was well motivated, and that he had ex-
pressed admiration for Verena’s form and manner. So she was prepared to
keep him motivated by being his appreciative mistress while in the library. It
was not only easy for her, she enjoyed it, so no fakery was necessary.
Jolie found this interesting too. She had known Kerena possessed spe-
cial skills and had a special destiny; that was of course why she was here to
keep it on track. But she hadn’t known the intricate details of it. A library
that wasn’t necessarily restricted to the present, kept by vampires: who would
have thought it?
There turned out to be an enormous amount of relevant material. The
vampires had been much concerned, historically, about the forces of night,
because vampires were creatures of the night. Their powers stemmed from
darkness, just as their liabilities stemmed from light. But Kerena needed more.
She had powers of her own, such as Seeing and making useful transforma-
tions of the velvet cloak. From where did these stem?
But now she encountered an obscure balking. Somehow the scrolls did
not ever quite address these powers, other than to acknowledge their exist-
ence. Some references referred to others for further information, but those
others were not in the library. “This is more spotty than I realized,” Keeper
said apologetically. “Prior interest has been in vampire powers, and we have
excellent definition on those. But phasing through stone—somehow it seems
those scrolls did not come into our possession.”
Vanja was annoyed. “There seems to be a barrier between you and the
knowledge you seek,” she said. “Can this be coincidence?”
Kerena started to laugh, but quickly stifled it, because her Seeing sug-
gested that this was indeed the case. Something was preventing her from
gleaning her answers here. Yet how could the long-term library have been

limited to balk her—before her arrival on the scene? That was what had
seemed funny, for a moment.
“There is a force opposing the fathoming of this mystery, by anyone,”
she said. “We are not meant to know.”
“A hostile force?” Keeper asked. “Who governs such force?”
“I don’t think anyone does,” Kerena said. “It’s just there, an intangible
wall. But I mean to surmount it, one way or another.”
“Was there similar opposition to the formation of the Incarnations of
Day?” Vanja asked.
“I wonder.” They dived into it. The library was not strong on the powers
of Day, but did suggest that for every power of Day, there was an equivalent
power of Night. So by studying Day, they might glean useful information on
Night. That was an indirect approach, but very well might get around the
wall.
But of course they couldn’t go and ask the Incarnations of Day exactly
how their powers had come to be harnessed, assuming they knew. It had to
be done separately.
Still, there were indications. Each Incarnation was different, but there
were some similarities. It seemed that each had become Incarnated when a
human being demonstrated that he or she was more capable of performing
the task than the original mindless force was. That human had stepped into
the swirl of energy and thereafter personified it. This was true for the major
and the minor Incarnations.
But no one had stepped into the force of Night. It remained mindless.
Except that it resisted exploration.
“Did the first human Incarnations have to overcome opposition to take
their positions?” Kerena asked, returning to Vanja’s question.
“It seems likely,” Keeper replied.
“Is it really?” Vanja asked, now taking another tack. “There’s one big
distinction between Day and Night: Day is visible, Night is invisible.”
Kerena pondered that. Things could be seen by day, but not by night,
unless some light was brought in, an aspect of day. “You think it is Night’s
nature to keep secrets?”
“What else? And the secret you want to fathom is how to save your
son’s son from the taint.”
So it seemed. “But I think the answer is not in this library. I need an-
other source of information.”
Vanja shrugged. “Maybe you could ask a ghost. They have access any-
where.”
“A ghost,” Kerena said thoughtfully.
“I was joking.”
“Nevertheless, it may be a good idea. Do you know of any local ghosts?”

“Well, there’s Lilah. She hangs around. I think she finds the undead
more compatible than the fully living. But she’s not a nice person.”
“I don’t want a friend, I want information. I will see if I can contact
her.”
“This may not be wise,” Keeper said. “Ghosts can be dangerous.”
“How so, since they can’t do anything physical?”
“Most of them crave life, and would take over the bodies of the living if
they could. That’s why the living don’t trust them.”
“Fortunately I am no longer truly living,” Kerena said. “I am undead.”
“Still, it’s a risk. There’s no certainty a ghost couldn’t govern an undead
person, given the chance.”
“I need information. I am willing to take a risk to obtain it. If the ghost
wants to borrow my body for a while, I will do it—if she gives me what I
want.”
Jolie shared Keeper’s misgiving. She was a ghost herself, and did not
want to share Kerena’s body with another, though it was possible. Suppose
the ghost started influencing the woman the way Jolie did? It might become
impossible to keep the timelines aligned. Yet if interaction with a ghost was
part of the proper history, it would have to be done. So she would stay out of
it, unless a divergence occurred.
What do you think? Kerena asked internally.
So much for staying out of it! If I participate in any way other than
aligning the timelines, I will be causing a divergence myself. I am a ghost,
and have an opinion, but I think must not answer you or assist you in this
respect.
To her half surprise, Kerena accepted that. “How do I summon Lilah?”
she asked Vanja.
“You can’t. She’s independent. But I will tell her of your interest the
next time I encounter her.”
The next day when Kerena was out foraging for food, and for a taste of
the blood of a distant sheep, she became aware of a presence. It was shad-
owy, though of course there were no firm shadows in the night, and signifi-
cantly masculine. “Hello, lover,” she said, recognizing the aura despite the
passage of two or thirty two years, depending on whether it was her time or
the world’s time.
He came to her, and a softly lighted bower formed around them as he
embraced her. “So you have external magic too,” she murmured as she kissed
him.
He did not reply. He simply bore her down on the thick cushions that
floored the bower. Her loin yearned to him; she was eager for his divine
penetration. But she had another mission, and decided to gamble in the hope
of making progress.

She locked her legs together. She knew this would not stop him long; the
mere touch of his conducive member would cause her to open them wide in
welcome. But she hoped to bluff him. “First talk to me. Who are you?”
He paused, seeming amused. Then, to her half surprise, he spoke. “You
seek to bargain, half-mortal girl?”
Victory! “You can have me unwilling, if you prefer. But if you want me
joyful, you must meet me part way.”
“You have unusual spirit.”
“Who are you?” she repeated firmly.
“Merely an anonymous afreet.”
“A what?”
“An air demon from Arabia. There is no precise equivalent in occidental
mythology.”
She extended her Seeing, but the man remained opaque. She had no
power over him. He was obviously supernatural. She relaxed, having gotten
as much as it seemed she could. She was desperate for the completion of his
embrace.
He took her swiftly, thrilling her has he had before, and she participated
fully. “You are the most luscious creature I have encountered in years.”
“Then come to me more often,” she said.
“Perhaps I shall.” He paused, perhaps in thought, then changed the
subject. “Is your existence ordinary, pretty vampire?”
“No. I have a case against the Incarnations of Day.”
“Ah. What is that?”
There seemed to be no harm in telling him that much. “My baby has a
taint, a curse. They refused even to listen to my plea for help.”
“They are arrogant,” he agreed. “But neither mortal nor half mortal
can make much of an impression on them. It is the other way around: they
control your lives and deaths.”
“What could make an impression?”
He smiled. “Another Incarnation.”
Did he know what she was seeking? She could not be sure. “I sought all
those I could find.”
“So you did. A remarkable achievement. You are correct: your existence
is not ordinary. Perhaps that is why you intrigue me. Yet it seems you have
been balked.”
“So it seems,” she agreed.
“Has anything supernatural actively interfered with your life course?”
That was an interesting way to phrase it. “I am aware only of tacit balki-
ness. But I am determined to overcome it.”
“Perhaps you will.” Then he proceeded to another bout of love, which
she was more than glad to oblige. It was evident that he possessed super-

natural potency, that incited her complementary passion.
She slept in his strong embrace. When she woke, he and the bower were
gone. She was lying on the leafy forest floor. But it had not been imagination;
the evidence of his passion was in her body. The lingering fluid was like a
warming balm, generating both satisfaction and new hunger. It spread from
her channel into her body, pleasantly diffusing.
Jolie remained wary of the afreet, if that was really what he was. He
had enormous magical power, and seemed to know a lot. Yet he had been
questioning Kerena, and she suspected she knew what he was seeking: in-
formation about Jolie herself. She had been interfering with the girl’s life.
What was his interest? She was not at all easy about this.
Yet the timelines had not blurred. Whatever effect the afreet had, was
in accordance with the proper course of history. All she could do was let it
be. But this was another disquietingly odd turn. Jolie had had no idea that
there would be such mysteries connected with her mission.
A few days later, as Kerena was pondering approaches, she became aware
of a presence via her Seeing. “Lilah,” she said immediately.
The presence floated close. Kerena put out one hand, touching the re-
gion. Lilah, the ghost agreed.
“Can you help me fathom the powers of Night?”
The ghost took faint form as a strikingly lovely woman. “Why should
I?” Her thought was not audible, but as Kerena attuned she was able to re-
ceive it as such.
“I can lend you my body for a time.”
Lilah considered. “It is undead.”
“But indistinguishable from living, when among the living, and as re-
sponsive as ever.”
“Give me half your time.”
Kerena laughed. “What, my waking time? You’ll get no more than the
time you give me, providing information. An hour.”
“An hour among the living, an hour at a time, at my choice, until the
time matches.”
“Far from here, where I am not known. I must maintain anonymity.”
“Agreed.”
This was too easy. “And I must agree to the hour you want, so that it is
convenient to my schedule.”
“Agreed.”
Kerena didn’t quite trust this, but if the ghost reneged on anything, the
deal would end. “Agreed. Now tell me who you are. Your personal history.”
“That counts as time.”
“Agreed, within reason.”
“I am Lilah, a version of Lilith, a once mortal woman. I was Adam’s first

wife, until he rejected me and took that feckless slut Eve instead. I swore
vengeance.”
“But Adam was the first man, and Eve the first woman.”
“Revisionist history. I was the first woman. I gave him the hottest sex he
could imagine. But the fool wanted a virgin, and I was cast aside and banned
from Eden. But I got him back: I sent the serpent to tempt the innocent girl
with the knowledge of good and evil. After that she was no more virginal
than I. God was angry; he blasted me to bits. But he still had to expel them,
because Eden is not for the knowledgeable.”
Kerena was amazed. If this was to be believed, this was no ordinary
ghost. This was a historic nemesis.
“You doubt?” Lilah inquired. “I see you are a sexual innocent.”
Kerena realized she was being baited, and refused to rise to it. “Go on
with your history; it interests me.”
“Now that Eve was no longer innocent, she had at it with Adam, and
they begat dozens of brats. Cain was an early one; I whispered in his ear,
infuriating him over a childish argument, and he slew his annoying brother
Able. Further vengeance. When he was banished for that, I came to him as a
child of Nod and taught him what sexual passion was all about, and bore
him more dozens of brats, as I had done with Nod before him.”
“But you were the age of his mother,” Kerena protested.
“Older; remember, I was the first woman. But we lived a long time in
those years. I was as sexy as I am now.” The ghost did a little dance with
breasts and bottom, showing both bouncing as she spun around. Her figure
was fuller than Kerena’s, and the rippling flesh was impressive. “Except that
I didn’t; he got a notion for a young virgin, as his lout of a father had—what
is it about virgins?—so I slew her, and the ungrateful lout slew me. I was
furious.”
Kerena was coming to appreciate that this was one mean spirited entity.
But one with no hesitation expressing herself. If she knew any secrets, she
would surely tell them. “Furious,” she echoed.
“So I hung around as a ghost, observing secrets, studying techniques,
and every so often I was able to animate the body of an unwary girl and
make her perform as never before. Some of them got themselves stoned as
witches, but what a time I had before it came to that. I remember infiltrating
Lilah, a formerly cow-like creature with nothing to recommend her other
than her voluptuous body. I gave her initiative and guile, causing the Philis-
tines to recruit her for a key mission. She then seduced that muscular igno-
rant Israelite Samson and betrayed him to the Philistines. They blinded him,
chained him to a wall, and used him for stud duty to generate sturdy dull
boys like himself. But me they ignored, after I accomplished my mission. So I
tempted an official, and whispered in his ear, and got him to anchor Samson

between two columns of their temple during a festival. Naturally the brute
heaved hard enough to bring the temple down on his head and on all the
celebrants, including those who had ignored me. I never tire of vengeance
against idiots.”
And she didn’t like to be ignored, Jolie saw. Lilah’s history was an exer-
cise in braggadocio, for all that that term would not be coined for another
thousand years. She knew Lila, as the variant spelling went, from her own
timeline, a notorious creature, but hadn’t realized that Kerena had associ-
ated with her.
“I think I have the essence,” Kerena said. “What do you know of the
powers of Night?”
“Everything, of course. But first give me my hour.”
Kerena considered, and concluded it was best to do that now, to keep
the cynical ghost cooperative. “Do you have a distant setting in mind?”
“Eastern Roman Empire, where decadence exists in style. Constantinople.”
Kerena had never heard of it, but was amenable. “What direction?”
“Southeast.”
Kerena dressed, oriented and phased down for rapid travel. The ghost
followed. Kerena wasn’t sure exactly how ghosts moved, but wasn’t sur-
prised.
Soon they came to the great decadent city. It was far larger than any
Kerena knew. It was surrounded by a great wall, but it was hard to imagine
an army large enough to represent a threat to such a vast metropolis.
Beyond the city was a large estate with a villa. Murals on the walls
depicted fabulous erotic scenes. People were arriving; it seemed it was time
for a party. The ghost evidently knew how to sniff out such events.
“Now,” the ghost said as Kerena stood in an empty chamber admiring a
scene wherein three nymphly maidens were seducing a willing man.
“Take it—for an hour,” Kerena said, and let Lilah in.
“Well now,” Lilah said, assuming control of the body. “I forgot the cos-
tume; your primitive rags won’t do. Fortunately slaves are nude for this type
of service.” She removed the dress and stood bare.
A robed man entered the chamber, wearing bright jewelry: apparently a
member of the governing class. “Ho—I don’t recognize you,” he said. He
spoke in Greek, but Kerena discovered she could understand it. The ghost’s
control had evidently lent her knowledge of the language, or she had some-
how assimilated it from the context. There were things about magic she had
yet to fathom.
“I am a slave from afar,” Lilah said, winsomely. “Just in today, for this
event.”
“Ah. Let me look at you.” He took hold of her and eyed her torso, which
she eagerly displayed to advantage. “You’ll do.” He bore her back and pro-

ceeded to sex without further preliminary. There was no pretense of mutu-
ality; it was all for himself, but Lilah cooperated enthusiastically.
“It’s good to have a body again,” she said as the man got off her and
went off in search of wine.
So it seemed. Kerena had shared in the sensations of the act, but as sex
went, this was not much. The man’s dry member had been abrasive until
liquifying, and technique had been absent.
But as it turned out, there was a good deal more to be had at this party.
In the next hour Lilah managed to set up a two man, three woman conjunc-
tion that did indeed have aspects Kerena hadn’t seen before. It seemed the
Romans and the ghost took their sex seriously. It was a considerable orgy.
“Your hour is done,” Kerena said.
“I don’t think so.”
“Oh, it is. Time to go home and study the forces of Night.”
“No it isn’t.”
“What are you talk about? We made a deal.”
“I lied. I know nothing about the forces of Night, and I am keeping this
body. It’s a good one, despite being not fully alive.”
“That does it. I’m taking it back now.” Kerena moved to do so.
And was balked. The ghost refused to relinquish control, and she had
experience with this kind of conflict. Possession provided power. “You fool
innocent girl, you threw it away. It’s mine now.”
Kerena realized that she had walked into a trap. She had blithely as-
sumed that a given deal would be honored by both parties. She had indeed
been a fool.
Yet Jolie noted that the timelines were not fudging. This sequence was
true to both realities. This was one Kerena had to fight through on her own.
She did. The ghost had taken control of the actions of the body, but not
its substance. Kerena thinned it down to ghostly texture, then steered it
through a wall and away. She was gone, leaving the ghost behind, as there
was no longer any substance to hold on to. She was free.
How did you know to do that? Jolie asked, surprised.
“Morely taught me, when I told him of my plan to negotiate with a
ghost. He warned me of their tricks.”
That was a revelation to Jolie, who had not picked up on Morely’s more
recent instruction. You could have done it with me, too.
“I trust you.”
There it was: she remained with this woman by tolerance, not right or
ability. Kerena was far from the innocent girl she once had been. Thank you.
But I can’t help you study Night.
They were headed back toward England. “I need a local ghost I can
trust. A friend.” She brightened. “Molly!”

Jolie did not speak. As it happened, she knew Molly very well; they were
associate ghosts in her own reality. She was an excellent choice. But she did
not dare provide information that might change the timelines.
In due course Kerena sought Molly. She went to the old town where
Molly had died. The experience with Lilah had at least taught her how to
interact with ghosts.
Kerena wasn’t sure exactly where to find the ghost, so started at the
obvious place: the brothel where they both had worked. It was under subse-
quent management, the daughter of the madam Kerena had known, who of
course did not recognize this pretty stranger as a former house girl. “Why
yes, we do have a ghost. That’s Molly, who worked here but was killed by a
client. We gave her a room out of sentiment. Some of our older clients re-
member her, and she’s shapely and friendly.”
“I’m not a client, but I would like to talk with her. I’ll pay a client’s fee.”
She proffered silver.
“You have the room for an hour,” the woman said, gratified.
The room was small but nice; they were taking proper care of their
ghost. Molly’s presence probably enhanced their reputation.
Kerena stood beside the bed. “Molly, do you know me?”
There was a swirl of mist. Kerena extended one hand to touch it. There
was a faint shock of recognition.
“Rena! It’s you! But what happened to you?”
“I became a vampire. That has its liabilities, but on the whole is a ben-
efit, because I retain my youth.” Actually she had in effect jumped thirty
years, but that was more complicated than she cared to get into at present.
“You are lovely! You have filled out since we were companions. But why
are you here?”
“I believe I have a deal to make. I will help you if you will help me.”
“We don’t need to make a deal, Rena; we’re friends. But there’s not a lot
I can do as a ghost.”
“I think there is. I want to learn how to use the powers of Night. I need
a test subject I can trust.”
“A test subject? I don’t understand.”
“I am studying magic, but lack access to the secrets of Night. I think a
ghost could find them more readily. More than that, I want to learn to trans-
form a ghost to something more solid, and not have her turn on me.”
Molly was interested. “Can you give me back my body?”
“I don’t think so. Not your living body. But maybe I could give you some
solidity, so you might emulate the living state. I don’t know whether there
would be danger for you.”
“What danger could there be for one already dead?”
“Dabbling in such arts is thought to be evil. You might get sent to Hell.”

“I am in Hell already, foully murdered and unable to seek vengeance.
No risk there.”
“I might be able to help you achieve vengeance. I don’t know.”
“No, it’s too late for that.”
“I can lend you my body for some renewed experience of living.”
“That would be wonderful! But I will help you regardless. You’re my
friend.”
“Then come with me, and we shall see what we can accomplish.”
“Gladly! But I must bid farewell to those I know here.”
“You can do it in physical form, though me. But when I need my body
back, I expect you to yield it.”
“Of course.” The ghost nodded. “Suddenly I appreciate why you want a
friend. You can’t trust just any ghost.”
“So I found. Do you know Lilah?”
“Don’t mess with her! She’s dangerous.”
“So I found,” Kerena repeated. “I think we understand each other. But
there is one other thing: I already have a ghost. Ignore her.”
“But maybe I know her.”
“No. She needs to be ignored. Trust me.”
The timelines didn’t waver. Kerena knew what was what. Molly and
Jolie were friends in T1, but Jolie did not yet exist in T2.
Molly joined them. Kerena gave her the body, and she walked to the
mirror, adjusting herself. Molly did not look at all like Kerena, apart from
being of a similar age, but as she fixed the hair and assumed an expression,
the image in the mirror came to resemble the ghost to a remarkable extent.
“I am ready,” she said.
Molly went to the madam. “I appreciate what you and your mother
have done for me,” she said. “Now I am departing with a friend, for a special
mission, so my room can be used by another girl.”
The woman stared. “Molly! Can it be?”
“I am still a ghost, merely with a temporary host. I don’t know how long
I’ll be gone. Thank you for accepting me, after my death.”
The women looked bemused. “Congratulations. You well be welcome
back when your mission is done.”
“That is kind of you. Tell the girls I wish them well.” She departed.
Outside, Molly relinquished the body. “That felt wonderful! It’s so nice
to be alive again, even if only in surrogate. Thank you so much.”
“Welcome,” Kerena said, resuming control. “Now I must travel north,
but we can talk meanwhile. Please tell me your history. You never mentioned
your curse when I knew you alive.”
“I preferred that it be unknown, as nothing could be done about it. It
started with my mother. She was a beautiful woman. She was courted by a

sorceress, but she was not of that persuasion, so declined and married a
man. The man was one the sorceress desired also, which made it worse. The
sorceress was angry, so retaliated by cursing the child of that union: me.
This was calculated to hurt my mother worse than anything else, and indeed
she wept, but could not change it. So I was destined to die young and vio-
lently.”
“Young and violently,” Kerena repeated, remembering something. “Who
was the sorceress?”
“The king’s sister, the Fey.”
That was what Morgan le Fey hadn’t told her: that she was responsible
for the curse that killed Molly. Kerena’s anger surged; indeed, they would be
enemies. “I worked with the Fey,” Kerena said. “I was with her when you
died. She never said.”
“The curse was from fifteen years before. Maybe she forgot about it.”
“No, she mentioned it to me. The bitch.”
“I wanted vengeance, but now she is dead or gone, so it’s too late. That
really irks me. Not that I ever had any way to accomplish it.”
“I had to turn vampire to accomplish my desire, yet today I am satisfied
to be so. Maybe you can find some satisfaction in your ghostly status, in time.
We never know where fate will lead us.”
How very true, Jolie thought. Kerena had as yet no idea of the phenom-
enal course she was destined to follow, just as Molly had no notion of her
own.
“What’s that?” Molly asked. “What phenomenal course?” And the lines
blurred.
Jolie jumped back to stifle her own thought, and the lines clarified. She
would have to be more careful; the other ghost could tune in on her other-
wise, especially when her thoughts were on that ghost.
“I hope my fate has something more interesting in mind than stasis.”
“Oh? What is it that ghosts do, when not interacting with the living?”
“Nothing. We simply settle in place and tune out of minutes, years, or
decades. I would love to have things interesting enough so that I don’t have
to tune out much.”
“I hope to have far more interesting things,” Kerena said.
They arrived at the warren. Kerena solidified and went to Morely’s cham-
ber. He was there, asleep, embracing Vanja, who lay naked on top of him.
“This is already interesting,” Molly said, observing detail knowledge-
ably. “He is in her, but asleep. She must be pretty dull.”
“Not at all. But they practice sex an enormous amount here. They must
have felt more comfortable sleeping together, as it were.”
“This is your man? He evidently doesn’t miss you much.”
“He’s with his wife. I’m his mistress. I’ve been busy elsewhere.” Kerena

nudged Vanja’s pert rear with a foot. “Wake up, sleepy bottom,” she said
aloud.
Vanja did. She lifted her head. “Oh, hello Rena. Did you find her?”
“Yes. Molly is with me now. She says you must be pretty dull if Morely
fell asleep at the helm.”
Vanja laughed. That woke Morely. He made as it to disengage, but Vanja
refused to let him. “Finish your business first, lover. Then you can see to
her.”
Morely did not require further urging. He completed the act with style,
while Kerena and the ghosts observed. It was surprising how many nuance
variants there could be for a straightforward act.
“I think I like these people,” Molly said internally. “They truly appreci-
ate sex.”
In due course Kerena formally introduced Molly, and lent her the body
briefly. Then it was time to explore the ghostly aspects. “Lilah said she knew
everything, but I’m not sure she did,” Kerena said. “How much do ghosts
know of Night?”
“Depends on the ghost,” Molly said. “I tried to learn things in order to
pursue vengeance, but found mostly interesting by-paths like the Carnival
of Ghosts. I could introduce you to more knowledgeable ghosts, I suppose.”
“That may help. But I’d rather start without them, because of the trust
issue.”
“Lilah was one of the worst choices, but any ghost will try to take your
body,” Molly agreed. “I would be tempted, if I weren’t your friend.”
“Which is why I sought you. But I’ll try to make it worth your while.
What do you want, apart from vengeance?”
“To have a living body, of course. But—”
“What about someone else’s body? If we could find a girl who doesn’t
want to live, so you could take over?”
“Depends on the body, but yes, I’d like that.”
“Now what’s this carnival you mentioned?”
“The Carnival of Ghosts. That’s a regular event, where we all get together
for fun. We dance, have contests, make love, see sideshows, tour time—”
“Tour time?”
“Ghosts aren’t limited the way mortals are. We can go where we want.”
“To the future?”
“Yes, but I don’t do that; it makes me dizzy. There are so many alter-
nates, I’m afraid I’ll get lost. The future really isn’t fixed, so what you see
there may not actually happen if you don’t stay on the right timeline. I prefer
to visit the past, which is fixed.”
Jolie found this interesting. She knew it, of course, but had thought
such awareness was a more recent thing. Evidently not. And of course even

the past was malleable, if touched by a visitor from a divergent timeline. She
had not said anything about this to Kerena, lest that make the lines diverge,
but now that a person of this timeline had done so, it was all right.
“I want two things,” Kerena said. “To save my son, now my grandson,
from the taint I inadvertently put on him, and to have vengeance against all
the Incarnations of Day for not helping me accomplish that. Maybe a visit to
the future could show me weaknesses they will have, that I could exploit. But
if I can’t be sure that what I see will really happen, that won’t help. Still, if
the past can’t be changed, that doesn’t help either.”
“Vengeance against the Incarnations! I think that’s impossible. I didn’t
even know of them until after I died, but now I know they are untouchable.
They wield powers beyond those of any mortal magician, and can destroy
mortals at whim. If Fate cuts your thread, or Death takes your soul—”
“I’ll risk it,” Kerena said grimly. “They are arrogant and uncaring, and
deserve to be dispatched.”
“Maybe so. Still, how can you hope to accomplish any such thing?”
“I was able to locate them using powers I have developed as a mortal
and as a vampire. If I can tame the powers of Night, I should be able to do
much more. Those powers should match all those of Day. But there seems to
be resistance; something prevents me from approaching those powers. I need
to find a way to get around that resistance.”
“Well, its inherent,” Molly said. “Things don’t like to be handled. A
boulder doesn’t like to be moved; the wind doesn’t like to be balked. Night
doesn’t like to be exposed.”
Kerena paused, surprised. Could it be that simple? The inertia of forces
long left alone? That had never occurred to her. “Could a ghost locate and
define those powers, even if they are resistive to exposure?”
“I don’t know. It’s not something I ever thought of doing.”
“This carnival—there are many ghosts there? Could I talk with them?
To learn if any know what I need?”
“Oh, sure, I could take you there. But they won’t necessarily tell you the
truth. Not unless you pay more than you want.”
“Would they tell you the truth?”
“Maybe. I have nothing to be cheated out of.”
“I want to go to the carnival. Can I go?”
“Yes, as my guest. But you would be the only part-mortal there; it could
be uncomfortable. They would notice, and maybe tease you cruelly.”
“I’ll risk it,” Kerena said again.

CHAPTER 8
NIGHT
The Carnival of Ghosts was a wondrous thing. It was set up like a pitched
camp, with assorted tents of various sizes, barkers at each entrance, and
throngs of ordinary looking folk. Kerena saw the top of some kind of wooden
mountain with tracks on it, an oddity.
A roller coaster, Jolie thought. They will be invented a thousand years or
so hence. Evidently the ghosts are truly timeless, and take their pleasures
wherever they find them.
“They are all ghosts,” Molly assured Kerena, “All but you. Don’t let them
get to you.”
They approached the main entrance. “What’s this dung?” the ticket man
demanded. “We don’t let her kind in here.”
“Well, make an exception, pinhead,” Molly snapped, floating out from
Kerena to assume her full ghost form. “She’s with me.”
“And how is she going to pay for the ticket, cutie?”
“I’ll buy the ticket.”
“No you won’t. She has to buy her own.”
“That’s not in the rules, you lecherous leech.”
Kerena caught on to what the ghost wanted: sex with a live woman.
This was hardly a burden, considering her history, and she had been without
sex for several hours, so was getting hungry for it. “I’ll do it. Tell me how.”
“Just stand there,” the male ghost said. He stepped up to her and em-
braced her, his outline barely touching. He kissed her, and she felt the tenu-
ous impact of his lips on hers. Then she felt a similarly tenuous penetration
below. Her clothing made no difference; he ignored it. He worked his way
into the spot, evidently feeling as much contact as he needed. She would not
have felt anything, had she not been alert for it. Had she moved, what faint
interaction there was would have been lost, as there was no physical compo-
nent. That was why he needed her acquiescence.
He thrust and panted, and she felt the motion, like a feather made of

bubbles, faintly tickling her interior. He climaxed, and it was like a driblet of
thin mist. Maybe it was her own moisture, stirred by her awareness of sex. It
was enough to get her interested, but not enough to allow her a climax.
He finished and withdrew, leaving her unsatisfied. “Here’s your ticket,”
he said, presenting a ghostly piece of paper.
So she had just had sex with a ghost. It wasn’t much, but at least she had
seen his figure and felt a little. Maybe if she practiced she would be able to
get more from it. “Thank you.”
“It’s not as much for him as with another ghost,” Molly confided as they
entered the Carnival. “A lady ghost is on the same plane, so the sensation is
real. But they’re all thrilled by the notion of doing it with a real live body.
Lady ghosts like doing it with living men, too, though they have to move
carefully to keep the anatomy in place.”
So it turned out to be. Every side show had its ticket taker, and the price
was the same for her: stand and be addressed. So she stood and felt their
faint ardors. As sex went, it was puny. But neither did it bother her, because
as sex went, it was also about as convenient as it could be. She didn’t have to
do anything but stand for a moment for the barely-felt plumbing. Then she
encountered a female ghost barker, and had to stand still for kissing, breast
stroking, and genital rubbing. Well, she had had experience with that, too,
before and after turning vampire.
The shows and activities were fun. Kerena saw all manner of exotic
animals and insects, and participated in wonderfully structured costume
dances, and tasted ghostly pastries and wines. Gradually she perfected the
ghostly semblance, so that the sensations became first real, then potent. At
last, drunk on spirits in more than one sense, she had a sexual fling with a
truly manly spook on a public stage that was fully satisfactory. Only the fancy
rides were beyond her: the roller ghoster, the cart through the horror house,
and the water mountain.
“It can be arranged, for a price,” a pair of young looking men informed
her. Apparent age was determined by the time in life they died, so was de-
ceptive, as was her own appearance. “What ride do you want?”
“All three,” she said, interested.
“Done.” A third young man came over, and she realized that it was one
man per ride. So be it.
“This will be some experience,” Molly warned. “I’ll watch.” She sepa-
rated into her own form.
Kerena sat on an isolated chair. Then illusion surrounded her: the cart
and tracks of the first ride. She was not moving, but the image was, so that
she seemed to be rolling forward. She let her mind accept it, beginning to
feel the motion.
Men appeared on either side of her, and the third bestriding her. So it

was to be all three at once. So be it, again. She was able to see through the one
on top, so he didn’t interfere with the experience of the ride.
The scene tilted, as the cart was hauled steeply upward by a stout rope.
The side men fondled her breasts and the top man kissed her lingeringly, his
translucent skull framing her view.
The cart reached the top of the wood mountain, then angled to roll
down the other side. It was awesome, like a long fall. The tracks descended to
a seeming lake, and the cart plunged into it with a great loud splash. She
seemed to feel the coursing water, though probably it was merely the quest-
ing mouths of the men as they kissed her breasts.
There were monsters under the surface: giant toothy fish, spectacular
jellyfish with trailing sting lines, and huge squid with sucker-lined tentacles.
One squid grabbed her with several arms and brought its deadly beak down
to bite her face. All three men kissed her mouth and ears at that moment,
making it seem more than real; a small cry escaped her, pleasing them. Girls
were supposed to scream in horror scenes.
By the time the ride was done, so were the three men. She had had
considerable multiple seeming plumbing. But also a phenomenal ride expe-
rience. “I must do that again, sometime,” she said dazedly as the track re-
turned to the open court and the illusion faded, leaving her sitting alone.
It was Molly who called her to account. “You have acclimatized. You
came here for a purpose.”
“So I did,” Kerena agreed, remembering. She threw off the daze of wine
and illusion and concentrated. “Who here knows things I need to learn?”
“Many. But remember, you can’t trust them. It will be better to see for
yourself.”
“I don’t even know where to look.”
“Why not start with the origin of the Incarnations?”
“And how they became offices. Yes! How do I see that?”
“You travel back in time. But you will need a better guide than I can be.
Someone who derives from those times.”
“Who would that be?”
A lovely ghost forged out of the throng. “That would be me.”
Oh, no! “Lilah!”
“Lilith, originally. The first woman.”
“You tried to keep my body.”
“Of course. A fool and her body are soon parted.”
“You aren’t even embarrassed about it.”
Lilah frowned. “Listen, you naïve creature. I was the first feminist.”
“First what?”
“An anachronism in terminology, not in practice. I refused to consider
myself Adam’s inferior, so I left him, and was expelled from Eden. I stand by

my stance: women are at least the equal of men, and far less crude.”
“You said Adam wanted a virgin.”
“Well, I was one, until that first fuck, for which he was as responsible as
I. But it was the virginity of the mind and spirit that counted. He wanted his
woman to be inferior to him. That was laughable, and I would have none of
it. Neither should you.”
Despite her ire at the betrayal, Kerena found herself warming to this
woman. She was open and direct, and proud of her gender. “How can I trust
you?”
“You can’t, until you are as cynical as I. That will require centuries. But
you can be sure I will honor a deal that provides something I want. Make me
that deal.”
“What do you want, aside from my body?”
“Next best is demon substance. That comes from the raw material of
chaos. I can’t go that far myself, but maybe you can. Get me some of that so
I can be a demoness and assume partial solidity when I want to.”
“Partial solidity? Why do you want that?”
“So I can have at men physically again, obviously. I won’t be able to stay
solid full time, but an hour at a time will be fine. It will expand my potential
enormously.”
“For this you will guide me to the origin of the Incarnations?”
“Exactly. That is near chaos.”
“How can you trust me to deliver, after you guide me?”
“You can be trusted, you naïve tart. I am the one who can’t be.”
This was making uncomfortable sense. “What do you think, Molly?”
“She’s right. Set it up so she has to trust you, and you don’t have to trust
her. She can be useful, for a price.”
So it seemed. “But I want you along, Molly.”
“Of course. I wouldn’t let you go with her alone. She’d find a way to
cheat you, because you really are too trusting.” Molly merged again, disap-
pearing into her body. Her presence was distinctly feminine and yielding, in
contrast to the eager hard lust of the male ghosts.
“I am more like Eve than Lilith,” Kerena agreed with resignation. She
found that an oddity, considering how many men she had serviced sexually,
and her status as a vampire. “Very well: I will make that deal.”
“This way,” Lilah said. She began to move backward. Not exactly physi-
cally.
Kerena’s Seeing picked up on how she did it, and emulated it. She fol-
lowed Lilah, and Molly followed her. They slid slowly back in time. It was
like thinning and traveling across the globe, only in another direction. They
were not moving spacially, but their surroundings were changing, as they
had for the ghost ride. This, however, was not illusion. Darkness came, and

light, and darkness, the nights and days of the recent past. Then the seasons
changed, faster as they accelerated, until they flicked by in much the way the
days and nights had before.
The Carnival of Ghosts was in a glade in a forest. The surrounding trees
diminished, growing younger. New old trees appeared, filling in the glade.
The forest became thick, overlapping Kerena’s space, but she was insubstan-
tial and did not feel any impact of the trunks. The forest was a living thing,
its parts shrinking while its whole remained. Everywhere trees appeared,
shrank into shrubs, and disappeared into the ground.
Then the forest changed its nature, the leafed trees giving way reluc-
tantly to firs. The pace increased, so that a tree that started as several centu-
ries in girth descended into nothing in the space of a few seeming seconds.
Hundreds of years were being traversed, then thousands.
Jolie was amazed and fascinated. This was an excursion beyond her
expectation. Far farther back in time than ever. What would be seen at the
end of this journey? Or the beginning, as it were.
Suddenly it stopped. They stood in a lush garden where all manner of
fruiting trees grew. Tame-seeming animals grazed, unafraid of molestation.
Indeed, there was a lion and lamb resting under a spreading tree. “Garden
of Eden,” Lilah said. “We drifted a little in space to find it, as well as time. It’s
in Africa.”
“But weren’t you banned from it?” Kerena asked.
“This is the Garden after Adam and Eve were booted. It’s empty of hu-
man beings. Nobody’s paying attention to ghosts anyway. This is as far as I
can go. Only my pre-ban self appears here before this. You’ll have to con-
tinue back on your own.”
Kerena hesitated. “Why can’t you go farther back, skipping over Eden?”
“I can’t go to the time before I existed.”
“How is it that I can, then?”
“You’re not a ghost, for one thing. You have special powers, for another.
You lack normal limits. That’s why I had my eye on you. No one knows your
potential.”
Jolie was a ghost, but not in her own timeline, so was able to break the
normal rules also. But Kerena was rapidly outstripping Jolie’s abilities. Jolie
was no longer riding a kitten, but a tigress.
“No normal limits,” Kerena murmured thoughtfully. That was interest-
ing, but this wasn’t the time to dwell on it. “How do I find the way?”
“Just keep moving back. You can’t miss chaos when you find it. I’ll be
here when you return; there’s more to see.”
Kerena nodded and concentrated. She resumed traveling back, slowly.
Lilah disappeared.
“Let’s move near the Tree of Knowledge,” Molly said. She was a ghost

without special powers, but evidently could be carried along with Kerena’s
sufference. “That’s where the action mostly happens.”
Kerena hadn’t thought they could talk while time traveling, but realized
that they were in the same framework. She adjusted her focus, and they
angled toward the center of the Garden. There stood a giant tree with many
different fruits: apples, pears, peaches, plums, oranges, bananas, cherries,
pineapples, blackberries—everything Kerena had ever seen was there, and
many more varieties. They all looked delicious.
“But don’t eat any,” Molly warned, mentally smiling.
Then they saw a man and a woman approaching the tree, backward. He
discarded a fig leaf, putting it back on its tree. Now the man was naked and
handsome, the woman clothed in a skirt of leaves but without upper cloth-
ing. They were trying ineffectively to cover their bareness with their hands.
The man held a banana, which he was uneating; the fruit grew with each
mouthful. Finally he reached up and put it in the tree, where it anchored.
That was Adam, of course. He and Eve then faced the tree and backed away
from it, he no longer ashamed of his lack of clothing.
Later (earlier) it was Eve alone who backed to the tree, discarding her
improvised skirt, where she handed the apple she was uneating to the ser-
pent that slithered backwards to receive it. She backed away from it, now
nude and lovely. Her temptation and loss of innocence had just unhappened.
Evidently the visitors, as time traveling ghosts, were not apparent to the
denizens of this wondrous garden. So Kerena followed the man and woman.
They were completely unaffected, eating, sleeping, defecating, and having
sex without inhibition. Their age of innocence.
Yet Kerena noticed that Eve never initiated a sexual encounter. She waited
until Adam thought of it, then gracefully acquiesced. She seemed to enjoy it,
but only by providing him his joy.
Eve disappeared and Adam was alone for a while. Then the original
Lilah/Lilith appeared, backing haughtily up to Adam to have some kind of
argument with him. She raised her arm and he unstruck it. So he had tried to
resort to violence, but she had balked him there too. Kerena found herself
privately applauding the woman. Why should she have to accept abuse from
her man? It was Adam who should have been banished, not Lilith. The seed
of his violence had passed along to his son Cain, who slew his brother. In-
stead, in the patriarchal scheme, she had been punished for defending her-
self.
But later (earlier) they were considerably more friendly. When it came
to sex, Lilith was evidently the expert, throwing herself into it with seeming
abandon. She would come to him, evidently demanding it, choosing the man-
ner of it. He seemed to be not entirely satisfied with this, though he did
participate. In time (earlier) Adam came to really like it, right up to the first

encounter, where they mutually discovered the kind of interaction their bodies
were capable of.
“Oooo, I wish I was doing that,” Molly moaned.
“Me too,” Kerena agreed.
Jolie agreed too. There was something about that first, innocent, tenta-
tive joy of union that was extremely seductive, surely by no coincidence. Yet
it seemed Adam had in time blamed her for it, perhaps resenting her evident
delight in it. It was, it seemed, only his joy that counted, not hers. In that
respect, Eve had been better for him.
Then they were gone, and before long, so was the garden. There seemed
to be nothing.
Kerena accelerated, trying to get beyond the blank spot. Suddenly she
passed a flurry of odd action, and realized that she had overshot. She slowed,
then reversed, so as to pick up the events in time-forward manner.
“This must be Chaos,” Molly said.
So it seemed. Around them the universe was without form and void, a
chaotic (naturally) mixture of light and darkness. Kerena tried to make sense
of it, and slowly there came to be two overlapping scenes. One was of patches
of light and darkness flying through space, coming from some monstrous
distant explosion, coalescing into points of light which were actually giant
hot balls of fire, admixed with great dark clouds of dusty vapors. As she
strained to see more of this confusion, a bit of substance formed from a
collapsing cloud and became a ball of hot rock. This bubbled and cooled,
forming vapor around it, and later was coated with slime that became plants
and creatures. Finally fish crawled out of the seas and became animals, and
one of the animals was mankind.
“I can’t make any sense of this,” Kerena complained.
“You’re looking at one scene; I’m looking at the other,” Molly said. “Mine
makes some sense.”
Kerena adjusted her vision to tune in on the other scene. In this one,
Chaos became a huge animate living thing that heaved and hurled out two
lesser things. One of the two was vaguely male, the other vaguely female,
both clothed in darkness. They writhed, forming semblances that enhanced
their genders: a monstrous phallus, a similarly monstrous vulva. They came
together, their parts merging repeatedly. Then the female squeezed out a
blob of energy that drifted away. She issued another, that also departed. An-
other, and another, until there were ten or more.
“She’s birthing babies!” Molly exclaimed.
Then Kerena saw it, like a huge mother, copulating with her brother
and generating children. They weren’t children, of course, but swirls of en-
ergy that sought their own regions.
Two of the swirls came together and mated, and from the female issued

plants and animals that came to inhabit a garden that came into being, and
two human beings.
“The Garden of Eden!” Molly said.
“And Adam and Lilith,” Kerena agreed.
“They were birthed by Nature. By Gaea.”
“By Mother Nature. Father Good made the Garden and established the
rules,” Kerena said, working it out. “And dictated the forms of the human
beings: they were modeled after his own chosen semblance, and Gaea’s. He
must have set up the Garden as a kind of playground, entertaining himself
by acts of creation. Things were fine until Lilith got assertive.”
“What about Nod?” Molly asked.
“He must have been an earlier experiment, not quite right to govern the
world, so he was set aside, and God and Gaea tried again. They were satisfied
with Adam, but Lilith still missed the mark and had to be replaced.” Kerena
smiled somewhat ruefully. “So Lilith went east of Eden and married Nod,
surely satisfying him sexually and fooling him about her fidelity. Even so,
there were subtle problems in Adam and Eve’s line, that took time to show,
such as Cain’s violence. But by then God must have been tired of tinkering,
and humanity has just had to live with his imperfect state ever since.”
“Agitated by the admixture of the blood of Nod and Lilith,” Molly agreed.
“That explains a lot.”
“An awful lot,” Kerena agreed. “You are surely a daughter of Eve, as it
were. Morgan le Fey would be a daughter of Lilith.”
So now they had seen the origin of living things, in one scene. Kerena
shifted focus to the other scene. Similar living creatures were there, as apes
lifted their bodies to walk on two feet, lost their body fur, and evolved into
human beings. There seemed to be no Garden of Eden, unless that was the
continent of Africa.
“So all the creatures were created in a short time,” Kerena said. “Or
they evolved over a long time. Depending in which scene you view. The end
result is much the same.”
“But the Incarnations of Immortality don’t yet exist.”
“Not as we know them now. They could hardly have human proprietors
before humans existed,” Kerena pointed out. “That’s the next thing we want
to see: how they were taken over. That must be what Lilah is waiting to show
us.” That reminded her. “I need to get some substance from Chaos.”
She reversed course, moved back to the void, and scooped up an armful
of chaos. She wasn’t sure how to handle it, but the blob seemed to stay with
her readily enough. It lacked much will of its own, so responded to hers. She
moved on forward, to the Garden, past Adam and Eve, and to the time just
after the expulsion.
There was Lilah. “You got it!” she exclaimed, grabbing for the blob of

chaos.
“Not so fast, ghost,” Molly said, intercepting her. “You still have to show
her the investing of the Incarnations.”
“I was going to,” Lilah snarled.
Kerena nodded. It was obvious that the ghost would have taken off with
the chaos substance and reneged on the rest, had Molly not been alert. That
was much of the point of having a friend along.
“This way,” Lilah said grudgingly. She led them downtime and slant-
wise across the terrain. “Here is the first one: the Incarnation of Good.”
The swirl of inchoate energy was resting at the top of a mountain, evi-
dently tuning out. A holy man climbed the mountain, discovered the swirl,
and stepped into it. He became transfigured, with glorious light surrounding
him. He had assumed the mantle, but did not seem to know exactly what to
make of it.
“It takes him about a thousand years to get it straight,” Lilah said. “I
could have done it faster, had I been interested in doing good.”
She took them to the next, some time later. This time an evil man fleeing
pursuit decided to hide in a dry well. In that well was a swirl. The man
merged with it, became charged, and floated up and away, amazed at his
newfound ability. “The Incarnation of Evil,” Lilah said. “If only I had known
that swirl was there, it could have been mine.”
“The people didn’t know about the swirls before they encountered
them?” Kerena asked.
“Right. The things were just drifting around, doing whatever they do
naturally and not very efficiently. Even Good and Nature reverted to some-
what chaotic status after their mixed results with early people. They must
have pretty well used up their initiative. But once humans got into them,
they had human will and intelligence. That made a difference. Good started
forming Heaven and Evil started forming Hell, and recruiting souls to in-
habit them. In time it developed into something of a system, supported by
the mortals who got a glimmer.”
The third one to be invested was Nature, taken over by a mature woman
who had a fair idea what was what. “But Gaea birthed all the animals, and
Adam and Eve,” Molly said. “Now she’s taken over by one of her great grand-
daughters?”
“And she birthed Nod and me. Why not?” Lilah asked wryly. “The whole
system is incestuously nepotistic. Erebus and Nox were brother and sister;
they got together and generated all the other Incarnations. Father God and
Mother Gaea are siblings, and so were Nod, Adam, Eve and me. Both my
brothers fucked me.”
“Erebus?” Molly asked.
“Chaos’ son. I don’t know what happened to him or Nox; maybe they’re

still drifting around somewhere, having fucked themselves out.”
But Kerena was paying attention to another aspect. “So all the humans
did was step into the swirls, and became the Incarnations of Immortality?”
“That’s all, at the beginning,” Lilah agreed. “It wasn’t very cosmopoli-
tan, early on. Anyone could have done it. Later they developed more sophis-
ticated rules of transfer.”
“I have seen enough. Here is your chaos.” Kerena pushed the blob to-
ward the ghost.
“Got it.” Lilah stepped into the blob, became a solid naked woman, and
stretched luxuriantly. Then she vanished.
“See, she skipped out,” Molly said.
“That’s all right. I’m through with her. She’s not the easiest person to
take, in more than small doses.” Kerena reversed course and headed back
uptime.
“What are you up to?”
“I am going to invest the powers of Night. No one else has.”
“Which one is that?”
“Nox. The one who mated with her brother and birthed the other pow-
ers.”
“You’re going to become an Incarnation?”
“I’m going to try. Before someone else does. I need those powers.”
“That’s why you are so hot on ancient history!”
“I knew the powers were there. The kind I need to do what I mean to
do.”
“I never knew!”
“I didn’t know it was possible, until now.”
“But can you do it before humans existed?”
“I doubt it. I mean to trace Nox to human times, then brace her.”
“But she’s the mother of the others! I think you’re younger than any of
the humans who took over. Not counting your vampire time.”
“That doesn’t matter. Age doesn’t matter. Just possession. If I under-
stand this correctly.” Kerena hoped she did.
They returned to the giant birthing. Then Kerena moved forward, fol-
lowing the mother swirl. It drifted aimlessly. She followed it as the Garden of
Eden was formed, and the plants and animals. It floated across the continent
of Australia. Now was the time.
She moved in. The swirl of energy was invisible, neither dark nor light,
but Kerena oriented on it with her Seeing. She had not been able to do it
before, not realizing that the absence of human presence fundamentally
changed the swirl. Now she knew exactly what it was, and had no further
difficulty. She solidified. And hesitated. “Molly, if something goes wrong—”
“I will tell Morely and Vanja.”

“Thank you.” Kerena nerved herself and stepped into the swirl.
She suffered immediate disorientation. She clung to her human aware-
ness, struggling to avoid being overwhelmed. Belatedly she realized that oth-
ers might have stepped into swirls and lost their identities instead of taking
over. Was she strong enough?
She recovered equilibrium and looked around. There was Molly. “You
changed your mind?” the ghost asked.
Kerena looked behind her. There was the swirl. She had passed though
it without investing it.
She turned about and tried again. And failed again. “I can’t do it,” she
said. “It’s as if we are on different planes.”
“Maybe you are,” Molly agreed. “What year is it?”
“About 3,000 BC.” As she spoke, she realized: “Way before my time! I
can’t do anything before I exist.”
“All we can do is look,” Molly agreed. “I forgot.”
“So did I. Fortunately that is readily remedied. I will return to my present
time.”
She did so, tracking the swirl so as not to lose it. It drifted all across the
world, which Kerena realized was a round ball rather than a flat plate, pre-
ferring night without being limited to it. It had no governing direction. Ap-
parently once it had mated and birthed the Incarnations of Day—if that was
really the right name for them—it had little remaining purpose. In that re-
spect it resembled Good and Nature, lacking continuing initiative on its own.
They returned to the Carnival of Ghosts, completing their excursion
into the past. But now Kerena knew where the swirl was. They left the Car-
nival and she phased down and zoomed back to Australia, where the swirl
had coincidentally drifted again. It was resting in the shadowed lee of an
isolated mountain. She solidified and walked toward it.
Another figure appeared, solidifying similarly beside the swirl. It waved.
“Oh, Rena—fancy meeting you here.”
“Lilah!” Kerena was not pleased. What was the demoness up to?
“I thought if there’s an Incarnation to be taken, I might as well take it,”
Lilah explained. “So nice of you to locate it for me.”
“You bitch!” Molly exclaimed. “That’s Rena’s chance.”
“Oh, really? I must not have gotten the word.” Lilah stepped into the
swirl.
There was a scintillation as body and energy overlapped. Then the body
was hurled out, landing limply on the sand.
Kerena hurried over. “Are you well?” she asked, kneeling beside the
form.
“Don’t waste time on her,” Molly urged. “Take the Incarnation. It’s your
chance.”

“But she may be injured. I have to help if I can.”
“You’re being a fool! She tried to take your chance.”
The demoness opened an eye. “Who are you?”
“A fool,” Kerena said.
“Who am I?”
“The demoness Lilah. You were just hurled a distance. Maybe if you
desolidify you’ll feel better.”
Lilah sat up, her substance dissipating. “Do I have a history?”
“You were Adam’s first wife, and Samson’s temptress. You’re the origi-
nal feminist. You were a ghost; now you’re a demoness.”
Lilah nodded. “I begin to remember. What happened to me?”
“You tried to become an Incarnation, and got ejected.”
“Now I remember more. I tried to steal your chance. Why are you tend-
ing to me?”
“You seemed to need help.”
“You are a fool.”
“Whatever,” Kerena agreed.
“A daughter of Eve,” Molly said.
“You must suppose I owe you one, now.”
Kerena laughed. “I know better. That’s not the way you think.”
“Here is the way I think: you will not do me harm, but may do me good.
I am likely to be better off on the right side of you, as there may be some
important favor you can do me in the future.”
“I have no awareness of that.”
“So I will return the favor, at such time as is convenient, as a matter of
cynical calculation. I will not be your enemy, though I can’t be your friend. I
prefer to have you neutral or owing me; it could pay off, as you have unusual
powers and may acquire more.”
Was that the truth, or did the demoness have a faint modicum of grati-
tude or decency in her? Kerena didn’t argue the case; Lilah was surely ashamed
of any good qualities she possessed. “I don’t even know what happened to
you.”
“I couldn’t Incarnate because I was not a proper match for the role. I
have too much selfishness and meanness. I surely could have taken the swirl
of Evil, had I had the chance, but this is not that. But you are generous and
good; you may be be able to do it. So I—”
Kerena was amazed by a wild thought. “Are you saying you want to be
my friend after all?”
“I don’t want to be anyone’s friend!” Lilah flared. “Friendships are wea-
risome.”
“To be sure,” Kerena agreed carefully. “Whatever way you prefer.”
“I prefer to depart.” She faded out.

“That was weird,” Molly said. “She masks appreciation with cynical
reasoning. I think she likes you.”
Kerena smiled. “Promise never to tell.”
“You want it that way?”
“She might one day do me some good.”
They both laughed, understanding. Then Kerena approached the swirl,
cautioned by Lilah’s rejection. Would it hurl her out similarly?
She stepped in. The energy swirled about her and through her, infusing
her, lifting her, tugging her in several directions, none of them physical. She
took another step.
And found herself out the other side. The swirl hadn’t thrown her out,
but neither had it accepted her. What did it mean?
“It didn’t work?” Molly asked.
“It didn’t work,” Kerena agreed. “Yet it didn’t manhandle me either.”
“So maybe you’re halfway there.”
Kerena had another idea. “The resistance I have encountered to obtain-
ing or even learning about the powers of Night—could it be that it is simply
that I am not yet where I need to be? That there is something else I need to get
or do before I can assume the office?”
“It is putting you through a test?”
“I don’t think so. But obviously it doesn’t just accept whoever approaches
it. There must be qualities that align with its nature, and I have some but not
all of them.”
“What would those qualities be?”
Kerena sighed. “I think that’s what I have to find out.”
“But you are what you are. How can you be something else?”
“Maybe I have to practice,” Kerena said with resignation.
“Did it offer any hint? You were in it for a moment; maybe there’s some-
thing.”
“No just a sort of nonphysical urgency. A lot of feeling, but I can’t say
what kind. Raw emotion.”
“Like chaos, before the fragmentation into assorted aspects. The ten chil-
dren.”
“Perhaps. Whatever is left to Nox.”
“Secrets!” Molly exclaimed. “That’s what Night has.”
“Secrets,” Kerena repeated thoughtfully. “Maybe that’s it. But what se-
crets?”
“Your Seeing. Can you use that?”
“Not on something that intangible.”
“On the Night Swirl. It’s still there.”
Kerena looked. “Try Seeing the swirl,” she said, intrigued. “What have I
to lose?”

“You may lose it if you don’t.”
Kerena approached the swirl. She extended her Seeing, and stepped into
it again.
Again the energy of it suffused her being. Again she found herself be-
yond it. But this time she had a notion.
“Secrets,” she agreed. “You were right. To merge with it I must learn to
control secrets. To expose those it wants to hide, and hide those it wants to
reveal.”
“What are those?” Molly asked, excited.
Kerena smiled ruefully. “I don’t know. They are secret.”
Molly laughed. “Is this thing teasing you?”
“Not intentionally. I simply don’t yet understand its nature well enough
to merge with it.”
“I think we need to go home and think for a while.”
“That does seem best.”
They returned to the warren. This time decades had not passed there;
Kerena had gone to the past and returned to the present, and the present
remained the present. She was relieved.
She had some sessions with Morely, and talked with Vanja. “Secrets?”
the vampire asked. “That makes sense. Our existence is mostly secret, neces-
sarily.”
“But I haven’t fathomed what secrets to expose or hide.”
“Well, let’s reason it out. What’s the most sensitive secret a girl can
have?”
“News of a crime?”
“People steal bread all the time without shame. But they hide their sexual
activity. We vampires don’t, but we’re different. Real people hate to have it
exposed.”
“People hate to have their toilet activities exposed too,” Kerena said.
“But everyone knows they perform them.”
“Embarrassment, literally. You sit on the pot, you don’t want tourists
peeking at your effort. But that’s not optional; you have to do it sometime.
Sex is optional, so can be canceled if the occasion is not private enough. That
makes it more sensitive; they don’t provide public facilities for sex, apart
from the brothels.”
“Still, just about everyone does it, and since normally two do it together,
it can’t be entirely secret.”
“I suppose not,” Vanja agreed. “That leaves you without a secret. Maybe
the library could help.”
Kerena brightened. “I’ll try it.”
She went to the library, and this time used her Seeing to orient on the
appropriate scroll. She found it—and was baffled again. Had Night balked

her once more?
The scroll she found had no text, just three pictures. A coin. A stage. A
group of people.
“What does it mean?” Vanja asked.
“I wish I knew! None of these seem exactly secret. Coins are used for
money, a stage is used for a public address, and people are everywhere. Yet
my Seeing suggests this is the hint I need.”
They discussed it with Morely. “An audience,” he said. “That’s what the
people are. An audience for whoever is on the stage. And the coin is what the
people pay to hear the speaker. He must be an entertainer.”
“But what is secret about that?” Kerena asked.
“Nothing. It’s a public event.”
Still, it seemed to be progress, of a sort.
“Maybe we should put on a show,” Vanja said. “I always like those. I’d
love to be a star.”
“What can you do?” Morely asked. “Can you sing or dance? Tell jokes?”
“Not well. I suppose I’d have to demonstrate how seductive I can be.
And I’d be ashamed to do that in public. So it’s a bad idea.”
“I love to see you seductive,” Morely said. “Why shouldn’t the world
appreciate it as well?”
“The world might call me a whore.”
“What’s wrong with being a whore?” Molly demanded. She remained
with Kerena, but hadn’t participated in the dialogue until now. “I was a good
whore. Rena was a better one.”
Morely laughed. “Good question. Men value whores for sex, but feel
constrained to disparage them at other times. It’s sheer hypocrisy, but wide-
spread.”
Kerena was intrigued. “Why do men condemn what they like best?”
“It’s religious. Sex is one of our strongest drives, but often socially con-
demned. So we have to have it, but also have to deny it. To pretend that we
don’t really desire what we desire. We must love and hate women for it.”
“I want to be loved, not hated,” Vanja said.
“You are,” Morely said.
“Can that be the key?” Kerena asked. “Sex is most desired, but also most
feared if it is exposed? Surely there are more secrets concerning sex than
anything else.”
“That can explain the stage and audience,” Vanja said. “But not the
coin. It can pay for sex, or for a show, but there’s not much shame in that;
anything can be bought.”
“A coin is also an agent of chance,” Morely said. “When it is flipped. It
spins in air and where it stops is theoretically unknown.” He produced a
Roman coin, one of those left over from the days of Roman occupation of

Britain, and flipped it. It landed on the floor, bounced, and came to rest
before Kerena.
“Chance,” Kerena said, staring at the coin. “What’s the connection be-
tween Night and Chance?”
“A strong one, I suspect. If Night shrouds the unknown, nothing is more
unknown than the outcome of pure chance.”
“So the coin could be the symbol of chance. But how does that relate to
a performance on a stage for an audience?”
“Oh, it can relate,” he said. “When there is a performance, no one can
be sure ahead what the reaction will be. They may love it or hate it, for
indecipherable reason.”
“I wouldn’t dare risk the stage,” Vanja said, “if my success or failure
depended on the flip of a coin. I’d be mortified by a loss.”
Hell had no fury like that of a woman scorned, Jolie remembered. That
thought might be anachronistic here, but related. No woman wanted to be
rejected or deemed to be worthless.
“Yet the coin is mindless,” Morely said. “It has no values. You shouldn’t
care.”
“I do care. Horribly.”
“You’re cute when you’re nervous.” He caught hold of her and began
stroking her. She resisted a moment, then participated, as there was no doubt
of his interest and she was a lusty vampire.
Kerena had been flirting with a realization. Now that she was alone, in
a manner, she concentrated. Sex—a stage—audience reaction—chance—
Night—secrecy. How did it all fit together?
She picked up the coin. One side had the head of a bygone Roman em-
peror, the other the designation of its amount. Heads and tails. A win or a
loss.
“Let’s find a stage and an audience,” Molly said.
“Somewhere,” Kerena agreed.
She went to the central hall of the warren, where there was a stage.
Several vampires were there, conversing between sexual efforts. They glanced
up as she entered.
She mounted the stage. Then, acting on a prompting by her Seeing, she
flipped the coin high in the air. It spun, trying to scintillate though there was
no significant light here; the vampire vision could see it well in the dark. It
seemed to slow, hanging in the air, turning in a leisurely manner. Time was
pausing.
Kerena started an impromptu performance: a sexual dance. She moved
her body sensuously, spreading her arms in seeming invitation, quivering
enough to make her breasts ripple. She turned, making her hair fling out,
showing her bottom. She was trying to make herself desirable to this spot

audience. If the coin landed heads, perhaps she would succeed and be thrilled.
If it landed tails, she might fail, and be chagrined. Suddenly it was important
that she win, proving herself to be lovely and worthy. It would be awful if
she lost; she would want to die. Yet her chances were even. It depended on
the unpredictable coin. Her life depended on its uncaring chance.
The coin descended, turning. Perhaps it already knew which way it was
going to land, carelessly sealing her fate one way or the other. Everything
depended on it. If it landed right, she would be a brilliant success, warmly
applauded. If it landed wrong, she would have to flee the stage, humiliated.
Chance.
To merge with Night she needed to fathom a secret Night was trying to
hide, and hide one Night wanted to expose. To be a public success, or a
private failure. The coin was random, but Night was not; it controlled its
secrets.
Yet they were two sides of the same coin. Heads and tails, publicity and
privacy, success and failure, joy and chagrin, all and nothing. They existed
together, opposite aspects of the same concepts.
It wasn’t sex that powered human emotion, or accomplishment. It was
feeling. Success was to be loved by others; failure was to be scorned. Yet to
achieve applause, a person had to risk condemnation. The verdict of chance.
The coin stopped in the air. Kerena stepped forward and caught it in
her hand, not looking at it. She had conquered chance, by realizing that
secrecy was the necessary underside of the human drive for recognition. She
had fathomed what Night had tried to hide, and now she would hide what-
ever she chose.
She stood still, spreading her arms. “Come to me,” she murmured, ex-
panding not merely her Seeing but her discovered power.
The swirl of amorphous energy came, attracted from far away as to a
magnet. It overlapped her body, merging with her. This time there was no
disorientation. She felt its power, and controlled it. She was Home.
She had become Nox, the Incarnation of Night, mistress of secrecy.

CHAPTER 9
DATABASE
But it was soon apparent that though she had become the Incarnation
of Night, she was not nearly close to being mistress of the Office. The secrets
were now open to her, but there were so many that she simply could not
keep track, or grasp the larger picture. It wasn’t just those of people, but
those of the other Incarnations she was now able to fathom: Exactly what
made souls be judged good or evil, the province of Thanatos. The nuances
and paradoxes of time that Chronos had to manage, as he made his way
backwards. He started with legions of selves, one for each timeline, which
merged as he progressed; when he finally reached the beginning, all would
be one. The devious interactions of the myriad threads of Fate. The ultimate
causes and futility of War. The living processes of Nature. All those folk
remedies she had studied with Morely were but the shadow of natural pro-
cesses no person comprehended. Indeed, most of them should never be opened
to mankind, lest he use them to exploit nature into destruction.
“I am Nox,” she told Morely and Vanja. “But the scope is huge. I feel like
a bird riding the back of a heedless ox. How do I make it mind?”
“You can’t simply fathom and use any secret you need?” Vanja asked.
“I can do that. But now I am aware of the larger picture. Every action I
take as Nox has consequences, like a ripple spreading out from a pebble
flipped into a lake. Those consequences have consequences, and may lead to
things I do not wish to be responsible for. So I dare not do anything.”
Morely nodded. “You have too much power, too quickly. You need time
to grow into it. Fortunately you will have the time; you can take centuries to
study the situation.”
“I don’t even know what to study. I need a guideline before I can start.”
“Maybe you should catalogue your information, as I catalogued magic
folk remedies.”
“You have a better memory than I, and my challenge is far greater. There
are more secrets than folk remedies.” How vastly she was understating the

case!
“The other Incarnations must have similar problems,” Morely said. “We
should consider how they handle them.”
“They have powerful tools,” Kerena said. “Death has the Scythe and
Mortis the Death-Horse. Time has the Hourglass. War has the Red Sword.”
“And it seems Fate has the Tapestry of the Threads of Life,” he agreed.
“Which she may weave in the form of a spider. The others surely have equiva-
lent tools. How did they come by those dread symbols of their Offices?”
Kerena was taken aback. “Why, I’m not sure. They just seem to be there.”
“I saw,” Molly said. “The humans made them when they became Incar-
nations, or soon thereafter. I think Death converted an ordinary horse. I think
they had some leftover chaos substance.”
“That is surely potent stuff,” Morely said.
“It is,” Kerena agreed. “It adapted Lilah from a ghost to a demoness. It
would account for the powers of those symbols, as you call them.”
“Yes. They would be defined by the first Office holders, then passed
along to their successors,” he agreed. “Or their predecessors, in the case of
Chronos. So perhaps you should develop a similar symbol.”
“I should,” Kerena agreed, liking the notion. “But what?”
“The cloak, of course,” Vanja said. “You have been using its powers all
along.”
“Those weren’t really its powers,” Kerena reminded her. “I only thought
they were, deceived by the Fey.”
“Yes, they are your powers. You imbued the cloak with them. Now you
can do it more. Make it the Nox Symbol.”
That was appealing. “Should I?”
“Yes,” Molly said. “Symbols are classy.”
“I agree,” Morely said. “I would be proud to see my old cloak become
eternal.”
“I’ll do it.” She brought out the cloak, and put it on. She found sur-
rounding left-over chaos stuff, and imbued the cloak with it. The old cloth
developed a sparkle, then a deep shadow.
“The stars!” Vanja exclaimed. “It shows the stars!”
Indeed it did. The chaos element made the cloak’s surface fade out, and
it showed the scintillating sky of night, with the stars as they were, slowly
moving in their courses. Then the moon appeared, a crescent, followed by
the first brightening of dawn.
“Enough,” Morely said. “Don’t burn us.”
Kerena took off the Cloak and folded it, stifling its growing radiance.
She could control its cycles, but was satisfied to have her Symbol: the velvet
Cloak of Night. “But this won’t enable me to remember myriad secrets,” she
said.

“I wonder,” Vanja said. “We seem to know more now than our ances-
tors did. Will our descendants know more than we do?”
“Surely so,” Morely agreed. “But Verena’s problem is now.”
“But if she can travel in time, maybe she can go see how they track
things in the future. It might help.”
Kerena was intrigued but dubious. “Could our descendants tell me how
to remember better?”
“Why don’t you go look and see?” Vanja asked.
“Can I do that?” Kerena asked Molly.
“Well, you can’t be sure that what you see will really happen,” the ghost
replied. “Because even your knowing about it can change it.”
“She doesn’t need to know the specific future,” Morely said. “She merely
needs to observe and learn a superior technique.”
“She should be able to do that,” Molly said.
Kerena remained unconvinced, but was willing to give it a try. “Then
let’s go look.”
Jolie was interested. She could travel in time, because this was not truly
her time; there was no necessary paradox. But if Kerena went to the future
and brought something back, wouldn’t that invite paradox? Still, the lines
were not fudging, so she could relax and see.
“Do they wear clothing in the future?” Kerena asked.
“Surely they do,” Morely said. “For warmth, protection, display, and
privacy. But it probably won’t resemble what you wear today. There’s prob-
ably no point in taking any current clothing, as it would only mark you as a
foreigner.”
“I will take the Velvet Cloak. That’s is my symbol, and I have imbued it
with significant magic.”
“Of course, he agreed. “But you won’t want to cut that up for future
fashion.”
“Never!” she agreed, horrified by the notion.
“I can help,” Molly said. “I learned sewing before I died, a maidenly
skill I thought might one day be useful as a mother.” Then she was quiet,
remembering that her death had forfeited all of that.
“Take cloth, shears, needles, thread,” Morely said. “Then let Molly make
what you need when you know the style.”
Vanja set her up with a knapsack filled with the essentials, including
some food and a vial of blood. She put it on and looked in the mirror. “A
nude girl with a backpack,” she said, bemused. The Cloak was neatly folded
inside the pack.
“A lovely nude girl,” Morely said. “The contrast is suggestive. I won-
der—?”
“Do it swiftly,” she said, laughing. “I’m ready to travel.”

He embraced her, bearing her back against the wall, standing. She braced
against the knapsack and thrust her groin against his, meeting him thrust for
thrust. It was indeed swift, almost instant, but intense and gratifying. She
was pleased to note that her new status as the Incarnation of Night had not
depleted her ardor; she could still respond as rapidly and intensely as a man,
and retained her interest in doing it frequently. Then she kissed him, disen-
gaged, and mopped up.
“I’m jealous,” Vanja said. “You never did me that way. You were so
turned on I feared she would sail into the air when you climaxed.”
“Then fetch a knapsack, girl,” Kerena said as she phased down and
oriented on the future. She was pleased to see the accelerating forms of the
man and woman indulging as she moved forward in time, both wearing
knapsacks.
“You have invented a new mode of sex,” Molly said. “Now all the vamps
will be doing it in knapsacks.”
“I’ll lend you the body and knapsack so you can do it too, when there’s
a suitable man.”
“Thank you,” Molly agreed, laughing.
She had started traveling in the warren. Now she slid upward to reach
the ground, preferring to see what was passing outside. It was the forest, the
trees this time growing larger, aging, disappearing, being replaced by sprouts
and saplings filling in the places.
Then the trees were gone. Only bare ground remained. “What hap-
pened?” Molly asked, surprised.
Kerena slowed, stopped, and solidified. She stood on he wreckage of the
forest. Only brush remained. There were a number of decaying flat-topped
stumps. “They cut them down,” she said, appalled. “All of them.”
“Why would they do that?”
“They must have wanted the wood.”
“But now there won’t be any more wood. They left none to grow.”
“It does seem nonsensical,” Kerena agreed. “Maybe when I learn to fully
handle my powers I’ll be able to stop the cutting, and save the forest.”
They resumed travel into the future, drifting across the terrain to get
away from the lost forest. Buildings appeared, aged, and vanished, to be re-
placed by larger ones. “There must be a lot of people living here,” Molly said.
“There must be,” Kerena agreed, not entirely pleased. She would rather
have kept the forest.
She accelerated, so as to spare them further sights along the way. She
used her Seeing to orient on what she wanted: a way to keep track of all the
information she would now be able to gather. She didn’t know how far into
the future she was going, but her impression was a thousand years or more.
Maybe fifteen hundred.

Her Seeing found its object. She slowed, and stopped.
She stood on a city street, naked except for her knapsack. She hastily
made herself invisible and inaudible, as she suspected her appearance in
this manner of garb would attract more attention than she liked.
Now they studied the sights of the street. There were floating carriages
that moved without being drawn by horses. There were stores with fancy
windows showing their wares. People appeared before the stores to look,
then went inside if they felt inclined. Some appeared in the street, then floated
to one of the upper stories, where there were doors. Obviously magic, and
everybody had it.
“No horses, no workmen,” Molly noted. “I think we’re not in Scotland
any more.”
“We’re in Scotland, but not the one we know. They evidently have magic
for everything. They must conjure their food and supplies, or just float to
wherever the things they need are.”
Jolie was interested. This was what in her day was called Hi-Tech magic.
But there had to be something to power it. Magic wasn’t free; there was
always a cost, just as there was with science. Also, was her awareness of the
alignment of timelines operative here in the future? She doubted it, as this
was a tenuous future, rather than a fixed one. Yet it could affect the align-
ment by changing Kerena’s outlook in her own time. Well, maybe Jolie would
be able to verify the alignment when they returned.
A handsome man wearing a turban appeared before them. “May I be of
service, pretty maiden? I see you are without a companion.”
Kerena extended her Seeing—and recoiled. This was a demon! What
was he doing out of Hell? Her invisibility was useless against that kind. But
she masked her reaction. “What did you have in mind?”
“Oh, the usual fair exchange of desire. I fulfill your worldly needs, you
fulfill my sexual needs.”
Kerena was surprised despite her caution. So was Jolie, for different
reason. It was known that demons desired mortal humans for sex, but nor-
mally this was confined to the punishments of Hell. Massively endowed male
demons perpetually ravished the souls and tight vaginas of prudish women,
while winsome bare female demons tempted eager men without ever grant-
ing them release. Sometimes, it was hinted, mortal male and female souls
were then put together naked while demons watched and made bets on the
outcome. Hell was not a nice place. “You openly proffer a deal like that?”
He squinted at her. “You’re a vampire! What are you doing here?”
“Just looking around,” Kerena replied evenly. “Demons are prejudiced
against vampires?”
“No. Mortals are. Here come the police.” Uniformed men appeared,
surrounding them. “There she stands,” the demon told them indignantly. “A

shameless loose bare vampire.”
“Fetch a stake,” the head policeman said as he advanced on Kerena.
“No, first we’ll have to torture her for information. There’s obviously been a
leak in the tank.” He brandished a bright silver cross as his other hand went
to the front fastening of his trousers.
Kerena didn’t know exactly what he was talking about, but she shot
backward in time, escaping the threat.
“What do you think?” she asked Molly as she came to a stop a few years
earlier.
“They tame demons,” Molly said. “Demons must do all the magic for
them, in return for sex. Why demons want sex so much with mortals I don’t
understand, but that seems to be the deal. You could make it readily enough.”
“Every male wants sex with personable young live women,” Kerena said.
“You saw how eager the ghosts are.”
“True. And demons are twice as sex obsessed as ghosts. So you have a
ready means of exchange.”
“But they kill vampires. I can’t risk that.”
“You can’t,” Molly agreed. “And we didn’t even learn if they can re-
member things.”
“Maybe they don’t need to, in an all magic realm.” But she reconsidered
immediately. “My Seeing brought me there, so they must have a way. Maybe
the demons do it all. But I wouldn’t trust a demon for that; I want to have
complete control myself, always.”
“I wouldn’t trust a demon for anything. They’re all like Lilah, if not
worse. But what is there, if not a magic way?”
“Morely taught me that there are usually alternatives to magic, like sci-
ence. He never used magic if there was another way. He studied the stars
without magic.”
“Did he count the stars? There are so many.”
“Even more than we can see. Myriads, he said.”
“Could there be a—a science way to keep track of them, or other things?”
“I wonder. I can try to visit a science future, though I don’t know whether
that would interfere with my magic.”
“Is Night limited to magic?”
Kerena considered. Then she used her Seeing. “No,” she said, surprised.
“Nox can fathom any secret, regardless of the universe it is in. I was limiting
my thinking, not being rational. Morely will chide me.”
“Horrors,” Molly said pleasantly. “Something else: shouldn’t the lan-
guage change in fifteen hundred years? That demon spoke just like us.”
“The gift of tongues,” Kerena said, abruptly discovering another Nox
ability. “Night knows all languages. It was actually rather different from ours.”
But she remembered something vaguely unsettling: she had understood other

languages when visiting Rome with Lilah. Had she been picking up on the
powers of Night before becoming Nox? That suggested that her course was
guided rather than coincidental.
Jolie, too, wondered. She remembered how the ghost woman Orlene
had begun assuming some of the powers of the Incarnation of Good before
she had been voted into the Office. Indeed, before she had an inkling of it.
Was individual choice more apparent than real? Or did the ambiance of
such status extend backwards as well as forwards?
“I’m glad you became Nox before traveling this far,” Molly said.
“Blind luck. Let’s call it foresight.”
“Naturally.”
She followed her Seeing. That took her back a thousand years, then for-
ward on another track. This brought them to what appeared to be the same
city street. There were floating coaches and stores with window displays.
“Are you sure it worked?” Molly asked as Kerena hastily made herself
undetectable.
“It is the same place, but has to be a different future,” Kerena said un-
certainly. “I will use my Seeing again.” She concentrated, willing herself to
become aware of the proper course.
A coach paused, and a rather muscular handsome young man stepped
out. The coach floated away, leaving him standing on the walk. He wore an
iridescently green shirt and metallic shorts, with what looked like wooden
boots. “Hello,” he said. “Is someone here?”
Kerena stared. Her Seeing indicated that he was what she was looking
for. But did she dare make herself apparent, after what had happened be-
fore?”
“I received a telepathic signal,” the man said. “It indicated that I would
find it well worthwhile to befriend a girl I would find here. Was that mis-
taken?”
“If you don’t want him, I do,” Molly said. “He is surely a fantastic lover.”
Molly decided, she hoped not for that reason. She had not encountered
the concept of telepathy before, but gathered that it meant he had somehow
received her mental presence. That, she hoped, was a good sign. She made
herself appear. “That must have been mine.”
He looked. His pupils expanded. “Well, now!”
Kerena remembered belatedly that she was still nude with her knap-
sack. Well, maybe that was suitable to impress the man. “I could use some
help.”
“You’re beautiful!”
“I could use some clothing,” she said. “I may indeed need a friend.”
“You wish to make a stipulation of friendship with me?”
Her Seeing remained positive. “Yes.”

“To what degree? What term?”
She avoided showing her confusion. “What do you prefer?”
“Need you inquire? Of course I want romance. How about a fortnight
renewable term?”
Fourteen days! Kerena was appalled. She intended to be here only hours.
Yet her Seeing remained amenable. She had to do it. It wasn’t as if it would
make a difference when she returned, as she would go to the time she had
left. She could manage time far better than she had when visiting the Incar-
nations. And the man was handsome. “Yes.”
“Wonderful! I hope you are as fetching as you appear. I am Kermit.”
“I am Kerena.” Was that sheer coincidence, or confirmation that they
were slated to be together?
A screen appeared before him. “Kermit and Kerena committing to a
fortnight romance,” he said.
A woman’s face appeared on the screen. “Kermit is listed. Kerena is not.
More detail, please.”
That set him back. “How can she be unlisted? She is standing here be-
fore me.”
Oops. Of course Kerena did not exist in this future; she was from its
past. Yet this challenge demonstrated that this culture had a way to check
every person in it, immediately. That was exactly the kind of thing she had
come for. “Please, can we withdraw, for the moment?”
“Withdrawn,” Kermit said to the screen, and it disappeared.
“That looks like a magic mirror to me,” Molly said.
Kermit turned back to Kerena. “You have an explanation? I assumed
you were registered. Everyone is.”
“I’m not. I don’t think you would believe what I am.”
“For the sake of a term romance with a woman as lovely as you, I am
ready to believe almost anything.”
She laughed, aware by the intensity of his gaze that the way this shook
her flesh excited him. He was a completely normal and manageable male in
this respect. “I am a woman, and I do want to be with you. The rest is com-
plicated. Is there somewhere we can go for a private dialogue?”
“A slow coach is private.”
“A slow coach,” she agreed.
He lifted his hand, which now she saw held a small key. The square
screen appeared in the air before him. “Slow coach, here, now, destination
home.”
A coach appeared behind him, floating. “Just like that,” Kerena mur-
mured appreciatively. “That’s hardly slow.”
“I gather you are unfamiliar with our society,” he said as he guided her
onto the step and into the coach. It was plush and dark inside, very comfort-

able.
They sat on facing couches as the door shut and the coach floated on-
ward. She noted with satisfaction that his gaze was unable to remain clear of
her bare legs. It was another confirmation that he was a typical young man,
regardless of the future culture. That was important. “I am. For example, I
don’t know exactly what a term romance entails, but am ready to accommo-
date it. Sex?”
He licked his lips. “If we choose.”
“Let’s do that first. Then I must see about obtaining suitable clothing.”
“If you really don’t know our culture, you may not be aware of the
range and degree of sexual expression we indulge in. If you prefer to discuss
it first—”
She lifted her bare rear, swung it about, and set it on his lap. “I believe I
can handle it,” she murmured, nibbling on his ear.
Things proceeded rapidly thereafter. Soon Kermit was naked and pant-
ing beside her on the bed that the merging seats had formed, her breasts still
pressing against his chest. His delightfully urgent young ardor was spent for
the moment. He was in every respect sexually ordinary, and she was per-
fectly equipped to accommodate his fondest ambitions. Now she had the
social advantage, having verified that she could manage him satisfactorily.
“That signal I received was right,” he said. “You have given me more joy
in less time than any girl I have been with.”
She slid up so as to put her breasts at his face. She drew him in, his
flushed cheek nestled between them. “I am a woman,” she repeated firmly,
conscious of the parallel between her tone and her flesh. His sexual urgency
had been abated, but breasts had effects on men that went beyond that. She
wanted him pacified as she told him what she needed to, to ensure his in-
formed cooperation. “I am older than I look.”
“I guess you must be, because you certainly know what you’re doing.
Will you tell me where you are from?”
She kept her Seeing attuned. So far it indicated that she could trust him.
“The key is not where, but when.”
“I don’t understand.”
She used her hand to press her upper breast more closely against his
face, so that it brushed his mouth in a reverse kiss. She felt his groin stir.
Good; his critical mind would be filtered through his recovering desire. He
had spoken truly when he said he was ready to believe anything for a rela-
tionship with her; men’s minds were opportunistic when sex was in the
picture. “I am from your distant past.”
“I think I would have remembered you, even if I knew you when I was
three years old.”
She tweaked her breast again. “I mean your culture’s past. About fifteen

hundred years.”
He reacted, first trying to laugh, then shocked. She stifled both reac-
tions with her breast, until he relaxed. “You’re not joking, are you?”
“No. I have traveled far into my own future to learn something I need to.
I wore no clothing because mine would have given me away as fabulously
out of fashion.”
Now he did laugh, and she let him. “I don’t think I should believe you,
but there’s something persuasive about you.” He kissed her conducive breast
as his groin heated. “What do you need to know?”
“How to keep track of a huge number of secrets.”
“That’s easy. You need a database. A relational database.”
“I have no idea what that is. I don’t think such things exist in my time.”
“Nor computers,” he agreed. “I can tell you the basics, but I’m not ex-
pert. You’d need to take a class to get competent.”
“If you could arrange that, despite my lack of registration, I would be
most appreciative.” She nudged him with her breast again. It had exactly the
volume and quality required to be properly persuasive.
“I—Oh, Kerena, can we—?”
She was well ahead of him. “Lie on your back.”
He did. She straddled him and took him in for another effort, letting
him hold her breasts as it progressed. “I believe everything!” he cried as he
climaxed.
“I think I would prefer to be anonymous as far as others are concerned,”
she said as he lay again in spent bliss. “So that you alone understand my
nature. I shall be happy to fulfill all the conditions of a term romance, de-
spite it being unregistered.”
“I’ll say you are an anonymous acquaintance. That is an accepted status
for those who prefer not to be known, such as ones having conflicts of inter-
est.”
“Such as being married?”
He looked at her with alarm. “You’re married?”
“No. Not at all. But I wouldn’t mind if others assumed that. It would
prevent them asking awkward questions.”
He smiled. “Yes. I’ll register you as an anonymous illicit romance, and
no one will inquire further. How jealous the boys will be! You don’t mind my
pride in that?”
“Not at all. But I assume that this romance limits us to each other.”
“A closed romance does. Good enough. I’ll do it now.” He fetched his
key from his clothing and made the screen appear. “Kermit and Kerena com-
mitting to a fortnight romance, she illicitly anonymous.”
“Screen name Kerena, illicitly anonymous,” the woman agreed. She
glanced at Kerena. “Mutually agreed?”

Kerena realized that this was to be sure there was no coercion. “Yes.”
“Registered,” the woman said to Kermit. She smiled. “Congratulations.
She’s spectacular.”
“Thanks.” The screen vanished. “See—even the clerk sees I have a good
thing. She can’t figure why a creature like you would waste her time on a
nothing like me.”
“But you’re a handsome man!”
“I have not yet graduated from trade college, and my grades are medio-
cre. My family has no political power. My face is my fortune, and that’s not
enough for ambitious girls. I am not even a great lover.”
That was an advantage, for Kerena, because she could readily lead him.
“You are fine for me.”
He glanced at her cannily. “Like an older man tackling an innocent girl,
delighting in her virginal naïveté?”
“I’ll never tell.” She drew him in for a languorous kiss. Actually, there
was much truth in the analogy. She did like seducing a relative innocent.
That type was far more malleable than cynically experienced older men.
By the time the slow coach conveyed them to his home, they had achieved
sex a third time, and he was thoroughly committed to her privacy and wel-
fare. As with any young man, he was smitten with her. This was an advan-
tage of the term romance: he knew there was a limit, so breaking up with
him would not be ugly. This was a social concept she would take back with
her.
Kermit’s family was nice about his sudden term romance, in part be-
cause they too were struck by Kerena’s young beauty. They let her share his
room, and they provided her with suitable clothing: iridescent blouses, me-
tallic skirts, and wooden boots. She was uncertain about those last.
“They are floaters,” Kermit explained. “So you can step across flowerbeds,
ponds, whatever. You had better practice to get control of them. Folk would
wonder if you floated out of control.” He demonstrated, rising from the floor.
“You apply them slowly, and use your calves to keep yourself steady.”
Kerena tried it—and promptly landed on the bed, her feet flying up.
Those boots really did float!
“I love the view,” Kermit said as he helped her get her legs down. “But
just barely press your toes on the contacts, slowly, slowly. You’ll get the hang
of it.”
She did, and did use the sturdy upper sections of the boots to brace her
body upright. That was why they were so solid: to take the strain off the
ankles. These were very nice seemingly magic boots, and quite comfortable
inside.
But there was something that interested her more. “That key that makes
the picture—what is that?”

“Oh, that’s my spot projector. It’s a virtual communicator.”
“A what?”
He nodded. “I guess those didn’t exist in 500 AD. Here, I’ll show you.”
He held up the key. It had little buttons along its sides. “Press here to log on to
the Net.” He pressed, and the square screen appeared, this time with no
woman’s face. “Here to project my computer.” A panel marked with assorted
symbols in jumbled order appeared. Kerena, used to script, could barely
decipher them, until she realized that they were stylized versions of the al-
phabet. He touched his fingertips rapidly to the panel, and letters appeared
on the screen above it.
“Could those be shown in script?” Kerena asked.
“Sure.” He touched a combination, and suddenly the text was in legible
script. I love you Ker
I love you Ker
I love you Ker
I love you Ker
I love you Kerena
ena
ena
ena
ena.
“Oh!” He had caught her by surprise.
“Yes, I know: you have to go in two weeks. But in that time, what an
emotional fling I’ll have! In fact—”
She moved into him, kissed him, and took him down on the bed, oblig-
ing his so readily roused ardor. But she was careful never to indicate that her
sex drive was as strong as his; she wanted always to seem to be doing him a
favor.
“As if that mature man with the teen girl is obliging her passion, rather
than his,” Molly remarked enviously. “Very nice trick if you can maintain
the pretense.”
“Who spoke?” Kermit asked.
Oops. Kerena would have jumped back a few seconds, but wasn’t quite
sure that would be enough, considering his occasional ability to receive
thoughts. “I have a confession. There is someone else with me.”
“In your mind?”
“Yes. The ghost of another woman, my friend Molly. She likes you too.”
“There are no ghosts.”
“You might call her a telepathic projection. An alternate personality.”
“Do you have multiple personality disorder?”
“I prefer to consider her the ghost of a friend.”
He smiled. “Very well. What is this about obliging passion?”
Kerena wasn’t sure what was safe. Some men did not like the notion of
women having sex drives. “I am not pretending when I enjoy sex with you.
It’s fun for me too.”
“And for Molly?”
“Yes!” Molly said.
He gazed at her. “I received that. If Molly is one of your personalities,
then it would not be a violation of our term romance if she participated.”
“I’m a personality,” Molly agreed quickly.

Kerena decided not to argue. “You were showing me your—computer.”
“So I was. You type on the virtual keyboard, and the virtual screen shows
it. It’s good for writing notes to friends. Of course it’s easier to speak it in-
stead.”
“To speak it?”
“Now I have two girlfriends: Kerena and Molly,” he said. As he spoke,
the words appeared on the screen, in script.
“Oh!” Kerena exclaimed, delighted. “Can I do that?”
“Speak.”
“I love this magic.” Her words appeared on the script screen. The word
“magic” was marked in color.
“That means the syntax program is querying whether that is the correct
word, there being no such thing as magic.”
That was another case Kerena decided not to argue. “Science,” she said,
and suddenly that word replaced the other. “Whatever it is, I still love it. But
can it be rendered into a scroll?”
“And you lacked printed books in your day, of course,” Kermit said. “Let
me print it out as a scroll. For this, a virtual device won’t do, because I pre-
sume you want it physical.”
“Yes, because that way I can keep it.”
Something made a whirring noise in the corner of the room. Paper
emerged from a slit. It was a small scroll. On it was written I love this sci-
I love this sci-
I love this sci-
I love this sci-
I love this sci-
ence
ence
ence
ence
ence.
Amazed, Kerena hugged the paper.
“But you know, that’s an archaic way of saving information,” Kermit
said. “A database is better, as I said before. Not only is it more convenient, it
can store more information that a whole library building of physical books.”
“I want to learn about that.”
“Then probably you should take a course in it. Then you’ll know more
than you’ll ever need.”
“A course. Is that like apprenticing?”
He smiled. “You really are out of touch. Why don’t I just sign you up for
the course?”
“Yes, please, do. That’s what I came here for, I’m sure. I’m so pleased.”
“And here we’ve just made love, so I can’t take advantage of the mo-
ment.”
Sex, of course, was never far from a young man’s mind. But the excite-
ment had turned her on too. “A change of partners can work wonders. Try it
with Molly.”
“Oooo!” Molly said enthusiastically.
Kerena gave Molly the body, and they went at it. Meanwhile Kerena
considered what she had learned. The tiny key was an avenue to all manner

of communications, including what she needed: a way to save a great deal of
information. Yet how could all that fit inside the key? She didn’t quite trust
this; there must be something she hadn’t yet discovered.
“Glorious!” Molly said as they climaxed together. “Where were you when
I existed alive?”
“One and a half millennia downtime,” Kermit said, kissing her. “But
we’re together now.”
Molly kissed him back, avidly. “Oh, yes!”
Next day Kerena registered for the database class. Because she was anony-
mous here she couldn’t receive college credit for it, but otherwise she was a
full participant. There were nineteen other students in the class, boys and
girls in their late teens, few of whom seemed really interested. It turned out
they were taking it for required credit and hardly cared about the subject.
Kermit joined her, his interest having been stimulated by hers. Also, she half
suspected, he wanted to be sure she developed no other male interest there.
Considering her appearance, readily the prettiest girl in the class, this pre-
caution seemed sensible. She preferred having him there, because she was
not at all comfortable on her own in this odd advanced culture.
“I realize that not all of you are truly devoted to anything as dull as
database management,” the professor said. He reminded Kerena vaguely of
Morely, which helped. “So we are offering an inducement: the outstanding
student will receive the demonstration unit we use here in class, hardware
and software. It is superior in all respects, state of the art.”
As an inducement it seemed to fall flat. It seemed that most students
were satisfied with their own units, and never intended to look at a database
again after this. But Kerena was intensely interested: she wanted that unit, as
she lacked her own. What she had was one Kermit had rented for her. It was,
he assured her, serviceable. But it wasn’t hers; she couldn’t take it back with
her.
That was a private qualm: she had traveled back in time, but could she
take a future artifact into the past? She hoped she could, because she would
keep it secret, allowing no one else even to know of it, let alone use it, so it
would have no effect on the ordinary world. But she wouldn’t know for sure
until she actually tried it.
“Now for basic definitions,” the professor said. “We are here to learn to
understand and use the standard relational database. A database is essen-
tially a collection of information organized into a table: times, costs, stock
numbers, orientations, sources, addresses, cautions, whatever. A relational
database is two or more tables operating in tandem, when the total informa-
tion is too complicated for a single table. We’ll review examples of every
type.”
The class evinced polite boredom, but Kerena was fascinated. She quickly

discovered that a table in this context was not a support for a meal, but a
criss-cross pattern of lines forming cells in which the bits of information
were stored. It could be just about anything; it would certainly do for storing
secrets, once she figured out how to properly record them.
Day by day the professor took them through it. Each student used an
individual computer unit to project the selected type of database on a virtual
screen, and manipulated the words and figures there. Kerena’s were in script;
it didn’t matter. From the first day the professor picked up on her attitude,
appreciating her extreme interest, and gave her leeway. Often she had ques-
tions that seemed stupid to some of the others, and might have been so, but
he answered them carefully. She had started from abysmal ignorance, but
rapidly forged toward the head of the class.
Between the daily sessions, she did homework with Kermit, visited the
many wonders of this realm, and made love with him. Often, for he was
quite conscious of the brevity of their romantic association: pleasure post-
poned was pleasure lost. Taken as a whole, it was a glorious week.
She won the database unit, of course, as the outstanding student. The
professor made to shake her hand as he gave it to her, but she leaned for-
ward and naughtily kissed him on the mouth. The class applauded; they
knew that not only was it a cute gesture, it would give him several nights of
restless dreams. Her standard issue blouse had somehow managed to flash
interesting frontal curvature, just as her short skirt flashed fascinating nether
curvature as she sat. Other girls in class, observing her, had made open notes
on more than database techniques.
“It’s a nice unit,” Kermit remarked when they were alone. “Enough
storage to hold a small universe, yet small as a coin.” For the unit was a disk
that could be set on the tip of a finger without overlapping much. “Powered
by a mini-nuke.”
“A what?”
“A tiny nuclear power plant that will last indefinitely. This will never
need an external power source.”
“That’s nice,” Kerena agreed, understanding only that it was a desirable
feature.
“Fissionable, too.”
“Fishing?”
He smiled. “I love it when you tease me. Fission. That means it splits.”
He demonstrated by squeezing it correctly, so that it fell into two thinner
disks. “Entangled, of course. That means that whatever happens to one, hap-
pens also to the other. So you have instant automatic backup. That’s useful, if
you happen to mislay one.” He squeezed them back together.
Kerena had learned a prodigious amount about databasing, but had
somehow not picked up on this feature. She liked it.

But now their time together was coming to an end; the term was almost
done. “You know I—is there any chance—” he started, abruptly awkward.
He was more than smitten with her.
“I really do have to return to my own time,” she said.
“But can you visit? I’ll never forget you.”
Kerena considered. Why not? She liked him and this future; it would be
a nice safe place to relax on occasion. “When I can,” she promised.
They made love. Then Kerena addressed another matter. “I want to keep
this databose with me always, but I don’t want folk of my time to know. How
can I do that?”
“Easy. Hide it in plain sight where no one will see it.”
“Isn’t that an oxymoron?”
“Not at all. For example, if you wear it as a bauble at your bosom it will
be taken as jewelry to attract the eye, and the eye will immediately forget it in
favor of your divine breasts.”
That seemed to have merit. “But it’s recognizable as what it is, a data-
base.”
“A token computer,” he said. “That would hardly be noticed here, but if
there are no computers where you live, that could be a problem. Maybe you
could hide it inside an ornament.”
Kerena had an idea. She produced Morely’s Roman coin, which she had
kept for sentimental reason. “What about this?”
“Ideal! A replica of an ancient artifact. People wear those too.”
They worked on it, and managed to fasten the disk onto the back of the
coin so it didn’t show. The coin was attached to a thin chain around her
neck. Kerena opened her shirt and let it dangle down between her breasts.
“Thus?”
“Ideal!” he repeated, leaning down to kiss a breast. “I’ve forgotten it
already.”
Kerena had one more thing to do before she left this future. She wanted
to make her first relational database entry, to be sure the device was in order.
When she was by herself, she selected the introductory secret: her own. She
had never told anyone, and never wanted any to know, but she had been
horribly jealous of her lovely older sister Katherine, the magnet for men
when Kerena was nothing.
She touched the disk. The virtual screen and keyboard appeared before
her. She typed the verbal indexing component: Kerena—jealousy—Katherine.
Subject person, emotion, object person. The script appeared on the screen.
She checked it and saved it, closing it.
She summoned the image of her sister Katherine as she had been then,
lovely at age fifteen. Since then of course the girl had aged, borne children,
become a stout grandmother, and of course lost her youthful beauty. There

was no jealousy any more. But the fact that it had once existed remained
secret, and Kerena never wanted it known. With an act of will she trans-
ferred the image to the screen, where it appeared holographically, three di-
mensional. She saved the picture and closed it.
Then she focused on that emotion, putting herself back into it, feeling
the ugly feeling. The intangible essence of it appeared on the screen, a dusky
pattern of textures with muted fire hidden underground. She concentrated,
and it digested down into computer coding and saved it to the database.
Three aspects: description, image, feeling. Three databases that related
to define the whole. She had done it. She shut down the virtual computer.
Now to verify that she could summon it back at will. She reactivated the
virtual computer. “Kerena, jealousy, Katherine,” she murmured, touching
the disk.
The picture of her sister appeared, smiling as though alive. The feeling
returned, suffusing her. It had definitely been recorded. Her first entry was
complete.
Jolie, observing, was highly impressed. Nox was developing a formi-
dable tool for her office.
And you must never tell, Kerena thought to her. It is a trade secret that
must never be known by any other, lest the paradox of anachronism be in-
voked. Jolie had to agree.
She had gotten what she had come for. With this device she could record
every secret she encountered, and recover it when she chose. Because the
secrets would be indexed by any system she chose, she would be able to
locate them at need.
She made love to Kermit one more time, and so did Molly. Then she got
by herself and faded out of this scene, returning to her own time.

CHAPTER 10
NIOBE
Kerena did not return straight to the warren and her friends there. She
paused on the way to take stock. Because of the danger of anachronism, she
had to keep the database secret from all but Molly, who would never betray
her because of personal loyalty, and Jolie, who would not do it because it was
her mission to protect the timelines. Yet she had to be free to use it, or it
would be no good to her.
She also suffered from a peculiar unrest. Maybe it was merely the dislo-
cation of returning to her own time, but it seemed like more. There was
something she had to do, but she didn’t know what it was. She couldn’t rest
until she found out.
She slowed her backward travel and spied a lovely land around her.
This was Ireland, centuries after her own time.
She hovered, invisible, looking for a nice and private place to rest. She
was aware of forest, field, village, and lake. One region attracted her; it was
somehow compatible. She floated there and discovered a dense swamp with
a faint path leading to a huge water oak tree inhabited by a hamadryad, a
tree nymph. That seemed ideal.
But there was something else. There was a huge nexus of significance
associated with that spot. Kerena was drawn to it like a moth to a lamp.
What was so important about this isolated site and time?
She phased in to the small dry region by the trunk of the water oak,
becoming tangible.
“Oh!” It was a startled girl. Kerena, distracted by her awareness of the
larger import, had not noticed the pedestrian aspect: the person sitting by
the tree.
She would have to bluff through and depart. “I apologize for disturbing
you. I wasn’t looking where I was going.”
“You popped out of nowhere! And you have strange clothing.”
How could she explain either the popping or the futuristic dress? She

should have taken out the Cloak and used it to mask her presence. “I was
traveling in a different mode. I didn’t mean to intrude.”
“That’s all right,” the girl said, recovering. She was about Kerena’s physi-
cal age—fifteen—and startlingly beautiful. In fact she reminded Kerena of
her lovely sister at that age. She had honey colored hair and sky blue eyes,
fine features, and a body the shape of man’s desire.
And, Kerena realized with a shock, she was the focus of the signifi-
cance. This lovely creature was destined to change the world in some re-
markable fashion.
“Is something wrong?” the girl asked. “You are staring.”
Kerena hastily averted her gaze. “I apologize again, for being rude. There
is something about you that fascinates me.”
The girl laughed, like the music of a trickling brook. “I am nothing. But
you—you’re the prettiest girl I’ve ever seen. And you’re magic. Like the ha-
madryad.”
Kerena glanced up into the tree, spying the tree nymph, who nodded.
One magical creature knew another.
This threatened to get complicated. “I believe I should leave now,” Kerena
said.
The timelines fudged. Jolie stepped in, moving them back a few seconds.
“I hate it when she does that,” Molly said.
“I have no choice,” Jolie said to Kerena. “You were diverging.”
That brief dialogue was internal. Kerena spoke again, externally. “I am
magic,” she agreed. “But not like the dryad.” This time, to her surprise, there
was no timeline trouble. Was she supposed to tell this girl the truth?
“I’m surprised too,” Jolie said. “I’m sure you mustn’t tell her about me,
but maybe the rest aligns.”
“There’s something about you,” the girl said. “As if we are destined to
be good friends.”
“That is not possible,” Kerena said. And the boundaries fudged.
Jolie moved them back to try again. “Perhaps so,” Kerena said. “Yet I am
not free to tell you very much about myself.”
The lines fudged. What was this? Nox was supposed to be secret.
“I know,” Molly said. “You have to tell her—then make her forget. There
must be some reason.”
“Tell her only to make her forget? This is ridiculous!” But the the lines
fudged again.
“I don’t understand it either,” Jolie said. “But it may be so.”
“Well, I’ll try it,” Kerena said dubiously. And the timelines straightened
out.
Jolie took them back for another try.
“...destined to be good friends,” the girl was saying.

“Maybe we are,” Kerena agreed. “There is enormous significance asso-
ciated with you.”
The girl laughed again. “If you were a boy, I’d be suspicious of your
motive.”
Kerena joined the laugh. “I have had my own experiences with boys.
They have only three things in mind, and two of them are on my chest.”
“And the third under your skirt.” The girl smiled, and it was like sun-
shine in the glade. “I’m Niobe.”
“I’m Kerena.” They shook hands, then hugged; it seemed natural.
“Do you know, seeing you, I can begin to appreciate what the boys are
after,” Niobe said. “I don’t think I ever saw a prettier girl.”
“That’s because you must lack a good mirror. You’re the prettiest I’ve
seen.”
“Are you teasing me?”
“No.” Kerena glanced up into the tree. “I see you have befriended the
dryad. Ask her.”
Niobe turned to face the tree. “Come down, dryad, if you think it’s safe.”
The nymph of the tree came down. That impressed Kerena; dryads were
extremely shy of mortal folk; the girl had succeeded in befriending her. She
was their height, without clothes, and lovely in the manner only her kind
could be.
“Which of us is prettier?” Niobe asked. This wasn’t any competitive-
ness on her part, but genuine curiosity.
The nymph studied them. She shook her head and made gestures with
her hands.
“She says we aren’t comparable,” Niobe said. “Because I’m innocent,
and you’re—” She didn’t finish, flushing.
“I’m not innocent,” Kerena said. “True. I am very far from that, how-
ever I may look. Still, judging physically alone, she might reach a verdict.”
Niobe looked at the dryad. “Can you do that?” Kerena realized that the
girl’s naiveté enabled her to relate much better to the tree nymph than Kerena
herself could. The nymph did not hesitate to approach Niobe, but was po-
litely wary of Kerena. Ah, the precious innocence of youth.
The hamadryad considered. Then she gestured as if removing clothing.
Clear enough. Both Kerena and Niobe doffed their clothing and set it on
the ground. Kerena quietly lifted the chain from her neck and put the coin
with her clothing, not wanting it to attract attention. Then they stood beside
each other nude, for the nymph’s inspection.
The dryad shook her head. She gestured them both to stand on either
side of her before a clear pool of water at the base of the tree. They did so
and looked down into the water.
There were three virtually identical reflections. They were all visions of

man’s fondest desire. No wonder the nymph had been unable to choose.
“Call it a draw,” Kerena suggested as the nymph returned to her tree. “I
became perhaps the prettiest of my generation, and you are surely the pret-
tiest of yours.”
“Maybe that’s why we were attracted to each other,” Niobe said.
“I don’t think so. There was something drawing me here before I saw
you.” Kerena returned to her clothing and picked up her iridescent blouse.
She would have to hide that the moment she got home, as there was nothing
like it in her time. Interesting that her future clothing traveled with her, not
disappearing when she went before its time. Maybe that was another aspect
of the power of Night.
The coin slipped off and plunked into the dark water of the swamp,
drawing its chain behind it.
“Oh!” Kerena cried, dismayed. How could she have forgotten that! Her
invaluable database, the whole point of her travel into the future.
“What is it?” Niobe asked, alarmed by her outcry.
“I dropped a—a coin into the water. It is very precious to me. I must
find it.” Already she was plunging her hand into the murky water. Of course
she couldn’t tell the girl the real nature of the coin.
“Let me help.” Niobe came and put her hand in.
They searched desperately, but all they came up with were roots and
mud. The coin had found a horribly effective hiding place. What was she to
do?
“I fear it doesn’t want to be found,” Kerena said. “It may be avoiding
us.” Because she had let it go out of the immediate presence of Nox, and it
had become anachronistic in this setting. She had been so foolish!
“I know,” Niobe said. “The dryad can find it. She knows every part of
her tree, roots and all. The roots will tell her where.”
“And she’s magical,” Kerena agreed. She looked at the dryad. “Please—
can you do this?”
Now the dryad did hesitate. She gestured to Niobe.
“She says she would like to—to exchange favors.”
Kerena suffered a siege of caution. “Does she know my nature?” For it
was important that Niobe not know that.
“Yes. She says you are—I don’t know the word, but it seems like Knocks.
I must have it wrong.”
Nox. The hamadryad knew, all right. “What favor?” Kerena asked grimly.
“Her tree—she wants to know its future. She’s afraid some logger will
cut it down. I don’t see how anyone could know such a—”
“Done.” Kerena was desperate to keep the girl from catching on. But
she had to recover that database. The dryad’s wish to know the fate of her
tree was quite reasonable; that would be her fate too.

Kerena stood back, and the nymph came back down from the tree. She
went to the spot where the coin had fallen and reached into the water. Im-
mediately she brought up the chained coin. She gave it to Niobe and re-
treated back to the tree.
Niobe brought the coin to Kerena. “Can you do what she wants?”
Kerena accepted the precious disk and put the wet chain over her head
so that the coin came to rest again at her breast. She would not remove it
again. “Yes.”
Kerena stood beside the tree, touched its bark with a finger, and moved
into the future. She followed the tree to the present time as she knew it. Then
its outlines fuzzed. She knew why: this alternate timeline was not assured of
survival beyond that time. Only if it remained aligned with her own could it,
and therefore the tree, remain beyond danger.
She returned to the time she had left. “The future becomes uncertain,”
she announced. “But the tree remains for a century hence, and longer if this
world remains. No one cuts it down.”
The dryad looked greatly relieved. She knew Nox spoke the truth.
“That’s wonderful,” Niobe said. “But how could you know such a thing?”
This complication with the coin had lead to a complication with Niobe.
How could she safely explain her power? Maybe she could change the sub-
ject. “As I said before, there is something that drew me to you. I have special
abilities; surely you do too.”
“But I’m just an ordinary girl,” Niobe protested. “I’m not smart or well
educated, while I can see that you have extraordinary powers. My face is all
of my fortune.”
That seemed to be the case, essentially. Yet the tremendous aura of sig-
nificance surrounded her. There was certainly something about her. Kerena,
as Nox, could probably fathom it—but was that the right thing to do? Surely
not; it was not wise to interfere with a situation as potent as this. “I think I
need to be on my way.”
The lines fudged dramatically. You mustn’t do that, Jolie thought,
alarmed.
Even if I make her forget, this is dangerous, Kerena said.
Not as dangerous as breaking off now.
Well, she would try it, and stop when Jolie saw the lines diverging. Jolie
moved them back.
“But I’m just an ordinary girl,” Niobe protested.
“You are hardly that, Niobe.”
“Do you know something I don’t? Please tell me!”
Still no divergence. This was weird. “First I must tell you something of
myself,” Kerena said. “I am not of this time. I come from a past time—about
fourteen hundred years ago.”

“I don’t understand.” The girl was evidently too polite to call her un-
truthful or deranged.
“It’s not a thing I can prove directly. But I can demonstrate other things.
I do have some magic powers. I can turn invisible.” She did so, briefly. “I can
float in air.” She did so. “I can travel in time.”
“I am beginning to believe, Niobe said, amazed.
Still no divergence. So she went for the rest. “I am Nox, the Incarnation
of Night.”
“I didn’t know there was an Incarnation of Night!” But she saw the
hamadryad nodding.
“That’s not surprising. I am the keeper of secrets. I am returning to my
own time after a visit to the future of a hundred or more years from this
time.”
“You do know the future?”
“I know a future, or two. The future is not fixed.”
“Can you see my future? Oh, please tell me!”
Could she do that? Kerena realized she probably could.
But there were constraints. “If I tell you your future, that knowledge
will cause you to change it. Then what I tell you won’t be valid.”
“I don’t understand. Why should I change it? I just want to know, in
case there’s something bad.”
“She really is of ordinary intelligence,” Molly said in her head. “As I
was, before I had several decades without a body to think about things.”
“Suppose there is something bad,” Kerena said to Niobe. “What would
you do?”
“Why I would avoid it, of course.” Then she paused. “Oh, now I see.
That would change it, and everything might be different. Still, maybe not as
bad as it would have been.”
“But possibly worse. We toy with fate at our risk.”
“Still, I so much want to know. Even if it changes.”
And Kerena was quite curious too. Niobe seemed like a perfectly ordi-
nary girl, apart from her stunning beauty. What was the overwhelming sig-
nificance associated with her? So she compromised: “I also have power over
memories, because secrets are made from them. I can cause you to forget
what you learn here. So you may not be able to keep your knowledge.”
“Tell me, and if it seems I must not keep it, then take it away,” Niobe
said. “At least I’ll know it briefly.”
“Even your knowledge of my visit here may have to go, because that
could change your future too. You would know there was something, and
you would search for it.”
Niobe blanched, but nodded. “Do what you must do, Nox.”
Kerena traveled into the future, following Niobe’s individual timeline.

What she discovered astonished her. Niobe was destined to have more im-
pact on the future than anyone else except Kerena herself—and their fates
were indeed intertwined. No wonder she had felt the attraction.
Jolie, too, was amazed. Now she recognized this innocent girl as the
grandmother of Orlene, with whom she had seriously interacted. No won-
der there was significance here; this girl was in a manner the start of a
phenomenal series of developments. But it was no simple course; the skein
of life was almost hopelessly tangled. Which was of course why Jolie was
here to guide Kerena through the tangle. She did not hide her thoughts from
Kerena. Awed, Kerena returned to the glade.
“I have looked,” Kerena said.
“I saw you flicker.”
“I was traveling to your future. It is amazing and complicated, and there
is early tragedy. It might be kinder not to reveal it to you.”
“Oh, please, you must tell me!”
Kerena sighed inwardly. She had to do it. “I must drastically summarize,
because there is so much. You will live here uneventfully about five more
years, and become recognized as the loveliest woman of your generation.
Then you will be married against your will to a boy five years your junior.
He—”
“What?”
“That is only the beginning,” Kerena said grimly. “He turns out to be an
extremely smart, strong young man, and you do come to love him. But Satan
means to kill you, and your husband takes your place, dying in your stead, to
foil that evil plot. That breaks your heart. You give your baby son to his
father’s family and go on to become an Aspect of the Incarnation of Fate.
Clotho, who spins the Threads of Life.” Jolie had of course known Fate, but
had not properly tracked her mortal origins, as it were. Clotho had simply
been Clotho, learning and performing her office.
“An Incarnation!”
“Later you leave that office to marry a mortal man, your son’s cousin,
and bear him a daughter, whose daughter will die, then become the Incar-
nation of Good.” How straightforward it seemed, phrasing it that way! Niobe’s
granddaughter Orlene, a fine sensitive ghost and good friend to the ghost
that was Jolie, on her way to the miraculous destiny none of them had fore-
seen. “So you are to be the grandmother of God.”
“The grandmother of—” The girl couldn’t finish.
“God, or Good, too, is an office. They are all offices, except those that
have not been animated by people. In one way or another, you are to be
related to all the major Incarnations of Immortality.”
“I can’t believe this!”
“Perhaps I can show you some of it. I will take you on a spot tour of

some of your relatives, as seen from this one site. I think I can safely take you
there if I don’t try to move you physically. You won’t be able to speak to them
or affect them, but you will see them briefly.”
Niobe simply stared at her.
“Take my hand,” Kerena said firmly. “Traveling will seem strange, but
you can not be harmed because you will not really be there. Only your spirit
will see.”
Awed, Niobe took her hand.
Kerena phased them both out and moved forward, tracing Niobe’s life
as she had done before, except that she remained by the water oak tree. That
was a blur, as Niobe’s visits to the tree were brief, until Kerena stopped to
show an episode at its normal pace. Then they could both see the Niobe of
the future, stunningly beautiful.
Thus they saw this same glade, anchored by the great tree, where a
handsome and powerful young man took Niobe’s hand and sang to her. “That
is Cedric Kaftan, your husband, a very fine young man who loves you abso-
lutely.”
“But you say he dies!”
“To save you. What finer love can there be?”
A tear formed in Niobe’s eye. “I can’t let him sacrifice himself for me.”
“That’s why you must forget. Your future must be as it is fated to be, or
your universe may suffer horrendously.”
They moved on, and paused again as Niobe brought a boy baby and left
him by the tree. “What is she doing!” Niobe demanded. “She can’t leave him
alone there!”
But then they saw how the dryad came down from her perch in the tree
and took care of the little boy. “The nymph can’t have children of her own,”
Kerena explained. “That is a price of her near immortality and youth. But
she loves children, and will approach them and help them while mortal
adults remain clear. She is teaching him magic. He is destined to become a
great Magician.”
Indeed, they saw how the child was gleefully learning magic tricks the
dryad showed him. It was a highly compatible association.
They moved farther forward. Kerena stopped when two little girls vis-
ited with the dryad, also learning magic. “The one with buckwheat-honey
hair is Orb, your daughter by your second husband. The one with clover-
honey hair is Luna, your granddaughter by another man, Cedric.”
“But they look like twins!”
“They are nevertheless more like cousins, once removed. It is a compli-
cated relationship. Later in life you found love again, but that was about
forty years later, with Cedric’s younger cousin. The two girls were born only
days apart, and you took care of them both.”

“I see,” Niobe agreed, seeing herself come in due course to take them
home. “But forty years? I look twenty!”
“Twenty three. You didn’t age while you were an Incarnation. But now,
as a renewed mortal, you age normally again.” That was another key to Jolie’s
initial nonrecognition: she remembered Niobe as the middle-aged Aspect of
Fate, Lachesis, her once phenomenal figure lost.
They watched other visits to the tree, as the girls grew and leaned, and
Niobe aged. She gradually became a middle aged woman, a bit heavyset, no
longer lovely. “Oh, I wish I had stayed in shape!”
“That is hard to do, when you are mortal. Once the girls went out on
their own, you return to become the second Aspect of Fate, Lachesis, who
measures the threads of life. As far as I know, you are the only one ever to
have occupied two such offices.”
“What did I do after that?”
“Nothing. You remain Lachesis in my time.”
Niobe thought about that. “Are we friends, then?”
“We can be,” Kerena said. “I haven’t gotten there yet.”
“Let’s be friends then.”
“But I must take away your memory now, so that none of this well be
changed.”
“Will you restore it, then?”
Kerena was taken aback. Would that be possible, most of a century later?
Why not, if she saved them? “But by then you will know all this, from living
it.”
“My memory of this meeting.”
Ah. “Yes, if I can. If I can’t, I will tell you about it, so you’ll know.”
“Thank you.”
Kerena glanced at the hamadryad. “You will not tell?”
The nymph shook her head, agreeing not to tell.
Kerena touched Niobe and drew out her memory of this occasion. Then,
before the girl could see her again, she resumed her travel into the past.
“But if she has no memory of it,” Molly asked as they traveled, “Why
was it so important for you to talk with her?”
“I wish I knew,” Kerena said.
Jolie didn’t know either. The contact with young Niobe had been a phe-
nomenal revelation to them all, but in terms of her mission, what was the
point? Why had Kerena been drawn to that site at that time? Why had the
lines of alignment faltered only when she tried to avoid it? Evidently it was a
necessary thing, but it seemed to make no sense.
“And you never did get to settle down to think things through,” Molly
said.
“I think I no longer need to. Now I know that this whole business is

more complicated than I had imagined. That provides perspective.”
Could that be the reason, Jolie wondered. Somehow she doubted it. Per-
spective could be gained in simpler, less risky ways.
They returned to the warren. Kerena meant to make it an instant after
she left for her future venture, but found herself balked. She was unable to
settle into normal mode until two weeks after her departure.
“How was it?” Morely asked as they made love.
“Tell us everything,” Vanja said as she watched.
Kerena did. “But I don’t understand why I couldn’t return to a time of
my choosing. I did when I traveled into the past.”
“I have no problem with that,” Morely said. “You traveled only spiritu-
ally into the past, but physically into the future. You actually lived those two
weeks. So your sundial was moving, as it were. It’s the same as if you had
visited London for two weeks.”
“But when I sought the Incarnations, I returned thirty years later.”
“Then you visited purgatory, and interacted with supernatural beings
whose time-scales aren’t fully of this world. Now that you are an Incarna-
tion yourself, you control your own time. You probably won’t suffer any
more such lapses unless you choose to.”
It made sense when he analyzed it. “Thank you.”
“Always glad to be of service,” he said, smiling with the pun as he com-
pleted his act with her.
“Will you show us the device from the science future?” Vanja asked.
Kerena lifted the coin and touched the disk embedded in it. The screen
appeared in the air between them. She realized that it had another nice fea-
ture: it could be read from the other side as well as her side. Her sister’s
lovely face appeared on it. “My first entry,” Kerena explained. “My secret
jealousy of my older sister’s beauty.”
“But you are lovelier than she,” Vanja said.
“It seems I became so,” Kerena agreed. “All I needed was time to ma-
ture, and the love of a good man.” She kissed Morely. “But that secret feeling
remained. Now all I have to do is fathom and record the secrets of everyone
else in the world.”
“Why?” Vanja asked.
“Because that is what Nox does: keeps the secrets. That will be the basis
of my power.”
“Naturally our secrets will be your next entries,” Morely said. “Can you
fathom them?”
Kerena focused on him, exerting her newfound power. “Hoo!” she ex-
claimed.
“Why do I suspect you are not bluffing?” Morely asked, evidently in-
trigued.

“Because your Seeing knows I have it.”
Vanja’s eyes glittered. “Tell us what he never told me.”
“When he was a boy of ten, his family had to travel briefly without him,
so they left him in the care of a neighbor. She was a handsome woman, and
he had a secret crush on her. He had never spoken of it to anyone, for fear of
ridicule, but he longed to possess her to the extent he was able. When it got
cold at night she kept him warm in the normal manner by sharing her blan-
ket and body heat with him, holding him close. Her bare breasts against him
were marvelously soft and exciting. Then when she slept he got his groin
close to hers and managed to wedge his stiffened member into her warm
damp cleft. There was no fluid from him, but he had a glorious sensation
and possible climax. Thus he had his will of her. She never knew, and of
course he never told; she would have been appalled by such abuse of her
hospitality. It was his deepest secret.”
“And I trust you will keep that secret,” Morely said tightly. “It has been
a lifetime, and she may no longer live, but I would not have it known what I
did.”
“It was no secret from her,” Vanja said. “She knew.”
“How can you be sure of that?”
“The same way I know when you have your will of me as I sleep,” she
told him. “A woman does. Your crush would have been as subtle as dog poop
on your foot. She surely liked you, and was intrigued to see whether you
could manage it. But she had to pretend oblivion, lest she be charged with
molesting a child.”
“She wanted it,” Morely breathed, realizing. “That’s why she shared
her blanket with me; she could have made me sleep alone and shivering. Oh,
those breasts! Her man had died; she must have missed his embrace.”
“So she clasped you close, pillowed your head with her conducive bo-
som, and feigned sleep, giving you leave. She kept her legs a little apart so as
to promote access. She was gratified by her evident sexual power over you.
But she surely never told.”
“Surely not,” he agreed. “All this time I thought it was my secret alone.”
“And now it is mine,” Kerena said, classifying it and putting picture and
feeling into the database.
“Now fathom Vanja’s secret,” Morely said, licking his lips.
“There is no need,” Vanja said quickly.
“Yes there is. You heard mine; it’s your turn.”
“Damn.” But the woman remained still as Kerena oriented on her.
“Her older brother forced her into sex, but that isn’t really her secret,”
Kerena said. “She didn’t like it because it hurt, and hated him, but didn’t tell
lest he beat her up worse. Then when they were out picking berries, the
pickings were small, so they ranged into unfamiliar territory. He slipped and

fell into an old well; she heard the splash. The sides were slippery and he
couldn’t climb out. But instead of going for help, she hauled branches to
cover the hole, concealing it, then went home and pretended she had been
sleeping. They never found him, having no idea where to look. She got away
with murder.”
Vanja cringed, awaiting Morely’s reaction.
“He molested you?” Morely asked.
“Almost daily,” she said. “It was easier to let him do it than try to fight
him. I learned to moisten my cleft with balm so it wouldn’t hurt so much.”
“Then it wasn’t murder so much as retribution. He brought it on him-
self.”
“You believe that? You don’t hate me for it?”
“Yes. You did what you had to do.”
“What a relief!” Vanja moved into him, pushing him down, and they
were promptly into sex while Kerena recorded the secret.
“But how are you going to proceed?” Morely inquired when Vanja let
him up. “Even if you read a secret every minute, there are too many people
to interview. You’ll never catch up, and meanwhile more are being born and
old ones dying.”
“I hadn’t thought of that.” Kerena considered. “I surely have the power
to achieve it, if I can figure out how to use it.”
“There need to be many of you,” Vanja said, smiling.
“Now that may be feasible,” Morely said. “Do the powers of Night in-
clude multiplying yourself?”
Kerena investigated. Then she split into three copies of herself. “Yes,”
the three said together.
Morely was not really surprised. “But can they act independently?”
The three pondered a moment. Then the one on the right went to Morely,
the one of the left to Vanja, and the middle one with the coin at her chest
spoke. “Yes.” The right one kissed Morely, and the left one hugged Vanja. All
three were solid and conscious.
Jolie was not reproduced. She remained with the middle figure, the one
with the coin. That had to be the original Nox. Just as well; she wasn’t sure
she wanted to be constantly duplicated. It might have a confusing effect on
her identity.
“Me too,” Molly agreed. She had remained single as well, as far as they
knew.
“And can you then recombine,” Morely inquired, “so the landscape isn’t
littered with sexy girls?”
The three walked together and merged into one. “Yes.”
Now Jolie was aware of the perspectives of the other two selves. It was
as if the original self had done three slightly different things in turn. It might

have been confusing, but wasn’t. This also verified that there had been no
Jolie or Molly copies made. It was strictly Nox.
“So you can split into as many copies as required to get the job done,”
Morely said, satisfied. “And one of them can remain with me to make per-
petual love.”
“Hey!” Vanja said. “What of me?”
“Correction,” he said equably. “Two for us, the other to make love with
Vanja.”
They dissolved into laughter, pretending not to remember that Kerena
and Vanja did make love often enough. It was fun discovering her powers.
“But one thing nags me,” Kerena said. “Why did I have to tell the girl Niobe
everything, then erase her memory so that her course was unchanged? What
sense does that make?”
Morely nodded. “I agree that the rationale is elusive. The Incarnation of
Good is said to be omniscient; maybe you should ask him.”
“God? He refused to answer me before. That’s why I want to get him
replaced. I want them all replaced.”
“Vengeance,” Vanja said approvingly.
“But then you were mortal,” Morely said. “Now you are an Incarnation
yourself. You should be able to compel a response.”
Kerena nodded. “Maybe so. I’ll try for God again.” She phased down
and moved toward Mount Ararat.
She stopped there and extended her Seeing, tuning into the Incarnation
of Good. As before, there was no response. But this time she brought the
powers of Night. Answer me, God, or I will tell your secret to the world: that
you are hopelessly tuned out. She was not bluffing. She had the power to
reveal secrets as well as fathom them.
A shining handsome male figure appeared before her. “A greeting, Nox.”
She focused her Seeing. “And to you, Angel Gabriel.”
Molly was amazed. “What’s he doing here?”
Jolie wondered too. She hadn’t known that Gabriel existed this far back.
“I was created to handle the routine business of Good, Ladies,” Gabriel
answered. “So that the Incarnation need not be bothered with trivia. I have
existed since God was formed as a separate entity from Chaos.”
It seemed that Kerena did have as much of God’s attention as was avail-
able. “Then perhaps you will do. I wish to talk.”
“Of course.” Gabriel gazed at her directly, and she felt the impact of his
scrutiny. “You are a remarkably esthetic woman.”
Kerena smiled. So he was a typical male in at least one respect. She
knew exactly how to play on that. “I was preserved at my age of blooming. I
presume you were created according to the template for the ideal man.”
“True, in every respect.”

Well, now. Kerena was experienced in recognizing male interest, and
he was confirming it. Sex was not something promoted in Heaven. “I know a
private place not associated with your business.”
“That would be appreciated.”
“This way.” She phased down and led the way rapidly back to the war-
ren. When there, she split into two, and her second self went to locate Morely
or Vanja and ask them to protect the privacy of their chamber for an hour.
Meanwhile Kerena stripped away her futuristic clothing.
Gabriel’s robe faded out, leaving him gloriously naked. He was well
endowed and perfectly proportioned. They came together, and there followed
a considerable sexual session. His member had the property of conveying
intense delight by its internal contact, enhancing her pleasure of the occa-
sion. He was very soon aware of her matching desire, and not at all turned
off by it.
After several rounds, as it were, they lay beside each other, sated for the
moment. “That’s the best I’ve had in a century,” he said, speaking literally.
“I confess to taking a certain pride in my sexual expertise,” she said. “So
many secrets concern sex, that I need to understand its nuances well.”
“Heaven is, in this respect, sterile. I dislike slumming, but the women of
Heaven are not interested in carnal activity. They prefer to assume the like-
nesses of their most esthetic youth, but also affect complete innocence about
the erotic appeal of such fine bodies. At times it causes me to envy the atten-
tion of the smoldering damsels of Hell, who have no such diffidence. Yet I
distrust demonesses for obvious reason. So I have to mask myself and take
up with unknowing but willing mortal girls. I have to hide the full nature of
my ardor, lest they be overwhelmed. It’s a nuisance, especially since news of
it would not be well received in Heaven.”
“Fortunately I will never go to Heaven,” Kerena said. “But what of the
female Incarnations?”
“Only Clotho, the youngest Aspect of Fate, is appealing in this respect,
and her interest in such liaisons is slight.”
“My interest is considerable, and I can be discreet.” It was an offer.
“I am at your disposal.” Accepted. They would meet for future liaisons,
unadvertised. Kerena’s early experience with brothel clients was serving her
well; she had excellent universal currency, as it were.
“I am new to my position, and seem to have much to learn. I would
appreciate a source of private advice.”
“I am not omniscient, but do know a fair amount.”
“I had contact with a woman named Niobe.”
“I am not familiar with that name. But there are so many names I lose
track.”
“She exists about fourteen hundred years hence.”

“That would explain it. I do not travel in time.”
She had not anticipated this complication. How could Gabriel know the
answer she craved? But she gave it a try. “I do, on occasion, backward and
forward. The past is fixed, but the future has many alternates. I call them
timelines. I discovered that I needed to examine her future, and tell her of it,
then erase her memory of it, so as not to cause her to change that future.
What mystifies me is why I had to do that, instead of simply leaving her
alone.”
“This woman has significant effect on her timeline?” He was quick to
pick up the terminology.
“Extremely.”
“Have you considered that the point of the exercise was less for her
than for you?”
“For me? How so?”
“To fix her identity and nature in your mind. Her memory was cleared,
but yours remains. You need to be sure not to mistake her, at such time as
you contact her again.”
“My memory,” Kerena said, seeing it. “It affects me, not her. Yet I am
not sure how.”
“Or perhaps it is my memory that counts, in this case,” Gabriel said.
“There may be an occasion when I need to know that her import is critical. I
would not know it, except for your travel in time and your report to me.”
“How would you affect her?”
“I do not know, but perhaps I will recognize the occasion when it comes.
It is clear that she is an essential link in your ghost’s alignment to the timelines,
so as to save this one from destruction. I will not forget.”
Jolie jumped, in her fashion. She knew Gabriel had been aware of her,
but not that he had read her full mission. No wonder he caught on so readily.
Fortunately he had no objection to her role.
Kerena extended her Seeing, and found confirmation. It was Gabriel’s
memory that counted. “This seems to be true. Thus you have after all ex-
plained the mystery.”
“I am happy to have done so. It is a pleasure assisting so lovely and
circumspect a lady.”
It was a hint she responded to immediately, for the pleasure was mu-
tual. They had another bout of quite rewarding sex.
Then they talked again. “It occurs to me that we could do each other
some good, apart from private pleasure,” Kerena said. “I can use advice, as I
mentioned, and perhaps I have something to offer in exchange.”
He frowned. “I assumed this liaison was for mutual satisfaction without
onus.”
“It was. I have something else in mind. Do you know what a database

is?”
“No.”
“It is a mechanical or electrical file of information. For example, I am
collecting secrets of all living people and storing them in my database.”
“You are storing all secrets?”
“It is my business,” she reminded him gently.
“There are times when it would be helpful to know secrets, especially
when processing in new souls for Heaven. They tend to try to hide things
that count against them.”
“That was my thought. I can provide you with a copy of all secrets.”
He laughed. “I would have no way to keep track of them.”
“Let me tell you more about the nature and operation of the database.”
She did, eliciting his considerable interest. Then she split apart the facets of
her disk. “These two are entangled; whatever is in one, is also in the other.
You will have all my secrets, as they are recorded.”
“I would need instruction how to use it.”
“I will give you that, until you are competent.”
He nodded. “And for this you desire—?”
“Your continuing good will and advice, for the next fifteen centuries.”
For this was an extremely intelligent and knowledgeable male, in a position
of considerable importance. For her purpose, quite possibly better than God
Himself.
“We would maintain our liaisons for that time?”
“Of course. They would perhaps be the pretext for our meetings.”
“I am completely at your service, in any manner that does not interfere
with the performance of my duties.”
“You have a staff of angels, I presume.”
“Yes, and growing as the population of Heaven grows.”
“You therefore have expertise in personnel management.”
“To be sure. But I doubt you need a staff, as you are not managing people
or souls.”
“I will have, not a staff, but copies of myself, perhaps in great number.
I am not entirely sure how to organize them.”
“Copies of yourself?”
Kerena split into four selves. “In this manner,” the one with the coin
said, while three went to kiss and stroke Gabriel. They were perfectly coordi-
nated. This led to another sexual episode that clearly amazed and delighted
him. Kerena was intrigued herself; this had been a spur of the moment no-
tion, and she liked it.
Once that was done, Gabriel gave her basic rules of organization and
dispersal, so that she could make most efficient use of her selves. He did
indeed have expertise, and she appreciated it. It would enable her to fetch in

secrets efficiently, and record them without confusion.
She gave him the other half of the database. Later this was to become
known as the marvelous and amazingly informed Purgatory Computer. The
secret of its origin was kept throughout.
And the fate of the sweet pretty girl Niobe was secure. Kerena was espe-
cially glad of that, and not merely because it meant the likely salvation of
this universe.

CHAPTER 11
INCARNATIONS
Nox split into several thousand selves and went out to fathom all the key
secrets of the population. She organized the selves according to the advice
Gabriel gave, and developed a technique of recording data in the database so
that one secret was entered every second, day and night. Even so, the job took
thirty years full time, before they caught up to every living person. Then they
were able to relax, merely keeping up with the new secrets that incoming
people had, while focusing on the secrets of Nature and the other Incarna-
tions. That promised to keep them busy for further decades. Everything was
open to Night, though Kerena tried to see that other Incarnations did not
realize what she was up to. Her power lay in knowing what they did not.
Meanwhile she maintained relations with several males, including
Morely in the warren, Kermit in the future, and Gabriel. Morely she loved,
Kermit was cute and sweet, and Gabriel was lustily appreciative. She let Molly
take over the body sometimes, as the men liked the variety. Molly especially
liked Kermit, and did her best to make him happy. Morely was good for
intellectual discussion, between bouts, and Gabriel had tremendous practi-
cal expertise to share. Overall, her social life was satisfactory. Except that she
missed the afreet: the supremely masculine anonymous lover who had come
to her only twice, and thrilled her like no other. She loved Morely, and had
loved Sir Gawain, and she liked the others, but somehow the demon lover
was supreme in her sexual fancy. Molly didn’t like him, and Jolie didn’t trust
him, but since when did liking or trusting matter when it came to pure lust?
He was the one she dreamed of. If only he would come to her more often.
Every so often some trivial detail caused the timelines to diverge, and
Jolie put her back on track. Once, curious, Kerena checked the alternate fu-
ture, and verified that it led surprisingly quickly to the destruction of the
world by the collision of a meteor. How an unfortunate spoken word caused
that to happen was beyond them to comprehend, but it was so.
Morely, who continued his astronomical studies, offered the most likely

explanation: “The divergence is not merely of actions or people, or even of
worlds, but of universes as we are slowly coming to understand them. Each
is its own separate reality. In some universes things are different from ours.
In some there are devastating collisions. This is one of those alternates.”
Neither Kerena nor Molly could quite grasp that concept, but Jolie, who
had seen more of alternate universes, almost did. It wasn’t cause and effect
so much as shifting to the wrong cosmos. At any rate, it confirmed the need
to keep the timelines aligned. Disaster otherwise lurked.
Kerena had two overriding imperatives: to achieve vengeance against
the Incarnations who had refused to help her, and to cure her son Gawain,
of whatever generation, of the psychic malady she had inadvertently given
him. Unfortunately she found she was unable to act on either objective di-
rectly; as Nox she fathomed and kept all secrets, but she could not do any-
thing about them herself. The powers of her office came with limitations.
She had to act through others, thus protecting knowledge of her hand in
events. She wasn’t a ghost, yet her impact was ghostlike. That complicated
her projects.
She tackled vengeance first. She examined countless futures, employing
selves that were no longer needed to fathom secrets, and located one that
would accomplish the most with the least continuing effort on her part. Then
she summoned the Demoness Lilah.
“No one summons me,” Lilah protested as she materialized. “I come
simply because I am curious what’s on your half-mortal mind.”
“I have located a nexus where you can betray another important man
and have enormous impact on subsequent worldly affairs.”
“I am interested, of course. It has been some time since Samson, and I
miss the action. What do you demand for this information?”
“I have no demand. You owe me for your demon substance; this will
expiate that debt.”
“There’s got to be a catch. Why should you show me a delightful situa-
tion and call it expiation?”
“Because it serves my purpose.”
“Still—”
“I want you to go to work for the Incarnation of Evil.”
“To serve Lucifer? I don’t want to be locked in Hell.”
“As an assistant and mistress. He has just had a housecleaning, as it
were, and is in need of new personnel he can trust.”
“But he can’t trust me.”
“Need he know that?”
Lilah considered. “If you don’t tell, I won’t.”
Kerena smiled. “Go fascinate him, bitch.”
Lilah vanished. Kerena followed her career over the course of the next

six centuries. She served Lucifer loyally as a thoroughly sexual creature, until
he sent her to corrupt a mortal cleric named Parry in the year 1242, which
she did most effectively.
“Parry!” Jolie exclaimed. “My love!”
“You’ve been dead 34 years,” Kerena reminded her.
“He’s still my love, in this world as well as my own. I hate seeing that
slutty creature mess him up.” Yet of course it was necessary to maintain the
alignment. She had to watch while Lilah used her chaos-enhanced body and
powers to tempt him to distraction. This was almost as painful as watching
her own brief life and love and death, and she tried to tune out of it. This was
not her story, but Kerena’s.
Parry fought valiantly, trying to deny the impact of her super-seductive
body and manner, but Lilah nailed him: “Every lie you tell, brings you closer
to Hell.” It was inevitable that he succumb; she had too much expertise and
sex appeal. A man was helpless before a woman’s apt appeal to his gonads.
But that was hardly the whole of the story. After corrupting Parry, Lilah
fell in love with him, to her chagrin, and finally betrayed Lucifer and helped
Parry take over as the Incarnation of Evil, now called Satan. Thereafter she
served Satan loyally, in her fashion.
Kerena smiled grimly. One Incarnation down. Not just any one, but the
one who would be treated despicably by the other Incarnations, and swear
vengeance against them, exactly as Kerena had. And Parry could act more
directly than she could to accomplish his purpose.
Initially he tried to be forthright, as she learned from Gabriel at a subse-
quent tryst. He went to talk with the Angel about replacing God. They finally
made a deal: if Satan could corrupt a particular mortal person, or that person’s
child or grandchild, Satan would win. Otherwise he would give up his cam-
paign to take power.
“Agreed,” Parry said at last. “Tell me the name.”
“Niobe Kaftan.” Who would not come into existence until five centu-
ries later. Gabriel, prompted by Nox, had delivered, in the process outsmart-
ing the father of lies.
“Thank you, Angel,” Kerena told him.
“Well, it does give me five centuries of relative peace.”
“As if this realm can ever be truly peaceful.”
“I suspect—this is a secret—that God finally got tired of the constant
bickering that passes for human social relations, and tuned out in disgust.”
“I can’t blame Him,” she said, surprised to discover that it was true. She
was long since disgusted with the cheap selfishness that passed for the aver-
age person’s secrets.
The five centuries passed quickly enough, punctuated by a few memo-
rable events. Kerena still collected the secrets of mortals and filed them in

the database, which both Gabriel and Parry found useful when assessing the
merit of souls entering Heaven or Hell. She still formed multiple selves at
need, and contracted them when the need passed. Each self was individual,
but generally aware of the others; they shared a common consciousness.
There was no confusion when they formed, and no regret when they merged;
they were all her, and she was all of them.
In the course of that time, the girl grew into the role, and became all
that Nox could be. She left Jolie’s comprehension far behind; the ghost was
now like a gnat riding the shoulder of a giant. But she retained the one thing
Kerena lacked: awareness of the alignment of timelines.
The afreet came every year or so, always a delight, but she couldn’t
wheedle any real information from him. Neither did she tell him of Jolie
despite his efforts to get her to reveal her secret. He clearly suspected some-
thing but couldn’t prove it. Meanwhile the sex was phenomenal.
An oddity about that was that he didn’t seem surprised about her change
of status, the first time he visited after her ascension. He understood that she
had become Nox, the Incarnation of Night, but it made no difference to him.
He was not at all awed. In fact he seemed to take it for granted. “I have been
enjoying you for millennia,” he said.
“But I have lived only a century or so,” she protested.
“And that makes you better yet. There is now a firmness about you that
I missed before.”
“He was having sex with Nox before you came!” Molly said when they
were alone, amazed. “He’s some afreet. I don’t trust him at all.”
Neither did Jolie. But the mysterious male was part of Kerena’s life.
Every so often the timelines tried to diverge, but Jolie put them back into
alignment. It was surprising how readily they could change, in trifling ways
that nevertheless led to ultimate disaster. It was almost as if this reality wanted
to be doomed, a curious notion.
Then, abruptly, shockingly, Morely was gone. That was only part of it;
the entire warren had been wiped out. Kerena returned from a tryst to dis-
cover Vanja gazing at the ruin in grief. “I was delayed returning,” she said.
“And found this.”
The warren had been destroyed. The entrance was rubble. The vam-
pires were not trapped inside; their bodies were hung on the branches of
trees, horribly mutilated. Superstition had it that a vampire had to be killed
by burying it with a stake through its heart; the fact was that simple hacking
apart would do it, and it had been done.
Kerena traveled back in time to discover what had happened. A villager
out hunting had discovered the entrance, and lurked, watching. He had seen
the vampires come and go, and had recognized their nature. The villagers
had organized and struck in force at noon, when the vampires were in their

chambers. They had charged inside with torches and knives, blinding and
slashing the occupants, driving or dragging them out. Then they had used
explosives to collapse the warren. It was a disciplined slaughter, well planned
and executed.
“Why do they hate us?” Vanja asked. “We never hurt them.”
“Superstition,” Kerena said. “They hate what they don’t understand,
and they don’t want to understand.” She was choking with grief too. She had
loved Morely for centuries.
She took Vanja to a private apartment she maintained for convenience,
and arranged for a new identity for her. As Nox she had ways to do such
minor things. Vanja was her one remaining living or half-living friend from
her original time.
Once Kerena had handled the necessary details, she retreated to a pri-
vate place and suffered. Morely, who had first recognized her Seeing, similar
to his own. Morely, the early astronomer and chemist. The one who had
taught her to think rationally. Who had taught her sex. Who had always
been there for her intellectual considerations. How could she exist without
him?
She wept for perhaps a week, and in that time the gathering of secrets
did not proceed, for she did not divide into other selves. All of them would
have been as grief-stricken as the original. She mourned him with abandon,
caring for nothing else. Molly and Jolie stayed out of it; they had had griefs
of their own, and knew there was no amelioration but time.
Slowly her grief shifted to something else: anger. Those ignorant villag-
ers had destroyed one who had never done them harm. Why should they be
allowed to live when they had killed him? They should be made to pay.
“Kerena,” Molly said. “I don’t think it’s my place to object, but—”
“Then don’t!” Kerena snapped.
Jolie stayed out of this too, because the timelines were not fudging.
Whatever was to happen, was to happen. She had to let it be. But it promised
to be ugly.
For the first time Kerena used her power as Nox for personal vengeance.
She went to the village by night, divided into more than a hundred selves,
and visited each sleeping person. She put the knowledge of another person’s
secret into the dream of each, firmly enough to be remembered on waking.
Then she settled back to watch. Her indirection was about to become sav-
agely direct, through the actions of the dreamers.
A mother learned that her brother had been sexually abusing her daugh-
ter. A man learned that his son had been torturing small animals. A woman
learned that her diffident lover was homosexual. A poor man learned that
his cousin had cheated him of his inheritance. A rich man learned that his
wife was plotting to poison him. A woman learned that her married lover

was also having sex with her sister and her best friend. A grandfather learned
that neither his grandson nor his son were his own; he had been cuckolded
throughout.
There was a kind of pause when day came, as the villagers pondered
the dirty secrets that had come to them. They knew they were true, because
Nox had instilled absolute belief—and because they were true. They ques-
tioned, they verified, they reacted. Then the mayhem commenced.
On the first day several villagers committed suicide when they found
their guilty secrets exposed. Several more were killed in crimes of passion.
Others were so severely shamed they had to leave the village, never to return.
On the second day the retaliations began, for the outrages of the first day.
Day by day the carnage continued, until the village was but a hollow shadow
of its former self.
Yet somehow vengeance didn’t feel sweet. Like the urgency of sex, it
seemed less reasonable once satisfied.
“I think it is time for me to be moving on,” Molly said. Kerena knew that
the siege of ugliness had turned her off, though she was too polite to say so
directly.
There was nothing for Kerena to do but oblige her friend’s wish to be
separate from her. It was part of her own punishment for misusing her power.
She resolved never to do that again. She still missed Morely, but recognized
too late that this was not the way to honor his memory. It had not brought
her relief, and had cost her a friend.
Then she found a situation for Molly. A handsome young woman in the
Irish city of Dublin had lost her mind and would soon die if not helped. She
was a fishmonger, selling cockles and mussels in the street from her wooden
wheelbarrow. It was dull, dingy work, but it paid her way.
Molly took over the vacant body, restored to life. “But you know my
curse will catch up with me,” she reminded Kerena.
“But maybe not for years. Meanwhile you will have life, and so will a
body that would otherwise have died much sooner.”
By day Molly the fishmonger wheeled her wheelbarrow through the
streets of the city, crying out her wares for sale. But by night she reverted to
her own early trade, becoming a pricey courtesan and making a lot more
money. She reveled in it, knowing she was good at it.
But after a decade the curse did catch up, and she was brutally mur-
dered. Kerena, attuned, came immediately to claim her soul, and she re-
turned as the ghost companion she had been. She was philosophic about it,
and appreciated the years of renewed life she had been granted.
But her story wasn’t over. The officials of the city, appalled by the double
life revealed and embarrassed because a number of them had been Molly’s
nocturnal patrons, did their best to erase all evidence of her existence. They

pretended she had never existed, and that even the legend of her double life
was fake. “As if there could ever be a fake legend!” Kerena said, laughing.
Indeed, the common folk remembered, and the legend refused to fade. It
even became a song.
Then the American-Irish city of Kilvarough, seeking tokens of authen-
ticity, offered Molly a position there, as a ghost. It wasn’t a perfect spell,
because Molly could truly interact only with those who were approaching
death. But it was better than nothing, and had its own recognition. Kerena
visited her on occasion, and she was satisfied.
Thereafter the afreet had disturbing news. “I have studied you, Nox,
and discovered something. Your reality is not constant. It deviates from its
proper course.”
“I don’t understand,” Kerena said. Of course she understood the truth
of his observation perfectly; what she didn’t understand was how he could
know of this. Would he finally tell her?
“I have made something of a study of the timelines,” he said. “There are
many of them, each traveling its destined course. But yours is unnatural; it
shifts into alternates. Do you have any idea why?”
Kerena was sure she did not want him to know the truth. He was a great
lover, but she had no notion of his ultimate nature or aims. Her Seeing did
not help her in this respect; his background was a frustrating secret from
her. So she played the innocent. “What is a timeline? Is it like a row of clocks?
I don’t believe I have seen anything like that.”
His mouth smiled, but his eyes smiled not at all. “You are the mistress of
secrets, of course, and you are keeping them well. I am sorry that you do not
trust me enough to tell me the truth.”
Jolie was outraged. This ultimately secretive entity expected to be trusted?
Sheer hubris!
“I don’t know who you are!” Kerena flared. “You have never even given
me a name, let along revealed your true nature. How can I trust you?”
“Perhaps in time.” He faded out. She tried to use her Seeing to track his
essence, but he was totally gone.
“The afreet is more than he seems,” Jolie said. “He knows I am adjusting
the timelines to make this one conform to mine. But I don’t fathom his mo-
tive. Does he know what happens to the timelines that don’t conform?”
“I don’t know,” Kerena said. “He’s such a great lover that I have been
hesitant to challenge him, but the fact that he takes Nox in stride makes me
nervous. Who or what could do that?”
“An Incarnation,” Jolie said. “An angel. A demon. A ghost.”
“He is none of these, as far as I can tell. He’s not an afreet, either; I’m
sure of that now.”
“So am I,” Jolie said.

Kerena continued to watch, and saw the woman Niobe come on the
scene. Now was coming the time of the changing of Incarnations. But she
remained clear of Niobe, not interfering with her at all. She had done enough
of that five centuries before, via Gabriel.
In 1917 Niobe gave her baby boy into the care of her dead husband’s
brother’s family and became Clotho, an Aspect of Fate. Actually the three
Offices of Fate had already changed in the interim, so that aspect of Kerena’s
vengeance had already been accomplished. In any event, she was no longer
so keen on vengeance. For one thing, it distracted her from her main per-
sonal mission: somehow removing the taint from the lineage of her son.
Forty years later, Niobe stepped out of the Clotho role and married a
mortal, Pacian Kaftan, then of middle age. Niobe was still physically 23, the
age she had been when she became Fate. The following year she birthed her
daughter Luna, destined to be a prominent politician. In 1980 Zane shot
Death and assumed the office, becoming Thanatos, and began his associa-
tion with Luna, then 22.
In 1981, after Pacian died, Niobe returned to Fate, this time as the As-
pect Lachesis. She was now 46 physically, no longer a beauty, but a solidly
responsible woman. She had finally had the experience she had missed be-
fore: that of raising her child.
Meanwhile Niobe’s granddaughter Orb had been active. An accom-
plished musician, she sought the Llano, the potent set of melodies that could
be called the operating system of the cosmos. She loved Mym from the east,
but his royal family broke up their affair, not knowing that she was preg-
nant. In due course she birthed a daughter, Orlene. Mym learned of that
only after he became the Incarnation of War. By that time they each had
other social interests. Orb became the Incarnation of Nature and took an
interest in Parry, who remained physically a young man. When she discov-
ered his identity as Satan, she destroyed humanity in a fit of rage. Kerena
understood about that sort of thing. But Chronos, the Incarnation of Time,
who lived backward in time, reversed it, saving the world. Parry had courted
her for a purpose, but fell in love with her, though it was not acceptable for
the Incarnations of Nature and Evil to be a couple. Nevertheless, they mar-
ried. Love was love, regardless of rules or the approval of others.
Orlene grew up and entered into a key relationship: a ghost marriage to
Kerena’s descendant Gawain, who had died of the curse before she met him.
It would be her duty to conceive a baby of a living man, to inherit Gawain’s
name and fortune. The ghost of Gawain located a man named Norton and
sent him to impregnate his bride. From this affair came Gawain the nth, who
became known as Gaw2. His father appealed to Gaea to change his genetic
pattern to match Gawain’s, and she, not realizing the significance or the
consequence, obliged. Thus Gaw2 acquired the Taint, and died as a baby.

Orlene, distraught, committed suicide, determined to follow and somehow
rescue her baby. Norton, desolate, would later take the Hourglass and be-
came the Incarnation of Time.
The turnover of the Incarnations was complete or accounted for, except
for the Incarnation of Good. God. Jolie felt relief; she had guided Kerena
almost to salvation for her timeline.
Then something changed.
It was the afreet who did it. He made glorious sex with her as always,
then hit her with it.
“I have investigated. You have been having your timelines changed. There
is a malignant ghost doing it, costing you grievously.”
“So you say,” Kerena said, determined not to let him trick her into re-
vealing the truth.
“Her name is Jolie. She is determined to bring you to ruin.”
Jolie jumped, figuratively. How had he learned her identity?
“How do you know such a thing?” Kerena asked.
“I visited her home timeline and saw her cross over. She has been inter-
fering with you for some time.”
“And you say this supposed ghost is malignant? Why?”
He smiled grimly. “Because she caused you to lose your lover, Morely.
And before that, your baby, to the taint.”
Now Kerena jumped. “I don’t believe it!”
“I shall be happy to explain. She nudges your reality from one timeline
into another. In the originals you suffered neither of these horrors.”
“That can’t be!”
He shrugged with affected nonchalance. “Travel back in time, Nox, and
verify it for yourself.” He faded out.
“I am not malign,” Jolie said angrily.
“I am sure you are not,” Kerena agreed. “But I must check.”
She checked. She phased down and moved back in time to check what
she had not thought to check before: the connection between one of Jolie’s
alignment nudges and the slaughter of the vampires. She attuned to the clos-
est such change before the event, then traced the alternate timeline—the one
not taken.
It was a routine meeting of Kerena and Vanja. Kerena, as Nox, was
away from the warren most of the time, but she tried to check in with both
Morely and Vanja frequently. In this instance, Vanja was out seeking a sheep
for her necessary token taste of blood. The day was overcast, with rain threat-
ening, so she was comfortable in the light. Kerena appeared before her, so-
lidified, embraced her, asked after Morely, then remarked that she had seen
a sheep nearby.
Jolie stepped in and erased that as a deviance. So Kerena did not men-

tion the sheep, and they parted. Vanja quested farther out, found another
sheep, and returned to the warren in good order. That was all. All that had
changed had been her harvesting a few drops of blood from a different sheep.
No one else had been affected.
Meanwhile the hunter had stumbled upon the entrance to the warren,
observed it, and in due course roused the villagers to their mayhem.
This time Kerena followed the other timeline: the one she had deviated
from. In that one, Vanja went to intercept the closer sheep, tasted its blood,
and moved on. The sheep hardly noticed, and went on grazing. Vanja headed
for home.
And intercepted the hunter. Realizing that he was ranging awkwardly
close to the warren entrance, she did what came naturally. She pretended to
be an innocent wood nymph, which wasn’t difficult because she was already
nude and shapely. She acted timid, retreating from the hunter in maidenly
caution. He pursued her, and when they were fairly distant from the warren,
she let him catch her for a fast crude plumbing, which she discovered she
liked, once she experienced it. He was, she indicated in her silent nymphly
way, a truly manly man. Well pleased with his conquest, the hunter soon
recovered enough passion to do it again, before going on home to his com-
pact wife. Naturally he did not mention the forest encounter to her, and his
associate menfolk did not believe him on the following day. Everyone knew
that forest nymphs could not be caught unless they wished to be, and why
would such a creature ever want to be caught by him?
And he never found the warren entrance. It had been pure chance, which
chance Vanja had distracted him from. She had unknowingly saved the war-
ren from destruction.
Kerena did not follow the timeline farther. She knew it would end in
destruction somewhere down the line, perhaps in centuries, but inevitably.
The cost of saving it had, in some devious manner, been the murder of all
the other vampires.
All because Kerena had said or not said a thing that put or did not put
Vanja in the way of the hunter at the right moment. It was really Kerena’s
fault. The afreet was painfully correct.
She suffered another siege of grief for Morely and the others, for the
moment not regretting her vengeance against the villagers. Then she resumed
time traveling.
This time she moved all the way back to the deviance closest before her
conversion to vampire. That was the act that had introduced the taint. Sure
enough, it was a dialogue wherein she said something that caused Morely to
think of a possible consequence to her baby. Jolie had erased it, and the
matter had not come up. Kerena could have waited for her conversion until
after birthing her baby, had she considered that aspect. But Jolie had steered

her into the other course, and the major horror of her early life had hap-
pened.
“I didn’t know!” Jolie protested. “I meant you no mischief.”
Kerena understood that. She also knew that had she not started her long
quest to save her baby, she would not have become the Incarnation of Night,
and acted in ways that helped save the timeline. Gaw-Two’s Taint was the
price of that.
Yet if she had known, and avoided it, she would have been a far happier
mother. How would she have chosen, had she seen the alternate consequences
at the time of decision? She didn’t know. After all, her life would have prob-
ably have run its course before the end of the timeline came. She might have
had nothing personal to lose.
“I have paid serious consequences for saving the timeline,” Kerena said.
“I am not sure I want to continue that. Who else in the world even cares
about my sacrifices?”
“I’m sorry,” Jolie said lamely. “It’s the only way we know. I didn’t think
it would cost what it did.”
Kerena didn’t answer, but she doubted that was enough.
A few days later there came another divergence. This time Kerena did
not simply accept it. “I want to know what the consequences of each choice
are.”
“Salvation versus doom,” Jolie said. “Not immediately, but inevitably in
the future.”
“The short-term consequences,” Kerena said grimly.
The point of divergence was seemingly innocuous, as they all were.
Kerena was about to pay a routine visit to Vanja, who had settled in Kilvarough
with a male vampire she had encountered, and was working as a night clerk.
She had made a decent half-life for herself, and had largely recovered from
the horror of the massacre. The two of them remained close friends, and
Kerena often spent the night, giving extra pleasure to the husband. He re-
sembled Morely, surely not entirely by coincidence; she closed her eyes and
pretended. It was something they understood.
She phased in to Vanja’s day room, in the early evening. “Hello,” she
said. “Is anyone home?”
Vanja appeared, garbed in a fetching nightie. “Kerena!” The two came
together for a hug and kiss—and the lines blurred. Jolie immediately jumped
it back to just before Kerena spoke.
“Hold,” Kerena told her. “I need to know.”
She held herself still in time and traced the course of the timeline she
had been about to take. It proceeded to a hug by the two women, followed by
a friendly dialogue, then a session where the two of them tackled the hus-
band to see how often they could make him climax in exactly one hour.

Kerena slept with them, and departed in the morning, satisfied with the
friendly outing. No problems there.
Then she followed the alternate timeline. In this one she paused a mo-
ment, then spoke. “Hello. Is anyone home?”
Vanja appeared. “Kerena!” The two ran together, embracing and kiss-
ing. “I was just about to get it on with Hubby. Come join us.”
Kerena did, and Hubby was highly appreciative. It was almost like old
times with Morely. Kerena loved relaxing with folk of her own nature, keep-
ing the necessary secrets. No one else in Kilvarough knew they were vam-
pires, and Hubby did not know that Kerena was Nox. That was for his own
safety, so that he could never inadvertently betray his knowledge of her and
attract dangerous interest. He thought she was merely a vampire friend with
traveling magic.
Nothing untoward here. Kerena tracked it farther—and saw that Vanja
and Hubby got arrested two days later, charged as vampires, and slated for
execution.
“That can’t be!” she told Jolie, who kept quiet. “Vanja is my last ancient
friend.”
Kerena rechecked the first timeline. There there was no arrest. So the
short term consequences were clear: the lives or deaths of her friends.
But why should such a trifling difference, a mere pause, change the
realities so painfully? Kerena went back to the divergence point and extended
her Seeing. And there it was: there was a neighbor woman who happened to
glance in the window at just the moment that Kerena passed it. The neighbor
evidently wondered how such a visitor had arrived without being seen at the
walk outside. The neighbor was working in the adjacent garden, and would
have noticed. Curious, she investigated—and discovered that there was some-
thing about her neighbor. That led to the query to the police, their checking
of records, and discovery of Vanja’s background.
That pause doomed Vanja.
“No,” Kerena said. “I refuse to let any action of mine doom my last old
friend.”
“But the alternate leads to doom for the timeline,” Jolie reminded her.
“We can’t be sure of that.”
“Check it.”
Kerena did, and found that the survival of the vampire couple did devi-
ously lead to the destruction of the timeline. But she still refused to accept it.
“If a small deviance from my natural timeline leads to the deaths of my
friends, a small deviance from the other timeline should lead to its salvation.
I just need to find the way. We are now so close to your ’present’ that there
should be many avenues to salvation.”
“I don’t advise this,” Jolie said. “I understand why you want to save

Vanja; I have known her as long as you have, in my fashion. But to trade her
life for the whole timeline is unthinkable.”
“I’ll risk it,” Kerena said. She blocked Jolie’s effort, and proceeded to the
first timeline, saving her friend. She said nothing of this to the vampire couple;
it was just something she had to do.
When she returned to her home, she had a visitor.
“So you finally did it,” the afreet said.
Kerena was not totally pleased. “What do you know?”
“That you refused a deviation. Now you have doomed this timeline.”
“I have done nothing of the kind! I’ll find a way to change it back, with
my friends alive.”
He smiled, again with no more than his mouth. “When you are satisfied
that you can’t save it, call me.”
“Why?”
“Because there may be a way after all, if you have the gumption.”
“I have the gumption.” She was annoyed by his presumption, but that
did not change the fact that he was her best of lovers. “Now is that the extent
of your interest at the moment?”
“Such a lovely invitation.” He swept her in, and proceeded to the kind
of passion that only he could generate.
Thereafter Kerena searched for ways to save the timeline. She discov-
ered that key divergences were few; most accomplished nothing worthwhile.
The course of the timeline was surprisingly stable. It proceeded slowly, sub-
tly, but inevitably to its ultimate destruction.
There had to be a way! The destruction was not immediate; it would
take a century for the subtleties to become obviously damning. So she pro-
ceeded with her other project, hoping that she could discover a world-sav-
ing avenue along the way. If that failed, well, she would ask the too-knowl-
edgeable afreet. She didn’t want to do that; he was a great lover, but his
attitude irritated her. It was as if he thought that a woman could not accom-
plish what a man could.
Jolie stayed out of it. She agreed with Kerena, and sympathized with her
desire to save her friend. But she feared very much for her timeline. She
sincerely hoped there was a way to get back on track. It seemed that while
every person on the globe was constantly making decisions, only those of
Nox, and of Kerena before she assumed the Office of Night, affected the
timeline in this manner. The hidden powers of Night were awesome, and
invisible to others, even the Incarnations.
“I mean to emulate your timeline as closely as possible,” Kerena told
Jolie. “I may no longer be exactly on it, but if I follow it closely I may be able
to discover a way to cross back to it. I hope you will let me know where I
deviate.”

“I will try,” Jolie agreed. It did seem sensible, in the circumstance. As it
happened, her active part in her own timeline was just about to commence;
that should facilitate this. But there was a tricky aspect.
Niobe’s granddaughter Orlene had lost her baby, Gaw-Two, and com-
mitted suicide. Orlene was Jolie’s friend, and she had come immediately to
try to help the young woman. That meant that the Jolie of this second timeline
was here with Orlene, and Jolie of the first timeline would be interacting
with her other self.
“It’s not hard,” Kerena said with a passing trace of amusement. “Think
of it as dividing into two selves. You both have similar minds and experience,
so she should understand readily enough.” Then she reconsidered. “But will
that foul the alignment?”
“If it does, I’ll know it.” But as she spoke, Jolie realized it wasn’t true.
The timelines were no longer perfectly aligned. “No, I won’t know it. Maybe
I should hide myself from her, so as to avoid affecting her.”
“No need. Since we are out of alignment, the worst you can do is put it
further out—and if it is already doomed, that shouldn’t make much differ-
ence. Maybe your interaction will bring the timelines closer together. That
could spare us both some serious mischief.”
So it might. But Jolie decided to remain clear for the time being. They
joined the just-formed ghost Orlene, undetectably.
Jolie Two was there. “Orlene, let go! You will float directly to Heaven!”
Orlene’s soul writhed. “No, no, I must not go.”
“Orlene, it is Jolie, your dream friend. I would not guide you falsely. You
are good; you have nothing to fear from the Afterlife.”
“I must not,” the soul protested, clinging.
The skeletal Death appeared. He spied Jolie and paused, surprised. “You
know this client?” Jolie, having served as Gaea’s messenger, knew all the
Incarnations.
“She is my friend, almost my child. I don’t know why she died.”
Thanatos clarified that Orlene’s baby had been tainted, and died early.
Orlene wanted to recover him, even in death.
“Let me try to help her, Thanatos,” Jolie Two said. “Does she have to go
to Heaven right away?”
“She does not,” Death answered. “Her balance is close. She was born
illegitimate, had an extramarital affair, and committed suicide. Those three
sins would have been enough to send her to Hell, were she not otherwise
almost completely good. I leave the matter in your hands.”
“Thank you, Thanatos.”
The cowled figure nodded, then walked through the wall. Jolie Two had
charge of this soul.
Jolie One nodded too. “I remember,” she told Kerena. “This is almost

identical. The alignment is perhaps close enough to be restored.”
Kerena extended her Seeing. “That baby is now in Purgatory. I must
fetch it.”
“You would deny a grieving mother her baby, even in death?” Then
Jolie remembered. “Oh, of course. You’re Nox!”
“You forgot?” Kerena inquired wryly as they moved off.
“I did, for the moment. In Timeline One I did not understand your mo-
tive.”
“And what is my purpose?”
“To recover and heal your baby at last, and to promote the ghost Orlene
to the office of the Incarnation of Good. If you can accomplish that here in
Timeline Two, we may yet save this world.”
“You forget that my search into the future shows that I do accomplish
that, but the timeline remains doomed.”
“I forgot, again,” Jolie agreed ruefully. “I am suffering a confusion of
perspectives, now that my T2 self is active on the scene.”
They went to Purgatory, where Nox picked up the soul of the baby Gaw-
Two. She was not challenged; the Angel Gabriel understood her mission. As
a ghost, the boy required no feeding or cleaning up. She folded him into her
bosom, where he slept in comfort. “Now at last I will save my baby, using his
immediate mother to appeal to the Incarnations, in the process preparing
her for her ultimate destiny.”
“First she will seek you, as Nox,” Jolie said.
“Yes. That is the apparent reason I took the baby.”
And only the apparent reason, Jolie now knew. Kerena’s history with
the Taint went back fifteen hundred years.
Nox had a mountain estate associated with Purgatory, an incidental prop-
erty set up a few centuries before to establish her presence and legitimacy.
Apart from that she had remained largely aloof from the other Incarnations.
She prided herself on being mysterious even to them. Now she was set to
interact rather more forcefully.
The ghosts Orlene and Jolie had the semblance of their original living
bodies, here, and seemed solid to the mountain and each other. That was
part of their challenge.
The mountain was shaped like a giant diamond, and its Afterlife sub-
stance was diamond. There were several impediments along the way, but
these were mere diversions, to generate the semblance of resistance to intru-
sion. The real challenge was to Orlene: as she progressed up the steep slope,
she was gradually masculinized in the crudest manner. Unused to the form
and drives of a man, she attempted to rape her companion Jolie.
“I remember,” Jolie One said, wincing.
Then Nox appeared to them, in the form of a woman made of mist.

“Come to me, man-thing,” she said. She spoke to them in the ineffable mode
they perceived, <Come to me,> but now Jolie One recognized it as ordinary
dialogue. Perspective made a difference.
Orlene-Man did so. She/he embraced the lovely figure and proceeded
to try to have sex with it. Then Nox changed her back to female. “Remem-
ber,” she said. For that was the lesson: that the genders differed, and a woman
should not condemn the passions of a man without understanding them.
Orlene, appalled, now understood.
“How can I endure this shame?” Orlene demanded, and fainted.
Jolie Two ran to her, but it was Nox she addressed. “Why do you play
with us, Incarnation of Night?”
“You have much to learn,” Nox replied. A significant understatement.
“All she wants is her baby, Gaw-Two. Please return him, now that you
have humiliated us.”
Jolie One winced again. She had, understandably, not understood when
she played this scene herself. Now she did: the prior Incarnation of Good
and many of the other Incarnations had had overweening arrogance. Nox
meant to see that the next God understood humiliation, and would never
forget. That, and a little empathy, would go far in preventing indifference to
human concerns in the future.
“I have her baby,” Nox agreed. “His malady continues in his Afterlife.”
How well she knew!
“Give him back to her! We’ll cure him somehow.”
And there was the challenge. Orlene could do what Nox could not, for
she could act directly in the ordinary universe, whether living or dead. She
was the necessary tool. Nox spelled it out: “Fetch a blank soul from Death, a
grain of Hourglass sand from Time, a thread of Life from Fate, a seed of
violence from War, a tear from Nature, a curse from Evil, and a blessing
from Good. Bring these items to me and I will restore him.” Before they
could respond, Nox departed.
It seemed like an impossible requirement, yet Jolie One knew it was
necessary, both for the salvation of the baby and for Orlene’s preparation to
become the Incarnation of Good. She also knew that Orlene would struggle
through, suffering further heartaches, until at last she achieved the fate she
had never dreamed of, and had to give up her baby after all. It was a culmi-
nation Nox had crafted most carefully.
Now they went to talk with the Incarnation of Evil. Kerena, as Nox,
broached him in Hell; she was of course immune to its fire and its reluctance
to let any soul go. “Satan.”
“Nox,” he agreed. “I though your taste ran more to angels.” He was of
course teasing her about her affair with the Angel Gabriel, and implying that
she had come to him for sexual purpose.

That was an incidental challenge. “My taste is eclectic,” she said, coa-
lescing into her lovely physical body. “What do you do for relief when Gaea
is absent?” She was teasing him in turn about his affair with the Incarnation
of Nature.
Lilah appeared behind him, in luscious dishabille. “What do you think,
mistress of secrets?”
“What, haven’t you betrayed him yet?”
“Not quite yet,” the demoness agreed. The two came together and hugged.
They were not friends, quite, but knew that their continuing association had
benefits. Lilah was also the mistress of the Incarnation of War; she got around.
“Hey!” Satan protested, as if jealous. “Just whom did you come to se-
duce?”
“You, of course,” Kerena said, leaving Lilah and moving into him. “I
bring Jolie.” Jolie had been his first love, and the two retained feelings for
each other.
He was of course more than willing. But he demurred. “You don’t do
much for nothing, vampire vixen. What will it cost me?”
“Merely a dialogue about a deal.”
“A dialogue,” he agreed. “Not a deal.”
“Not yet,” she agreed. She turned the body over to Jolie.
Then they went at it. Satan was good at sex, having had much experi-
ence with Lilah, and Jolie had learned much in the course of her associations
with Nature and Night. But the dominant passion was love. Satan was pro-
fessionally the master of hate, but one of his secrets was love: a secret he
knew Nox would keep.
In due course the two were satisfied. Jolie returned the body to Kerena,
and Satan was ready for the dialogue. “You drive a hard bargain, you noc-
turnal temptation. What is your concern?”
“I want my baby.” She drew Gaw-Two from her bosom, where he had
slept without substance.
Satan smiled. “I think I might have guessed.”
“You want to achieve power, in accordance with your deal with Gabriel,
by corrupting Niobe’s granddaughter Orlene. She is your last chance, and
little time remains.”
“She is not corruptible. Your angel lover outmaneuvered me on that
deal.”
“That is my hope. But I must be sure. There is one way she might be
corrupted: via her ill baby. She died to follow him, and means to save him. In
the course of that effort she will come to you, begging a curse. Here is the
deal I proffer: you may use Orlene’s baby to corrupt her, if you can, and thus
achieve dominance in this realm. If you can not corrupt her, then you will
support my candidate for the replacement of the Incarnation of Good.”

Satan considered. “This is interesting. You will provide me my last chance
for victory. If I flub it, I will promote your victory.”
“Yes. As you know, I do not act directly, but only through intermediar-
ies. I want you to be mine for this occasion.”
“This may be a first: Satan as an agent for good. I am not sure I could
stomach that.”
“You forget I know all secrets. Yours is that you are at heart a good
man.”
“Damn your information!” he swore, and a ball of fire flew out of his
mouth.
“You’re so cute when you’re mad.”
“Negative passion is much the same as positive. Abate it as yourself
while I ponder.”
“What, me?” she asked innocently.
“You do wish me to take your deal seriously?”
She moved into him, retaining possession of the body. “Can Nature do
this?” she inquired as her hands stroked him with very special expertise.
“Hoo! Not yet, I think.” He reacted as he had to, and they were soon in
the throes of an explosive mutual climax. It was all gaming; both of them
wanted it, and both knew it. He as the male had the option of professing
desire, and she as the female the option of professing avoidance. Such pre-
texts were no more than ornaments on a foregone commitment.
Thereafter they talked again. “Who is your nominee?”
“The same one you Tempt: Orlene.”
“Hoo!” he repeated. “Fate’s granddaughter, Nature’s daughter, War’s
daughter, Time’s lover, Death’s lover’s great niece—”
“And your lover’s daughter,” Kerena concluded. “Who among all of
you will turn her down—if you nominate her?”
“But she is a good woman! How can I, in evil conscience, support her?”
“She is a bastard, an adulteress, a rapist, and a suicide. What more need
she be, to fit your profile?”
Satan nodded. “You make a formidable case, Nox. I would love to see
such ludicrous definitions of evil overthrown. I will make that deal.”
Kerena was relieved. She had thought he would agree, but not been
quite sure. This was not the same timeline as Jolie’s, and was no longer in
alignment. “Shall we shake hands on it?”
“The hell we will! We’ll fuck on it.”
“Oh, my,” she said, with feigned reluctance. “So soon again. Such lan-
guage. How can I ever endure the shame?”
Lilah burst out laughing, holding her ribs and floating. And of course
they went at it again. She would have to visit Satan more often; he was a good
sport.

Jolie Two took Orlene to animate a teenaged prostitute on spelled H, one
of the worst of addictive drugs. This was to help Luna, who needed to save
this girl for reasons relating to the welfare of the timeline, and to give Orlene
a temporary living body to occupy. Thereafter the two ghosts were based in
the girl name Vita, helping her escape her addiction and profession while
still pursuing Orlene’s mission.
Death was no easy mark. He took them to a newborn baby in a Dumpster
doomed to die soon of exposure, and gave Orlene in Vita’s body the power to
take its soul for her purpose. Since the baby was doomed anyway, the soul
was available.
And Orlene balked. She couldn’t hasten the death of the innocent, help-
less baby. “I can’t!” she cried in anguish.
Death fixed her with his eyeless gaze. “I ask you to consider just how
serious you are about your quest for your own baby,” he said. “If you do not
care to do what is necessary—”
“Oh, Thanatos, I would give my own soul! But I cannot sacrifice this
innocent one to my purpose.”
Instead she took the baby to a hospital and left it for care and adoption.
She had saved the baby, to Fate’s momentary annoyance as she hastily recrafted
its Thread of Life. Orlene thought she had thrown away her chance, on her
first test of resolve. But Death, satisfied about the quality of her conscience,
agreed to obtain another clean soul for her. “I would not yield a soul to a
person who did not properly appreciate its value.”
So she had passed after all, because of the quality of her character, as
Jolie One had known she would.
She tackled Time, Fate, War, and Nature, and these were no easier, for
different reasons. Time had been her lover before assuming the Hourglass,
and wanted her to return to him, even in this different body. But he lived
backward, she forward, so it was not possible. An Aspect of Fate was her
grandmother, but Fate was in a process of transition that complicated it.
War was her natural father, but arranged to show her rather directly the
nature and stress of his business. Gaea was her natural mother, but required
an ugly service of her. They were all participating in her savage impromptu
education.
And Satan tempted her cruelly, providing her a painful tour of Hell and
offering to recover her baby for her if she cooperated with his designs. He
wasn’t bluffing; one of his secrets was that he always honored his deals to
the letter, however deceptive that letter might be. Again she struggled, but
again declined. Then she did Satan a service in return for his curse, hoping
somehow to win her baby the hard way.
But with God she failed, because He did not meet with her or respond to
her prayer. She could not get the Blessing.

The Incarnations voted to declare the Office of the Incarnation of Good
vacated. But they could not agree on a person to take over the Office. That
was when Satan, honoring his deal with Nox and his private preference,
nominated Orlene, to her amazement. And Orlene became God. Unable to
take Gaw Two with her, she allowed Nox to keep him, with the hard-won
items obtained from the other Incarnations. Including God’s Blessing, which
she herself was now equipped to give. The dread Taint would be cured at
last.
God, soon thereafter, sent Jolie to try to save Timeline Two. They had at
last reached the present time.
“But there is a difference,” the afreet said, appearing in Nox’s abode.
“Timeline One will survive. Timeline Two is doomed. The differences ap-
pear small at the moment, but they will steadily grow until the inevitable
happens.”
Kerena and Jolie knew it was true. They had run the full course, but the
one change had nullified it.
“And you have come to bargain,” Kerena said evenly to him. “What is
your case?”
“First I must reveal my identity. I suspect you knew I was no simple
demon.”
“We did,” Kerena agreed. “Who are you?”
“I am the Incarnation of Darkness.”
They stared at him, not understanding.

CHAPTER 12
EREBUS
“I see I must clarify,” he said. “I am Erebus.”
“Erebus!” Kerena exclaimed. “Nox’s ancient brother!” Lilah had men-
tioned him, but the distractions of becoming the Incarnation of Night had
put that in the background.
“The same. You are the Incarnation of Night. I am the Incarnation of
Darkness. They are not identical. Rather, they are the two salient Aspects of
the situation. Just as the Fate has three Aspects, we have two. Male and fe-
male.”
Kerena was appalled. “I’ve been having sex with my brother?”
He laughed. “Indeed. And we generated all the following Incarnations,
back at the dawn of timelines. We are the first siblings and lovers, parents of
the rest. It wasn’t as if there was much choice in partners, at the outset.”
“But I traced all the existing Incarnations. I never found evidence of
that one.”
“You aren’t the only Incarnation who can hide, sister. I was never on
anybody’s radar.”
“Who animates your office?” Jolie asked shrewdly. “The way Kerena
animates Nox.”
“One of the first true men: Cain.”
“Cain! Who slew his brother?”
“The same. I am good at slaying.”
Kerena felt dizzy with these revelations, but she regrouped. “Why Cain?”
“As you know, when I slew my impertinent brother, who really brought
it on himself, our parents were annoyed, and banished me from their land. I
went and dwelt among the Children of Nod. You understand, aspects of the
early history are figurative; Adam and Eve were the first officially recognized
man and woman, but of course there were others, such as Lilah and Nod.
They lacked recognition, but were human in all other respects. So I got me a
nice obliging girl, and did all right for myself.”

“That so-called girl was Lilah, your father’s mistress,” Jolie said.
“Lilith, then. And one sexy wench, at first,” Cain agreed. “She did well,
hiding her age, bearing me a number of brats, until I found a more suitable
virgin. Then she had the temerity to dispatch the true child of Nod before I
could enjoy her. I was annoyed.”
“So you killed Lilith,” Kerena said, remembering the ghost’s story.
“She was a bitch. I hadn’t known her identity at first. She was Nod’s
mistress, then pretended to be his daughter. That was a bit too unvirginal for
me.”
Kerena realized that the man had a case, of sorts. He had learned late
that his wife was both his father’s and his father-in-law’s mistress too. It was
also true that Lilah could be rather assertive and annoying, in her murder-
ous manner. “I mean, why did the Office accept you? You were bad seed
from the start, surely unfit for the power of an Incarnation.”
“Because we share a grudge against mankind. Erebus is the dark side;
he means to destroy all that Nox has wrought, and I am happy to facilitate
his effort. I am perfectly fit for that.”
“But Erebus is the father of the Incarnations,” Jolie said. “Just as Nox is
the mother. What could he have against his own children?”
“They are Nox’s children, and Nox’s worlds.”
“But they are Erebus’ children too, by definition,” Kerena said.
“I see I need to be more specific,” he said, as if she were being stupid.
“They were not merely children, but timelines, alternate realities. Each gen-
erated multiple new lines, each of which contained all the other characters,
including Nox. But not Erebus. They were her worlds.”
Now, indeed, Kerena felt stupid, and so did Jolie. “Not Erebus’ worlds
too?”
“Not,” he agreed. “She exists in all. He exists only in the original.”
Kerena used her Seeing to trace this back. “Because as the mother she
could make offspring, sharing her substance with them, while you were a
separate entity, not a child. But you could join them by separating into many
selves, as she could.”
“Not the same. Selves are all parts of the one, not entities in themselves.
They were intruders in realms in which they did not exist naturally.”
Kerena nodded. It was true. “But this is inherent. Why should you re-
sent it?”
“I resent being excluded. Wouldn’t you?”
Again, he had a certain case. “I’m sorry.”
“No need. I am taking care of it in my own fashion.”
“By destroying the other timelines?” Jolie demanded.
“Yes, of course. Then we are both excluded equally.”
“This reminds me of the story of the dog in the manger.”

“I see it as mere fairness.”
Kerena was growing angry. “All those dooms of the timelines that devi-
ate from the original one—that is your doing?”
“Yes. Nox is the generator; I am the destroyer. Our powers are equal
and opposite. The positive and negative aspects of Night.”
They reflected on that. “Why didn’t Erebus simply decline to contribute
to those offspring timelines?”
“And miss out on all that great sex? It wasn’t as if he had anywhere else
to get it, back then. He wanted Nox to stifle her damned fertility, but she
wouldn’t. So the battle was on. It has been quite a job, canceling all those
alternates. Have you any idea how many there were?”
“Theoretically an infinite number,” Jolie said.
“And I have had to extend myself almost infinitely to stop them all.” He
smiled again, with only his mouth. “Fortunately since Nox turned human,
you have not realized her full capacity, so there have been no more Incarna-
tions generated. That simplifies things somewhat. It is much easier to clip a
timeline that is a minor twig, than to prune back a branch sponsored by an
Incarnation.”
Kerena’s feelings were dangerously mixed. “Just for the sex! That’s all
you came for.”
“Not all,” he said, amused. “I also needed to keep track of your activity,
so as to catch the simpler variants that constantly spun off. Everything Nox
does has the potential to make new timelines, and they must be readily curbed
when caught early, as I said.”
“To spy on me!”
“Of course. But you like the sex too. Shall we go at it now?”
The awful thing was that Kerena was sorely tempted. This man, this
demon, this Incarnation, gave her the best sex ever, always. “But you’re my
brother!” she protested.
“Your brother and your lover,” he agreed, touching her hand. The touch
thrilled her despite her ire.
“He’s your brother,” Jolie told her. “He’s your lover. He’s not your friend.”
“Well spoken, ghost,” Erebus said. Then, to Kerena: “And with that un-
derstanding, shall we indulge?”
Kerena was minded to refuse angrily, knowing he could not force her.
But he had not yet told her what she needed to know. If she obliged him (and
herself) she might have a better chance to learn what she sought. She could
dazzle any ordinary man with sex; the Incarnation of Darkness was beyond
that, but might still be affected. “We shall indulge,” she agreed grimly.
And the sex was awfully, wonderfully, impossibly exciting and fulfill-
ing. Erebus was indeed the match of Nox in this respect, as it seemed in
others. There was even a certain frisson in the knowledge that he was her

brother and perhaps enemy.
In due course they separated, sated for the moment. “You surely have
more to tell me,” Kerena said. “I don’t expect to like it.”
“Yes, I enjoy making you accept what you wish to reject. You will really
hate my offer.”
“She’s not a mouse to be toyed with!” Jolie snapped.
Erebus affected surprise. “She isn’t?”
“He’s getting to you,” Kerena murmured.
“And you are important to my designs, Jolie,” Erebus said. “You, too,
will be properly appalled.”
“You are angling for me to give her the body for your next effort?”
Kerena asked mischievously.
“Kerena!” Jolie was not as shocked as she pretended; they were putting
on a small show to divert the man and perhaps recover control of the dia-
logue.
Erebus shook his head. “I would love to dally longer for your teasing,
ladies, but I have other timelines to terminate and must be on my way soon.
So we had better complete our present business, unless you prefer to end our
discussion now.”
And of course they couldn’t do that. They had to know what was on his
devious mind. “Speak,” Kerena said.
“A bit more clarification, first. The larger universe is a comparatively
grand endeavor, with several notable aspects. What concerns us at the mo-
ment is the Tree of Life.”
“In the Garden of Eden,” Kerena said. “We know of it.”
“This is somewhat more,” he said with that infuriatingly superior atti-
tude. “It is a useful analogy for concepts otherwise too complex for distaff
minds to assimilate.”
He was trying to get to them again. What was most annoying was that
he was succeeding. “Let’s try the complex version,” Kerena said, sure she
would regret it.
“There are a perhaps infinite number of very large approximately par-
allel membranes stretched across the larger universe. They are close enough
together so that sometimes two ’branes brush against each other, generating
ripples of matter and energy from the point source of their contact. To the
eventual residents of the region this appears to be an explosion of existence
emerging from nothing: a concept they find difficult, as they believe in the
continuity of matter and energy, which are actually different forms of the
same thing. Regardless, the ripples continue to expand outward, generating
eddy currents along the way that assume visible or invisible status. The deni-
zens perceive only the visible, yet are dimly aware of the rest, and are frus-
trated by their ignorance. Therefore they devise assorted theories of relativ-

ity, quantum mechanics, string, and other fanciful explanations to mask their
ignorance. In that minor segment of the visible cosmos that is suitably solid,
life appears and assumes several forms. This has its own mysteries, for which
alternate explanations are devised. One is evolution, which states that in-
credibly complicated creatures can evolve from very small variations and
very large periods of time, facilitated by natural selectivity.” He paused. “You
follow perfectly, of course.”
“Of course,” Kerena echoed faintly. Both women were utterly baffled
by this complicated nonsense, as he knew. “But for expedience, let’s try the
simple analogy of the Tree.”
“For expedience,” he agreed smugly. “When Chaos formed the known
cosmos, he generated a giant tree. It diverged into three main branches or
trunks, to accommodate the contrasting aspects of existence. One we shall
call the Science trunk, whereon all things followed strict patterns of non-
magical development. That is, chemicals formed and mixed and became the
first primitive types of life. Life followed evolutionary principles of diver-
gence and natural selection, with the unfit variants getting eliminated and
the fit ones surviving. Continued radiations and selections eventually evolved
into the entire modern panoply of funguses, plants, and animals, including
human beings, the animal with a naked body and an overdeveloped brain.”
Both Jolie and Kerena managed to stifle their threatened outbursts of
outrage at this revolting notion. “Fascinating viewpoint,” Kerena said tightly.
“Another stem we shall call the Magic trunk,” Erebus continued equa-
bly. “This was created approximately six thousand years ago, complete with
all creatures and plants, and mankind was put in charge. There were even
large old bones buried in the ground to make it seem as if giant lizards had
once walked the earth long before the present order, fooling those who did
not pay sufficient attention to the holy book that spelled out the only truth.
All things there are accomplished magically, and the Supreme Deity keeps a
beneficent eye on the proceedings so as to better select those good souls des-
tined for Heaven and the bad ones condemned to Hell. Yet such is the perver-
sity of the species that bad folk still appear and prosper, and require punish-
ment in the Afterlife.”
“Of course,” Kerena agreed. This description was more familiar, but
did not wholly align with the real world.
“The third trunk grows between the others, and shares aspects of each,”
Erebus continued. “Much of it is magic, and of course there are the Incarna-
tions of Immortality to assist it along its destined course. But there are also
rogues of the Science persuasion, who build machines and perform feats of
chemistry to improve their lives. The aspects of Magic and Science are thus
in chronic competition, neither achieving real dominance. A person is free,
for example, to travel by airplane or by magic carpet, and Hell itself adver-

tises its advantages, such as sexual and gluttonous gratification that are of
course unknown in Heaven. This is the trunk we know.”
“We do,” Kerena said, relieved to be back on familiar ground, as it were.
“But what has this three-trunked Tree of Life analogy to do with us?”
“Everything. This is the trunk I mean to eliminate, leaving only the two
extreme Science and Magic trunks.”
They stared at him, not trying to conceal their dismay.
“Here is the key,” he said. “If I can eliminate all the branches of this
middle trunk, it will wither away, and devolve back into chaos. Then we can
start over, this time with rules that favor me. Nox will be my plaything, lim-
ited to a single timeline, while Erebus will be everywhere. Ultimate power
will be mine.”
“Will it?” Kerena asked. “How can you be sure it won’t develop similar
to this one?”
“It may,” Erebus agreed. “In which case I will prune it back again, and
try again, and again, until I get what I want. The process may require a
number of millennia, but eventually there should be something worthwhile.”
“And you expect us to go along with this?”
“Not willingly.”
“What, then, is your proffered bargain?”
“Ah, yes. I have pruned this trunk down essentially to a single strand. It
is a sorry looking thing, compared to the fully spreading trunks on either
side. But I am unable to prune the remaining central strand, because the Nox
there has caught on and balks me. In fact she was the one who alerted the
Incarnation of Good to the threat, causing her not only to defend her own
reality, but to send an emissary to the adjacent one, in an effort to save it
also.”
“That’s why Orlene sent me!” Jolie explained.
Kerena extended her Seeing, and verified it. “And we almost saved this
one too. But for my determination to spare my friend Vanja, it would have
been secure.”
“Well, you are womanishly weak, understandably,” he agreed contemp-
tuously. “It took me some time to realize that I was being actively balked.
There are so many timelines to handle, so similar, I assumed the self as-
signed to this one had overlooked it. Each self handled several timelines, so
that’s understandable. So I diverted it again, and later discovered that too
had been balked. Finally I investigated more directly, and discovered the in-
terference of the ghost. That was a surprise, as normally individuals can’t
cross between timelines.”
“How is it than you can, then?” Jolie asked.
“Because there are no other Erebuses there. The presence of a home-
grown self prevents another from entering. Nox can’t cross, for example.”

“But I did,” Jolie said.
“There was no Jolie there, as you crossed before your self in this second
timeline existed.”
“But I remained to see myself come into existence, and to become a
ghost again. In fact I facilitated it by holding to the alignment.”
“Yes. That was what I overlooked. It seems that a ghost doesn’t count, at
least not as much. You crossed to where you did not exist, then remained,
and the presence of the new Jolie was not enough to drive you out. It might
have prevented you from crossing to your own time, but your inertia held
you here. So I did not suspect until later, and then I thought you were a local
ghost. I was a fool.”
Was that an invitation for them to gloat? Neither trusted it. “So we have
learned of a partial exception,” Kerena said. “Evidently Nox in T1 knew,
though.”
“She put it by me,” he agreed. “All our trysts, and she never let on.”
“You trysted with her too?” Kerena asked, not wholly pleased.
“Of course. Consider your alignment: how could I have done other-
wise, without fudging the lines?”
“And you were trysting with all the other Noxes. That’s why you came to
me so rarely.”
“Correct. That has been the one advantage of being the only male Erebus
on this trunk.”
“But now that we are down to so few branches, there are only me and
the Nox of T1. That’s why you have come more often recently.”
“Exactly,” he said, not at all embarrassed.
Kerena had had enough. “What is your deal?”
“First we must establish the parameters. Nox can not save any timeline
but the first; all others are doomed. I can not eliminate that one, because of
the active opposition of that one’s Nox. So we are at impasse. I need your
cooperation to eliminate T1.”
Kerena smiled, emulating his mouth-only expression. “I am the Nox of
doomed T2. I can’t help you there.”
“But you are very like the Nox of T1, by no particular coincidence. In
fact you are almost identical. What persuades you will persuade her.”
“I am in no mood to be persuaded to doom the final timeline.”
He looked at her, springing his trap. “But if you had the chance to save
T2, and perhaps others? As you may, with my cooperation.”
Kerena felt a shiver of excitement. “How?”
“We make a double or nothing deal. Both timelines, or neither.”
Kerena worked it out. “You would make this deal in order to get at T1
and make your victory complete, abolishing the last live branch of the cen-
tral Tree. I would make the deal in order to save T2 and whatever other

timelines remain.”
“If T2 is saved, it would in turn act to save T3,” he said. “By sending its
ghost Jolie there to its past to make it align, and so on for T4, T5, and on. The
process would be unstoppable, and the entire original foliage would recover.”
“All or nothing,” Jolie said. “These are fair stakes.”
“How would the issue be settled?” Kerena asked suspiciously.
“A contest between the two of us. The winner takes the timeline.”
“Between you and Nox1,” Kerena said.
“Actually, no. Nox1 will not compete. She needs to remain in place to
enforce compliance. You, who are otherwise doomed, will compete.”
“Why would she honor that?”
“Because you would. She trusts you.”
Kerena’s head was spinning. “Why would you trust her?”
“We are both masters of deceit, but we can’t deceive each other. We are
the two Aspects of Night. The winner will in effect incorporate the other,
preventing any further resistance. It will be a fair contest, and the decision
will be honored.”
“But if I contest with you and win, what does it matter whether I merge
with you, making you part of me? I am bound to this timeline.”
“Not if you win. You will assume my power of crossing, being twice
what you were. You will then cross and merge with your other selves. There
will be a single Nox governing the whole. Your victory will be complete.”
“As will yours, if you win.”
“Exactly.”
“I am interested,” Kerena said. “But I doubt it is a decision I can make
alone, or my sister self in T1 can make. When the new Incarnation of Good
was chosen, all the other Incarnations and a mortal woman participated.
They would have to be consulted again.”
“And Ghost Jolie will return to T1 and make the case,” he said. “As she
did when proposing Orlene to be God.”
“I hardly feel qualified,” Jolie said.
“You will cross back and consult with Nox1, who will convene the In-
carnations. I will be there, but of course they will not trust me. You are the
one who has been on this scene, here in T2. You will make the case.”
Jolie saw it. “They may not agree.”
Erebus shrugged. “Then the impasse remains, and T1 will be the only
survivor.”
“Shouldn’t the Incarnations of T2 have some say?” Kerena asked.
“They’re irrelevant,” Erebus said. “They have no way to alleviate their
doom. Only those of T1 count for this.”
That seemed to be true, unkind as it was. But now Jolie remembered
something. “There is a thing Nox1 wants from you, Erebus.”

“She can tell me that herself, next time I visit her.”
“No, because Nox2 must implement it.”
“A message from my other self?” Kerena asked, surprised.
“In a manner. She has cured Gaw Two—that is, her baby in that
timeline—and wants an Office for him. Only you can enable her to generate
that Office.”
“She wants her son to be an Incarnation, as of old,” Erebus said. “It is
true that she can’t generate that from copulation with a mere mortal. Why
does she think I would cooperate in that, since it would only complicate my
elimination of the resulting chain of new timelines?”
“Not just for the sake of the sex,” Jolie said. “As a condition of the con-
test.”
Erebus visibly took stock. “She knew it would come to this when she
sent you?”
“She saw you coming,” Jolie agreed. “In more than one sense.”
“And she knew it would at last come to this,” Kerena said, seeing it. “As
I would have known, had I kept the timeline aligned.”
“It won’t make any difference, if I win,” Erebus said. “That Incarnation
will be doomed along with the others.”
“It will make a difference to me if I win,” Kerena said.
He considered. “What Incarnation?”
“Dreams,” Kerena answered.
Jolie saw the nicety of it. Kerena had dreamed for centuries of saving
her tainted baby. Now he could become the Incarnation of Dreams.
“The contest can occur only if the Incarnations of T1 agree,” Erebus
said.
“And if I agree,” Kerena said. “This is my separate price.” She agreed
completely with her other’s self’s notion.
“Let’s have another bout of sex before I decide.”
Kerena reined in her burgeoning desire. “Decide before the sex, be-
cause it will generate the Office.”
“No. You don’t get the Office unless you agree to the contest. I finally
learned how to stifle the generative aspect of the interaction.”
“Free sex now, Office sex for the contest.”
“A sexual contest!” he agreed, delighted.
“We shall have to work out the details.”
“Between clasps,” he agreed.
“Go make the case,” Kerena told Jolie. “Return with their answer. As-
suming you can return, with a Jolie now here at T2.”
“She can,” Erebus said. “As a ghost with an established bridge.”
The two Incarnations of Night and Darkness came eagerly together as
Jolie crossed back to T1. She envied them their phenomenal sexual interest

and ability. They were indeed well matched.
There was only a kind of flicker as the timelines changed. Then she was
with Nox1, who was having sex with Erebus. Had she made it across?”
“Yes, this is T1,” Nox told her. “This is an alternate self of Erebus, align-
ing the timelines.”
“And I know all that my other self knows,” Erebus said, without paus-
ing in his effort.
“But I do not,” Nox said, not abating her own effort. “So in a moment
you will acquaint me with it, as I do not trust my brother.”
Which was perhaps an incidental irony: Nox was enthusiastically in-
dulging in sex with a man she couldn’t afford to trust. The mistress of se-
crets could not directly fathom the major one required.
They concluded their bout, with Jolie participating by sharing Kerena’s
sensations. Then Erebus faded out.
Jolie acquainted Kerena with the situation. “So Erebus proffers a con-
test between himself and Nox2 to decide the issue. Nox2 has agreed, pro-
vided he enable her to generate the Office of the Incarnation of Dreams for
Gaw Two to assume. But the final decision must be made by the informed
Incarnations of T1.”
“Of course,” Kerena1 agreed. “We’ll convene them now.”
“You can convene them on your whim?”
“Nox’s whims have force.”
The floor became a soft, firm white quilt. No, it was cloud stuff, except
that it was solid enough to stand on, slightly spongy. Nox sat on a glittering
dark stone throne, shrouded by the starry Cloak of Night. Arranged in a
circle before her were several other thrones of different hues, iridescent in
the soft sunlight from above. On each throne an Incarnation sat: Death, Time,
Fate, War, Nature, Evil, and Good, each appropriately garbed. Jolie knew
them all, but had never before seen them all together in their official splen-
dor.
The Angel Gabriel stood beside God’s throne, and assorted lesser Incar-
nations and assistants stood by the thrones of the others. This was truly a
complete gathering.
Orlene, the Incarnation of Good, spoke first. “Nox, the mother of all
our Offices, mistress of secrets, became aware of a secret that concerns us:
there are many alternate timelines, each a reality similar in some degree to
our own. But most of the others have been destroyed. I asked the ghost Jolie
to undertake a special mission: to align the adjacent timeline with ours. In
this manner we hoped to save it from the doom that otherwise threatened,
and perhaps initiate a chain reaction that would save many others. Unfortu-
nately the situation is worse that we supposed, and that timeline, too, is
doomed. Nox will explain.”

Nox nodded. “I defer to Jolie, who was on the scene. Jolie, tell them of
Erebus and his offer. Be complete; time is suspended.” She nodded toward
Chronos, whose shining Hourglass glowed.
Suddenly Jolie was the cynosure. For a moment she quailed, then ral-
lied. She described her excursion to T2, her long association with Kerena,
the manner Kerena had influenced the placements of all the other Incarna-
tions, the discovery of Erebus, and his concluding offer. “It seems that this is
Timeline One, the original, that Erebus can’t destroy directly without our
acquiescence,” she concluded. “We must decide whether to accept his offer,
in the hope of recovering the other timelines, at the risk of our own.”
Orlene glanced at Nox’s throne. “Erebus. We grant you no vote here,
but has the case been fairly presented?”
Erebus appeared beside the throne of Night. “Aye.” He faded. Jolie was
surprised; he had said he would be present, but she had for the moment
forgotten. He really could, as he claimed, hide even from Incarnations.
Orlene glanced around, then spoke. “We will have a chain of votes,
until we reach consensus. Do we accept Erebus’s offer? Thanatos.”
Death spoke. “This risks not the mere death of individuals, whose souls
are preserved, but our reality itself. That is too much. Nay.”
“Chronos.”
“This is not a manipulation of time, but the possible destruction of time
itself. Nay.”
“Clotho, Lachesis, Atropos.”
Niobe, the central aspect of Fate, spoke. “This risks Fate itself, destroy-
ing the entire tapestry. We are agreed: nay.”
“Mars.”
“There can be no War if there is no cosmos. Nay.”
“Gaea.”
Orb spoke. “Nature prefers to leave nothing to pure chance. Nay.”
“Satan.”
“Hell is a better risk than nonexistence. Nay.”
“God,” Orlene said, calling on her own office. “Heaven, too, is better
than nonexistence. Nay.” She looked at Kerena. “Nox.” The Incarnation of
Night had not participated directly in the vote for the new God, but was this
time.
Kerena spoke. “Aye.” She glanced at Jolie. “Speak to my case.”
Again, Jolie was caught by surprise. The vote was seven to one against
accepting the offer, and she was supposed to argue for the one? How could
she even attempt it?
The eight Incarnations gazed silently at her. They seemed neither con-
cerned nor impatient.
Then it came together. Jolie asked a question of her own: “Are we to be

safe and selfish?”
Satan shook his head. “Trust my ancient beloved to find the key. What
point safety, if we are heedless of the welfare of others? This is not the kind
of evil I advocate; there is no justice in it, no redemption. I reverse: Aye.”
“I am shamed,” Gaea said. “I would not doom my alternate selves for
my own benefit. Aye.”
“I, too, am shamed,” Orlene said. “I gave up my life for my child. Will I
not risk it for the universe as we now know it, the Tree? Aye.”
The Death figure spoke. “I once asked Orlene to consider how seriously
she viewed her mission. She refused to take the selfish route, and thereby
gained her objective that she thought lost. How can I do otherwise? Aye.”
“One timeline risked,” Chronos said. “A myriad to be gained, though I
will not see them. Aye.”
“We of Fate, too, reconsider,” Niobe said. “I owe my position, ultimately,
to Nox. We prefer to join her. Aye.”
“And there will be war,” Mars said. “Between the two Aspects of the
Incarnation of Night. Given fair rules of engagement, Aye.”
“We accept the offer,” Orlene said without other comment. “Now we
will negotiate for the rules of engagement.”
rs
The rules of engagement were weird. Someone, probably Satan with
Lilah’s advice, had invented a new competition to fit the need, simple but
tricky. Erebus and Nox met in a dream, in free-fall, floating in a misty envi-
ronment, naked. The surrounding fog alternated at irregular intervals aver-
aging three minutes between blue and pink. Blue was Erebus’s color, favor-
ing him, the male; pink favored female Nox. The object was to have the sex
required to fertilize her with the Incarnation of Dreams in a chosen envi-
ronment. If it occurred in blue fog, Erebus won; in pink fog, Nox won. They
had merely to keep their eyes out for the color, and seek the act in the right
one.
Each of them had loops affixed to their hands and feet. Her pink loops
would immobilize any part of his body they encircled, from the point of
contact to the end. If she looped his neck, all of his body would lose volition,
making him helpless. The paralysis would last one minute, then abate, and
the loop would need to rest for a minute before its power was restored. So it
was not a contest of strength so much as timing and dexterity. She needed to
immobilize him in pink fog, make the connection, and hold it for one minute.
He needed to do the same to her in blue.
The problem was that they could never be sure how long a color would
hold. It might be six minutes or ten seconds, randomly generated. The three
minute average was only a crude guideline. A perfect hold would be wasted

if the color changed. Chance was a major factor. In this dream state they had
no powers of phasing out or checking the future; it was all blindly ongoing.
No database or advice from the sideline. They were purely now and physical,
Kerena and Cain. For as long as it took.
Because the game was newly devised, they had no experience with it.
That made it even, in that sense. Neither of them had been playing entertain-
ment games in the past millennium; their games had been all business, seek-
ing advantage or accomplishment.
The fog was pink. Kerena stalked Cain, finding that she was able to
move in the direction she wished despite having no firm ground. She swung
her loops to get the proper feel of them; they were flexible and controlled by
her will. She looped his left wrist, but at the same time he looped her un-
guarded left wrist. Her hand went numb. She threw herself back, to with-
draw her hand by hauling it clear with the rest of her body, but the loop had
closed firmly. Meanwhile he did escape her loop, which she had failed to
tighten. A pox on the initial learning curve!
Cain looped her right arm at the elbow, and pulled it tight. Now she
could not escape. He held her before him, his member erect; he was quite
ready for sex. But it was not his time, while the fog remained pink.
Then the fog changed to blue, fading to neutral in the course of five
seconds, and taking the new color in another five. Now Cain had her by hand
and arm, and it was his turn. He hauled her in, angling for entry.
But her legs were free. She lifted them and set her feet against his hips,
holding him out from her body. He pushed forward but was balked. He could
not penetrate her while her feet were free. Then he twisted to the side, and
her feet slid off, allowing him to get his body close to hers. He grinned, savor-
ing his victory.
Her left hand recovered its feeling. The minute was up; the loop’s effect
had worn off. Quickly she slipped it free and looped his right hand, revers-
ing the hold. Her right arm followed, recovering. But he caught on, and
whipped his hand and loop away. She had the advantage, but not enough,
and the fog remained blue.
By the time the fog was pink again, her loop had lost its effect and Cain
was free. But they had both learned things. Looping hands or arms was not
enough; the legs had to be immobilized too, and at the right time. Better yet,
loop the neck, and have the whole body vulnerable; then there could be no
counter-attack. For a minute, at least. Longer, if one neck-loop could be
switched for another after a minute. Loop time management could be criti-
cal.
She looped one of his feet, but he looped one of her arms again, and the
position was indeterminate. He couldn’t pin her during his color, and she
couldn’t pin him during hers. They were evenly matched, in their inexperi-

ence, as physical strength counted for little. Both protected their heads, and
while one tried to loop one limb, the other went for another limb. At one
point she looped his right arm with her left foot-loop, and his left arm with
her right hand loop, and the color was hers, but the position was too awk-
ward to manage. She couldn’t do anything with one foot held up against his
elbow and his lower body free to swing away. Then her loops lost strength,
and he reversed it and pressed in close to her as the color changed. But the
color changed again in thirty seconds, forcing him to stop, and soon his loops
lost effect.
She realized that more was required than mere sparring. She needed a
larger strategy. How could she succeed in immobilizing him at just the right
time? The chances were close to even that the color would change, giving
him the advantage at just the wrong time.
Cain formed a huge foot loop and whipped it at her leg. She countered
by snapping her legs together so that one could not be caught. That turned
out to be disaster; the loop circled both legs and tightened about her waist.
Suddenly all of her body below the waist lost volition. He bent his knee and
came close as her powerless legs drifted apart. The fog was blue.
“Now take it, loser,” he said. His form became that of a gorilla. He in-
tended to make it clear that she was being ravished.
Kerena was so surprised that she forgot to resist for a moment, and he
looped one of her hands. He could change form? No, as he touched her she
realized that it was illusion. She countered by assuming the seeming of a
crocodile, snapping at his face with her long toothy snout. That made him
jerk back, before he realized that this, too, was illusion.
Then the loops lost power, and she was free. The one remained about
her waist but had no further effect; he would have to remove it to let it
recover. She tried to keep tension on it so he couldn’t get it off her, but it
foiled her and fell away. Meanwhile she went for his head. He blocked that
with his arm, and the loop slid aside. The color changed to pink. They were
even again.
But that gave her an idea. Cain didn’t merely want to win, he wanted to
win with style. To make her suffer worse by being seemingly ravished by a
monster. That could be a dangerous distraction on his part.
She sparred, foiling him and being foiled by him. She tried a kick at his
groin, but her foot shied away; that kind of combat was not allowed. He was
similarly unable to strike at her breasts or pull her hair. The loops were the
only physical weapons.
She would have to gamble horrendously, but if she had figured him
correctly, it would give her a better than even chance of winning. That was
the edge she needed.
She came at him during the blue fog, focusing on both his arms to-

gether. She got one, but missed the other, and that gave him an opening. He
lifted his free hand and dropped its loop over her head. It became snug, and
her entire body became inert.
“Fool!” he said. He assumed the form of a bear, pulled her close, and
penetrated her unresisting body.
Only her head was free. She screamed piercingly. “No! No!” She whipped
her head about, causing her hair to flair.
“Scream. Struggle,” he said approvingly. He brought his seeming snout
down for a kiss. But he did not forget what counted: he was holding the
nether connection for the minute required.
“No! Please!” she cried, trying to avoid his cruel kiss. Her face was the
only part of her capable of resisting his embrace.
“Delightful,” he said. “I think I like you better this way, hating your
loss.” He tried again for a kiss.
This time she met him, kissing him back. That surprised him, but he
held it, enjoying it. He didn’t know what ploy she could be trying, but re-
fused to be distracted from the vital action below.
At last he lifted his head, savoring his victory. “I think the minute has
passed.” Then he froze: the fog was pink. “How long—?”
“Thirty seconds,” she said. “You did not complete your minute. Now
you’re on mine.”
He tried to jerk away—and discovered that not only had the color
changed, his loop had lost its potency. She had quietly looped his arms and
wrapped her legs around his hips. He struggled, but could not escape. In this
setting her strength matched his. She held him as the next thirty seconds
passed, bringing her to the completion of her minute. Connected and in
pink.
He had been distracted trying to torture her, and not seen the color
change in time. She had continued crying past the resumption of her free-
dom, as if remaining caught. She had deceived him. And won.
“Damn,” he said.
“Come into me, Erebus,” she said as her powers recovered beyond the
dream. She sucked him into her, like a reverse birth, making him part of her
body. She became the whole of Night and Darkness.
Then she birthed the baby he had become, for there were no human
delays with the Incarnations. She squeezed him out: the Incarnation of
Dreams. She had accomplished the rest of her mission.
The dream framework dissolved. Nox was back in her own chamber,
with the baby. Jolie was there, amazed. “Tell them I won,” she said. “All of us
won.”
rs

It was an elaborate hall, decorated for a party. Kerena was in a translu-
cent evening gown, her hair loose and half floating. She looked devastatingly
lovely.
Jolie was in a gown too, looking her best. Perhaps slightly better than
her best in life. “Where are we?”
“In Erebus,” Kerena said.
“But I thought you absorbed him.”
“I did, and birthed his substance as the Incarnation of Dreams. Then I
locked him into a region between the mortal realm and Hades. He has be-
come Erebus the place.”
“But isn’t that dangerous? Suppose he locks us in?”
“He can’t. I deprived him of that power. But it hardly matters; this is not
the literal place, but a communal dream recreation of it. I needed an ambi-
ance that anyone can visit, for this special party.”
“Party?”
“To celebrate the salvation of my timeline—and all the others. It has
been a long and sometimes difficult chore, as you know.”
Jolie studied the hall. “It is a very well appointed dream. But where is it?
I mean, in which timeline?”
“In no specific timeline, because some guests will be from the first,
some from the second. Most can’t cross, but the dream has no such restric-
tion.”
“Guests?”
“They will be arriving soon. Most are from T1, as are you. But I am from
T2, and a few others. There will be no problem.”
“No problem,” Jolie agreed uncertainly.
A handsome young man appeared. He reminded Jolie strongly of Sir
Gawain of old. “Thank you, Jolie.”
“Meet Gaw Two, in his adult form,” Kerena said. “He crafted this dream,
of course.”
Music started. “Will you honor me with the first dance, Grandmother?”
“By all means.” The two danced, perfectly, an extraordinarily hand-
some couple. Mother and son, grandson, great grandson on through the
centuries, at last reunited, he cured and eternal as an Incarnation.
A man appeared. “May I cut in?”
“Of course, Morely.” And as Kerena entered his embrace, Jolie saw that
it was true. Her first lover had returned. That was an advantage of a dream
setting: life and death no longer mattered. Morely had spent some time in
Purgatory but finally made it to Heaven, and of course his soul had been
released for this occasion.
“I always knew you had promise,” Morely told her. “Now you have saved
the central trunk of the Tree of Life.”

Gaw Two turned to Jolie with a flourish. They danced, and he was the
perfect partner. Jolie smiled. “I knew you when you were a baby,” she said.
“More than once.”
“I am the culmination of fifteen hundred years of babies,” he agreed.
“Grandmother, bless her, simply would not give over until she had restored
me.”
“Well, she loves you.”
They finished the dance and went to sit on the sideline. “Mother has an
impressive guest list,” he remarked. Mother was Orlene, the Incarnation of
Good, who had fought as hard to save him in her way as Kerena had in hers.
She had coordinated with Nox to set this up.
A pretty young woman appeared. “Molly!” Kerena cried, hurrying to
embrace her old young friend.
“Congratulations on saving the timeline. Lovely party.”
“Would you object if I invited Morgan le Fey also?”
Molly paused. “I never achieved vengeance against her.”
“This would not be for that purpose. I am inviting those who had sig-
nificance in my life or career.”
Molly shrugged. “It’s your party.”
Morgan le Fey appeared, also eloquently garbed. “Thank you, dear,”
she said to Molly.
“You put a curse on me! Before I was even born.”
“And have you never cursed innocents?” the Fey inquired. “Those you
spoke to on the streets of Kilvarough, doomed to die soon?” She turned to
Kerena. “I was correct. You had too much potential to remain with me.”
“I did learn much from you,” Kerena said.
“Of course.”
“Not all of it was true.”
“Of course. Have you never deceived others in the line of business?”
And of course Nox was the mistress of secrets and deception, and was guilty.
Morely approached. “Fey, you are a fascinating sociopath.”
“Of course.” She moved into his arms for the next dance, her décolletage
drifting artfully downward. She had put on her most seductive figure for this
occasion.
Molly shook her head. “She has grace and nerve, but I don’t want to be
like her, even in death.”
“You will never be like her,” Kerena said.
The original Sir Gawain appeared. “I would have married you if I could
have,” he said, embracing Kerena.
“I know it.” She kissed him. “I finally saved our son.”
“So I see.” He kissed her again. “Oh, Rena, I wish we could—”
“We can,” she said. “Take over as hostess, Jolie.” The two faded out.

Jolie nodded to herself. So this was to be that kind of a party. But there
could be complications.
Vanja appeared. “Kerena sends you this,” Jolie said, hugging her. “And
wants you to know that Morely is yours, for the moment.”
“Ah, delight!” She turned, caught Morely’s eye, and the two faded from
their separate locations, leaving the Fey without a dancing partner. It seemed
the dream had many chambers.
Lilah appeared. She looked surprised. “I’m on the guest list?”
“It includes all those who had significance in her life or career. You
helped her handle Lucifer.”
“I did,” Lilah agreed. “Because I fell in love with his successor. Now if
only—”
Satan appeared. “I see Nox is busy at the moment, so you will have to
do, demoness.”
“I’m second to her?” she demanded.
“Third. My true love is Gaea, but I don’t find her here.”
Lilah was outraged. “Parry, I refuse—”
“Refuse what? You’re War’s concubine now. You can hardly object to
being second when you yourself are straying.”
“Well, you were going to destroy me for failing to corrupt War.”
“I was angry. But later I remembered how sexy you can be when you
try, and forgave you in my fashion.”
“So I discovered subsequently. Many times. Your fashion is certainly
virile. But being third is beneath my station, and I don’t belong to you any
more.”
“But you do still love me.”
“That’s irrelevant. You never loved me. I was just your sex slave.”
“An excellent one,” he agreed.
“I’m not sorry I got back at you for heartlessly using me.” The demoness
evidently enjoyed playing the wronged maiden.
“I am after all the Incarnation of Evil.” He glanced sidelong at her. “You
got back at me by not corrupting War?”
“That, too. I also told Thanatos that you had never released a soul from
Hell.”
“I released five souls in the fourteenth century.”
“I know. It was a wonderful lie. Thanatos believed it and told Nox, and
she put it in the database, thus also the Purgatory Computer, so everyone
believed you never released souls.”
“You lied about the Father of Lies!”
“My supreme achievement,” Lilah agreed. “So as I said, I refuse to oblige
your selfish carnal passion again. In fact I refuse—”
He caught her and kissed her.

“To wait any longer,” she finished, and the two faded out. The game
could play out only so long.
Kermit appeared, from his future science timeline. “Kerena welcomes
you,” Jolie said. “But she is busy at the moment. However, Molly is here, in
her own form.”
“You’re still such a handsome man,” Molly said, stepping into him. They
faded.
Fate appeared, in the Aspect of Lachesis. “Welcome, Niobe!” Jolie said.
“Nox is—”
“She was always more physical than I was,” Niobe said. “And more
mysterious. I am here for the party.” Soon she was mixing with the guests
who remained in the scene.
Gaea appeared. “Welcome, Orb!” Jolie said. “I’m so glad you could join
the party. This is Gaw Two grown, and Morgan le Fey, and of course you
know your mother Niobe.”
But Orb had something else on her mind at the moment. “Where is
Parry?”
The Fey smiled cruelly. “With the erotic demoness, of course, who wasn’t
his second choice. They interact marvelously.”
That was the connection Jolie had sought to conceal. Naturally the evil
sorceress had clarified it, in a misleading manner.
There was a rumble of not-very-distant thunder. “Oh?”
Orlene appeared. “Please, Mother, don’t make a scene. You know how
tangled our relationships are.”
“Yes, daughter,” Niobe said. “It ill behooves Nature to go awry.”
Orb sighed. “It seems Nature must give way to the Incarnations of Good
and Fate.” She hugged both. “It is good to see you both, informally.”
Gabriel appeared. “Am I late?”
“Not at all, Angel,” the Fey said. “I’m sure Nox will join you when she
finishes with the knight.”
Orlene turned to Gabriel, frowning. “What is your interest in Nox?”
He was taken aback. “Um—”
Then they couldn’t hold it back any longer. They all laughed. Of course
all the Incarnations and their associates knew who related to whom in what
ways; the mischievous Purgatory Computer was quite current, naturally.
Tolerance was endemic.
Gaw Two approached the Fey. “Naturally I have no idea what the hu-
mor is, having grown up in the past hour, but I suspect you have interesting
explanations. Shall we dance?”
“I shall be happy to enhance your imagination,” the Fey said, stepping
rather too closely into his embrace as her gown threatened to fall apart at
strategic seams. “Have you encountered dirty dancing yet?”

“The distaff hound!” Gabriel swore. “She will never be admitted to
Heaven.”
“Considering that she is on temporary leave from Hell,” Jolie said, “that
seems likely.”
“I must say, it’s an interesting dance,” Gabriel said, observing closely.
“I am familiar with it,” Jolie said. “Would you like a demonstration?”
He nodded. “Of course you would be conversant, Bride of Satan. Yes, I
would.” He took her hand as they moved onto the dance floor.
“This is the first time I have embraced you in my own likeness,” Jolie
said as she moved in close to demonstrate the moves. “Always before I have
been with Kerena.”
“You are interesting in your own right. We certainly appreciate what
you have done for the second timeline.” He was rapidly catching on to the
moves.
Was he suggesting a tryst? He was, as she knew from prior observation,
considerably male beneath the extreme caution his position in Heaven re-
quired. Jolie was definitely interested. “The dance merely emulates move-
ments better performed without clothing.”
“Why settle for mere emulation?”
Then the other dancing couple faded out. Fate, Nature, and Good stared,
aghast.
“Damn,” Jolie murmured, seeing opportunity lost.
“I could not have said it,” Gabriel said. “Thank you.”
“I believe it is time to call the meeting to order,” Orlene said grimly.
“Gabriel?”
The naughty side of the dream had definitely been aborted. “Of course,”
Gabriel agreed regretfully. He was ever the loyal and efficient right hand of
God. He disengaged from Jolie’s torso and clapped his hands.
Suddenly all fifteen at the party were present, seated in the meeting hall
that the dance hall had become. Several looked somewhat surprised and di-
sheveled. Gaw Two seemed amazed and the Fey angry; Orlene had evidently
acted in time to preserve a bit of her child’s innocence. Parry and Orb now
sat blithely together and Lilah was in a waitress’ uniform, serving refresh-
ments. Things had been firmly set in order.
“May I introduce the Incarnation of Night,” Gabriel said smoothly. “Nox,
the mistress of this particular dream.”
“Thank you, Angel,” Kerena said. She had evidently had the time she
needed to complete her business with Sir Gawain and put herself back in
order. Probably she had peeked ahead along the timeline and made sure of
it. “We have secured the first and second timelines. It was easy to do once
Erebus was vanquished.”
“That’s something I don’t understand,” Vanja said. “Timeline Two was

doomed, because you saved me instead of aligning it to Timeline One. How
did that change?”
“I can answer that,” Morely said. “The default is the original timeline. It
is always easier to make it conform than to change it. That is why Jolie was
able to keep the lines straight; Erebus could not make his changes hold as
long as Nox supported alignment. But once she accepted a deviation, that
became the primary course, and she could not subsequently revise it with-
out his acquiescence. Since he was determined to channel it into destruction,
only his elimination enabled her to save it. She made the necessary changes,
and it is now no longer doomed.”
“But it isn’t identical,” Vanja said. “I died in the original, and lived in
the second.”
“There are many routes to salvation,” Niobe said. “The timelines don’t
have to be identical any more. Identity was the only way to be sure of saving
Timeline Two while Erebus was trying to steer it wrong. Now we have more
freedom.”
“But there is still a considerable job to do,” Kerena said. “We have se-
cured two, but there is an infinite number of others that are doomed unless
they too are revised to eliminate the deviations Erebus caused. There will
have to be a knowledgeable emissary from T2 to attend to T3, and thereafter
from T3 to T4 and so on, as we discussed before.”
Jolie had almost forgotten that. “I will do it, of course. Or my T2 self
will.”
Orlene nodded approvingly. “We certainly appreciate it. Go with our
Blessing.”
rs
It was the time of a great king who ruled from a shining city. In a small
village in this kingdom was a family with two daughters. Jolie Two searched
for the younger daughter. She had a mission to accomplish.
A great central tree had been trimmed of most of its branches. Now
they were reappearing, one by one. In time and space, with diligence and
conscience, it would be restored.

AUTHOR’S NOTE
The Incarnations of Immortality series started with Death. Not merely
the novel; my concern with the subject. I am, by my definition, mildly de-
pressive, and I think about death a lot. So finally I made something of it, and
wrote On a Pale Horse, a novel featuring Death as the central character. It
has a story, of course, but the essence of it was the thoughts along the way,
touching on various aspects of death. My breakthrough was in devising death
as an office rather than merely a role, so that an ordinary person could step
into it. Once I had that concept, I realized it was possible to go onto other key
aspects of existence: Time, Fate, War, Nature, Evil, and Good.
Originally I planned to stop at five novels, because I thought readers
would consider it unacceptable to address Satan and God fictively. But as
reader responses came in, I found no such concern, so I decided to complete
the roster. Thus I added two more, and that completed the series, I thought.
But readers didn’t want to let it go. They urged me to write more, tackling the
minor Incarnations, perhaps with a collection of stories, or a novel about
Nox, the Incarnation of Night. I demurred, because I felt that after God any-
thing else would be anticlimactic. It would require considerable effort to
review the complicated novels and get forgotten elements straight, and the
effort might not be appreciated anyway. Thus it continued for about 15 years.
Then two things happened. I learned of a chronology a reader, “Phoe-
nix,” had made for the series. He had worked out the dates of events from
clues in the novels and put it all together as consistently as was feasible. That
timeline is available on the Internet: http://www.spundreams.net/~phoe-
nix/IoIChron.html. This did much of my homework for me; instead of hav-
ing to do copious rereading and note-taking, I could use this as an excellent
starting point. The other was a long letter from Stephen Smith, who not only
suggested Nox, but had three pages of summary for the novel he proposed,
Under a Velvet Cloak. I considered that, and concluded that it was feasible: it
would indeed make a novel.
So I queried my readers via my bimonthly column at my http://
www.hipiers.com website. What about it: did they favor or disfavor such a
project? The vote was overwhelmingly positive: they favored it. Accordingly

I decided to write the novel, and worry about marketing it later.
One contributing factor was that at this time there was a motion picture
option on the first novel in the series, with Disney working on it. A movie
would probably increase the market for a new novel, making it more likely
that my effort would not be wasted: I would be able to find a publisher. Many
readers think that a successful author can sell anything he writes; that’s not
the case. The market is highly competitive, and the dubious judgment of
editors is notorious. I had a number of unsold novels that I was marketing or
self publishing, and they’re not stinkers. I wanted them to be available for
reading, one way or another. So this movie option made a difference.
An option doesn’t necessarily mean there will be a movie; it is in es-
sence a reservation placed on the book for a year or more while the option
holder explores the prospects: screenplay, financing, location, studio, suit-
able actors, prospective audience, and related aspects. If everything falls into
place, the option is exercised and the movie made. They don’t want to do all
that work only to discover that in the interim someone else has grabbed it for
a movie. The option guarantees that such a thing can’t happen. They pay for
the option, and if they don’t make the movie, the author keeps the option
money. Options are free cash for writers. Exercised options are barrels of
money for the authors. Sure, they may change things all around, perhaps
ruining it, but the average writer needs the money. That’s why the standard
advice is to take the money and run.
Thus early in 2004 I started writing, following Stephen Smith’s sum-
mary. This is the only time I have done this: writing a novel based on a sum-
mary by a reader. His thoughts were not always mine, and increasingly as I
went I added elements of my own, finally leaving the summary and going
entirely on my own. So in general the first part of the novel is as conceived
by him, and the last part is mine. But the novel would not have come to be at
all without his summary.
Stephen had analyzed the first seven volumes of the series, and used
logic, interpolation, extrapolation, intuition, and imagination to fill in the
blanks. “I think now is the appropriate time for this story to be revealed,” he
said. But a story based on a careful study of a series is necessarily derivative,
and despite the claims of critics, that’s not the kind of thing I write. I needed
a story that fit the existing parameters but was not merely a restatement of
familiar themes. I needed to widen the compass, including novelty and new
perspective, without departing too far from the original framework. It is an
ongoing judgment call for series writing. So there are aspects that are neither
in the summary nor the prior novels, such as the multiple Timelines of the
Tree of Life. This is part of the creative process for such a project.
I did spot research to buttress my references, and this got into aspects of
the Arthurian legend to get Morgan le Fey and Sir Gawain straight. In the

process I realized what a tangled skein those legends are. For example, King
Arthur’s wife Guinevere falls in love with his chief knight Sir Lancelot. That
forbidden love aspect is found in other knights and in variants of the same
ones, depending on who is retelling the tale. In one version, Lancelot is loved
by two women, both named Elaine. In another it is Tristan with two Iseults,
one the wife of the king he serves. I tried to steer generally clear of the main
legend, catching it peripherally, as this novel is about Nox, not Arthur.
Another reader, Tim Bruening, was at this time reading my series and
sending me up to three emails a day asking awkward questions. Some were
about this series. In On a Pale Horse, Chronos mentions Adolf Hitler, but in
For Love of Evil Chronos eliminates the Nazi Holocaust. “How can he do that
without eliminating Hitler as leader of the Axis?” I answered that Hitler may
have been diverted, so didn’t get around to the Jewish pogrom. He asked how
come Luna’s hair ranged from bright chestnut to dull brown in different
novels. I answered that Luna’s natural hair was honey blonde; she dyed it to
fool Satan, and must have used different dyes at different times that didn’t
quite match. In Bearing an Hourglass, magic has a range of about one Earth
diameter, so how could a magic-powered saucer fly to the moon? I answered
that magic, like gravity, surely faded gradually with distance; the original
figure would have been an approximation for full-effect magic, not the ulti-
mate limit.
A simpler explanation would be that in the course of seven complicated
novels, the author lost track of some details. They were written before the
days of the personal computer, so I couldn’t do a Find to verify prior refer-
ences. In fact they were written in pencil, then typed for sending to the agent
and publisher. I considered trying to address such questions in this 8th novel,
but concluded that one omnibus answer would have to do: there are many
timelines, differing from each other in slight or significant manner, so that
just about every possible combination of human event, science/magic ef-
fect, or hair color is to be found somewhere. The Incarnations have superior
powers, and may catch glimpses of alternate timelines, accounting for stray
references. Meanwhile I made sure to get Tim’s feedback on this present
novel, and try to correct errors before they appear in print.
Fantasy is generally low-research writing, but this novel required a lot
of background thought and some spot research. A decade back Patricia Telesco
sent me her book Folkways—Reclaiming the Magic & Wisdom. I saved it for
future research, and used it for some of the folk wisdom and belief Kerena
learned from Morely. Of course there’s a great deal more in the volume than
the tidbits I used. It really pays to have the right reference at the right time.
I also had an idea I wanted to use somewhere: the virtual computer,
projected from a tiny cube, with the virtual parts such as screen and key-
board working in the normal manner. I was watching a movie in a theater

when it abruptly jelled: that would fit in this science/magic framework. That
was actually the point when I decided to write the novel; it tipped the bal-
ance. So that computer is there, concealed as Nox’s coin, and I hope that
before too long something like it exists in our own realm. True convenience:
carry it in your pocket or on your wrist, expand it by virtual projection when
you need to use it while traveling, eating, taking a bath, in bed or wherever.
Almost like magic.
In each of the prior novels of this series, the events of my life seemed to
echo the subjects of the novels. Was that the case with this one, tackled fif-
teen years later? I’m not sure, but perhaps I can make a case. By this time I
am pushing 70 in age, my children are long gone into their adult lives, and
my career as a best-selling author is over a decade past. My wife and I and a
big dog, Obsidian, live in a house on our tree farm, coming up on our 48th
anniversary in reasonable health considering our retirement age. It’s really a
pretty dull life, aside from my writing career.
That career, however, may be changing. In that post-best-seller decade
I made a sustained effort to get my books consideration by the motion pic-
ture industry, and at this time—mid 2004—have three serious movie op-
tions on three series, and interest in one or two more. A movie can make a
big difference, and a good movie can make a huge difference. So there is a
reasonable chance that I will live to see a restoration of my former success.
Does that relate to the way Nox manages to rescue the other timelines from
destruction? Well, it was a thought.
At any rate, I think this novel does conclude the series, though perhaps
only Nox knows for sure, and she’s not telling.
—Piers Anthony,

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Piers Anthony is one of the world’s most prolific and
popular authors.  His fantasy Xanth novels have been read
and loved by millions of readers around the world, and
have appeared on the New York Times Best Seller list 21
times.
Although Piers is mostly known for fantasy and sci-
ence fiction, he has written novels in other genres as well,
including historical fiction, martial arts, and horror.
Piers Anthony’s official website is HI PIERS at www.hipiers.com, where
he publishes his bi-monthly online newsletter. Piers lives with his wife in a
secret forest, hidden deep in Central Florida.

