

Andy Oram
Pitching Your IoT Project
How to Get Executive Buy-In

978-1-491-95288-7
[LSI]
Pitching Your IoT Project
by Andy Oram
Copyright © 2016 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Jeff Bleiel
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Randy Comer
January 2016:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2016-01-22: First Release
2016-03-01: Second Release
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Pitching Your IoT
Project and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
While the publisher and the author have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the authors disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without
limitation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this
work. Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own
risk. If any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is sub‐
ject to open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your
responsibility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or
rights.

Table of Contents
Pitching Your IoT Project. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
Before Your Pitch                                                                                    3
Focusing on Benefits                                                                               4
The Impact on Your Company’s Business                                            6
Making Your Pitch                                                                                  8
vii


Pitching Your IoT Project
Many developers are chomping at the bit to become experts at cur‐
rent breakthrough technologies in sensors, embedded systems, mesh
networking protocols, big data analytics—all the elements of what’s
popularly known as the Internet of Things (IoT). Many CxO-level
executives are also interested in the IoT and how they can broaden
their grasp of its potential.
But if you’re a developer trying to get corporate buy-in for an IoT
project, you need to understand that the pitch is somewhat different
from one for a typical new product or technology buy. You will be
implicitly (and perhaps explicitly) asking for new ways for depart‐
ments within the company to communicate, new ways to make
management decisions based on the data your project will generate,
new forms of customer interaction, and possibly even major
changes in staffing. Go in with your eyes open, and take the time to
develop a compelling pitch that can lead to these outcomes.
Why is the IoT such a challenge to organizations that adopt its tech‐
nologies? Consider a few example projects and their potential
impact on a typical company.
One IoT project may connect sensors to machinery in your com‐
pany’s factory so that engineers can tell when heat, stress, or normal
degradation will cause a machine to fail. This is not particularly dis‐
ruptive to the company. Even so, your company will have to:
• Find engineers who understand the causes of machine malfunc‐
tions, and who can recommend or create sensors to accurately
measure these warning signs.
1

• Redesign machines to incorporate these sensors, and not break
the sensors during normal operations.
• Design software user interfaces and alert systems that allow
maintenance personnel to receive warnings in a timely manner.
• Train maintenance personnel to check for warnings and adjust
their schedules so they respond as needed (rather than follow‐
ing routine maintenance procedures).
Your company may also need to purchase new machines that will
enable you to fully take advantage of the data that will be collected
from the sensors, which might move the project into the “big data”
realm.
The impact may be even greater in a situation where a company
plans to have sensors incorporated into a customer-facing product,
with the same goal of identifying failures before they happen. In this
case, your company may need to:
• Consult with each department within the company (starting
with the service group, which provides the original business
case for adding sensors) to see what data they can use and how
they can use it to improve the customer experience or stream‐
line the organization.
• Evaluate all the likely circumstances under which customers
deploy your products, so the sensors do not fall victim to heat
and cold, jarring impacts, water damage, etc. They need a power
source to keep operating over time, and must remain accurate
even when subjected to electrical noise. Connecting previously
unconnected systems also raises issues of security, a well-known
risk in deploying networked products.
• Design protocols to collect massive amounts of data, databases
in which to store it, and tools to analyze it.
• Hold discussions among marketing, PR, legal, and technical
people about the ethics of collecting data and how to respect the
different privacy preferences of customers.
The trend is clear: the IoT provides great promise, but challenges an
organization from top to bottom. This fact should be an underpin‐
ning of the pitch you make to your executives.
2 
| 
Pitching Your IoT Project

Before Your Pitch
Some questions you may need to ask while developing your project
pitch include:
• What business are we in, and where do we need to be?
• What kind of organization and management structure can suc‐
ceed in this business?
• What kinds of staff do we need?
• What new kinds of technology may we need?
Before developing your pitch, hopefully you can talk to some CxO-
level executives about their impressions of IoT technology and their
plans for the future of your business. Michael Glessner, Director of
Kalypso, an innovation consulting firm warns, “Do not approach
such an important proposal from an information vacuum. Don’t
guess; rather engage in meaningful dialogue with the key executive
decision makers to ensure your proposal is immediately relevant to
the needs of the business. That’s the most direct path to a funded
effort.”
Do some internal research in your own organization to find out who
in upper management may already be sympathetic to an IoT strat‐
egy. Decision makers are not functioning in isolation. Like every‐
one, they have been reading about the IoT and will realize that their
industry will move in that direction. A frank discussion with such
executives will help you choose a project that gets approved and
implemented.
To help you in preparing your pitch, keep in mind some of these
general reasons that companies invest in the IoT:
• Improve the product or the customer experience
— Add new functionality, such as automating manual activities
or reporting when wear and tear requires maintenance
— Release products more rapidly, or offer automatic updates
through software and the Internet
— Remove effort from the customer and automate activities
that used to be manual
— Give the customers feedback on their own use and consump‐
tion, helping them reduce resource use
Before Your Pitch 
| 
3

— Integrate the product with others
— Offer a new service, such as letting customers know better
ways to use the product
— Improve access control for security
— Institute leasing licenses instead of purchases
• Improve the manufacturing or delivery processes
— Report how the product is used to help differentiate markets,
develop new products, and respond to long-term market
shifts
— Monitor the machinery that does the manufacturing for
wear and tear
— Support just-in-time delivery and similar efficiencies in the
supply chain
— Predict upcoming shortages of your product
— Target stock more effectively
— Support rapid prototyping
Keeping these larger company goals in mind may help you identify
opportunities that might otherwise be missed.
Focusing on Benefits
Like any presentation to top-level decision makers, an IoT project
pitch should focus on benefits to the organization. Emphasize ideas
that provide better products, provide products faster, or result in
additional services that improve the customers’ lives and productiv‐
ity, and build customer relationships.
In some ways, the pitch you develop will be like a pitch for any
product. But instead of incremental improvement over current com‐
pany offerings, you are recommending new practices that challenge
the organization. Sample pitches might start like this:
• Our service department can discover imminent machine fail‐
ures and provide maintenance before they occur. Potential ben‐
efits include happy and grateful customers (if the machines are
in the field), more efficient use of staff resources, cheaper main‐
tenance from catching problems early, and data we can use to
identify weak points in the products and strengthen them.
4 
| 
Pitching Your IoT Project

• Our sales and marketing team would like to learn how custom‐
ers are using our motorcycles so we can recommend new prod‐
uct features. We’d like to answer questions such as: Do custom‐
ers ride the motorcycles to work every day or save them for
weekend excursions? Are they partial to riding in certain types
of weather? Potential benefits include getting new features to
market faster, saving money by not designing in features that
customers don’t care about, and refining sales pitches to focus
on known customer needs. In the long term, we may provide
customers with software tools to plan trips and increase the use
of their motorcycles.
• Our engineers would like to install bed sensors so hospitals
know when patients get out of bed, and when they are staying in
bed for long periods of time without moving. This will help pre‐
vent falls and bedsores, improving their care and revenues. Data
collected from the beds can help them recognize what infirmi‐
ties or treatments are associated with the falls and bedsores.
You get the idea. Every pitch hits the executives with some immedi‐
ate return on investment but leads into a more visionary plan. Alan
Cohen, author of the book Prototype to Product, suggests that, in
more conservative companies that have been historically focused on
physical products rather than software, you should frame the pitch
to minimize risk.
A bit of fear-mongering is not out of place in your pitch. “You had
better disrupt your business before some outsider does it for you,”
says Andy Timm, VP, Technology Platform Group for ThingWorx, a
PTC business. You can quite rationally remind executives that if
they don’t enhance their production process or products, others will
leap ahead by doing so. It is possible that a healthy industry of 10
companies could be reduced to a single one, if that one achieves
massive efficiencies or wins the hearts of consumers with amazing
new technological features. The winner might not even come from
existing competitors, but from some hitherto unknown high-tech
firm that just happens to decide that your little machine tools niche
would be nice to add to their roster.
Also, as in the motorcycle example above, consider whether your
company may be in a position to develop service-oriented software
products, which could help establish long-term relationships with
customers. Advantages of this could include:
Focusing on Benefits 
| 
5

• You can generate revenue continuously over a period of years
from a single sale.
• Your revenue comes from software, which scales more easily
and costs less than shipping physical products. (Software’s
incremental costs are marginal.)
• You can help your customers achieve goals they value and
embed your brand more firmly in your customer base.
• The data you collect can be marketed for yet another revenue
source.
The Impact on Your Company’s Business
Although this report focuses on obtaining approval for your project
from upper executives, you will eventually need cooperation from
many parts of your organization to carry out the project success‐
fully. For instance, if you plan on adding a service in a company that
currently has only stand-alone products, you’ll have bring in your
sales and finance teams.
In order to launch your IoT project, your company may need to
consider budgeting for and purchasing new technology. Depending
upon the type of IoT solution you need to implement, investing in
technology such as an IoT platform may be critical in supporting
your project. A platform handles IoT “plumbing” tasks (connectiv‐
ity, data collection, security, cloud-based functions), enabling a com‐
pany to concentrate resources on product innovation and the rapid
creation of applications.
Make certain that all parties are aware that many aspects of your
business will be affected by the IoT, including development, archi‐
tecture, platforms, and partnerships. You might also need to inspire
suppliers and customers to join you in this journey.
Staffing could become a major block to achieving your goals. Don’t
underestimate the impact an IoT project will have or the resistance
you will encounter. The goal of many information technology
projects is efficiency, and efficiency often means fewer staff. At the
same time, the data analysis required for such projects requires
sophisticated statisticians (or data scientists, as they are now popu‐
larly called) who are in short supply. In this respect, your company
will be competing with prestigious high-tech firms, deep-pocketed
6 
| 
Pitching Your IoT Project

financial powerhouses, and other organizations across all industry
sectors for a limited pool of highly educated people.
Here is a sample continuum of alterations that various IoT projects
might create in your organization. The evolution somewhat matches
the well-known evolution in sophistication of data use (descriptive,
diagnostic, predictive, prescriptive):
• As data offers new insights into product use and degradation,
existing teams such as service and sales can incorporate it into
their existing operations.
• Software can enhance operations. Augmented reality can help a
technician fix a product. Monitoring can lead to predictive
maintenance.
• Data can start to take over where it used to be a management
prerogative to make decisions. Managers must be willing to fol‐
low the data, but preserve skepticism.
• New services can be built on data, supplementing or replacing
things done by the customer or other parts of your organiza‐
tion.
Your company’s relationships with suppliers, customers, and even
competitors will change. Can you predict the effects of your com‐
pany’s evolution on the competition and what they’re doing in turn?
A strategic shift may turn former competitors into strategic partners
or merger-and-acquisition possibilities. On the other hand, you may
turn your suppliers and customers into rivals as you take over some
of their functions.
Liat Ben-Zur, Head of Digital Technology for Phillips, says, “Com‐
panies that really get it with IoT are dealing with impacts on busi‐
ness models, new engagements, new ways of understanding custom‐
ers, new ways to track what you used to track, new APIs. The IoT
project affects development, architecture, platforms, and partner‐
ships. To provide new value and better outcomes, you should collect
data, analyze it across many devices, and become part of an ecosys‐
tem.”
The Impact on Your Company’s Business 
| 
7

Making Your Pitch
After considering all these factors and doing the prep work, you are
now ready to pitch your executives. Here’s some practical advice on
the nuts and bolts aspects of this final step.
When to pitch
Cohen says that the decision about when to approach executives
depends on the organization and its own readiness to discuss
technological change, but that sooner is usually better than later.
This means you should probably get executives’ buy-in before
doing market research or tapping the company’s customers for
opinions.
How to pitch
PTC’s Andy Timm recommends that you start your pitch by
showing, not telling. For instance, if your proposal involves col‐
lecting data about stress points in your machinery, create a little
augmented reality demo that shows a video of a machine with
superimposed numbers that indicate stresses. Timm has found
that such visually-engaging demos achieve instant buy-in.
Demos also help an executive grasp how a technology project
can help the company’s staff improve their productivity or their
product—which, you’ll remember, is our key goal.
“Save yourself 50 pages of PowerPoint about the business case,”
Timm says. “Let managers draw the dots themselves.” Several
companies offer IoT platforms that facilitate demo develop‐
ment, along with data ingestion, analysis, and many other ele‐
ments of an IoT strategy.
Low-cost and flexible components such as Raspberry Pi or
Arduino boards make it quick and cheap to build demos or pro‐
totypes. During a pitch, your prototype can establish that your
technical requirements are reasonable. For example, it can show
that you’ll be able to collect the data you want, that you can pro‐
duce actionable information that leads to a display or a change
in a device’s activity.
Pitch targets
Eventually, you’ll have to win over all of your executives. But to
start with, you’d like to pitch to someone who says, “Sure, I’ve
been wondering how we can exploit his trend,” not someone
who says, “What’s the Internet of Things?” or “Yeah, I’ve been
8 
| 
Pitching Your IoT Project

reading the hype and it’s not for us.” The right champion will
come on board eventually, but you can move faster by starting
with the already converted.
Developers have a lot of homework to do in advance of making a
pitch. Setting up pre-pitch consultative discussions within your
organization will give you insight on the factors that will influence
your executives. Understanding the project’s wider business implica‐
tions—and including them in your pitch—will enable executives to
more quickly evaluate the idea. Keeping your pitch focused on an
IoT project’s overall strategic value, rather than its technical features,
will go a long way towards successfully achieving buy-in.
Making Your Pitch 
| 
9

About the Author
Andy Oram is an editor at O’Reilly Media. An employee of the
company since 1992, Andy currently specializes in programming
and health IT. His work for O’Reilly includes the first books ever
published commercially in the United States on Linux, and the 2001
title Peer-to-Peer.

