PLUMBING CARE AND 
REPAIR 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
No special skills are required for any of the repairs described 
in this section. 
  
 
 
Plumbing repairs are seldom dangerous unless leaking water 
is soaking areas where there are electrical cables or fittings. 
Switch off the power at the consumer unit and call a 
plumber. 
  
 
 
Undertaking simple plumbing repairs as they occur avoids 
the risk of more expensive work later.  
  
It makes sense to repair leaking taps and overflows as soon 
as possible. They are not only wasting a valuable resource, 
but leaks have a tendency to get worse, causing all manner 
of problems associated with damp. The methods described 
here cover the most common fittings and appliances used in 
the average home. If you find your situation is different, get 
the advice of a plumber before you start work, and always 
remember to turn off the water supply before making 
repairs! 
  
See the B&Q leaflet 'Basic Plumbing' for instructions on 
shutting off your water supply and draining the system.  
 
2  - Clearing wastepipes  
Water draining slowly from a sink, bath or basin is a sure 
sign that a serious blockage is imminent. Leave the water to 
drain, then pour a chemical cleaner down the waste outlet to
dissolve the obstruction before it becomes a major problem. 
Flush out the waste system with clean water. 
 
 
 
If a chemical cleaner fails to clear the blockage, try using a 
sink plunger. Ensure there is enough water in the sink to 
cover the rubber cup of the plunger. Block the overflow 
outlet at the back of the sink or basin with a wet cloth. Place 
the plunger over the waste outlet and pump the plunger up 
and down to create pressure in the pipework.  
 
 
 

Alternatively, use a hand-
operated hydraulic pump. Fill 
the pump with water and 
place it over the waste o
Push down on the handle to
force a jet of water through 
the wastepipe.  
 
If you cannot shift the 
obstruction with pressure, 
you will have to dismantle th
waste system. Sinks and 
basins are fitted with water-sealed traps, designed to 
prevent drain odours entering the house. Check the trap for 
a blockage. 
utlet.
 
e
 
 
 
A bottle trap is designed with a large access cap. Place a 
bucket under the trap and unscrew the cap. Wash out the 
trap then refit the cap.  
 
 
 
To clean a trap that forms a U-bend, you will have to 
remove the complete unit unless it is fitted with a cleaning 
eye sealed with an access cap.  
 
 
 
Access may be provided for clearing blockages in the 
wastepipe beyond the trap. If not, remove the trap and pass 
a hooked wire into the pipe to free the blockage. 
Alternatively, buy a flexible drain auger.  
 
3  - Leaking taps - Replacing washers  
A tap that continues to drip requires rewashering. You will 
have to remove the headgear mechanism to replace it. 
However, when water is leaking from the tap spindle, just 
below the head, it is a sign that the gland packing has failed,
if this is the case see 'Replacing gland packing'.  
 
 
 
Step 1: Turn off the water supply.  
 
 
 
Step 2: For a traditional 
capstan-head pillar tap, first 
remove the cross head by 
releasing its retaining screw. 
Next, unscrew the bulbous 
shroud below the head to 
expose the tap mechanism.  
 
 
 
On modern taps, the head and shroud are one-piece 
mouldings. Simply pull off the push-fit types or remove the 
fixing screw hidden beneath the coloured hot or cold 

identification disc. Use a thin blade to prise out the disc. 
 
 
 
Step 3: Just above the tap body is the headgear nut. 
Holding the tap firmly, unscrew the nut and lift the headgear 
assembly out of the tap body. 
 
 
 
Step 4: You will find the w
washer at the base of the 
assembly attached to the 
'jumper'. With some taps, t
washer fits over a stud in the 
centre of the jumper, and i
simply prised off and 
replaced. Other washers are 
held in place with a retaining 
nut. 
orn 
he 
s 
 
 
 
Bath-tap washers are larger than those required for sink and 
basin taps - replace a worn washer with a new one of the 
correct size.  
 
 
 
Step 5: Before you replace the headgear assembly, check 
the condition of the seat inside the tap body. The washer is 
compressed against the seat, and if the metal is pitted, a 
new tap washer may not prevent the tap leaking.  
 
 
 
Step 6: Buy a reseating tool 
to smooth the seat. Fit the 
tool in the tap body and 
adjust the cutter until it 
begins to remove the pitted 
metal as you turn the h
 
Al
seat over the old one. Th
are supplied as a kit, 
complete with new jumper 
and washer. 
andle.  
ternatively, fit a new plastic 
ese 
 
 
 
The latest type of taps use ceramic discs in place of 
traditional rubber washers. These hard-wearing units last 
longer, but in the event of a leak, it is necessary to replace 
the whole disc cartridge. 
 
4 - Leaking taps - Replacing gland packing  
 
When water is leaking from the tap spindle, just below the 
head, it is a sign that the gland packing has failed. 
 
 

• 
On older taps, the rotating spindle is sealed with a 
waterproof packing that is compressed by a gland 
nut fitted to the top of the headgear assembly.  
• 
Modern taps use rubber O-rings to form the seal.  
Step 1: Turn off the water 
supply.  
 
Step 2: Remove the tap h
and try tightening the gland 
nut. Take care not to 
overtighten the nut as this 
will prevent the spindle 
turning.  
ead 
 
 
Step 3: If the spindle continues to leak, unscrew the gland 
nut and pick out the old packing with a penknife. Replace it 
with plumber's fibre twine wound clockwise around the 
spindle. Grease the twine first with petroleum jelly. Pack it 
down and retighten the gland nut.  
 
 
For taps fitted with O-ring 
seals, remove the headgear 
assembly and pull the old 
seals from their grooves. 
Replace them with new rings 
of appropriate size. Smear 
new O-rings with petroleum 
jelly to ensure they slide 
easily into place. 
 
5 - Stopcocks & gate valves  
 
Stopcocks are valves that control the flow of incoming water 
through the rising main. Due to the build-up of deposits, the 
spindle can become hard to turn. Since a stopcock is used to 
shut off the water during an emergency, it pays to open and 
close the valve occasionally to keep it moving freely.  
 
 
 
Gate valves control the flow of water on the low-pressure 
side of the storage cistern in the loft. If gate valves or 
stopcocks are stiff to turn, apply penetrating oil to their 
spindles and turn them on and off until they begin to 
operate freely.  
 
 
 
If you need to replace an old stopcock, make sure you fit it 
with the arrow moulded on the side of the body pointing in 
the direction of water flow.  
 
6 - Dripping overflow pipes  
 

The level of water in a 
storage cistern, such as the 
one installed in the loft or 
above a toilet, is controlled 
by a float valve. If, for some 
reason, the valve does not 
close automatically, the w
level continues to rise until it 
is diverted to the outside 
an overflow pipe.  
ater 
via 
 
 
Older-pattern float valves are made from brass and are 
fitted with a small rubber washer to seal the water inlet. 
Modern fittings are made from plastic and incorporate a 
large rubber diaphragm.  
 
 
• 
In a hard-water area a build-up of limescale on the 
float arm and valve can become a problem. Chip off 
the limescale crust occasionally to keep the 
mechanism moving freely.  
• 
If a float is punctured it will sink - as an emergency 
measure, tie a plastic bag around the float with an 
elastic band until you can replace it.  
• 
Water will continue to seep into the cistern once the 
valve washer wears. To replace the valve washer 
follow the instructions below.  
Replacing the valve washer  
 
 
 
Step 1: To replace a washer 
in a metal bourne valve, turn 
off the water supply, then 
pull out the split pin that 
connects the float arm to the 
valve.  
 
 
Step 2: Remove the arm and unscrew the threaded cap on 
the end of the valve body and slide out the piston.  
 
 

Step 3: Unscrew the piston 
end cap that retains the 
rubber washer - use pliers to 
grip the cap while turning t
piston with a screwdriver held 
in the side slot. 
he 
he 
alve 
. 
crew 
plastic flap-valve inside the siphon unit should be replaced.  
 
 
Step 4: Clean the parts with wire wool, then put a new 
washer in the end cap and refit the piston.  
 
 
Step 5: Reassemble the 
valve, taking care to align t
slot in the piston with the 
bottom of the valve body in 
order to receive the end of 
the float arm. Fit a new split 
pin.  
 
 
Step 6: Replace the diaphragm in a plastic valve by 
unscrewing the large retaining cap. Pick out the old 
diaphragm and insert a new one.  
 
 
Step 7: Reassemble the v
and turn the water back on
If necessary, reset the float 
arm with the regulator s
to raise or lower the water 
level in the cistern - the 
water should be about 25mm 
(1in) below the overflow.  
 
7 - Toilets - Unblocking  
 
If the water will not drain from the pan, hire a toilet plunger 
to free the obstruction. 
 
 
 
Use the tool's rubber cone to seal the U-bend in the base of 
the pan, and pump the handle to create suction. Lift out the 
plunger and, hopefully, the water will run out.  
 
 
 
If not, buy a WC auger to dislodge the obstruction. Feed the 
flexible shaft into the pan until it meets with resistance, then
crank the tool's handle to break up the blockage.  
 
8 - Toilets - Flush repair  
 
If you need to crank the flush lever more than once, the 

 
 
 
Step 1: Shut off the water supply and flush the toilet to 
 
tep 2: Disconnect the metal link that connects the lever to 
 
tep 3: Unscrew the connector that holds the flush pipe to 
tep 4: Just above the connector is a nut that clamps the 
e 
 
tep 5: You will find the flap valve resting on a perforated 
 
 three-part siphon unit can be serviced without removing 
 
tep 6: The metal link that connects the flushing lever to the
empty the cistern.  
 
 
S
the flushing mechanism. 
 
 
S
the base of the cistern, and move the pipe to one side.  
 
 
 
S
siphon to the cistern. Unscrew this retaining nut, and lift th
siphon unit out of the cistern.  
 
 
S
plate inside the siphon unit. Replace the flap valve and 
reconnect the siphon and the flush pipe. Reattach the flush 
lever.  
 
 
A
the flush pipe - dismantle this type of unit from inside the 
cistern.  
 
 
S
flushing mechanism may break due to wear. Tie the lever to 
the mechanism with wire until you can buy a replacement.  
 

