400 Practice Questions 
and Answers to help 
you Pass
―
Updated for 2016
―
Third Edition
―
Sean Whitaker
PMP® 
Examination 
Practice Questions
www.it-ebooks.info

 PMP® Examination 
Practice Questions 
 400 Practice Questions and 
Answers to help you Pass
Third Edition
Sean Whitaker  
www.it-ebooks.info

PMP®  Examination Practice Questions: 400 Practice Questions and Answers to help 
you Pass, Third Edition
Sean Whitaker 
 
 
 
ChristChurch, Canterbury, New Zealand  
 
ISBN-13 (pbk): 978-1-4842-1882-2 
 
ISBN-13 (electronic): 978-1-4842-1883-9
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-1883-9
Library of Congress Control Number: 2016940412
Copyright © 2016 by Sean Whitaker
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part 
of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, 
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission 
or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or 
dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this legal reservation are 
brief excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis or material supplied specifically for 
the purpose of being entered and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser 
of the work. Duplication of this publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions 
of the Copyright Law of the Publisher’s location, in its current version, and permission for use must 
always be obtained from Springer. Permissions for use may be obtained through RightsLink at the 
Copyright Clearance Center. Violations are liable to prosecution under the respective Copyright Law.
Trademarked names, logos, and images may appear in this book. Rather than use a trademark 
symbol with every occurrence of a trademarked name, logo, or image we use the names, logos, and 
images only in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of 
infringement of the trademark.
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar terms, even if they 
are not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion as to whether or not they are 
subject to proprietary rights.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of 
publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility 
for any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, 
with respect to the material contained herein.
Managing Director: Welmoed Spahr
Lead Editor: Steve Anglin
Technical Reviewer: Mike Roberts
Editorial Board: Steve Anglin, Pramila Balan, Louise Corrigan, Jonathan Gennick, 
Robert Hutchinson, Celestin Suresh John, Michelle Lowman, James Markham, 
Susan McDermott, Matthew Moodie, Jeffrey Pepper, Douglas Pundick, 
Ben Renow-Clarke, Gwenan Spearing
Coordinating Editor: Mark Powers
Copy Editor: Mary Behr
Compositor: SPi Global
Indexer: SPi Global
Artist: SPi Global
Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer Science+Business Media New York, 
233 Spring Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10013. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER, fax (201) 348-4505, 
e-mail   orders-ny@springer-sbm.com   , or visit   www.springeronline.com   . Apress Media, LLC is a 
California LLC and the sole member (owner) is Springer Science + Business Media Finance Inc 
(SSBM Finance Inc). SSBM Finance Inc is a Delaware corporation. 
For information on translations, please e-mail   rights@apress.com   , or visit   www.apress.com   . 
Apress and friends of ED books may be purchased in bulk for academic, corporate, or promotional 
use. eBook versions and licenses are also available for most titles. For more information, reference our 
Special Bulk Sales–eBook Licensing web page at   www.apress.com/bulk-sales   .
 Any source code or other supplementary materials referenced by the author in this text are available 
to readers at   www.apress.com/ 9781484218822  . For detailed information about how to locate your 
book’s source code, go to   www.apress.com/source-code/ . Readers can also access source code at 
SpringerLink in the Supplementary Material section for each chapter. 
Printed on acid-free paper
www.it-ebooks.info

iii
Contents at a Glance
About the Author ............................................................................. vii
About the Technical Reviewer .......................................................... ix
Foreword .......................................................................................... xi
Introduction .................................................................................... xiii
 
■Chapter 1: Questions ...................................................................... 1
 
■Chapter 2: Answers .................................................................... 107
 
■Chapter 3: Formulae to Remember............................................. 279
Index .............................................................................................. 281
www.it-ebooks.info

     
www.it-ebooks.info

v
Contents
About the Author ............................................................................. vii
About the Technical Reviewer .......................................................... ix
Foreword .......................................................................................... xi
Introduction .................................................................................... xiii
 
■Chapter 1: Questions ...................................................................... 1
Foundational Concepts ............................................................................ 1
Project Integration Management ............................................................. 9
Project Scope Management .................................................................. 21
Project Time Management .................................................................... 30
Project Cost Management ..................................................................... 42
Project Quality Management ................................................................. 52
Project Human Resource Management ................................................. 64
Project Communications Management ................................................. 72
Project Risk Management ..................................................................... 79
Project Procurement Management ....................................................... 90
Project Stakeholder Management ......................................................... 98
Professional Ethics .............................................................................. 102
www.it-ebooks.info

 ■ CONTENTS
vi
 
■Chapter 2: Answers .................................................................... 107
Foundational Concepts ........................................................................ 107
Project Integration Management ......................................................... 120
Project Scope Management ................................................................ 139
Project Time Management .................................................................. 154
Project Cost Management ................................................................... 172
Project Quality Management ............................................................... 189
Project Human Resource Management ............................................... 207
Project Communications Management ............................................... 221
Project Risk Management ................................................................... 232
Project Procurement Management ..................................................... 250
Project Stakeholder Management ....................................................... 263
Professional Ethics .............................................................................. 272
 
■Chapter 3: Formulae to Remember............................................. 279
Index .............................................................................................. 281
www.it-ebooks.info

vii
 About the Author 
  Sean  Whitaker ,  BA, MSc, MBA, PMP  ,  has a diverse 
project management background, having successfully 
managed complex projects in the construction, 
telecommunications, and IT industries. He brings 
this diversity of experience into sharp focus with his 
emphasis on professional project management. 
 In addition to this book, Sean is the author of many 
books on project management including  
PMP® Training Kit  (Microsoft Press/O’Reilly Publishing, 
2013),  PMP®  Rapid Review  (Microsoft Press/O’Reilly 
Publishing, 2013),  The Professional Project Manager 
(CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 
2014), and  The Practically Perfect Project Manager 
(CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 2012). 
 Sean regularly trains, coaches, teaches, and 
speaks about professional project management around 
the globe. He has been a volunteer with the Project 
Management Institute since 2005. When not teaching, 
speaking, or writing about project management, Sean is a keen and accomplished 
musician. 
 Please visit his web site at    www.seanwhitaker.com  . 
www.it-ebooks.info

     
www.it-ebooks.info

ix
 About the Technical 
Reviewer 
  Mike  Roberts   is a New Zealand-based project 
management professional and trainer. Mike offers 
project management services across the IT sector and 
has experience delivering projects through both 
traditional and Agile techniques. 
 Mike is the Principal Trainer and Partner of Falcon 
Training. He has been facilitating project management 
training for a number of years. He has a reputation 
for his ability to connect with his students and for his 
commitment to learning. He is always happy to discuss 
the application of the wide variety of approaches 
available across all industries—IT, construction, health, 
retail, government, and more! 
 Mike is also an active volunteer with the New 
Zealand Chapter of the Project Management Institute. 
He was recently awarded the PMINZ Volunteer of the Year award to recognize and 
honor his significant contribution to the Project Management Institute and the project 
management profession.   
 
www.it-ebooks.info

     
www.it-ebooks.info

xi
   Foreword 
 Sean Whitaker has a real passion for project management, like no one I have met before. 
 Sean is not only a recognized Fellow and a former President of the New Zealand 
Chapter of the Project Management Institute, but he is also a passionate practitioner, 
consultant, speaker, teacher, and mentor in the global project management community. 
He has dedicated a great deal of time to the profession of project management and to 
anyone who shows an interest in it. 
 This book offers a fantastic aid for those preparing to sit their PMP examination, 
the world's leading project management certification. The PMP exam is hard; there is no 
doubt about it. The theory is extensive, and the examination questions are challenging. 
 Having the opportunity to apply your knowledge of the theory to 400+ practice 
questions, well in advance of the exam, is incredibly valuable. It’s a good way to indicate 
your readiness for the real thing. 
 I operate a New Zealand-based project management training company called Falcon 
Training. We offer both public and tailored training services throughout the country 
and across Asia-Pacific. We use a number of Sean’s materials in our PMP Examination 
Preparation courses because I see the value they add to our students’ learning. Sean 
has the unique ability of being able to rephrase complex theory into meaningful words, 
drastically improving the rate at which our students learn. 
 Speaking from personal experience, by incorporating Sean’s work into your study 
program, I know you’ll appreciate the value gained just as much as I did. 
 I wish you the best of luck with your upcoming exam and your ongoing career as a 
professional project manager. 
 —Mike Roberts, PMP, PMI-ACP, BICT, GDipPM 
 Principal Trainer and Partner, Falcon Training 
   www.falcontraining.com  
www.it-ebooks.info

     
www.it-ebooks.info

xiii
 Introduction 
 Welcome, and congratulations! 
 You have either committed to taking the globe’s leading project management 
credential or are seriously considering it. The Project Management Institute (PMI®) 
Certification Program is recognized worldwide, and PMI is the world’s leading association 
relating to the profession of project management. Gaining the Project Management 
Professional (PMP®) certification is a great way to prove your existing experience, gain 
insight into best practices, and advance your career prospects. 
 This book contains over 400 practice questions for the PMP® examination, based on 
the contents of the PMBOK® Guide, 5th edition. They are created to provide revision and 
preparation for when you decide to sit the exam. It is a difficult exam, and you will need to 
make a significant investment in study time to ensure that you will pass. 
 You can use this book in a way that suits your study style. You can work through 
each of the questions in sequence, randomly pick ones from different sections, or assign 
yourself a time limit to answer a particular set of questions. 
 No collection of practice questions can fully replicate the questions found in the real 
exam, although I have aimed to get them as close as possible. Examination preparation 
questions, like these, are focused on a single knowledge area, while many of the exam 
questions draw scenarios from several different process groups and knowledge areas. Be 
prepared for this: study the inputs into each process and identify where they originate as 
outputs. Additionally, study the outputs from each process and where they are used as 
inputs. You will find that outputs from processes in one knowledge area become inputs in 
an entirely separate knowledge area. 
 Here are some other study tips to increase your chance of passing the exam:
 
 1. 
  Start by finding out how you best learn. Some people can only 
learn by taking notes, or by reading and rereading. You may 
learn better by drawing diagrams or by teaching to others. 
Visit a web site like   www.vark-learn.com to figure out how you 
learn best. 
 
 2. 
  Use mnemonics to help you remember things. Mnemonics 
are phrases or acronyms that can jog your memory, like 
“In Summer The Cruel Queen Has Cold Runny Porridge 
Snacks.” The first letter of each word represents the ten 
knowledge areas in the PMBOK® Guide: Integration, Scope, 
Time, Cost, Quality, Human Resource, Communications, Risk, 
Procurement, and Stakeholder Management. You can use this 
one if it helps, but they are usually more memorable if you 
make up your own. 
www.it-ebooks.info

 ■ INTRODUCTION
xiv
 
 3. 
 Plan your study well in advance and set aside time just for 
study. Stick to it. Life and work can get in the way of your best-
laid plans, so if you miss a scheduled study time, be sure to 
make it up. 
 
 4. 
 Teach the topic to someone, anyone! Teach it to your wife, 
husband, children, work colleagues, family pet, or stuffed toy. 
Simply verbalizing and trying to explain things in your own 
words to someone (or something else) will expose holes in 
your knowledge pretty fast. 
 
 5. 
 Make games and puzzles of information that you have to 
learn. Write out processes on pieces of card and throw them 
on the floor and try to reassemble them in the correct order. 
There is a great game waiting for you as a free download on 
my web site. 
 
 6. 
 Draw mind maps that link important concepts in a logical 
fashion. There is a set of blank ones as a free download on my 
web site.  
 
 7. 
 Put together a study group with others aiming to sit the exam 
as well. Share ideas, experience, and knowledge. 
 
 8. 
 Use a commercial training provider that offers courses 
specifically designed to help you pass the exam. I strongly 
recommend that you look for a PMI Registered Education 
Provider® (R.E.P.) to ensure you are getting a quality trainer.  
 
 9. 
 Remember that although the PMBOK® Guide contains a lot 
of the theory found in the exam, the exam itself is not based 
on the PMBOK® Guide but on the PMP Examination Content 
Outline. A study guide that covers all the material is much 
better than relying solely on the PMBOK® Guide. I suggest that 
you look for a study guide to help you with your self-study. 
I recommend the  PMP Training Kit and the  PMP Rapid Review , 
both books I’ve written and both available from all good book 
retailers.  
 
 10. 
 Schedule an exam date. Nothing focusses your study like 
having a confirmed exam date. If you don’t lock it in, you may 
be a perpetual student. 
 Here are my six steps to help you answer the questions:
 
 1. 
 Read the question fully! 
 
 2. 
 Reread the question! 
 
 3. 
 Eliminate any obviously wrong answers. 
 
 4. 
 Place the answers on a spectrum of most right to most wrong, 
and choose the most right one. 
www.it-ebooks.info

 ■ INTRODUCTION
xv
 
 5. 
  Organize the answers in order of which would be done first to 
last, and choose the one you would do first.  
 
 6. 
 Guess! Leave no question unanswered. 
 For up-to-date PMP® examination eligibility, pricing, and scheduling information, 
please visit the Project Management Institute web site,    www.pmi.org  . 
 Finally, it is important that if you get a question wrong, you understand why. Use the 
following sheet to record the reason you marked an incorrect answer. See if you can spot 
patterns or issues that need adjusting in your test-taking technique. 
 With the benefit of hindsight I could have got more questions 
correct if I had… 
 No. of Questions 
 Carefully read the entire question and made sure I understood 
what was being asked. 
 Carefully read all of the alternative answers provided and 
understood what each meant before answering the question. 
 Eliminated the obviously wrong answers. 
 Had a thorough knowledge of the appropriate definitions from the 
PMBOK® Guide. 
 Had a working knowledge and understanding of the appropriate 
and relevant formula from the PMBOK® Guide. 
 Double-checked my mathematical results before selecting an 
answer. 
 Answered the questions as per the PMBOK® Guide perspective 
instead of my own perspective. 
 Reviewed how I answered tough questions after completing other 
related questions to see if my memory was any better. 
 Had more time to complete the examination questions and didn’t 
rush to answer each question. 
 Please visit my web site for free games, tools, and study aids you can download to 
help with your study. Here is the list of what you can download for free:
• 
 How to Pass the PMP® Exam Guide 
• 
 The PMBOK® Guide Process Mapping Game 
• 
 PMP® Examination Domain Tasks Puzzle Game 
www.it-ebooks.info

 ■ INTRODUCTION
xvi
• 
 PMBOK® Guide Blank Mind Maps 
• 
 Key Terms and Definitions 
• 
 Formulae to Remember 
 Good luck! 
 sean@seanwhitaker.com 
   www.seanwhitaker.com  
www.it-ebooks.info

1
© Sean Whitaker 2016 
S. Whitaker, PMP® Examination Practice Questions, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-1883-9_1
 CHAPTER 1  
 Questions 
 The purpose of this book is to provide essential support to your study for the Project 
Management Professional (PMP ® ) examination. There are many ways to study for the 
exam, and you should spend some time learning exactly what works for you. 
 Answering questions written in the style and format of the actual exam questions 
is a good way to study, for two main reasons. First, it tests the extent of your knowledge, 
exposing any holes in your knowledge so that you can revise your studying appropriately. 
 Second, it helps you get accustomed to answering exam-style questions, which will 
take away a bit of the nerves you may face during the exam, particularly if you put yourself 
under the same time limits of 200 questions in 4 hours. 
 With this in mind, I have crafted a book offering the flexibility to meet these 
particular needs. This first chapter provides over 400 multiple choice questions grouped 
by topic. The second chapter restates the questions and provides a brief explanation of 
why three of the answers are wrong and one is correct. 
 There are many ways you can use this book. You can to answer the questions in each 
section immediately after reviewing material associated with the section. You can also pick 
questions at random from different sections of the chapter, as the exam will be fully randomized. 
 Whichever method you choose, you will find that these questions will add to your 
knowledge and contribute to your success in passing the exam. 
 Foundational Concepts 
 Question 1: Your team is confused because they use terminology and words in project 
communications that appear to have interchangeable meanings, but other teams treat 
these terms as though they have specific,   unique meanings. How can your team find out 
what the terms mean?
 A:  The best way to differentiate between similar project terms 
is to ask the project sponsor. 
 B:  Direct your team to a defined and standardized glossary 
such as the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 C: Have your project team vote on what definitions they 
would like to use for common terms. 
 D: Project management terms have different meanings in 
different countries, so consult your nearest PMI community.  
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
2
 Question 2:  You are delivering an introduction to a project management training 
session to new team members. One team member appears confused about the exact 
definition of a  project . What is the BEST  def inition of a project?
 A: A temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique 
product, service, or result. 
 B: A body of work constrained by finances and time. 
 C: An organized effort of work by a team managed by a 
project manager. 
 D:  The ongoing management of a business enterprise to 
achieve profitability. 
 Question 3: Your team seems confused about whether the work they are doing meets 
the definition of a project. To help them understand the difference  between  projectized 
and operational work you give them the following examples. Which of the following is not 
an example of a project?
 A: Designing a new software solution. 
 B: Building a new house. 
 C:  Regularly achieving 3% growth on last year’s sales figures. 
 D:  Implementing a new business process or procedure. 
 Question 4:  You are planning to sit the PMP ® examination and as part of your study 
are referring to the PMBOK ® Guide for help in defining the  project   process groups. Which 
of the following is not one of the five process groups in the PMBOK ® Guide?
 A: Closing 
 B: Checking 
 C: Initiating 
 D: Executing 
 Question 5: You are the project manager on a project to develop a new piece  of 
 customer management software for an external client. Through your approved change 
control process you are considering a request to alter the scope of the project. While 
considering the impact of the request on the project scope, you must also consider the 
impact on other areas of the project such as quality, schedule, budget, and risk. These 
other areas that you are considering represent what to the project?
 A: Opportunities 
 B: Constraints 
 C: Constrictions 
 D: Risks 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
3
 Question 6: The process of continuously updating, improving, and detailing a 
 project management plan, or parts of a project management plan, as more specific 
information becomes available is known as what?
 A: Iterative expectation management 
 B: Project life cycle 
 C: Continuous improvement 
 D: Progressive elaboration 
 Question 7: While delivering a presentation to senior management on the ways 
in which  portfolio management can help your organization achieve strategic success, 
you realize that not everyone in the room understands what portfolio management is. 
Portfolio management is BEST defined as what?
 A: A group of projects managed by a project director. 
 B: A collection of projects grouped together to take advantage 
of effective management to meet strategic business objectives.  
 C: A group of related projects managed in a coordinated way. 
 D: A collection of projects relating to a single business unit 
within an organization. 
 Question 8: A group of projects that must be managed in a coordinated manner to 
ensure that common goals and  potential  resource conflicts are managed effectively is 
known as what?
 A: Program 
 B: Portfolio 
 C: PMO 
 D: Life cycle 
 Question 9: The CEO of your organization is considering the strategic reasons 
the company has for approving your project proposal. At times he seems confused 
about the definition of  strategic consideration . Which of the following is not a  strategic 
consideration for authorizing a project?
 A: Strategic opportunity 
 B:  Return on investment (ROI) 
 C: Customer demand 
 D: Market demand 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
4
 Question 10: The team, or function, assigned responsibility for  the   centralized and 
coordinated management of projects within an organization is known as what?
 A: Project headquarters 
 B: Program management office 
 C: Project management office 
 D: War room 
 Question 11: Your organization has employed a person to head the PMO. During 
your first meeting with her, you discuss the extent of her  roles and responsibilities   to fully 
explain what tasks she will be responsible for and those she won’t be responsible for. 
Which of the following is not a primary function of a project management office?
 A: Providing a project manager with daily progress reports on 
a specific project. 
 B: Managing shared resources across several projects. 
 C:  Identifying and developing project management 
methodologies, best practices, and standards. 
 D:  Coordinating communication across projects.    
 Question 12: All of the following are points where projects can  intersect  with 
operational activity during the product life cycle except?
 A: During development of a new product. 
 B: While monitoring and controlling. 
 C:  During improvements in operations. 
 D: In closeout phases. 
 Question 13: What is the best description of the relationship between  project 
 management and organizational strategy?
 A: Organizational strategy ensures that projects are delivered 
successfully due to the way in which it appoints a qualified 
project manager. 
 B: Organizational strategy enables a project manager to provide 
appropriate governance to the entire project life cycle.  
 C: Organizational strategy and project management don’t 
interact because one is operational in nature and the other is 
project based. 
 D:  Organizational strategy should provide guidance and 
direction to project management, and project management 
should deliver organizational strategy by successful project 
delivery. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
5
 Question 14: Your team seems confused about  roles and responsibilities in the 
project that you are leading. They are particularly confused about your role as project 
manager. How would you explain the primary purpose of your role?
 A:  The person responsible for budget control.  
 B:  The person responsible for delivery of technical tasks. 
 C: The person assigned by the performing organization to 
achieve the project objectives. 
 D: The person responsible for sharing resources 
among projects. 
 Question 15:  While using the PMBOK ® Guide to help you define and carry out 
processes on your project, you notice that a very common input into nearly all the 
processes is enterprise  environmental  factors. Which of the following examples would not 
be considered an enterprise environmental factor?
 A:  Government or industry standards or regulations  
 B: Political climate 
 C:  Net present value of investment 
 D: Project management information systems 
 Question 16: You have volunteered your time to help your organization’s PMO carry 
out an assessment of your organization using the  OPM3   tool. What does OPM3 measure?
 A: The interdependency of projects within a program of work. 
 B: The level of variance between project management best 
practice and the actual application. 
 C:  The ability of a project manager to successfully deliver 
a project. 
 D: An organization’s project management maturity  level . 
 Question 17: The  internal and external environmental factors   that surround and 
influence, and sometimes constrain, a project are known as what?
 A:  Enterprise organizational assets 
 B: Environmental process assets 
 C:  Environmental enterprise constraints 
 D: Enterprise environmental factors 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
6
 Question 18: The collection of generally sequential and sometimes overlapping 
project phases differentiated by a distinct work focus is  kno wn as what?
 A: Project management information systems 
 B: Project management methodology 
 C: Project management office 
 D: Project life cycle 
 Question 19: All of the following are basic  characteristics   of the project life cycle 
except?
 A: Closing the project. 
 B: Checking the project work. 
 C: Starting the project. 
 D: Carrying out the project work. 
 Question 20: Divisions within a project where extra control is needed to  ef fectively 
manage the completion of a major deliverable are commonly known as what?
 A: Phases 
 B: Stage gates 
 C: Decision trees 
 D: Sub-projects 
 Question 21: You are explaining to your project sponsor that the best approach to 
managing your project is a phase-to-phase relationship. Which of the following is not an 
example of a  phase-to-phase relationship ?
 A: Sequential 
 B: Overlapping 
 C: Iterative 
 D: Progressive 
 Question 22: You are the project manager working in an organization where the 
 function  al manager, to whom some of your staff answer when not working on your 
project, controls the project budget and resource availability. This type of organization is 
commonly referred to as what?
 A: Projectized 
 B: Strong matrix 
 C: Functional 
 D: Weak matrix 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
7
 Question 23:  You work in an organization where staff members are grouped 
according to their specialty, such as production, engineering, and accounting, and 
projects are generally undertaken  w ithin these respective groupings. What is this type of 
organizational structure known as?
 A: Projectized 
 B: Weak matrix 
 C: Strong matrix 
 D: Functional 
 Question 24:  All of the following are examples of  Organizational  Process Assets that 
can assist your project except?
 A:  Government regulations 
 B: Lessons learned from previous projects 
 C: A template for a work breakdown structure 
 D: Configuration management knowledge bases    
 Question 25:  The process of determining which of the PMBOK ® Guide processes are 
appropriate to use on your project and the appropriate degree of rigor to be applied in 
any given project is known  as  what?
 A: Customizing 
 B: Prudency 
 C: Tailoring 
 D: Standardization 
 Question 26: The process group consisting of those processes performed to define  a 
 new project, or a new phase of an existing project, by obtaining authorization to start the 
project or phase is known as what?
 A: Closing 
 B: Executing 
 C: Initiating 
 D: Planning 
 Question 27: You are completing the work defined in the  project management plan 
 to satisfy the project specifications. Which process group would your activities fall under?
 A: Monitoring and Controlling 
 B: Planning 
 C: Initiating 
 D: Executing 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
8
 Question 28: Your team members are not aware of the differences between  a 
 framework, such as the PMBOK ® Guide, and a methodology, such as Kanban or Lean. 
How would you best explain this?
 A: A framework is a toolbox containing a series of structured 
best practices used across a profession; it is not prescriptive. 
A methodology prescribes how a project should be delivered, 
using certain procedures and techniques. 
 B: A framework prescribes how a project should be delivered, 
using certain procedures and techniques. A methodology is a 
toolbox containing a series of structured best practices used 
across a profession; it is not prescriptive. 
 C: A framework is used during the planning phase of a project, 
whereas a methodology is used during the execution phase of 
a project. 
 D: There is no difference. They are both concepts used to 
manage the delivery of a project. 
 Question 29: You have been asked to lead a project to improve the operations of a 
major company. The sponsor has requested you to apply  Lean principles   to facilitate the 
improvement program. Which of the following is not a principle of Lean?
 A: Seek Perfection. 
 B: Identify the value-add. 
 C:  Eliminate waste. 
 D: Reduce team size. 
 Question 30: What does  eliminating waste refer to under the practice of 
 applying  Lean?
 A:  Not having project meetings because it is more important 
for staff to be working on delivery. 
 B: Avoiding project documentation where appropriate 
because it consumes unnecessary time. 
 C: Keeping a clear work area to avoid risks associated with 
health and safety. 
 D: Assessing a process to understand if value can still be 
achieved without the inclusion of certain components. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
9
 Question 31: You are working through the planning phase for a project that will 
improve the production output of your employer’s automotive factory by 7.5%. As part of 
your approach to managing the engagement of your stakeholders, you are educating them 
on the benefits of Lean. What are the key benefits realized from  applying  Lean practices?
 A: Reduced duration, minimized costs. 
 B: Increased duration, minimized costs. 
 C: Increased duration, maximized costs. 
 D: Reduced duration, maximized costs. 
 Question 32:   Delay s, duplication, over-production, and errors are all forms of what?
 A: WIP 
 B: Waste 
 C: Risks 
 D: Issues 
 Project Integration Management 
 Question 33:  You are in the process of developing your project  closure checklist and 
selecting those items and actions that need to be completed to ensure your project is closed 
properly. A team member asks to help you do this work and asks how you know a project can 
be closed. A project can be considered finished under all of the following conditions except?
 A: When the project manager resigns. 
 B: When the project objectives have been achieved. 
 C: When the project is terminated because its objectives will 
not or cannot be met. 
 D: When the need for the project no longer exists. 
 Question 34:  During the preparation of the business case for your project you 
outline and document several different compelling reasons why your project should 
proceed. These reasons include the high ROI,  delivering strategic value, and an increase 
in business value. What is the BEST definition of business value?
 A:  The value of company’s tangible assets, which can be 
liquidated to provide working capital. 
 B:  The value added to the business by projects that are 
completed successfully. 
 C: The value of the total sum of all tangible and intangible 
elements of the business. 
 D: The value of all of the projects that the company is 
currently completing. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
10
 Question 35: You are explaining to your team that all changes on your project must 
be documented and assessed in relation to any extra costs incurred. This is particularly 
important at what point in a  project’s timeline ?
 A: At the beginning of the project. 
 B: Towards the end of the project. 
 C:  During the project execution. 
 D: It is equal throughout a project. 
 Question 36: While studying towards the PMP ® examination, you memorize the 
 processes in the PMBOK ® Guide. How many processes are there in the Project Integration 
Management knowledge area in the PMBOK ® Guide?
 A: 7 
 B: 5 
 C: 4 
 D: 6 
 Question 37: You are involved in making choices about resource allocation on your 
project, making trade-offs among competing objectives and alternatives, and managing 
the interdependencies  a  mong the different project management knowledge areas. 
Of which of the PMBOK ® Guide knowledge areas will it be most useful to have an in-depth 
understanding?
 A: Develop Project Management Plan 
 B: Project Integration Management 
 C: Project Risk Management 
 D: Perform Integrated Change Control 
 Question 38: One of your team members has recently discovered the PMBOK ® 
Guide and is intent on doing a project using each and  ever y process, tool, and technique. 
You take this team member aside and explain to her that the knowledge and processes 
described in the PMBOK ® Guide should be applied in what way?
 A: You should apply the project management knowledge, 
skills, and required processes in whatever order is appropriate 
and with varying degrees of rigor to achieve the desired 
project performance. 
 B: Rigorously and exactly as shown in the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 C: The PMBOK ® Guide is only a guide, and you should only 
apply the parts you understand fully. 
 D: You should apply all the different knowledge areas and 
processes to your project at the level required to achieve 
project success. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
11
 Question 39:  You are newly appointed to a project and are currently reading the 
project charter to gain an understanding of what is known about  the   project at this point. 
The project charter should contain enough information to do all of the following except?
 A:  Complete the WBS. 
 B: Initiate the project. 
 C: Describe the high-level project scope. 
 D: Appoint the project manager. 
 Question 40: You have been called in to evaluate a project that is experiencing some 
performance challenges. The team seems disorganized, and  when   you ask to meet the 
project sponsor, the project manager replies that she doesn’t know who the sponsor is. 
She also shares with you that the planned value (PV) is $20,000, earned value (EV) is 
$14,500, and the actual cost (AC) is $36,000. You decide that you should really go back 
to the beginning and figure out how this project got started. What document should you 
request?
 A:  The project plan 
 B:  The project charter 
 C: The cost performance analysis and report  
 D: The project authorization memo 
 Question 41:  You and your team are currently developing the project charter and are 
looking for valuable inputs you can use to complete it.  All   of the following are inputs in 
the Develop Project Charter process except?
 A:  Business case 
 B: Project management plan 
 C: Enterprise environmental factors 
 D: Project statement of work 
 Question 42:  You have completed a  business case   and project charter for your 
project and are presenting it to senior management for consideration and approval. 
Which of the following have you included in this document?
 A: The project management plan 
 B:  A copy of the stakeholder register 
 C: Any blank templates your organization has to assist in 
completing the project charter 
 D: A description of the expected market demand for the 
product of the project 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
12
 Question 43: There are many ways to describe the work to be done on a project. 
 Wha t is the high-level, narrative description of products or services to be delivered by the 
project more commonly referred to as?
 A: Project statement of work 
 B: Project scope statement 
 C: Project scope 
 D: Product scope description 
 Question 44: Which of the following is not a method you would expect to see used in 
 a  business case to justify a project on financial grounds?
 A: External rate of investment (ERI) 
 B: Return on investment (ROI) 
 C: Net present value (NPV) 
 D:  Internal rate of return (IRR) 
 Question 45: You are a project manager working for an organization and have been 
asked to help evaluate some potential projects and draft the  statement of work (SOW) 
to be given to potential solution providers. One of the projects has an expected value of 
$50,000 in three years. Another project has an expected value of $60,000 in four years. The 
discount rate is 8.2%. You will want to make sure your statement of work indicates all the 
following except?
 A: Staffing plan 
 B: Business need 
 C: High-level project scope description 
 D: Strategic plan 
 Question 46: You are in the process of developing a project charter for your project. 
Which of the following is a tool or  technique that you would find useful to complete this 
work?
 A: Delphi technique 
 B: Expert judgment 
 C:  Analytical techniques 
 D: Business case preparation 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
13
 Question 47:  You have just taken over a project that has been underway for 10 
months. The previous project manager left the project for health reasons. The project 
is performing well but you would like to become familiar with the way in which this 
particular project is being executed, monitored and controlled, and closed. What 
 document will help you in this instance?
 A: Quality management plan 
 B: Project statement of work 
 C: Project charter 
 D: Project management plan 
 Question 48:  You and your team are carrying out the  development   of the project 
management plan for your project. You are unsure about which inputs are best to use to 
develop it. All of the following may be of assistance to you except?
 A:  Communications management plan 
 B: Project charter 
 C: Process improvement plan 
 D: Work performance information 
 Question 49:  After completing most of your project management plan, your project 
sponsor is so impressed that she comments, "With this level of planning and detail, 
we know exactly where the project will be nine months from now." What is the BEST 
response you should give to the  sponsor ?
 A: “Projects seldom run exactly according to the project 
management plan, which is why we have the integrated 
change control process.” 
 B: “Projects that are planned and scheduled using the 
critical chain method will completely eliminate any possible 
changes.” 
 C: “That’s correct. Good planning gives us precise knowledge 
about how our project will perform.” 
 D: “These are exactly the type of results that are achieved 
through professional project management as defined in the 
PMBOK ® Guide.” 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
14
 Question 50:  Whic h of the following would your project sponsor not expect to see in 
your project management plan?
 A: The project management plan can be either summary or 
detailed. 
 B: The project management plan sets out the business case 
for the project, the project manager, and approval from the 
project sponsor. 
 C: The project management plan describes how work will be 
executed to accomplish the project objectives. 
 D: The project management plan integrates and consolidates 
all of the subsidiary management plans. 
 Question 51: You and your project team are busy putting together a first  iteration  of 
your project management plan. One of your team members seems confused about what 
exactly a project management plan is. Which of the following answers would be your best 
response to this team member?
 A: The project management plan includes the actions 
necessary to define, integrate, and coordinate all subsidiary 
plans into a project management plan. This is a deliverable 
that is rarely used in real practice. 
 B: The project management plan includes the actions 
necessary to define, integrate, and coordinate all subsidiary 
plans into a project management plan. The content will be 
very similar regardless of the complexity of the project.  
 C: The project management plan includes the actions 
necessary to define, integrate, and coordinate all subsidiary 
plans into a project management plan. The content will vary 
depending on the complexity of the project. 
 D: The project management plan includes the actions 
necessary to define, integrate, and coordinate all subsidiary 
plans into a project management plan. The content will be 
very high level and further refined in the project charter.    
 Question 52: Which of the following tools or  techniques   would you find useful when 
developing your project management plan?
 A: Project scope analysis 
 B: Project management information systems 
 C:  Expert judgment 
 D: Business case preparation 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
15
 Question 53: Your project management plan describes your  performance 
measurement baseline against which you will measure project performance in several 
interrelated areas. This baseline is most commonly a combination of what other baselines?
 A: Procurement, scope, and cost baselines 
 B: Schedule, cost, and risk baselines 
 C: Communications, cost, and schedule baselines 
 D: Scope, schedule, and cost baselines 
 Question 54:  You and your project team are implementing a variety of approved 
 chan ges to your project. Which of the following would not be a type of approved change?
 A: Lessons learned 
 B:  Preventative action 
 C: Corrective action 
 D: Defect repair 
 Question 55: The  activities involved in performing the work defined in the project 
management plan to achieve the project’s objectives include all of the following except?
 A:  Issue change requests and adapt approved changes into the 
project’s scope, plan, and environment. 
 B: Manage risks and implement risk response activities. 
 C: Staff, train, and manage the team members assigned to the 
project. 
 D: Complete the business case and use it as an input into the 
development of the project charter. 
 Question 56: You are in the process of directing and managing the work to  be  done 
on the project. Which of the following would not be of use to you during this process?
 A: Project management plan 
 B: Work performance data 
 C: Approved change requests 
 D: Enterprise environmental factors 
 Question 57: You are in the process of directing and managing the work to be done 
on the project. Which of the following would not be a useful  ty pe of Organizational 
Process Asset to use during this process?
 A: Issue and defect management procedures 
 B:  Process measurement database 
 C: Stakeholder risk tolerances 
 D: Standardized guidelines and work instructions 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
16
 Question 58: You are the sponsor on a time-constrained project that must deliver 
the expected output by a defined date or your organization will face severe financial 
penalties. You meet with the project manager 20 days after the kick-off of the project and 
ask to have an update on schedule progress, schedule activities that have been started, 
and the extent to which quality standards are being met. The project manager looks at 
you somewhat uncomfortably and tells you that he doesn’t have any of that information. 
What output from  Direct and Manage Project Work process is the project manager 
missing?
 A: Change requests 
 B: Project management plan updates 
 C: Deliverables 
 D: Work performance data 
 Question 59: The process of tracking, reviewing, and regulating the progress of your 
project  to  meet the performance objectives defined in the project management plan is 
known as what?
 A: Perform Integrated Change Control process 
 B: Direct and Manage Project Work process 
 C: Monitor and Control Project Work process 
 D: Develop Project Management Plan process 
 Question 60: You and your team are completing work to monitor and control project 
work. Which of the following tools or  techniques would not be of use to you to complete 
this work?
 A: Expert judgment 
 B: Delphi technique 
 C:  Analytical techniques 
 D: Meetings 
 Question 61: You and your team are completing work to monitor and control project 
work. As part of this effort you are producing a variety of  outputs  . Which of the following 
is not one of these outputs?
 A: Project management plan updates 
 B: Work performance information 
 C:  Change requests 
 D: Project documents updates 
 Question 62: You and your team are considering making an early change to a part of 
the project management plan when one of your team members says that it is too early to 
be considering any changes. At what  points  in the project would you perform integrated 
change control?
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
17
 A:  During project execution 
 B: From project inception to completion 
 C: During project monitoring and control  
 D: From project execution through to project closure    
 Question 63:  Your client has requested a change to the project and as a result you 
are preparing a change request according to the approved change control process that 
your project management methodology prescribes. A project administrator on your 
project asks to assist in the preparation and assessment of  the   change request but seems 
confused about the key characteristics of a change request. You explain that all of the 
following are characteristics of a change request except?
 A:  Every documented change request must be approved or 
rejected. 
 B:  All change requests should be considered by the change 
control board. 
 C: They may be initiated verbally. 
 D: They may involve assessing impacts on several 
knowledge areas. 
 Question 64: You have developed a  formal documented system and set of processes 
to assist with technical and administrative direction, control, and iteration management 
of project documents, records, accountability, physical characteristics, and required 
materials. What is this system called?
 A:  A work authorization system 
 B:  A risk management system 
 C: A project management information system (PMIS) 
 D: A configuration management system 
 Question 65:  You are carrying out project-wide application of the configuration 
management system in order to accomplish three main  objectives  . Which of the following 
is not one of these objectives?
 A:  Establishing an evolutionary method to consistently 
identify and request changes to established baselines. 
 B:  Providing a documented process to enable the assessment 
of requested changes to the project. 
 C: Providing opportunities to continuously validate and 
improve the project by considering the impact of each change.  
 D: Providing a mechanism for the project management 
team  to  consistently communicate all approved and rejected 
changes to the stakeholders. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
18
 Question 66: The configuration management system is a collection of formal 
documented procedures. Which of the following is not an objective of  configuration 
management ?
 A: Prevent any changes to functional characteristics.  
 B: Record and report each change to the functional 
characteristics. 
 C:  Identify and document the functional characteristics of a 
product. 
 D: Support the audit of the products to verify conformance to 
requirements. 
 Question 67: You are in the process of documenting, assessing, and making a 
decision on a requested change to your project. Which of the following  configuration 
management activities would you not find useful at this time?
 A: Configuration control and assessment 
 B: Configuration identification 
 C:  Configuration status accounting 
 D:  Configuration validation and audit 
 Question 68: As an experienced project manager, you have been asked to review a 
 project  with an SPI of 0.86 and a CPI of 0.83. You quickly identify a number of changes 
that are required to fix defects and meet some critical customer needs. Which of the 
following PMBOK ® Guide processes will you need to perform first?
 A: Perform Integrated Change Control 
 B: Direct and Manage Project Work 
 C: Monitor and Control Project Work 
 D: Develop Project Management Plan 
 Question 69: You are carrying out work to document and  assess requested changes 
to your project. Which of the following would you find least helpful to you as an input as 
you complete this work?
 A:  Organizational Process Assets 
 B:  Change requests 
 C: Project documents updates 
 D: Work performance reports 
 Question 70: Your  client has requested a change that is considered feasible but is 
outside of the already approved project scope, and your project is already significantly 
advanced. What should occur if the change is approved?
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
19
 A: The project sponsor should be consulted. 
 B:  The request should not be approved. 
 C: The relevant baseline will require changing.  
 D: The person making the change request should be removed 
from the project to avoid conflict of interest. 
 Question 71:  You and your project team are carrying out the work described in the 
Close Project or Phase  process in the PMBOK ® guide. You want your team to understand 
the exact characteristics of this work, so you tell them that the process includes all of the 
following except?
 A: Establishing the procedures to investigate and document 
the reasons for actions taken if a project is terminated before 
completion.  
 B: Finalizing all activities across all of the project management 
process groups. 
 C: Closing and finalizing any contracts for providing goods or 
services. 
 D:  It includes all of the activities necessary for administrative 
closure of the project or phase. 
 Question 72: While carrying out the work to close the design phase of your project 
you are using a variety of useful  inputs . Which of the following is not a useful input to you?
 A: Organizational Process Assets 
 B:  Accepted deliverables 
 C: Work performance information 
 D: Project management plan 
 Question 73: You are a project manager and you have just been informed that 
due to budget cuts your project has been cancelled and your team should cease work 
immediately. The project was doing very well and will likely be restarted at a later time 
when  organizational finances are better. What is the BEST action to take next?
 A: Formally document why the project was terminated and 
set up the procedures to transfer finished and unfinished 
deliverables to others. 
 B:  Ignore the request since your charter has been approved 
and it commits organizational resources to your project.  
 C: Release your team to the functional organization, shred 
most of your documents, and ask for a new project.  
 D: See if more money is available from another project. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
20
 Question 74: You are just about to complete administrative closure of your project 
and are updating the relevant Organizational Process Assets for your company. Which 
of the following is not an example of an  Organizational Process Asset that you would 
update?
 A: Project closure documents 
 B: Project files 
 C:  Stakeholder risk tolerance register 
 D: Historical information 
 Question 75: Your project is reporting a CPI of 1.02 and a SPI of 1.1. The project you 
are delivering is for a customer who is notoriously difficult to please. Your team comes 
up with a way to deliver more  functionality in the project than the customer is expecting, 
at a lower cost, and the change will result in improvements to the schedule. What is your 
BEST course of action?
 A: Do not do the extra work because it is not included in the 
project scope. 
 B: Contact the customer and explain the situation to them. 
 C:  Carry out the work and surprise the customer.  
 D: Do not do the extra work because the customer will not 
appreciate it. 
 Question 76: You are a project manager that is involved with the preparation of a 
business case to justify whether a particular project should go ahead. You are using  net 
present value   as a key financial filter. Your project will spend $100,000 in the first year, 
and then it will generate revenue of $33,000 in the first year, $62,000 in the second 
year, and $85,000 in the third year. Assuming a discount rate of 10%, what is the net 
present value?
 A: $100,000 
 B: $45,101 
 C: $80,000 
 D: $280,000 
 Question 77:  You are choosing between two potential projects that your organization 
could undertake. The first project,  Project Eagle , will cost $500,000 and will have a NPV 
of $50,000. The second project, Project Falcon, will cost $420,000 and will have a NPV of 
$48,000. Which of the two projects should you do?
 A: Do not have enough information to answer this question.  
 B: Project Falcon. 
 C: Project Eagle. 
 D: Neither project meets NPV criteria. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
21
 Question 78: After measuring expected project benefits, your project management 
office has four  projects from which to choose. Project A has a NPV of $160,000 and will 
cost $10,000. Project B has a NPV of $470,000 and will cost $220,000. Project C has a NPV 
of $265,000 and will cost $33,000. Project D has a NPV of $335,000 and will cost $57,000. 
Which project would be BEST?
 A: Project C 
 B: Project A 
 C: Project B 
 D: Project D 
 Question 79:  You are assisting your portfolio manager in making a decision about 
which of two possible projects should be given approval to proceed. Project A would 
generate $75,000 in benefit. Project B would generate $225,000 in benefit. Unfortunately, 
due to limited resources, your company can only perform one project, and they choose 
Project B because of the higher benefit. What is the  opportunity cost of performing 
Project B?
 A: $225,000 
 B: $75,000 
 C: $300,000 
 D: $150,000 
 Project Scope Management 
 Question 80: The  processes that describe the work required to ensure that the project 
includes all the work and only the work required to complete the project successfully are 
collectively known as what?
 A: Project scope management 
 B: Project baseline delivery 
 C: Project specification delivery 
 D: Project management execution 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
22
 Question 81: You are completing the work defined in the project scope statement of 
a new software development project when a team member points out that you have an 
opportunity to deliver enhanced capability to the client at no extra cost, time, or risk to 
the project. What should you do NEXT?
 A: Decline to make the changes and proceed to deliver exactly 
what the scope statement sets out. 
 B: Assess the change via the change control process and, if 
approved, amend the project scope statement. 
 C:  Go ahead and make the changes, and surprise the client 
with the extra capability. 
 D:  Ask the team member to keep quiet about the changes and 
ignore her recommendation because it presents too many 
risks to the project. 
 Question 82: You are new to a project that has been underway for some time. One of 
your first jobs as project manager is to familiarize yourself with and understand the  scope 
baseline  . What documents will you require in order to do this?
 A: The project scope statement, the WBS, and the WBS 
dictionary 
 B: The project scope statement, the WBS, and the risk register 
 C: The WBS, the change register, and the project scope 
statement 
 D: The WBS, the project management plan, and the change 
register 
 Question 83: You are a project manager and you are working with your sponsor to 
define and plan a complex project. You plan to complete your  initiation and planning 
documents sequentially to make sure the organization really understands and supports 
the project. What key deliverables will you produce in the correct order?
 A: First the project management plan, then then project 
charter, and then the project scope statement. 
 B: First the project charter, then the requirements 
documentation, and then the project scope statement. 
 C: First the project charter, then the project scope statement, 
and then the requirements documentation. 
 D: First the project management plan, then the requirements 
documentation, and then the project charter. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
23
 Question 84: What is the name of the planning  document that describes how 
requirements will be analyzed, documented, and managed?
 A:  Requirements traceability matrix 
 B: Scope management plan 
 C: Requirements management plan 
 D: Requirements scope statement 
 Question 85: Completion of the project scope is measured against the  scope 
management plan . What is completion of the product scope measured against?
 A: Client expectations 
 B: Scope management plan 
 C: Project management plan 
 D: Product requirements 
 Question 86:  As part of your ongoing commitment to mentoring the next generation 
of professional project managers you have taken on an intern on your software 
development project. You are explaining to her the key differences between project 
 requirements  and product requirements. How would you best explain this to her?
 A: Project requirements relate to the detail contained in the 
individual components of the project management plan and 
the processes that make them up, while product requirements 
relate to the specifications provided by the client and their 
expectations for the project delivery methodology. 
 B: Project requirements can include tools and techniques 
for completing the appropriate project process groups, while 
product requirements can include the method of delivery and 
manufacturing quality specifications. 
 C: Project requirements relate to the detail included in the 
project management plan, while product requirements are 
defined by the client’s expectations. 
 D: Project requirements can include business requirements, 
project management requirements, and delivery 
requirements, while product requirements can include 
technical requirements, security requirements, and 
performance requirements. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
24
 Question 87: You are carrying out the work to define and document the project 
 stakeholders ’ needs to meet the project objectives. What PMBOK ®  Guide process 
describes this work best?
 A: Determine stakeholder expectations. 
 B: Project integration management. 
 C: Project scope management. 
 D: Collect requirements. 
 Question 88: A team member on your project has questioned whether the project 
is delivering as per the original high-level  requirements and narrative high-level product 
description, and is concerned that what you are doing has deviated from this. What is 
your BEST course of action?
 A: Check the project scope statement. 
 B: Check the project management plan. 
 C:  Check the project charter. 
 D: Have the team member assigned to another project 
because she is clearly not a team player. 
 Question 89: You are carrying out the work to define and document the project 
stakeholders’ needs to meet the project objectives. All of the following are tools or 
 techniques  that would be useful to you except?
 A:  Focus groups 
 B: Requirements traceability matrix 
 C:  Group decision-making techniques 
 D: Interviews 
 Question 90: You have decided to use a technique to help get a comprehensive 
set of project requirements that involves getting a group of experts to answer a series 
of questionnaires anonymously and provide feedback on information received in an 
 iterative   manner. What technique are you using?
 A:  Mind mapping 
 B: Nominal group technique 
 C: Brainstorming 
 D: The Delphi technique 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
25
 Question 91:  You have just completed the work of gathering, documenting, and 
prioritizing the  project and product requirements, and  mapping them back to original 
project objectives. Which PMBOK ® Guide process best describes this work?
 A: Scope Definition 
 B: Develop Project Charter 
 C: Project Scope Management 
 D: Collect Requirements 
 Question 92:  An experienced team member has taken responsibility for compiling 
the requirements  documentation for the project. Which of the following components 
would you not expect to see included in this documentation?
 A:  Business rules stating the guiding principles of the 
organization  
 B: Business need 
 C: Acceptance criteria 
 D: Configuration management activities 
 Question 93: You are a project manager working on a complex construction project 
and have begun the process of planning your project. You have the project charter, which 
is guiding you in preparing your  project management plan  . Using your requirements 
documentation, you begin the process of developing a detailed description of the project 
and product. What process are you completing?
 A: Collect Requirements 
 B: Define Scope 
 C: Plan Scope Management 
 D: Define Activities 
 Question 94: You are the project manager for a large project and have recently taken 
over the project from another project manager. On review of the project schedule, you 
learn that two major  deliverables are missing. Your sponsor reminds you how important 
it is to complete this project on time and within budget. What part of scope management 
was likely not done properly and should be reviewed and perhaps even repeated?
 A: Decomposition 
 B:  Critical path analysis 
 C: Integrated change control 
 D: Stakeholder analysis 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
26
 Question 95: You are completing the work to define the scope of your project. 
 This  work is best performed with a certain variety of documents and processes already 
available to you. Which of the following is not a useful input for you to have in order to 
complete this work?
 A: Project scope statement 
 B: Project charter 
 C: Requirements documentation 
 D: Your organization’s project management methodology 
 Question 96: You have been assigned as a new project manager for a  multi-phase 
project that is midway through phase 3 of 5 phases. While the overall work of the team 
seems pretty good, you feel that phase 3 is starting to drift from the original plan. You 
set up a meeting with the project sponsor to discuss your concerns. The sponsor is 
surprised and agrees that phase 3 includes work that was not documented in the original 
agreement. To prove this, the sponsor refers you to which document?
 A: Requirements traceability matrix 
 B: Project management plan 
 C: Statement of work 
 D: Project scope statement 
 Question 97: You and your project team have spent time decomposing the project 
scope statement using your  organization’s  work breakdown structure template. What is 
the lowest level of the work breakdown structure called?
 A: Tasks 
 B: Work packages 
 C: Activities 
 D: Units 
 Question 98: The PMBOK ® Guide process of subdividing project  deliverables   and 
project work into smaller components is known as what?
 A: Collect Requirements 
 B: Define Activities 
 C: Define Scope 
 D: Create WBS 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
27
 Question 99:  You have just completed a workshop with all of your senior project 
technicians to break the project work down into its component parts and produce the 
first iteration of your work breakdown structure. All of the following are true about the 
 work breakdown structure except?
 A: The planned work within the lowest levels can be 
scheduled, cost estimated, monitored, and controlled. 
 B:  It is a deliverable-oriented hierarchical decomposition 
of the work to be executed by the project team in order to 
accomplish the project objectives and create the required 
deliverables. 
 C: Each descending level of the WBS represents an 
increasingly detailed definition of the project work. 
 D: It is an output of the Define Scope process in the 
PMBOK ® Guide. 
 Question 100: The point in the decomposition of the WBS at which cost  and  activity 
durations for the work can be reliably estimated and managed is called what?
 A: Tasks 
 B: Activities 
 C: WBS dictionary elements 
 D: Work packages 
 Question 101: You are consulting with senior technicians working on your project in 
order to decompose the project scope into its component parts to produce a  work breakdown 
structure  for your project. One team member with extensive experience and a focus on detail 
wishes to continue decomposing the project scope further but you advise him against doing 
this because excessive decomposition of the WBS can lead to all of the following except?
 A: Non-productive management effort 
 B: Inefficient use of resources 
 C: Decreased efficiency in performing the work 
 D: Added value 
 Question 102: You have a new team member on board and she is new to the profession 
of project management. How would you explain  the  work breakdown structure to her?
 A: The WBS is a list of categories and sub-categories within 
which risks may arise for a typical project. 
 B:  The WBS is a hierarchically organized depiction of the 
resources by type to be used on the project. 
 C: The WBS defines the scope of the contract. 
 D: The WBS represents the work specified in the current 
approved project scope statement. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
28
 Question 103:  Your project team has largely completed the creation of the WBS. 
 However, some deliverables have not been decomposed because clarity is lacking. The 
project team decides to leave them and wait until more details are available. What is this 
an example of?
 A: Rolling wave planning 
 B: Progressive decision making 
 C: Iterative expectation management 
 D: Poor project management planning 
 Question 104:  You are having trouble understanding some of the detail associated 
with  your  WBS work packages. To help you understand the components of your WBS in 
greater detail, which document would you use?
 A: Project scope statement 
 B: Project charter 
 C: WBS dictionary 
 D: Activity list 
 Question 105:  A team member responsible for validating the scope of the project 
seems to be confusing this work with quality control work. How  would  you explain the 
difference between scope validation and quality control work on the project?
 A: Scope validation is primarily concerned with acceptance of 
the deliverables, while quality control is primarily concerned 
with correctness of the deliverables and meeting the quality 
requirements specific for the deliverables. 
 B: Scope validation involves checking the output from the 
project, whereas quality control means checking the output 
from the product. 
 C:  Scope validation is primarily concerned with ensuring 
the scope management plan is being followed, while quality 
control is ensuring that the product is fit for its purpose.  
 D:  Scope validation involves checking that the requirements 
documentation reflects the project charter, whereas quality 
control means checking the amount of defects in the 
deliverable. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
29
 Question 106: You are currently completing work associated with the process called 
 Validate  Scope in the PMBOK ® Guide. What is this process primarily focused on?
 A: Performing variance analysis on the expected and actual 
deliverables. 
 B: Finalizing the project and product scope statement. 
 C: Formalizing acceptance of the completed project 
deliverables. 
 D:  Accepting approved change requests and amending the 
project scope baseline. 
 Question 107: You are using your project management plan, requirements 
documentation, and requirements traceability matrix, and you are undertaking 
inspection to validate the project and product. What PMBOK ® Guide  process group are 
you involved in?
 A: Closing 
 B:  Monitoring and Controlling 
 C: Planning 
 D: Executing 
 Question 108: The customer has contacted you and has requested a change to the 
scope of your project, which is already well underway. They are in a hurry to get the 
change implemented and they tell you that they are prepared to pay whatever  extra  cost is 
associated with the change so you should just get on and do it. What is your BEST course 
of action?
 A: Tell the customer it is too late because the scope is already 
defined. 
 B:  Refer to your change control process for controlling scope 
and submit the request as detailed. 
 C: Incorporate the change into the project because the 
customer has agreed to it. 
 D: Send the customer a written agreement for them to sign 
before you accept the change into the project. 
 Question 109: Your team is receiving a large number of small change  requests   
and some are being adopted without being fully documented and assessed. These 
uncontrolled scope changes are often referred to as what?
 A: Scope amendment 
 B:  Scope variance 
 C: Scope change 
 D: Scope creep 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
30
 Question 110:  A team member is concerned that you have not documented how 
 requirements  activities will be planned, tracked, and changed. What document will you 
show this team member to show him how you did the work?
 A: Requirements management plan 
 B: Change control plan 
 C: Project management plan 
 D: Scope management plan 
 Question 111:  You are assessing the magnitude of variation of actual work 
 performed from the original scope baseline. What technique are you utilizing?
 A: Scope baseline analysis 
 B: Change control assessment 
 C:  Variance analysis 
 D: Variation change analysis 
 Question 112:  You are leading a PMP ® study group within your organization. You are 
widely respected within the organization for your theoretical and practical knowledge, 
particularly in those areas required to pass the PMP ® . Several of the students in the class 
are struggling with some of the concepts in the recommended study material, particularly 
the PMBOK ® Guide. An area of concern to most of the class relates to the distinction 
between the focus of the  Validate Scope and Quality Control processes . They look to you 
for clarification and a clear explanation. How do you best describe the difference between 
these two processes?
 A: Quality Control is performed in the Monitoring and 
Controlling part of the project, while Validate Scope is 
performed at the Executing part of the project. 
 B: Quality Control is concerned with the correct acceptance 
of the deliverables; Validate Scope is concerned with the 
completeness of the deliverables. 
 C: Quality Control is concerned with the correctness of the 
deliverables; Validate Scope is concerned with the acceptance 
of the deliverables. 
 D: Validate Scope is performed by the project sponsor, while 
Quality Control is performed by the team members. 
 Project Time Management 
 Question 113:  You are helping a colleague study for the PMP ® exam, and as part of his 
study plan he is using the PMBOK ® Guide as one of his reference books. He is having 
difficulty understanding the Time Management knowledge area processes, particularly 
how inputs from one process are often outputs from other processes and as such there 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
31
is an order in which the processes are generally performed. You offer some advice and 
describe the generally correct  order of schedule development activities in the Time 
Management knowledge area in the PMBOK ® Guide. What is your answer?
 A: Define Activities, Sequence Activities, Estimate Activity 
Resources, Estimate Activity Durations, Develop Schedule 
 B: Sequence Activities, Develop Schedule, Estimate Activity 
Resources, Estimate Activity Durations, Define Activities 
 C: Define Activities, Estimate Activity Resources, Estimate 
Activity Durations, Sequence Activities, Develop Schedule 
 D: Sequence Activities, Define Activities, Estimate Activity 
Resources, Estimate Activity Durations, Develop Schedule 
 Question 114: You are using the work packages from your WBS to assist with creating 
your project schedule. You begin breaking the  work packages   down into the actual work 
necessary to complete the work package. What are you in the process of defining?
 A: WBS dictionary items 
 B: Project tasks 
 C: Activities 
 D: Work package assignments 
 Question 115: You are the project manager on a project that is currently in the 
planning stage. You are working on your project schedule and beginning the process of 
defining your  activity list . Involving your team members in this process would result in 
what outcome?
 A: Better and more accurate results 
 B: Project inefficiencies due to delays experienced in building 
consensus 
 C: Bad team morale due to disagreements between experts 
 D: Extra cost to the project 
 Question 116: You have your activity list completed and are explaining to your team 
members what it contains. Which of the following is  not   contained on the activity list?
 A: Milestone list 
 B: Scope of work description 
 C: All schedule activities required on the project 
 D: Activity identifier 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
32
 Question 117:  You and your project management team are conducting the  activity 
sequencing for a new project. The team has determined that Task A takes 3 days. Task B 
is dependent on Task A finishing and has a duration of 1 day. Task C takes 4 days. Task 
D is dependent on Task C starting and has a duration of 7 days. Task E is dependent on 
both Task C and Task D finishing and has a duration of 2 days. Task F is dependent on 
both Task E and Task B finishing and has a duration of 4 days. What is the duration of the 
project?
 A: 10 days 
 B: 13 days 
 C:  17 days 
 D: 8 days 
 Question 118:  You are leading your team in the preparation of your project schedule 
and are currently sequencing the activities and determining which type of precedence 
relationship exists between them. Which of the following is the most commonly used type 
of  precedence relationship that you will use?
 A: Start-to-start 
 B: Start-to-finish 
 C: Finish-to-finish 
 D: Finish-to-start 
 Question 119:  You are using the precedence diagramming method to  construct   your 
project schedule network diagram. What other name is sometimes used to describe the 
precedence diagramming method?
 A: Activity-on-node diagram 
 B: Activity-on-arrow diagram 
 C: Critical chain methodology 
 D: Critical path methodology 
 Question 120: After talking with your team and the people responsible for 
completing the activity, you schedule two activities in your project so that the 
successor  activity is able to start a week before the predecessor activity. What is this is 
an example of?
 A: Lag 
 B: Lead 
 C: Slack 
 D: Float 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
33
 Question 121: You are leading your project scheduling specialists in the 
completion of your project schedule and you wish to add leads and lags into your 
schedule to accurately reflect the total project duration. Some members of your team 
are  confused  about the two terms. How would you describe the difference between a 
lead and a lag to them?
 A:  A lead means a successor activity can be started prior to the 
completion of a predecessor activity. A lag directs a delay in 
the successor activity. 
 B:  A lead means that both activities can start at the same time. 
A lag means that neither can start until the other one starts.  
 C: A lead means that the successor activity must start prior to 
the predecessor activity finishing. A lag means the successor 
activity has a mandatory dependency and can not start until 
the predecessor activity is complete. 
 D: A lead means the amount of time free on the critical path 
between activities. A lag is the amount of delay that can occur 
between activities that will not adversely affect the final 
project delivery date. 
 Question 122: You are completing the sequence of activities and note that one of 
your activities can not proceed until consent  is  granted by the local government agency. 
This is an example of what sort of dependency?
 A: Discretionary 
 B: External 
 C: Environmental 
 D: Mandatory 
 Question 123: You have successfully completed the first iteration of your project 
schedule network diagram. This  indicates  that you have completed the work in which 
PMBOK ® Guide process?
 A: Control Schedule 
 B: Define Activities 
 C: Develop Schedule 
 D: Sequence Activities 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
34
 Question 124: Your project sponsor has asked to see your  resource calendar.  What 
sort of information is included in this document?
 A: The length of time the project will require input from 
external resources. 
 B: The dates of annual holidays for project team members. 
 C: The duration of each activity in the project resource 
diagram. 
 D:  When and how long project resources will be available 
during the project. 
 Question 125:  You are estimating your activity resources and breaking down the 
work within each activity to its lowest level and  then  aggregating these estimates to get a 
total quantity for each activity’s resources. What tool or technique are you using?
 A: Published estimating data 
 B: Bottom-up estimating 
 C:  Expert judgment 
 D: Parametric estimating 
 Question 126:  You are about to begin the work to estimate  activity  durations on your 
project. Which of the following would not be an input you could use to complete this 
work?
 A: Activity attributes 
 B: Activity duration estimates 
 C: Project scope statement 
 D: Activity list 
 Question 127:  While estimating the activity durations on your project,  you   come 
across a similar project completed by your organization last year. To save time, you use 
information from this project to help estimate activity durations. This is an example of 
which tool or technique?
 A: Bottom-up estimating 
 B: Analogous estimating 
 C:  Parametric estimating 
 D: Three-point estimating 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
35
 Question 128: As a result of a brainstorming session, your team  determines   that the 
most likely duration of an activity will be 8 days, the optimistic duration is 6 days, and the 
pessimistic duration is 16 days. What it the expected activity duration?
 A:  10 days 
 B:  5 days 
 C: 9 days 
 D: 30 days 
 Question 129: There is some uncertainty over the duration of a particular activity 
on your project. You call your team together, all of whom have experience in completing 
the activity.  After a brainstorming session, they are able to determine a most likely 
duration, an optimistic duration, and a pessimistic duration. You then use these numbers 
to calculate the expected activity duration. This is an example of which sort of tool or 
technique?
 A:  Bottom-up estimating 
 B:  Three-point estimating 
 C: Analogous estimating 
 D: Parametric estimating 
 Question 130: To estimate the amount of time it will take to install 500 meters of 
cable on your project, you divide the number of meters required by how many meters 
an hour the person laying  the  cable can lay. This is an example of which sort of tool or 
technique?
 A:  Three-point estimating 
 B:  Bottom-up estimating 
 C: Analogous estimating 
 D: Parametric estimating 
 Question 131: You are leading your team members in the development of your 
project schedule. You have just started the process  and  are checking that you have all 
the appropriate inputs required. Which of the following would not be an input into this 
process?
 A:  Resource calendar 
 B: Project schedule network diagram 
 C: Activity list 
 D: Project schedule 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
36
 Question 132: What is the PMBOK ® Guide process of analyzing activity sequences, 
durations, resource requirements, and  scheduled  constraints to create the project 
schedule?
 A: Project Schedule Development 
 B: Create Project Schedule 
 C: Develop Schedule 
 D: Schedule Management 
 Question 133: You are completing a network diagram with the following 
information: Task A has a duration of 3 days and has the  start  as a predecessor; Task B 
has a duration of 5 days and also has the start as a predecessor; Task C has a duration of 
4 days and has Task A as a predecessor; Task D has a duration of 4 days and has Task B 
as a predecessor; Task E has a duration of 6 days and has Tasks C and D as predecessors; 
Task F has a duration of 5 days and has Task D as a predecessor; the finish milestone has 
a duration of zero days and has Tasks E and F as predecessors. Using this data, what is the 
duration of the project?
 A: 16 
 B: 14 
 C: 13 
 D: 15 
 Question 134: You are completing a network diagram with the following 
information: Task A has a duration of 3 days and has the  start  as a predecessor; Task B 
has a duration of 5 days and also has the start as a predecessor; Task C has a duration of 
4 days and has Task A as a predecessor; Task D has a duration of 4 days and has Task B 
as a predecessor; Task E has a duration of 6 days and has Tasks C and D as predecessors; 
Task F has a duration of 5 days and has Task D as a predecessor; the finish milestone has 
a duration of zero days and has Tasks E and F as predecessors. What is the critical path for 
this network diagram?
 A: Start-B-D-F-Finish 
 B: Start-B-D-E-Finish 
 C: Start-A-C-E-Finish 
 D: Start-A-C-F-Finish 
 Question 135: According to Goldratt’s critical chain theory, what  should   you do in 
order to reduce risk in project schedules?
 A: Start activities in the feeder chains as late as possible. 
 B:  Add buffers to the critical chains. 
 C: Start activities in the critical chains as early as possible. 
 D: Start activities in the feeder chains as early as possible. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
37
 Question 136: During a discussion with a fellow project manager you realize that she 
is using the terms  critical path method and  critical chain method  incorrectly. You offer 
some pieces of advice and insight into how the two methods are different.  Which of these 
statements about the critical path method and the critical chain method is FALSE?
 A:  The critical path method schedules early start and late start 
dates to planned activities, whereas the critical chain method 
schedules only late start dates to planned activities. 
 B:  The critical chain method initially uses non-conservative 
estimates, whereas the critical path method is concerned with 
using more accurate estimates. 
 C: The critical path method focuses on managing the total 
float of network paths, whereas the critical chain method 
focuses on managing the buffer activity durations and the 
resources applied to planned schedule activities. 
 D: The critical chain method accounts for resource 
availability, whereas the critical path method does not. 
 Question 137: You are adding duration buffers that are non-workable schedule 
activities to manage uncertainty in your  project  schedule. What tool or technique are you 
using?
 A:  Parametric estimating 
 B:  Critical path method 
 C: Three-point estimating 
 D: Critical chain method 
 Question 138: You are using a methodology that calculates the amount of float on 
various paths in the network diagram to determine  the   minimum project duration. What 
tool or technique are you using?
 A:  Critical path method 
 B:  Critical chain method 
 C: Parametric estimating 
 D: Three-point estimating 
 Question 139: In the first attempt at resource leveling the  project   schedule, what 
would you expect to occur?
 A: The overall project duration will increase. 
 B: The number of required resources will decrease during 
certain time periods of the project. 
 C: The number of required resources will increase during 
certain time periods of the project. 
 D: The overall project duration will decrease. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
38
 Question 140: You are the project manager on a software project. While examining 
your schedule you see that there has been a delay in completing a task. The sensible 
choice seems to move a person, someone who is an expert on the work that is behind, 
 from another task. There is a choice between two people who are working on different 
tasks. One person is working on a task that has 5 days of free float and the other is working 
on a task that has 8 days of total float and no free float. What is your BEST course of 
action?
 A: A person should be brought in from outside the project. 
 B: The person working on the task with total float of 8 days.  
 C: Either person can be used. 
 D: The person working on the task with free float of 5 days. 
 Question 141:  You are using a computer-based modelling technique  that  examines 
possible outcomes based on a range of potential probabilities if a particular situation 
occurs. What is this technique called?
 A: Parametric estimating 
 B: Schedule compression 
 C: Critical chain methodology 
 D: What-if scenario analysis 
 Question 142: Your project team is behind schedule and has decided to compress 
the schedule. They have requested extra budget to bring in the additional resources 
required.  Which  schedule compression technique are they seeking to use?
 A: Compressing 
 B: Crashing 
 C:  Fast tracking 
 D: Resource leveling 
 Question 143:  You have managed to bring forward the predicted completion date for 
your project by doing in parallel several of  the  activities that were scheduled to be done in 
sequence. What is this technique called?
 A: Acceleration 
 B: Increasing priorities 
 C:  Fast tracking 
 D: Crashing 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
39
 Question 144: You are working on a project to build a new house. Usually you 
would wait until the concrete foundation dried and then erect the wall on top of it. To 
speed up the project, you start putting the wall frame together off site while the concrete 
foundation is drying. This is an example of  which  schedule compression technique?
 A:  Fast tracking 
 B: Compressing 
 C: Crashing 
 D: Resource leveling 
 Question 145: Your project sponsor asks you to attend a senior management 
meeting and present a brief update on your  project  progress. Which of the following 
would be best to use in the presentation?
 A:  Bar chart 
 B: Project management plan 
 C: Work performance information 
 D: Schedule network diagram 
 Question 146: What is the name of the process in the PMBOK ® Guide  that  monitors 
the status of the project to update project progress and manage changes to the schedule 
baseline?
 A: Develop Schedule 
 B: Monitoring and Controlling 
 C: Verify Schedule 
 D: Control Schedule 
 Question 147: Your project is underway and you are measuring the forecast 
schedule against the actual schedule, checking for variances between the two and 
initiating corrective actions if required.  To successfully complete this work, you require a 
range of inputs. Which of the following is not one of these inputs?
 A: Project management plan 
 B: Work performance information 
 C: Project schedule 
 D: Work performance data 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
40
 Question 148:  While using the earned value management technique to measure 
project schedule progress on your project, you  discover  that your project’s schedule 
performance index (SPI) is 0.9. What does this mean?
 A: The amount of buffer in your critical chain methodology is 
less than optimal. 
 B: The project network diagram was incorrectly put together.  
 C: The project is behind schedule and in need of schedule 
compression. 
 D: The project is ahead of schedule. 
 Question 149: You are a project manager on a project where your SPI has  been 
calculated at .95. Your earned value (EV) has been calculated at $10,000, and your actual 
cost (AC) is $10,400, so what is your planned value (PV)?
 A: $10,000 
 B: $10,526 
 C: $9,500 
 D: $10,947 
 Question 150: As part of the development of your project schedule, you are informed 
that a particular activity has an estimated optimistic duration of 7 days, an estimated 
 pessimistic  duration of 15 days, and will most likely take 10 days to complete. Using PERT 
analysis, what is the standard deviation?
 A: 0.5 
 B: 10.33 
 C: 1.76 
 D: 1.33 
 Question 151:  As part of the development of your project schedule, you are 
informed that a particular activity has an estimated optimistic duration of 7 days, an 
estimated pessimistic duration of 15 days, and will most likely take 10 days to complete. 
Your sponsor asks you the activity  duration  range in which you are 95% confident that the 
activity will be delivered. What is your response?
 A: 8–12 days 
 B: 7.67–12.99 days 
 C: 9–11.66 days 
 D: 10 days 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
41
 Question 152: Yvette is the project manager for a software project. She and her team 
are determining the activity duration estimates for the project. She has requested that 
each team member determine the estimates by multiplying the quantity of work  to   be 
performed by the known historical productivity rate of the individual department. Yvette 
has asked her team to generate the estimates using what technique?
 A:  Parametric estimating 
 B:  Analogous estimating 
 C: Three-point estimating 
 D: Expert judgment 
 Question 153: Consider the following information. What is the critical path? Task 
A has a duration of 3 days and is a starting activity. Task B has a duration of 6 days and 
has Task A as  a  predecessor. Task C has a duration of 5 days and has Tasks A and B as 
predecessors. Task D has a duration of 4 days and has Task B as a predecessor. Task E has 
a duration of 1 day and has Task C as the predecessor. Task F has a duration of 6 days and 
has Tasks D and E as predecessors. Task G has a duration of 4 days and has Tasks E and F 
as predecessors.
 A: A-B-C-E-F-G 
 B: A-D-F-G 
 C: A-C-D-E-F-G 
 D: A-B-D-F-G 
 Question 154: Consider the following information. How many tasks have a slack of 
2 days? Task A has a duration of 3 days and is  a  starting activity. Task B has a duration of 6 
days and has Task A as a predecessor. Task C has a duration of 5 days and has Tasks A and 
B as predecessors. Task D has a duration of 4 days, and has Task B as a predecessor. Task 
E has a duration of 1 day and has Task C as a predecessor. Task F has a duration of 6 days 
and has Tasks D and E as predecessors. Task G has a duration of 4 days and has Tasks E 
and F as predecessors.
 A: 4 
 B: 2 
 C: 3 
 D: 1 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
42
 Project Cost Management 
 Question 155:  You have finished putting together your project budget and notice that 
there is a point at which cost and  staffing  levels are highest. At which point in the project 
would this generally be?
 A: Starting the project. 
 B: Organizing and preparing. 
 C:  Carrying out the work. 
 D: Closing the project. 
 Question 156:  You are completing the work of aggregating the estimated costs of 
individual activities or work packages to  establish  an authorized cost baseline. What 
PMBOK® Guide process are you completing?
 A: Cost Performance Baseline 
 B: Estimate Costs 
 C:  Control Costs 
 D: Determine Budget 
 Question 157: You have completed the work required to develop your cost 
management plan and are introducing it to your team members so that they are aware of 
its purpose and limitations.  The cost management plan can establish all of the following 
except?
 A: Units of measure 
 B: Level of accuracy 
 C: Activity definition 
 D: Control thresholds 
 Question 158: Costs that cannot be directly traced to a specific  project  and are 
accumulated and allocated equitably over multiple projects are known as what?
 A: Indirect costs 
 B: Direct costs 
 C:  Allocatable costs 
 D: Non-projectized costs 
 Question 159: While completing the processes required to develop an approved 
project budget, you have started the work required to estimate costs on your project. In 
order to do this successfully, you should have access to several important inputs.  Which 
of the following is not an input you would find useful to complete this work?
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
43
 A:  Activity cost estimates 
 B: Project schedule 
 C: Risk register 
 D: Scope baseline 
 Question 160: Which of the following is not an Organizational Process Asset you 
would consider when estimating  costs  on your project?
 A:  Historical information 
 B:  Cost-estimating templates 
 C: Market conditions 
 D: Lessons learned 
 Question 161: You are estimating the costs in your project and are using information 
from a previous, similar project as the basis  for  estimating in your current project. What 
technique are you using?
 A:  Parametric estimating 
 B:  Analogous estimating 
 C: Three-point estimating 
 D: Published estimating data 
 Question 162: You and your team are currently breaking down all the project 
deliverables into the smallest useful unit so that  you   can then estimate costs for each of 
these units and then aggregate these estimates into a total project cost estimate. What is 
the name of the technique you are using to estimate costs?
 A:  Parametric estimating 
 B:  Bottom-up estimating 
 C: Low-level estimating 
 D: Project management software 
 Question 163: While developing individual costs estimates for work packages 
on your project, you use a technique that requires you to use a statistical relationship 
between  historical  data and other variables to calculate a cost estimate for a schedule 
activity resource. What is this estimating technique more commonly referred to as?
 A:  Statistical estimating 
 B:  Bottom-up estimating 
 C: Parametric estimating 
 D: Top-down estimating 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
44
 Question 164:  Your project sponsor has asked you to provide a cost estimate quickly 
to give the project steering group an idea of  what  the costs for a particular work package 
will be. Which of the following estimating techniques would you choose to use?
 A: Analogous estimating 
 B: Parametric estimating 
 C:  Resource rate estimating 
 D: Bottom-up estimating 
 Question 165:  While completing the cost estimating process for a particular activity 
in your project, several members of your team disagree over the estimate to do the work. 
After a discussion with the team, you determine that the most likely cost of  the   activity 
will be $25, the optimistic cost of the activity will be $15, and the pessimistic cost will be 
$70. Using the three-point estimating technique, what is the expected cost of the activity?
 A: $110 
 B: $36.66 
 C: $30.83 
 D: $25.83 
 Question 166:  While completing the cost estimating for a particular activity in your 
project, several members of your team disagree over the estimate to do the work. After a 
discussion with the team, you determine that the most likely cost of  the  activity will be 
$50, the optimistic cost of the activity will be $30, and the pessimistic cost will be $70. 
Using the three-point estimating technique, what is the expected cost of the activity?
 A: $150 
 B: $25 
 C: $70 
 D: $50 
 Question 167:  During your cost estimating you include a figure for cost uncertainty 
on your project, and the project  sponsor  agrees to give you delegated authority to manage 
this reserve. What is this figure generally known as?
 A: Reserve analysis 
 B: Contingency reserve 
 C: Management reserve 
 D: Slush fund 
 Question 168:  You are using the three-point estimating method of scheduling for a 
project. The variance for the project is found to be 16 days and the duration of the project 
is found to be 90 days.   What is the range of values for the project duration such that there 
will be at least a 95% probability that the actual project completion will fall between the 
high and low value of the range of values?
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
45
 A:  58-122 days 
 B:  74-106 days 
 C: 82-98 days 
 D: 86-94 days 
 Question 169: You are aggregating the cost estimates of  individual  activities and 
work packages to establish an authorized cost baseline. Which PMBOK ®  Guide process 
are you engaged in?
 A: Budget Preparation 
 B: Determine Budget 
 C: Estimate Costs 
 D: Cost Performance Baseline 
 Question 170: You have spent time with your team developing individual cost 
estimates and are now using the project schedule to determine your project budget. 
Which of the following inputs would  you  not find helpful to complete this work?
 A: Cost baseline 
 B:  Basis of estimates 
 C: Activity cost estimates 
 D: Scope baseline 
 Question 171: What is the authorized time-phased budget at completion used to 
measure, monitor, and control overall cost  performance  on the project more commonly 
known as?
 A: Approved project budget 
 B: Cost baseline 
 C: Activity cost estimate 
 D: Total funding requirements 
 Question 172: You are monitoring the status of the project to  update  the project 
budget and manage changes to the cost baseline. Which PMBOK ®  Guide process best 
describes the work are you carrying out?
 A: Determine Budget 
 B: Control Costs 
 C: Earned Value Management 
 D: Cost Aggregation 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
46
 Question 173:  While using a technique that gathers a number of key metrics to 
assess, track, and forecast variances in both project  cost  and time, you discover that the 
tool is being used without all the required inputs. Which of the following inputs would 
you not require to use this particular technique?
 A: Work performance information 
 B: Earned value 
 C:  Planned value 
 D: Actual cost 
 Question 174:  After measuring your project performance you note  that   your 
schedule variance is $75,000. What would your BEST course of action be?
 A: Immediately begin fast tracking the schedule to catch up time.  
 B: Ask your project sponsor for extra funds to crash the 
schedule to catch up time. 
 C:  Congratulate your project team on doing well with the 
project but also submit the information through the approved 
change control process so that any updates required can be 
made to the schedule baseline documents. 
 D:  Do nothing because everything is going well on your 
project and you are obviously a good project manager. 
 Question 175:  The earned value on your project is $15,000, the  planned  value is 
$20,000, and the actual cost is $18,000. What is your schedule variance?
 A: -$3,000 
 B: $5,000 
 C: $3,000 
 D: -$5,000 
 Question 176:  The earned value on your project is $18,000, the planned value is 
$20,000, and the actual cost is $15,000.  What  is your cost variance?
 A: $3,000 
 B: -$3,000 
 C: $2,000 
 D: -$2,000 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
47
 Question 177: The earned value on your project is $26,000, the planned value is 
$20,000, and the actual cost is $18,000. What is  your  schedule variance?
 A: $6,000 
 B: $8,000 
 C: -$8,000 
 D: $2,000 
 Question 178: The earned value on your project is $52,000, the planned value is 
$51,000, and the actual cost is $49,000.  What  is your cost variance?
 A: $3,000 
 B: $2,000 
 C: $1,000 
 D: -$1,000 
 Question 179: A new junior project manager seems to be having some difficulty 
understanding key terms used in the reports being prepared for the project. He is 
particularly confused by the earned value management system and the approved project 
budget. You explain to him that there are easy ways to understand what each element 
means and demonstrate this by point out that  the  total planned value of the project is 
better known as what?
 A: Approved project budget 
 B: Cost baseline 
 C: Actual cost 
 D: Budget at completion 
 Question 180: What is the term for the measurement of the authorized work that has 
been completed and the authorized  budget  for such completed work?
 A: Cost baseline 
 B:  Earned value 
 C: Actual cost 
 D: Budget at completion 
 Question 181: You are a project manager on a large software project using the 
earned value reporting system to manage your project. At this point in time, the EV is 
$24,000, the BAC is $97,000,  the  PV is $29,000, and the AC is $45,000. What is the percent 
complete?
 A: 30% 
 B: 25% 
 C: 46% 
 D: 53% 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
48
 Question 182:  You are working on a large project and have  determined  that your CV 
is $50,000 and your EV is $125,000. What is your AC?
 A: $75,000 
 B: $50,000 
 C: $175,000 
 D: $125,000 
 Question 183:  The earned value on your project is $20,000, the actual cost is $18,000, 
and the planned value is $25,000. What is your SPI?
 A: -$5,000 
 B: 1.11 
 C: 0.8 
 D: $5,000 
 Question 184:  The earned value on your project is $25,000, the actual cost is $20,000, 
and the planned value is $20,000. What is your SPI?
 A: 0.75 
 B: 1.25 
 C: 1 
 D: 0.8 
 Question 185:  The planned value on your project is $120,000, the earned value is 
$100,000, the actual cost is $90,000, and your  cost  variance is $10,000. What is your cost 
performance index (CPI)?
 A: 1.2 
 B: 3 
 C: 0.83 
 D: 1.11 
 Question 186:  The planned value on your project is $9,000, the earned value is 
$9,000, the actual cost is $8,000, and your cost variance is $1,000. What is your cost 
performance index?
 A: 1 
 B: 1.125 
 C: 0.88 
 D: 8 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
49
 Question 187: You are working on a large project and have determined that your 
cost variance is $50,000 and your earned value is $125,000.    What is your cost performance 
index?
 A: 2.5 
 B: 1.5 
 C: 0.4 
 D: 1.666 
 Question 188: Your project control measurements show a CPI of 0.89. What  does  this 
show about your project?
 A:  That your project is only spending 89% of the money need 
to get 100% of the job done. 
 B:  That your project is experiencing a cost overrun for the 
work completed. 
 C: That your project is experiencing a cost underrun for the 
work completed. 
 D: That your project is running behind schedule and over 
budget. 
 Question 189:  Your  project has a CPI of 1.1 and a SPI of .9. What does this mean?
 A:  You are experiencing a cost underrun and are ahead of 
schedule. 
 B:  You are experiencing a cost overrun and are behind 
schedule. 
 C: You are experiencing a cost underrun and are behind 
schedule. 
 D: You are experiencing a cost overrun and are ahead of 
schedule. 
 Question 190: You are forecasting your estimate to complete your  project   and are 
incurring extra costs to do this work. What sort of estimating technique are you using?
 A: Earned value management 
 B:  Bottom-up EAC estimating 
 C: Estimate to complete (ETC) forecast 
 D: To Complete Performance Index (TCPI) 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
50
 Question 191:  Your actual costs on your project are $75,000, the budget at 
completion is $100,000, and the earned value is $85,000. Your project has experienced 
some atypical variances to date which have affected its financial performance but from 
this  point   forward you expect it to perform at the originally budgeted rate. What is your 
estimate at completion?
 A: $90,000 
 B: $110,000 
 C: $100,000 
 D: $105,000 
 Question 192:  Your budget at completion is $50,000, your earned value is $40,000, 
and your actual cost is $45,000. Using an  estimate  at completion forecast for ETC work 
performed at the present CPI, what is your estimate at completion?
 A: $47,666 
 B: $50,000 
 C: $56,818 
 D: $53,225 
 Question 193:  The calculated projection of cost performance that must  be   achieved 
on the remaining work to meet a specified management goal such as the BAC or the EAC 
is known as what?
 A: Earned value 
 B: Estimate to complete 
 C: Cost baseline 
 D:  To Complete Performance Index 
 Question 194:  Your actual cost on the project is $10,000, the budget at completion is 
$20,000, the earned value is $8,000, the cumulative CPI is 0.8, and the cumulative SPI is 
0.9. Using  both  your CPI and SPI factors, what is your estimate at completion forecast?
 A: $18,750 
 B: $25,000 
 C: $22,666 
 D: $26,666 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
51
 Question 195: You are approximately halfway through a complex construction 
project and are presenting the data from earned value management analysis of the 
project to your team. You have a BAC of $50,0000, an EV of $2,800,000, an AC of $260,000, 
and a PV of $250,000. The team members are happy with these figures and want to know 
the rate at which they have to work  to  achieve the revised estimate at completion. What is 
your answer?
 A: 1.0 
 B: 0.92 
 C: 1.08 
 D: 0.5 
 Question 196: As part of the work to check if you are achieving your expected and 
approved spend on the project, you are completing a process of controlling project costs. 
Which of the  following  is not an output from this process?
 A: Work performance information 
 B:  Variance analysis 
 C: Cost forecasts 
 D: Change requests 
 Question 197: You are managing a project and the original scope baseline of the 
project was budgeted at $100,000. Since work on the project started there have been 13 
authorized and approved changes to the project. The changes have a value of $12,000 
and the cost of investigating them prior to their approval was $1,500.    What is the current 
budget for the project?
 A: $113,500 
 B: $109,500 
 C: $112,000 
 D: $100,000 
 Question 198: The project you are managing is going well and you are using the 
earned value management system to assess historical information and forecast a likely 
future financial state of the project. You have a budget at completion of $120,000, an 
earned value of $50,000, a planned value of $55,000, and an actual cost of $45,000. What is 
your To  Complete  Performance Index to achieve the budget at completion?
 A: 1 
 B: 1.07 
 C: 0.93 
 D: $5,000 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
52
 Question 199:  You are nearing the end of a residential remodeling project and are 
presenting the data from earned value management analysis of the project to your team. 
You have a BAC of $300,000, an EV of $2,500,000, an AC of $260,000, and a PV of $250,000. 
The team members are happy with these figures and want to know the rate at which they 
have to work to achieve the budget at completion.  What is your answer?
 A: 1.25 
 B: 0.95 
 C: 1.1 
 D: 0.85 
 Project Quality Management 
 Question 200:  Customer satisfaction means that  customer requirements are met. 
 Meeting customer requirements requires a combination of what two factors?
 A: Continuous improvement and prevention over inspection 
 B: Conformance to requirements and prevention over 
inspection 
 C:  Continuous improvement and fitness for use 
 D: Conformance to requirements and fitness for use 
 Question 201:  You are successful using the FMEA approach to assess implications of 
quality decisions on your project. Your client  asks  you what FMEA stands for. What is your 
answer?
 A: Failure model of effective analysis 
 B: Failed measurement and effect analysis 
 C:  Failed measurement and effective assurance  
 D: Failure mode and effect analysis 
 Question 202: Modern quality management complements project  management 
 very highly, with both disciplines recognizing the importance of all the following 
characteristics except?
 A: Customer satisfaction 
 B: Prevention over inspection 
 C:  Continuous improvement 
 D: Total quality management (TQM) 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
53
 Question 203: Quality is planned, designed, and built into your project instead of 
being inspected in. What is the main  reason  that prevention of mistakes in quality is 
preferred over finding the mistakes via inspection?
 A: Because finding defects via inspection should be avoided 
at all costs. 
 B: Because if you are a good project manager and perform 
prevention well, you won’t have to deal with inspection.  
 C: Because the cost of preventing mistakes is generally much 
less than the cost of correcting them when they are found by 
inspection. 
 D: Because your quality management plan focuses on 
prevention. 
 Question 204: How would you best describe to your client the difference  between 
 precision and accuracy?
 A: Precision means the degree to which there is conformance 
to requirements. Accuracy refers to fitness for use. 
 B:  Precision means the values of the repeated measurements 
are clustered and have little scatter. Accuracy means that the 
measured value is very close to the true value.  
 C: Precision is the degree to which the project quality 
assurance processes are being met. Accuracy is the degree to 
which the product meets customer specifications. 
 D: Precision is the ability to provide information to a six sigma 
level. Accuracy is the process of ensuring that the six sigma 
target is met. 
 Question 205: A member of your project team seems confused about the differences 
between quality approaches to the project and product.  How would you best explain 
these differences?
 A: Quality in relation to the project relates to the processes 
and procedures that run the project. Quality in relation to the 
product looks at conformance to requirements and fitness of use.  
 B: There is no difference between the two. 
 C: Quality in relation to the project is focused on ensuring the 
project control and reporting are accurate. Quality in relation 
to the product ensures that it stays within the upper and lower 
control limits. 
 D: Quality in relation to the project is focused on the 
preparation and execution of the quality management plan. 
Quality in relation to the product is set solely by the customer. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
54
 Question 206:  Your project is behind schedule and you have asked your project 
team to work longer hours to make up the time so that  the   customer’s needs are met as 
planned. As project manager, you should monitor your quality management plan for 
what reason?
 A: Meeting customer requirements by overworking the project 
team may result in increased employee attrition, errors, or 
rework. 
 B: The customer requirements and specifications can change 
rapidly during periods of rework as the customer sees 
opportunities to make changes. 
 C: Achieving customer needs is not the primary focus of the 
quality management plan, and you need to make sure your 
team is working on project quality, not product quality, at 
these times. 
 D:  The overtime cost incurred will take away the project 
budget assigned to the implementation of the quality 
management plan. 
 Question 207: Your project team has completed a check of the project and the 
product you are managing. They discover that  although  you are meeting the quality 
requirements, the product is of a low grade. What should you do FIRST?
 A: Keep the project running as normal with no changes as a 
result of this discovery. 
 B: Check the quality management plan on what to do when 
discovering a low-grade product. 
 C: Immediately stop work to discover the source of the low 
grade, and proceed to fix it. 
 D:  Keep the project running so that you don’t lose time, but 
assign a team member with experience in the area of the 
product to discover the reason behind the low grade. 
 Question 208: What is the method of modern quality management that relies on 
continuing small improvements involving everyone from the top management to the 
lowest-level worker  in  the organization more most commonly known as?
 A: Kampai 
 B: Kanban 
 C: Kawasaki 
 D: Kaizen 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
55
 Question 209: The PMBOK ® Guide process groups of initiating, planning, executing, 
monitoring, and controlling a project are based on  the  work of Shewhart and Deming. 
What is their quality improvement model known as?
 A: Six Sigma 
 B: Organizational Project Management Maturity Model 
(OPM3) 
 C:  Plan-do-check-act cycle 
 D: Total quality management 
 Question 210: You are explaining to your project sponsor that the decision made to 
lower the quality of deliverables on the project to save money will have long-lasting cost 
impacts beyond the project. The project sponsor does not seem convinced so you refer 
to the concept of cost of quality to make your point.  How would you best describe cost of 
quality to your sponsor?
 A:  The total cost of the quality effort throughout the project 
life cycle 
 B: The amount of money required to complete your project 
quality management plan 
 C:  The total cost of all efforts related to quality throughout the 
product life cycle 
 D:  The total cost of implementing a prevention and inspection 
regime 
 Question 211: The PMBOK ® Guide process that is focused on  identifying  quality 
requirements and standards for the project and product is known as what?
 A: Control Quality 
 B: Cost of Quality 
 C:  Plan Quality Management 
 D: Perform Quality Assurance 
 Question 212: You are completing the work to identify and document quality 
requirements and standards for your project. Which of  the  following would you not use as 
an input into this process?
 A: Requirements documentation 
 B: Stakeholder register 
 C:  Risk register 
 D: Quality checklists 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
56
 Question 213:  When considering the cost of quality on your project  you   should 
consider all of the following characteristics except?
 A: Destructive testing loss. 
 B: Investment in preventing non-conformance to 
requirements. 
 C: Appraising the product or service for conformance to 
requirements. 
 D:  Failing to meet requirements. 
 Question 214:   Which  of the following is not an example of a cost of conformance?
 A: Testing 
 B: Equipment 
 C: Training 
 D: Rework 
 Question 215:  You and your team are checking data that has been gathered and 
presented in a control chart to determine if the product you are producing is meeting 
the required quality objectives.  What is your main objective in completing this work and 
representing it in this way?
 A: To measure if the cost of quality is providing the forecast 
cost benefit analysis. 
 B: To determine if your quality management plan is achieving 
the objectives. 
 C:  To measure if your product is meeting the goal of fitness for 
use. 
 D:  To determine if a process is stable or has predictable 
performance. 
 Question 216:  Control limits for the production rates for the  machines   your project 
is building are set at 3 and 9, with a mean value of 6 units per hour. The results this week 
are as follows: 4, 7, 10, 5, and 6. What should you do first?
 A: Investigate the third result. 
 B: Continue working. 
 C:  Investigate the tenth result. 
 D:  Investigate the first result. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
57
 Question 217: You have received the results of statistical sampling performed on the 
product of your project. The control chart  shows  nine data points in a row just under the 
mean. What should you do first?
 A: Change the control limits and the mean so the process is 
under control. 
 B: Find an assignable or special cause using an Ishikawa diagram.  
 C: Nothing. If the data points are not outside the control 
limits, then the process is in control. 
 D: Fire the quality assurance team. 
 Question 218: Upper and lower control limits on a control chart  are  generally  set at 
how many standard deviations above and below the acceptable mean?
 A:  1 standard deviation 
 B:  2 standard deviations 
 C: 3 standard deviations 
 D: 6 standard deviations 
 Question 219: Your project data, as shown on the control chart, indicates the latest 
seven consecutive points are above the mean  but  within the upper control limit. What is 
your BEST course of action?
 A:  Stop work immediately and investigate the root cause of the 
problem. 
 B:  Do nothing because the data clearly indicates that the 
process is above the lower specification limit. 
 C: Initiate corrective action in accordance with your quality 
management plan. 
 D: Lower the lower control limit so that the data is now above 
the limit. 
 Question 220: Your project is generating useful data for your control chart. The latest 
data indicates that the process of manufacturing the product has produced units below 
the lower control  limit  but above the lower specification limit. What is your BEST course 
of action?
 A:  Initiate corrective action in accordance with your quality 
management plan. 
 B:  Do nothing because the data clearly indicates that the 
process is above the lower specification limit. 
 C: Stop work immediately and investigate the root cause of 
the problem. 
 D: Lower the lower control limit so that the data is now above 
the limit. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
58
 Question 221:  While working on the project to assess and measure quality, you 
are determining the number and type of tests and  their  impact on cost of quality. What 
technique are you using?
 A: Design of experiments 
 B: Analogous estimating 
 C: Benchmarking 
 D: Cost of quality 
 Question 222: You are comparing actual or planned project practices to those of 
comparable projects to identify best practices and generate ideas for improvement for 
your project.  What  quality technique are you using?
 A: Cost of quality 
 B: Analogous estimating 
 C: Design of experiments 
 D: Benchmarking 
 Question 223: A quality technique that chooses only a part of a  population  of 
interest for studying, and is often used to reduce cost, is called what?
 A: Inspection 
 B: Flowcharting 
 C:  Statistical sampling 
 D: Budget control chart 
 Question 224: Your project team is working on a software project with over two 
million lines of code and has just  randomly  selected a number of lines of code for 
inspection. What quality technique are they using?
 A: Benchmarking 
 B: Design of experiments 
 C:  Statistical sampling 
 D: Random inspection 
 Question 225:  During a project to deliver a complex set of requirements for a wide 
range of stakeholders, you and your team have placed a great deal of importance on the 
quality of the project. You have decided to use a wide variety of tools and techniques to 
help you achieve the desired quality standards.  Which  of the following is not an example 
of a quality planning tool that you would find useful in this endeavor?
 A: Affinity diagram 
 B: Force field diagram 
 C:  Matrix diagram 
 D: Quality checklist 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
59
 Question 226: While completing work associated with ensuring quality in a project, 
it is important that you know the difference between several different quality related 
terms. Several of your team members regularly get confused about the difference 
between the different terms, particularly understanding exactly what a quality metric is. 
To demonstrate to your team the difference, you point out that one of the following  is   not 
a quality metric. Which one do you point out?
 A:  Failure rate 
 B:  Budget control 
 C: Defect frequency 
 D: Upper control limit 
 Question 227: You have completed the work to plan and document your particular 
approach to quality on your project. Which of the following is not an output you would 
expect to  produce  as a result of this work?
 A: Quality metrics 
 B: Flowcharting 
 C: Process improvement plan 
 D: Quality management plan 
 Question 228: The process of continuous process improvements to reduce waste 
and eliminate activities that do not add value to  a  project is known as what?
 A:  Progressive elaboration 
 B:  Plan quality management 
 C: Control quality 
 D: Perform quality assurance 
 Question 229: You are using your quality management plan to guide the work being 
done to ensure that project quality assurance expectations are being met. Which of the 
following would  not  be a useful input to you?
 A:  Process improvement plan 
 B: Quality audits 
 C: Quality metrics 
 D: Quality control measurements 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
60
 Question 230:  A project administrator has asked for guidance on completing a 
project audit as per the approved quality management plan for your project. They are 
seeking your guidance on what exactly  a  quality audit is. How is a quality audit best 
defined?
 A: A structured, independent review to determine whether 
product specifications comply with organizational and project 
policies, processes, and procedures. 
 B: A structured, independent review to determine whether 
project activities comply with organizational and project 
policies, processes, and procedures. 
 C:  An examination of the product specifications to test 
whether they are fit for use and conform to requirements. 
 D: A review of the project management plan to ensure it 
contains the appropriate quality management plan.    
 Question 231:  You are completing the work to ensure the required quality assurance 
levels are met on your project. Which of the following is  an  output of this work?
 A: Quality audits 
 B: Quality metrics 
 C:  Change requests 
 D: Process analysis 
 Question 232: What is the process of monitoring and recording results of 
executing the quality activities to assess  performance   and recommend necessary 
changes known as?
 A: Perform quality assurance 
 B: Control quality 
 C:  Plan quality management 
 D: Statistical sampling 
 Question 233:  During a workshop to define quality control processes on your 
project, you sense that team members are confused abut the difference between 
 prevention and inspection. What is  the BEST description of the difference between 
prevention and inspection?
 A: Prevention is focused on keeping errors out of the process. 
Inspection is focused on keeping errors out of the hands of the 
customer. 
 B: Prevention is concerned with the implementation of the 
quality process at the start of the project. Inspection is done 
once the project is underway. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
61
 C: Prevention is the systematic adoption of rigorous quality 
standards during the planning phase. Inspection is carried out 
during the monitoring and control process group.  
 D: Prevention is focused on the quality of the project. 
Inspection is focused on the quality of the product. 
 Question 234: What is the BEST description of the difference  between tolerances 
and control limits?
 A: Tolerances are concerned with project quality. Control 
limits are concerned with product quality. 
 B:  Tolerances can indicate if the process is out of control. 
Control limits specify a range of acceptable results. 
 C: Tolerances are a specified range of acceptable results. 
Control limits are thresholds that can indicate if the process is 
out of control. 
 D: Tolerances are concerned with product quality. Control 
limits are concerned with project quality. 
 Question 235: All of the following are an example of one of  Ishikawa’s seven tools of 
 quality except?
 A: Flowcharting 
 B: Inspection 
 C: Run chart 
 D: Control charts 
 Question 236: You are the project manager for a project where quality is an 
important constraint, and you are trying to correct a problem with a machine that makes 
parts that are used in complex medical imaging equipment. As a result of carrying our 
your Control Quality process, you discover that unfortunately these parts are frequently 
made with defects. You have decided to hold a meeting to discuss the process of making 
the parts.   You create a diagram that has branches that show the possible causes of the 
problems. Each of the branches breaks the cause down into more and more detail. What 
is this diagram called?
 A:  Fishbowl diagram 
 B: Cause and effect diagram 
 C: Pareto diagram 
 D: Scatter diagram 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
62
 Question 237:  You are trying to find the cause of an identified problem on your 
project by examining the various  factors  that might be linked to potential problems. What 
technique are you using?
 A: Ishikawa diagram 
 B: Control chart 
 C:  Pareto chart 
 D: Run chart 
 Question 238:  The quality manager on your project wishes to analyze the data that 
is being received in the form of a list of defects that have occurred in the manufacturing 
department. The report comes with defects listed chronologically as they occurred, the 
cost of the repair necessary to correct each defect, the person involved, and a description 
of the defect. The  quality  manager would like to determine which of the defects should be 
corrected first according to the frequency of the defect occurring. Which of the following 
tools should she use?
 A: Pareto diagram 
 B: Sampling inspection 
 C: Cause and effect diagram 
 D: Quality critical path 
 Question 239:  You are explaining to your project team the ranking of causes for 
defects on your project to enable them to focus their corrective actions on those causes 
that are responsible  for  the greatest defects. What sort of diagram would you use for this?
 A: Pareto chart 
 B: Scatter diagram 
 C:  Control chart 
 D: Histogram 
 Question 240:  While performing quality control inspections, you note down relevant 
data and use a vertical bar chart to show how often  a  particular variable state occurred. 
What is this sort of bar chart more commonly called?
 A: Histogram 
 B: Pareto chart 
 C:  Control chart 
 D: Scatter diagram 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
63
 Question 241: While performing quality control inspections, you note  down  relevant 
data and use a chart similar to a control chart without displayed limits, which shows the 
history and pattern of a variation. What sort of chart are you using?
 A:  Fishbone diagram 
 B:  Control charts 
 C: Pareto chart 
 D: Run chart 
 Question 242: A visual presentation of quality data gathered showing  the 
 relationship between a dependent and independent variable is known as what?
 A:  Run chart 
 B:  Pareto chart 
 C: Control chart 
 D: Scatter diagram 
 Question 243: Your team members have completed work to perform quality control 
on the project. Which of the  following  outputs would you not expect them to produce as a 
result of doing this work?
 A: Quality metrics 
 B:  Validated changes 
 C: Change requests 
 D: Quality control measurements 
 Question 244: You and your team are working hard to produce a quality wireless 
headphone product capable of high-quality audio transmission. You are discussing an 
approach with your Quality Assurance Team Leader that will aim to reduce the variation 
 the  team is experiencing with the prototype headsets being produced. What technique 
are you discussing?
 A: Six Sigma 
 B: Lean 
 C: Scrum 
 D: Kanban 
 Question 245: If a process is considered to have only 3.4 defects  per  million 
opportunities, which sigma class is this defined as?
 A: Two Sigma 
 B:  Three Sigma 
 C: Six Sigma 
 D: Twelve Sigma 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
64
 Question 246: The terms Yellow Belt, Green Belt, and Black Belt are  terms  given to 
individuals that practice which methodology?
 A: Rapid Application Development 
 B: Six Sigma 
 C: Scrum 
 D: Kanban 
 Question 247: You have been asked by senior management to focus on eliminating 
any bottlenecks that exist in your project’s processes.  What methodology will be most 
effective in highlighting bottlenecks?
 A: Prince2 
 B: MPMM 
 C: Lean 
 D: Kanban 
 Question 248:  Your Quality Assurance Manager has requested that you assist her in 
mapping the value stream for the assembly of a new combustion engine. Value stream 
mapping is part of  which  methodology?
 A: Waterfall 
 B: Scrum 
 C: Lean 
 D: Kaizen 
 Project Human Resource Management 
 Question 249:  The PMBOK ® Guide processes that organize, recruit, reward, manage,  and 
lead the project team are collectively known as what?
 A: Project Human Resource Management 
 B: Project Team Management 
 C: Project Management 
 D: Project Team Building and Development 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
65
 Question 250: The project sponsor has several responsibilities while working with 
the project management team. Which of  the  following is not a responsibility of the project 
sponsor?
 A: Influencing others in support of the project. 
 B:  Completing the WBS. 
 C: Monitoring progress. 
 D: Project funding. 
 Question 251: A team member is studying towards obtaining the PMP ® credential 
and has asked for your assistance with her study. She is having difficulty remembering 
the generally correct order of activities in the PMBOK ® Guide Project Human  Resource 
 Management knowledge area. What is your answer to this question?
 A: Plan Human Resource Management, Acquire Project Team, 
Develop Project Team, Manage Project Team 
 B: Develop Project Team, Acquire Project Team, Plan Human 
Resource Management, Manage Project Team 
 C:  Acquire Project Team, Plan Human Resource Management, 
Develop Project Team, Manage Project Team 
 D: Plan Human Resource Management, Develop Project 
Team, Acquire Project Team, Manage Project Team 
 Question 252: You have completed your human resource management plan for 
your project. You recognize that the profession of project management features a lot of 
interdependencies, and you want to make sure that the  human resource plan  is used in 
other appropriate parts of your project work. This plan is used as an input into all of the 
following processes except?
 A: Identify Risks 
 B: Estimate Costs 
 C:  Estimate Activity Resources 
 D: Acquire Project Team 
 Question 253: While completing initial planning work on your project, you begin to 
develop your human resource plan. Which of the  following  inputs would not be of use to 
you to complete this plan?
 A: Activity resource requirements 
 B: WBS 
 C:  Enterprise environmental factors 
 D: Organizational process assets 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
66
 Question 254:  You are showing your project team members the organizational 
structure, and you point out where in the  structure  their role is located. What tool would 
be useful to you in preparing this information?
 A: Responsibility assignment matrix (RAM) 
 B: Work breakdown structure (WBS) 
 C:  Resource breakdown structure (RBS) 
 D:  Organizational breakdown structure (OBS) 
 Question 255:  You are using a matrix-based chart to give a clear indication of the 
connection between work packages and team members.  Additionally, the chart shows 
who is responsible, accountable, consulted, and informed about the work. What is the 
common name of this type of chart?
 A: RACI chart 
 B: Organizational breakdown structure 
 C:  Work breakdown structure 
 D: Responsibility assignment matrix 
 Question 256:  As a competent project manager you should be aware of the leading 
and foundational theories relating to the management  of   human resources and their 
practical application. Which of the following is not one of these theories?
 A: Colbin’s Intuitive Behavior Modification Theory  
 B: Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs 
 C: McGregor’s Theory X and Theory Y 
 D: Herzberg’s Motivation-Hygiene Theory 
 Question 257:  As a competent project manager you should be aware of the leading 
and foundational theories relating to the management of  human   resources and their 
practical application. Which of the following is not one of these theories?
 A: Vroom’s Expectancy Theory 
 B: Ouchi’s Theory Z 
 C:  McLachlan’s Theory of External Motivation  
 D:  McClelland’s Human Motivation, Achievement, or Three 
Needs Theory 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
67
 Question 258: While completing initial planning work on your project, you begin to 
develop your human resource management plan.  The human resource management plan 
can include all the following information except?
 A:  Project organization charts 
 B:  Staffing management plan 
 C: Cost estimates for staff time 
 D: Roles and responsibilities 
 Question 259:  What  does a resource calendar show?
 A:  The annual leave for staff throughout the project 
 B:  The cost of staff members over time 
 C: The human resource level, constraints, and commitment 
over time 
 D: Any programmed team-building activities throughout 
the project 
 Question 260: You are currently attempting to acquire project team members 
on a project that is just about to start. You are meeting resistance from the functional 
managers of the staff you want to use on your project, and it appears that you may have to 
seek help from external consultants. Your project sponsor  is  concerned about the impact 
this process is having on the project. All of following are potential adverse effects of not 
acquiring your project team except?
 A: Reduced quality 
 B: Decreased customer satisfaction 
 C: Reduced project costs 
 D: Delays to project schedules 
 Question 261: Your construction manager approaches you about a particular team 
member that has just been assigned to the project.  She  thinks that he does not have the 
required skills to complete the work expected of him and suggests that this team member 
be assigned to a different project. What is your BEST course of action?
 A:  Arrange for the team member to get the necessary training.  
 B:  Tell your construction manager to fire the team member 
immediately. 
 C: Tell your construction manager that it is ok if the team 
member learns on the job. 
 D: Arrange for the team member to be assigned to another 
project. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
68
 Question 262:  You are in the process of obtaining the staff members you require 
on your project from other functional areas within your organization. You have made a 
request to a particular functional manager to have one of her staff members assigned part 
time to your project. The functional manager is concerned about the effect this will have 
on her operational goals and  suggests  instead that the staff member be assigned to your 
project for 30% of her time instead of 50%. What technique are you engaged in?
 A: Negotiation 
 B: Pre-assignment of staff 
 C: Acquisition 
 D: Acquire project team 
 Question 263:  The software project you are working on is using developers from 
different geographic areas around the world because the high level of experience 
required for this project could not be obtained locally. With the different time zones you 
are having difficulty organizing regular meetings between all the project team members. 
What would be the BEST thing  you  could do to improve communication between your 
virtual team?
 A: Only meet with those team members in your office and 
tell them to let the other team members know what was 
discussed. 
 B: Insist they all make themselves available at 10 AM your 
time once a week. 
 C:  Run multiple meetings on the same topic so that everyone 
gets the same message. 
 D: Use real-time and recorded web-based video conferencing. 
 Question 264: What is the PMBOK ® Guide process of improving the competencies, 
team interaction, and the overall team environment  to  enhance project performance 
known as?
 A: Acquire Project Team 
 B:  Plan Human Resource Management 
 C: Develop Project Team 
 D: Manage Project Team 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
69
 Question 265: You are holding a weekly project meeting when a disagreement 
between two members of the project team begins. The disagreement is over a technical 
detail of the project. It is important that the conflicting opinions of the two team members 
be resolved as quickly as possible. It is even more  important   that the difference of opinion 
be resolved correctly. What is your BEST course of action?
 A:  You should make the decision right away to save time and not 
let the two disagreeing parties stay in disagreement very long.  
 B:  End the meeting and give everyone a few days to cool off.  
 C: Assign someone to find out more factual information about 
the problem. 
 D: You should suggest a compromise between the two 
disagreeing team members. 
 Question 266:  Which  of the following is not an objective of developing your 
project team?
 A:  Improve team members’ knowledge and skills.  
 B:  Get everyone to align themselves with the culture of the 
project office. 
 C: Improve trust and agreement between team members.  
 D: Create a dynamic and cohesive team culture. 
 Question 267: The Tuckman theory of team development states that team 
development generally follows a sequence of stages. Which is  the  correct order of those 
stages?
 A:  Storming, Norming, Forming, Performing, Adjourning 
 B:  Forming, Storming, Norming, Performing, Adjourning 
 C: Forming, Norming, Storming, Performing, Adjourning 
 D: Performing, Forming, Norming, Storming, Adjourning 
 Question 268: You have offered everyone on your team an individual financial 
bonus if they are the first to complete a  particular  piece of work. Instead of motivating the 
team, your offer has caused unhealthy competition in some staff and apathy in others. 
What could be the problem with your offer?
 A: Your team does not respect you as project manager. 
 B: You offered too little money. 
 C: You offered too much money. 
 D: Your team culture does not support individualism.    
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
70
 Question 269:  You have decided that all of your project team members must move 
into their own space within the organization’s main headquarters to improve efficiency 
and team building. What is  this  commonly called?
 A: Assignment 
 B: Project team residential compatibility 
 C: Co-location 
 D: War room 
 Question 270:  After completing some work required to develop your project team 
members, you have noted several outputs that have been produced. Which of the 
following is an output that you  would  expect to produce?
 A: Team performance assessments 
 B: Team building activities 
 C:  Staff assignments 
 D: WBS dictionary elements 
 Question 271:  As a project manager, your greatest challenge has been managing 
your project team. You have decided to gain extra skills to help you in this task. All of the 
following are areas  y  ou should focus on except?
 A: Negotiation 
 B: Communication 
 C: Remuneration 
 D: Leadership 
 Question 272:  Your project is more than halfway through and you have a CPI of 
1.08 and an SPI of 1.03. You attribute a lot of the success so far to the work being done 
by the team and the way in which they are working together. This has been as a result 
of the work you have done as project manager in managing the project team.  In order 
to complete the work associated with managing the project team successfully, you have 
used a variety of inputs to help your efforts. Which of the following is not an input that 
you would have used?
 A: Team performance assessments 
 B: Project staff assignments 
 C: Project management plan 
 D: Project performance appraisals 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
71
 Question 273: In his theory of motivation of employees, Herzberg divided 
motivation factors into two classes: satisfiers and dissatisfiers.  Which of the following are 
examples of satisfiers according to Herzberg?
 A:  Vacation time, assignment of a personal staff assistant  
 B:  Work satisfaction, fringe benefits 
 C: Plush office space, performance-based salary raise 
 D: Sense of personal achievement, work satisfaction 
 Question 274: As a project manager, you understand how important effective 
management of your team is to the success of the project. Which of the following is not a key 
interpersonal skill that  you   should have as a project manager to help you manage your team?
 A:  Strong leadership skills with the ability to communicate the 
vision and inspire the project team to achieve high performance  
 B:  The ability to be persuasive and have high levels of active 
and effective listening skills 
 C: A focus on prevention over inspection and an eye for detail 
when reporting your project status reports 
 D: Effective decision-making skills 
 Question 275: Your project has been underway for 18 months and currently has 
a CPI of 1.02 and an SPI of 1.07. During the project, two of your project team members 
have disagreed constantly over non-technical issues and on occasion have shown open 
hostility towards each other, often in front of other team members. Lately the situation 
has escalated, and during your last project team status meeting they openly shouted at 
each other. As project manager, you decide to call both team members into your office 
and explain to them that the best way to resolve this conflict is a give-and-take attitude 
and open dialogue.  What  conflict resolution technique are you using?
 A:  Collaborating and forcing 
 B:  Confronting and problem solving 
 C: Smoothing and accommodating 
 D: Withdrawing and avoiding 
 Question 276: As part of your own professional development plan, you have 
approval from your senior manager to undertake leadership training. As part of your 
training, you have asked your team members for their opinion on what constitutes the 
key elements and characteristics of an effective leader. What are  the   key elements of 
effective leadership?
 A:  Fear and submission 
 B: Friendship and admiration 
 C: Vision and humor 
 D: Respect and trust 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
72
 Question 277:  Which of the following is not one of the four  basic  decision-making 
styles normally used by project managers?
 A: Ideas to action 
 B: Coin flip 
 C: Command 
 D: Consensus 
 Question 278:  You are faced with a large decision to make on your project. After 
fully defining the problem, you call in your team to brainstorm multiple solutions. You 
then define the evaluation criteria and rate the pros and cons of different options.    Prior to 
making a decision, you go through a process of problem definition, solution generation, 
ideas to action, solution action planning, solution evaluation planning, and evaluation of 
the outcome and process. What process are you using?
 A: Kouzes and Posner six-step decision making process 
 B: Shewhart and Deming’s plan-do-check-act cycle 
 C: Six-phase decision making model 
 D: Turner and Muller’s six-phase decision making process 
 Project Communications Management 
 Question 279:  It is commonly acknowledged that one of the most important  sets   of skills 
a project manager should develop is their communication skills. All of the following are 
examples of communication skills except?
 A: Reviewing the work breakdown structure to ensure team 
members know what has to be done. 
 B: Setting and managing expectations. 
 C:  Persuading a person or organization to perform an action.  
 D:  Listening actively and effectively. 
 Question 280:  Your project is experiencing a range of variations that require one of 
the contracts you are using to engage an external vendor to be amended. What sort of 
 communication  is most appropriate when dealing with changes to a contract?
 A: Informal written 
 B: Formal written 
 C:  Formal verbal 
 D: Electronic 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
73
 Question 281: After conducting your stakeholder analysis, you determine that there 
are, excluding you, 7 stakeholders on the project.  How many communication channels 
are there?
 A: 7 
 B: 21 
 C: 28 
 D: 35 
 Question 282: There are 12 stakeholders including yourself on the project,  so how 
many communication channels are there?
 A: 66 
 B: 144 
 C: 78 
 D: 12 
 Question 283: All of the following are factors that  influence   the method of 
communication disbursement between team members except?
 A: Availability of technology 
 B: Duration of the project 
 C: Local government regulations 
 D: Urgency of the need for information 
 Question 284: You are leading a team on a complex project that requires constant 
communication with influential stakeholders. Despite your best efforts, the message that 
you send to the stakeholders is disrupted and misunderstood. Communication between 
the sender and the receiver is often affected  by  communication barriers or noise. These 
include all of the following except?
 A:  Educational differences 
 B:  Differences in motivation 
 C: Lack of a communications device 
 D: Cultural differences 
 Question 285: You are having difficulty concentrating on what a stakeholder is 
saying during a business meeting and you feel you  are   not fully understanding them. 
What technique could help you to understand them better?
 A:  Repeat the message back to the stakeholder. 
 B:  Ask them to write everything down. 
 C: Ask to postpone the meeting until you feel better. 
 D: Ask them to speak slower. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
74
 Question 286: Your project team is scattered over three countries in three different 
time zones. Each project office has a different language as its first language, so to improve 
communication you have asked that all correspondence be conducted  in   English. In 
doing this, what are you trying to minimize in your team’s communication?
 A: Environmental constraints 
 B: Cultural differences 
 C: Noise 
 D: Foreign accents 
 Question 287:  The skill of listening involves more than just hearing  the   sounds. 
Which of the following is a characteristic of a good listener?
 A: Takes good notes. 
 B: Repeats some of the things said. 
 C:  Finishes the speaker’s sentences. 
 D:  Agrees with the speaker. 
 Question 288:  You are in the process of sending out your weekly project update to a 
wide range of stakeholders. This is an example  of  what sort of communication method?
 A: Stakeholder management strategy 
 B: Pull communication 
 C:  Interactive communication 
 D: Push communication 
 Question 289:  You are using your intranet site to post large amounts of 
information that team members can log into to read. This is an  example  of what sort of 
communication method?
 A: Encoding and decoding 
 B: Push communication 
 C:  Interactive communication 
 D: Pull communication 
 Question 290:  Your project team has spent a considerable amount of time and 
energy completing the stakeholder analysis and putting together the communications 
management plan but is now disagreeing what, how, and when different communication 
methods are to  be  used. Who should take responsibility for determining this?
 A: Stakeholder representative 
 B: Project team 
 C: Project sponsor 
 D: Project manager 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
75
 Question 291: You are regularly referring to your communications management 
plan to help guide your project communications. Which of the following would you not 
expect to find in  your  communications management plan?
 A: The person responsible for authorizing the release of 
confidential information 
 B:  Team members’ addresses and phone numbers 
 C: Glossary of common terminology 
 D: Stakeholder communication requirements 
 Question 292: As part of your project, you regularly hold status meetings with project 
team members and influential stakeholders. You endeavor at all times to ensure that these 
meetings are productive and contribute to successful communication on the project. All of 
the following are  techniques  to ensure your project meetings are more productive except?
 A: Teleconferencing 
 B:  Ground rules 
 C: A set start and finish time for the meeting 
 D: An agenda 
 Question 293: While carrying out the work described in your project communications 
plan, you go to great lengths to ensure that relevant information is disseminated to the 
correct stakeholders in the right way at the right time. As a senior project manager, you 
know that effective information distribution is a key factor in project success. This is 
because effective information distribution includes all of the following  techniques  except?
 A:  Writing style 
 B: Presentation techniques 
 C: Issue log 
 D: Choice of media 
 Question 294: You have decided to study for the PMP ® credential and are currently 
learning the way in which the project life cycle can be described in terms of process 
groups associated with initiating, planning, executing, monitoring and controlling, 
and closing activities. You then move on to studying the ways in which successful 
communication occurs in a project. In order to demonstrate how much you have learned, 
you are able to describe to a colleague how some aspect of project communication occurs 
in different process groups. The Manage  Communications  process occurs within which 
PMBOK ® Guide process group?
 A: Initiating 
 B: Planning 
 C: Executing 
 D: Monitoring and Controlling 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
76
 Question 295: You and your project team have been in negotiations with a potential 
supplier for several hours over an important contract that will deliver a large part of the 
one product required to complete your project. You and your team are getting frustrated 
at the slow rate of progress on the negotiations  but  know it is important that they are done 
thoroughly. How important is non-verbal communication to the negotiations?
 A: Very important 
 B: Not very important 
 C:  Only important when the other party is silent  
 D:  Only important during negotiations over cost 
 Question 296:  You have called a team member into your office to deal with 
unacceptable behavior towards other project team members.  After  the meeting 
you decide to follow up to make clear what was discussed. What is the best form of 
communication to use in this instance?
 A: Formal written 
 B: Formal verbal 
 C:  Informal written 
 D: Informal verbal 
 Question 297: Your project sponsor has asked you to present a detailed project 
update to some high-level stakeholders who are concerned that the project is not meeting 
its agreed timeframes, its agreed budget, nor delivering the quality the customer is 
expecting. What information and method would be BEST to  use  in this situation?
 A: A verbal presentation during a 10-minute meeting  
 B: A summary milestone report tabled as an agenda item at 
their next scheduled meeting 
 C:  A PowerPoint presentation outlining the major issues, 
given in your office 
 D: A detailed performance report in writing with an 
accompanying presentation and time for questions and answers  
 Question 298:  You are attempting to communicate with various project stakeholders 
and, despite your best efforts, you find that the information that you send to them is 
misunderstood. Cultural differences and using unfamiliar technology are the main 
problems contributing to this lack of understanding. What is  the   best term to describe 
these characteristics?
 A: Decoding 
 B: Feedback 
 C: Noise 
 D: Transmission 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
77
 Question 299: You are actively monitoring and controlling the project 
communications according to your approved communications management plan and are 
seeking to generate work  performance  information about the effectiveness of your project 
communications. Which of the following would be least useful to you?
 A: Project communications 
 B:  Issue log 
 C: Work performance data 
 D: Change requests 
 Question 300: You are using historical data about your project to forecast an 
estimated future outcome in your project  performance   reporting. This is an example of 
what forecasting method?
 A:  Budget forecasts 
 B:  Judgmental methods 
 C: Econometric method 
 D: Time series methods 
 Question 301: Your project team has just finished the first round of soliciting 
information from experts about what they think the forecasted future performance on 
your project will be using information supplied to them. You are currently assessing the 
 information  supplied anonymously by the respondents and plan to request a second 
round of opinions to use in your project forecasts. What forecasting method are you 
using?
 A:  Judgmental method 
 B: Causal method 
 C: Earned value 
 D: Econometric method 
 Question 302: Which of the following would you not expect to see in  a  detailed 
project performance report?
 A:  Current status of risks and issues 
 B: Staff performance reviews 
 C: Forecasted project completion 
 D: Summary of changes approved in the period 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
78
 Question 303:  Several of your stakeholders are raising issues with you, and you are 
documenting their issues in an issue log and providing feedback to the stakeholders 
about the status and any resolution of the issues. Furthermore, you are using the issue log 
as an input into a process because it provides  a  repository for what has already happened 
in the project and a platform for subsequent communication to be delivered. Which 
process are you involved in?
 A: Control Communications 
 B: Manage Communications 
 C:  Plan Communications Management 
 D: Monitor and Control Project Work 
 Question 304:  A project manager should spend approximately how much of their 
time communicating to team members and  stakeholders  to effectively contribute to 
project success?
 A: 50% 
 B: 5% 
 C: 90% 
 D: 70% 
 Question 305:  Which of the following has been identified as one of  the   single biggest 
reasons for project success or failure?
 A: Enterprise environmental factors 
 B: Financial accountability and accuracy 
 C:  Appropriate communication 
 D: The nature of the working relationship between project 
sponsor and the project manager 
 Question 306:  There are 36 communications channels on a project.  How many 
stakeholders are there in the project?
 A: 6 
 B: 36 
 C: 18 
 D: 9 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
79
 Project Risk Management 
 Question 307:  What  is the best description of the objectives of the risk management work 
you will undertake on your project?
 A:  Increase the probability and impact of positive events and 
decrease the probability and impact of negative events.  
 B:  Decrease the probability and impact of positive events and 
increase the probability and impact of negative events. 
 C: Decrease the probability and impact of any risks occurring 
on the project. 
 D: Assess the qualitative and quantitative probability and 
impact of positive and negative risk to the project.    
 Question 308:  All  of the following are characteristics of risks except?
 A:  Risk is always in the future. 
 B: Risk is an uncertain event or condition. 
 C: If a risk occurs, it will have an effect on at least one project 
objective. 
 D: Risk cannot be avoided. 
 Question 309: When completing your risk management plan you also decide to 
create a contingency plan. What is the main reason  for   creating a risk contingency plan?
 A:  Unknown risks that cannot be managed proactively.  
 B:  To deal with known risks with a large uncertainty about the 
probability of occurrence. 
 C: Unknown risks that have been identified in the risk 
management plan. 
 D: Known risks that if they occur can have a larger-than-
anticipated impact on your project. 
 Question 310: While completing your risk management plan you also decide to 
create a fallback plan. What is the main reason for creating  a   fallback plan?
 A:  To deal with known risks with a large uncertainty about the 
probability of occurrence. 
 B:  Unknown risks that cannot be managed proactively.  
 C: Unknown risks that have been identified in the risk 
management plan. 
 D: Known risks that if they occur can have a larger-than-
anticipated impact on your project. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
80
 Question 311:   The  willingness to accept varying degrees of risk is called what?
 A: Risk tolerance 
 B: Risk acceptance 
 C:  Risk planning 
 D: Risk analysis 
 Question 312:  When  should you begin risk management on a project?
 A: When you are completing the monitoring and controlling.  
 B: Once project planning has commenced. 
 C: Once project execution has commenced. 
 D: As soon as a project is initiated or conceived. 
 Question 313:  During a meeting to develop your risk management plan, a senior 
team member questions whether you have all the required inputs to develop a robust risk 
management plan that is appropriate for your project. Which of the following is not an 
input  that   you could use to complete this work successfully?
 A: Risk management plan 
 B: Project charter 
 C:  Stakeholder register 
 D: Project management plan 
 Question 314:  You and your project team are currently involved in the process to 
plan your particular approach to risk management on your project and are using a variety 
of tools and techniques to assist you in producing the risk management plan. Which of 
 the following is not a tool or technique used during the Plan Risk Management process?
 A: Risk probability and impact assessment 
 B: Analytical techniques 
 C:  Expert judgment 
 D: Meetings 
 Question 315:  As part of your risk management planning, you develop a diagram 
showing the hierarchy of project risks  arranged  by risk category and subcategory. What is 
this diagram commonly called?
 A: Risk assessment register 
 B: Risk breakdown structure 
 C:  Probability and impact matrix 
 D: Risk register 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
81
 Question 316: Your risk management planning session has  produced  definitions of 
risk probability and impact. These are used during which PMBOK ®  Guide process?
 A:  Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis 
 B: Identify Risks 
 C:  Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis 
 D: Plan Risk Management 
 Question 317: Your team is carrying out the process of determining which risks may 
affect the project and documenting their characteristics. You are using a variety of tools 
and techniques,   including documentation, reviews, information gathering techniques, 
checklist analysis, and SWOT analysis. What is the name of this process?
 A:  Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis 
 B: Identify Risks 
 C:  Perform Quantitative Risk analysis 
 D: Plan Risk Management 
 Question 318: You are congratulating your team for the time and effort taken to 
develop the first iteration of your project risk register. You are now contemplating the 
many uses that your risk  register  will have in your project and the many different areas 
in which it can be used as an input into the work being done. Which of the following 
PMBOK ®  Guide processes does not use the risk register as an input?
 A: Control Risks 
 B:  Manage Stakeholder Engagement 
 C: Plan Procurement Management 
 D:  Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis 
 Question 319: You and your team are in the process of identifying all potential 
uncertainty and risk on your project. You wish to ensure that your risk register is as 
comprehensive as possible; as such you are looking for as many relevant inputs as 
 possible   to assist you in this process. Which of the following is not an input into this 
process?
 A: Activity duration estimates 
 B:  Assumptions analysis 
 C: Stakeholder register 
 D: Activity cost estimates 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
82
 Question 320:  You are using your risk management plan to guide the work needed 
to identify both  positive and negative risks on your  project. Which of the following is not a 
tool or technique you would find useful to complete this work?
 A: Assumptions analysis 
 B: Information gathering techniques 
 C: Risk urgency assessment 
 D: Diagramming techniques 
 Question 321:  You and your team are completing the process of identifying risks 
on your project, and you wish to use a  particular  type of diagram to represent risk 
characteristics. All of the following are diagramming techniques used during the Identify 
Risks process except?
 A: Process flow chart 
 B: Cause and effect diagram 
 C:  Pareto diagram 
 D: Influence diagram 
 Question 322:  Your team has successfully identified many categories of risks, and 
within each category they have identified specific risk events that may impact your 
project. You have documented all of this information in an initial list of identified risks as 
part of the iterative development of your risk register. At this early stage, this document 
will generally have all of the following information on it except?
 A: Cause 
 B: Event 
 C: Consequence 
 D: Probability 
 Question 323:  Your team is carrying out the process to identify the risks to the 
project and is identifying strengths and weaknesses of the organization by looking at 
the way these strengths offset threats and opportunities that may serve to  overcome 
 weaknesses. What technique are they using?
 A: SWOT analysis 
 B: Expert judgment 
 C:  PERT analysis 
 D: PEST analysis 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
83
 Question 324: As project manager on a project, you have begun the process of 
qualitatively assessing the probability and impact to risks that have been identified on 
your project. Which of  the  following is not an input you would find useful in completing 
this work?
 A: Project charter 
 B: Risk management plan 
 C: Risk register 
 D: Scope baseline 
 Question 325: Your team is using the project risk register and has started a 
quantitative assessment of the risks. You tell your team that it is better to start with 
 qualitative analysis first.  What reasons do you give your team for this decision?
 A:  Quantitative analysis takes the numerical values assigned 
during the qualitative process and adds a more intuitive 
interpretation of the risks. 
 B:  Qualitative analysis provides accurate numerical values 
based on probability and impact that can then be quantified.  
 C: There is no particular reason why one should be done 
before the other. It is just the way your organizational 
processes require the process to be completed. 
 D: Qualitative analysis provides a subjective and rapid means 
of prioritizing risks and indicating which risk can have 
quantitative analysis applied to them. 
 Question 326: Your team is using your risk register to prioritize risks for further 
analysis by assessing their probability of occurrence and impact. What PMBOK ® Guide 
process  best  describes the work they are carrying out?
 A: Plan Risk Management 
 B: Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis 
 C: Identify Risks 
 D:  Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis 
 Question 327: While completing your assessment of the risks on your project, you 
begin to examine the ones with the greatest potential threat to your project. You are 
using a diagram to help  you  complete this task, and you are currently looking at the high 
priority risks for further analysis. What diagram would best help you?
 A: Probability and impact matrix 
 B: Scatter diagram 
 C:  Pareto chart 
 D: Risk register 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
84
 Question 328:  An important aspect of your qualitative risk analysis is determining 
the validity of the information you are using.  What is this technique commonly called?
 A: Risk data quality assessment 
 B: Assumption analysis 
 C: Risk urgency assessment 
 D: Risk categorization 
 Question 329:  Your team is completing the process of numerically analyzing the 
effect of identified risks on your  project  objectives. Which PMBOK ®  Guide process best 
describes the work they are carrying out?
 A:  Plan Risk Response 
 B:  Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis 
 C: Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis 
 D: Identify Risks 
 Question 330:  After completing work to perform qualitative risk analysis on 
identified risks in your risk register, you have produced several updates to your risk 
register. Which of the  following  processes described in the PMBOK ® Guide indirectly uses 
these updates?
 A: Identify Risks 
 B: Project Integration Management 
 C: Project Time Management 
 D: Plan Risk Responses 
 Question 331:  Three-point estimating is a commonly used technique for  g  athering 
and analyzing data. It is used in all of the following project areas except?
 A: Project risk management 
 B: Project time management 
 C: Project quality management 
 D: Project cost management 
 Question 332: If a project has a 40% chance of achieving a $17,000 profit and a 60% 
chance of achieving a $20,000 loss, what is  the  expected monetary value of the project?
 A: -$3,000 
 B: $37,000 
 C: $5,200 
 D: -$5,200 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
85
 Question 333: If a project has a 65% chance of a $200,000 profit and a 35% chance of 
a $100,000 loss, what is the expected  monetary  value for the project?
 A: -$100,000 
 B: $100,000 
 C: $165,000 
 D: $95,000 
 Question 334: If a risk event has a 80% chance of occurring, and if it  does   occur, 
the consequence will be a $10,000 cost to the project, what does -$8,000 represent to the 
project?
 A: Quantified risk 
 B:  Probabilistic risk assessment 
 C: What-if analysis result 
 D: Expected monetary value 
 Question 335: After completing your risk register and a quantitative assessment of 
the financial value of prioritized risks on  your  project, you have a dollar amount added to 
your project budget. What is this amount typically called?
 A: Contingent response strategy 
 B: Management reserve 
 C: Slush fund 
 D: Contingency reserve 
 Question 336: Which of the following is not an example of a  probability   distribution?
 A:  Normal distribution 
 B: Obtuse distribution 
 C: Triangular distribution 
 D: Beta distribution 
 Question 337: Your team is completing an exercise to determine which risks have 
the greatest potential impact on your project. They are assessing the extent to which the 
uncertainty of each element of the project affects the risk being examined when all other 
uncertain elements are held at static baseline values. What is  this  technique commonly 
known as?
 A:  Tornado diagram 
 B: Expected monetary value analysis 
 C: Sensitivity analysis 
 D: Modeling and simulation 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
86
 Question 338:  You are currently performing risk analysis on a large and extremely 
complex project. Your project team decides that the most comprehensive way to 
approach the process of risk analysis is to examine all the possible outcomes using 
an iterative computer simulation process to model a range of  variables   taken from a 
probability distribution. What is this technique known as?
 A: Sensitivity analysis 
 B: Expected monetary value analysis 
 C:  Monte Carlo analysis 
 D: Ishikawa analysis 
 Question 339:  You have documented and quantitatively assessed the risk to your 
project and the potential outcomes in a diagram to show the different outcomes of events 
should a  particular   probability occur, in order to determine the expected monetary value. 
What is this technique generally called?
 A: What-if scenario analysis 
 B: Decision tree analysis 
 C:  Ishikawa diagram 
 D: Tornado diagram 
 Question 340:  Your team has completed the process of assessing and documenting 
risks that may occur on your project. What is  the  next step to complete?
 A: Identify risks. 
 B: Control risks. 
 C:  Plan risk responses. 
 D: Execute the project tasks. 
 Question 341:  A project manager is faced with making a large decision about a risk 
that her project team has identified. The risk involves the design of a car component. 
It has been found that the weld of the component where the load-bearing flange is 
located will corrode in a high salt environment. If this takes place, the component may 
fail and injure the driver and passenger. The project team decides that the design of the 
component should be modified by using corrosion-resistant materials. This will eliminate 
the risk from consideration. What is  this  risk response technique called?
 A: Risk rejection 
 B: Risk acceptance 
 C: Risk avoidance 
 D: Risk transference 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
87
 Question 342: You are managing a project to build a large hydro dam for electrical 
power generation, which will be built over a known seismically active area. Your 
team decides to strengthen the core structure of the dam to better tolerate any earth 
movements that  may  occur. This is an example of what sort of risk response?
 A: Accept 
 B: Transfer 
 C: Avoid 
 D: Mitigate 
 Question 343: You have decided to take out insurance on your project to cover your 
project financially if a risk occurs. This is an example  of  what sort of risk response?
 A: Transference 
 B: Mitigation 
 C: Sharing 
 D: Avoidance 
 Question 344: All of  the  following are acceptable responses to positive risks except?
 A: Accept 
 B: Mitigate 
 C: Enhance 
 D: Exploit 
 Question 345: You are about to tender for a large, multi-billion dollar infrastructure 
project, and your general manager has just announced a joint venture with another 
company to help with risk management.  This is an example of what sort of risk response?
 A: Sharing 
 B: Avoidance 
 C: Mitigation 
 D: Exploiting 
 Question 346: You and your project team have completed your risk register, 
including planned responses to identified risks. What is your next step?
 A:  Update the work breakdown structure. 
 B: Begin the Control Risks process. 
 C: Perform another iteration of the risk register.  
 D: Update your project sponsor on the planned risk 
responses. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
88
 Question 347:  You have completed the final steps to develop a complete risk 
register with identified risks, a priority assessment, a qualitative assessment of all risks, a 
quantitative assessment of the top priority risks, and you have also  identified  appropriate 
risk responses for each risk. Which of the following is not an expected output from 
completing this work?
 A: Project document updates 
 B: Project management plan updates 
 C:  Updates to the cost management plan 
 D: Contingent response strategies 
 Question 348: Your project has been underway for 9 months when a major problem 
occurs that is not included in the risk register.  What is your BEST course of action?
 A: Begin the process of evaluating the risk qualitatively, then 
quantitatively. 
 B: Begin the process of evaluating the risk quantitatively, then 
qualitatively. 
 C:  Create a workaround. 
 D: Contact your project sponsor. 
 Question 349:  Despite your best efforts at anticipating and documenting all risk 
and uncertainty on your project, you have encountered a completely unforeseeable risk 
that will incur significant extra cost to your project. You decide to approach your project 
sponsor and ask for permission to get these extra funds from a pool of money that they 
control. What is this  pool  of money generally referred to as?
 A: Slush fund 
 B: Contingency reserve 
 C: Management reserve 
 D: Control account 
 Question 350:  The project you are working on is over halfway through, and you have 
begun to measure that price increases on the steel that you require for the project have 
gone 8% over your estimate for price increases over the timeframe of the project. As a 
result, you put in place a policy to procure all the remaining steel required for the project 
and pay for it to be stored in a warehouse instead of ordering the steel as you require it. 
 This is an example of what?
 A: Contingent response strategy 
 B: Mitigation 
 C: Transference 
 D: Exploiting 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
89
 Question 351: You are using your risk management plan and your risk register 
to check if your assessment of risks is accurate,  if there are any new risks, or if new 
information is available about existing risks. Which of the following inputs would not be 
of use to you to complete this work?
 A: Project management plan 
 B:  Quality control measurements 
 C: Work performance reports 
 D: Risk register 
 Question 352: You are conducting the process of implementing your risk response 
plans, tracking identified risks, monitoring residual risks,    and identifying new risks. What 
is this PMBOK ® Guide process called?
 A: Assess and Control Risks 
 B: Risk Management 
 C: Risk Assessment 
 D: Control Risks 
 Question 353: During your regular monitoring of the risks identified on your project, 
you examine and document the effectiveness of risk responses in dealing with identified 
risks  and  their root causes. What technique are you using?
 A: Ishikawa analysis 
 B: Risk audits 
 C: Risk urgency assessment 
 D: Trend analysis 
 Question 354: The project team members assigned responsibility for controlling 
risks on your project are doing a great job.  Which of the following is not an expected 
output of the work they are completing?
 A: Project management plan updates 
 B: Change requests 
 C:  Organizational Process Assets updates  
 D: Work performance data 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
90
 Project Procurement Management 
 Question 355:   During   the process of procurement management, the organization you 
work for can be all of the following except?
 A: Buyer and seller of products or services 
 B: Seller of services 
 C: Insolvent 
 D: Buyer of products 
 Question 356:  As part of your commitment to advancing the profession of project 
management you are tutoring candidates wishing to sit the PMP ®  examination. The 
session you are about to give is focused on the Project Procurement Management 
 knowledge  area in the PMBOK ® Guide. What is the generally accepted correct sequence 
of processes in the Project Procurement Management knowledge area?
 A: Plan Procurement Management, Conduct Procurements, 
Control Procurements, Close Procurements 
 B: Conduct Procurements, Plan Procurement Management, 
Control Procurements, Close Procurements 
 C: Plan Procurement Management, Conduct Procurements, 
Close Procurements, Control Procurements 
 D: Plan Procurement Management, Control Procurements, 
Conduct Procurements, Close Procurements 
 Question 357: You are carrying out the Contract Management and Change Control 
processes required to develop and administer  contracts for  you project. What is this 
PMBOK ®  Guide knowledge area called?
 A: Plan Procurement Management 
 B: Close Procurements 
 C: Project Integration Management 
 D: Project Procurement Management 
 Question 358:  All  of the following are examples of legally binding agreements 
except?
 A: Agreement 
 B: Subcontract 
 C:  Organizational process assets 
 D: Purchase order 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
91
 Question 359: You are just about to begin the process of procuring services from 
external providers and you think there may be a standard set of rules governing this 
process. Where would it be BEST  to  look for these rules?
 A: Lessons learned 
 B:  Organizational Process Assets 
 C: The PMBOK ® Guide 
 D:  Your organization’s legal team 
 Question 360: You have completed the work described in the contract as per the 
required specifications but the customer is complaining  that   the product is not what they 
wanted. What is your BEST course of action?
 A: Ask your project sponsor to clarify the scope of the project. 
 B: Restart the project and complete the work the way the 
customer wants it. 
 C:  Ask the customer to note their concerns in writing and 
present them to your project team at the next team meeting.  
 D: Enter the Close Procurements process. 
 Question 361: Which of the following is not a term used to  describe  the buyer in a 
contract?
 A: Client 
 B: Entrepreneur 
 C:  Service requestor 
 D: Prime contractor 
 Question 362: Which of the following is not a term used to  describe  the seller in a 
contract?
 A: Service provider 
 B: Vendor 
 C: Dealer 
 D: Contractor 
 Question 363: You and your project team are completing the process of producing 
your procurement management plan and want to make sure that you have completed a 
robust process and used all  possible  and appropriate inputs. Which of the following is not 
an input into the work to plan procurement management on your project?
 A: Requirements documentation 
 B: Activity resource requirements 
 C:  Stakeholder register 
 D: Make-or-buy decisions 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
92
 Question 364:  You are carrying out the procurement of services necessary for 
your project. After consulting with your Organizational Process Assets, specifically the 
procurement guidelines, which specify that you are to use the most commonly  used 
 contract type, you offer the seller what type of contract?
 A: Time and materials 
 B: Firm-fixed-price 
 C: Fixed-price-incentive-fee 
 D: Cost-plus-incentive-fee 
 Question 365: You discover that there is a part of the project that contains some risk. 
Your strategy to deal with this risk is to subcontract the work to an outside supplier by 
using a  firm-fixed-price contract.  Which of the following must you do?
 A: You should assign a member of the project team to monitor 
the activity of the supplier to make sure that the supplier deals 
with the risk properly if it occurs. 
 B: You should make every effort to make sure that the supplier 
is made aware of the risk after the contract is signed. 
 C:  You should make certain that the project team does not 
reveal the risk to the supplier until the contract is signed. 
 D:  You should make sure that the supplier understands the 
risk before the contract is signed. 
 Question 366: You are the project manager for a project that is well underway. You 
are using a contractor that has agreed to a fixed-price contract that calls for a single, lump 
sum payment on completion of the contract. The contractor’s project manager contacts 
you and informs you that cash flow problems are making it difficult for the contractor to 
pay employees and subcontractors. The contractor then asks you for a  partial   payment for 
work accomplished to date. What is your best course of action?
 A: Make no payments to the contractor until all the work is 
completed as per the terms of the agreed contract. 
 B: Negotiate a change to the contract to allow payments to the 
contractor. 
 C:  Pay for work accomplished to date. 
 D:  Start making partial payments to the contractor. 
 Question 367:  Your organization is providing services to another organization as 
part of a project. Which of the following contract types would your organization most 
prefer  to  engage in to carry out the work?
 A: Fixed-price-incentive-fee contract 
 B: Fixed-price with economic price adjustment 
 C: Firm-fixed-price 
 D: Cost-plus-incentive-fee 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
93
 Question 368: Your project has begun with a planned series of iterations that will 
gradually define the scope of work required. You are negotiating with a potential supplier 
of services. What is  the BEST form of contract to enter into?
 A: Fixed-price-incentive-fee 
 B:  Time and materials 
 C: Cost-plus-fixed-fee 
 D: Firm-fixed-price 
 Question 369: During your project there has been an unforeseen amount of work 
that requires urgent and immediate attention from an external contractor to ensure it 
does not adversely  affect  the project. What sort of contract for services is BEST to use in 
this instance?
 A: Fixed-price incentive fee 
 B:  Time and materials 
 C: Cost-plus-fixed-fee 
 D: Cost-plus-incentive-fee 
 Question 370: You are leading your team through the process of making 
procurement decisions and selecting the appropriate procurement documentation to use 
when procuring services  from  external contractors. Which of the following is not a form of 
procurement document?
 A:  Request for fixed price contract (RFPC)  
 B:  Request for proposal (RFP) 
 C: Request for quotation (RFQ) 
 D: Request for information (RFI) 
 Question 371: Several procurement specialists on your team have completed the 
procurement management plan for your project. Which of  the  following is not an output 
you would expect from them?
 A: Source selection criteria 
 B: Procurement statement of work 
 C: Procurement management plan 
 D: Project scope statement 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
94
 Question 372: You are the project manager on a large project to develop a new 
customer information database for your organization. You are currently assessing the 
merits of developing key components of the required software in-house by your own 
development team compared to getting an external contractor to complete the work. 
 What technique are you using?
 A: Risk-related contract decisions 
 B: Make-or-buy analysis 
 C: Source selection criteria 
 D: Expert judgment 
 Question 373:  You are letting your project team analyze responses received to some 
of your procurement documents and you are beginning the process of selecting the 
successful seller. Which of  the  following is not an example of selection criteria used to 
select sellers?
 A: Technical capability 
 B: Make-or-buy decision 
 C:  Management approach 
 D: Proprietary rights 
 Question 374:  You are currently obtaining seller responses to an RFP you issued 
and, after assessing the responses, you expect to select a seller and award a contract for 
delivery for services  on  your project. What process are you carrying out?
 A: Close Procurements 
 B: Plan Procurement Management 
 C: Conduct Procurements 
 D: Control Procurements 
 Question 375:  You are carrying out the process of obtaining seller responses, 
selecting a seller, and an awarding a contract. You wish to make sure that you complete 
the process thoroughly and use any and all inputs that may be useful to you. Which of  the 
following is not an input into the Conduct Procurements process?
 A: Procurement statement of work 
 B: Source selection criteria 
 C:  Resource calendars 
 D: Project management plan 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
95
 Question 376: You have just finished preparation of an exhaustive RFP for your 
project and are about to send it out to potential service providers. Based on past 
acceptable performance, you decide to send the RFP to a small group of potential 
suppliers and not all of the suppliers who may be  interested   in providing a response. 
What technique are you using?
 A: Bidder conference 
 B: Qualified seller list 
 C: Procurement management plan 
 D: Proposal evaluation technique 
 Question 377: After soliciting responses from prospective sellers, you are in the 
process of considering each seller’s response against a set of criteria in order to determine 
who will be the seller selected to provide the required services. The  process  is giving a 
greater weight to previous experience in this type of work than it is giving to the price 
submitted. What technique are you using?
 A:  Weighted average calculation 
 B:  Weighted criteria 
 C: Expert judgment 
 D: Procurement negotiations 
 Question 378: You are carrying out a bidder conference that is attended by five 
potential sellers of services to your project. You have spent a considerable amount of time 
explaining the statement of work and answering questions from the sellers at the bidder 
conference. During a break in the afternoon, one of the  sellers  approaches you and asks a 
question relating to the statement of work. What is your BEST course of action?
 A: Ask the seller to leave the room and remove him from the 
process. 
 B: Refuse to provide an answer to the seller. 
 C: Provide an answer to the seller. 
 D: Explain to the seller that they should wait until the session 
begins again and then submit their question. 
 Question 379: You are in the process of ensuring that the seller you have engaged to 
provide a product for your project is meeting  the  contractual requirements expected of 
them. What PMBOK ® Guide process are you carrying out?
 A: Conduct Procurements 
 B: Control Procurements 
 C: Close Procurements 
 D: Plan Procurement Management 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
96
 Question 380:  As part of your project, you are looking to make sure that you 
complete the Control Procurements process properly in order to ensure that you are 
managing procurement relationships, monitoring contract performance, and making 
changes and corrections to contracts as appropriate. As part of this process,    you want to 
make sure that you are using all the appropriate inputs. Which of the following processes 
does not provide an input into the work to control procurements?
 A: Control costs 
 B: Monitor and Control Project Work 
 C: Perform Integrated Change Control 
 D: Direct and Manage Project Work 
 Question 381:  As part of your project, you are looking to make sure that you 
complete the Control Procurements process properly in order to ensure that you are 
managing procurement relationships, monitoring contract performance, and making 
changes and corrections to contracts as appropriate. In order to do this process 
thoroughly, you have decided to review all the possible tools and techniques that you 
could use. All of the  following  are tools or techniques used in the Control Procurements 
process except?
 A: Inspections and audits 
 B: Performance reporting 
 C: Work performance information 
 D: Claims administration 
 Question 382: You are the project manager on a large project that has been 
underway for five years. Your project has consistently reported a CPI of 1.2 and an SPI 
of 1.3. Delivery of the expected product of the project has been in accordance with the 
customer’s expectations and you are beginning the process of closing the project. Your 
project team is confused about  which  process to complete first, the Close Procurements 
process or the Close Project process. What is your BEST advice to your project team?
 A: Complete the Close Project process first and then the Close 
Procurements process so that any final payments incurred by 
the Close Project process can be made. 
 B: Only complete the Close Project process because it 
incorporates the Close Procurements process. 
 C: Complete the Close Procurements process first because the 
contracts need to be closed before the project can be closed 
by the Close Project process. 
 D: It does not matter which order they are completed 
in as long as they are both completed according to the 
organization’s project management guidelines. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
97
 Question 383: You and your project team are completing the work required by 
contract with a buyer when your general manager decides to suddenly terminate the 
contract due to factors that are outside  of  your control. What is your BEST course of 
action?
 A:  Contact the buyer and explain the situation to them.  
 B: Begin the Close Procurements process. 
 C: Review the WBS for errors in the scope of work. 
 D: Explain to your manager that you are contractually bound 
to carry out the work. 
 Question 384: As part of closing out all contracts used on a project, you want to 
make sure that you demonstrate to your team what is considered best practice in this area 
and have available to you all of the potential tools and techniques that could assist.  Which 
of the following is not a tool or technique used in the Close Procurements process?
 A: Bidder conferences 
 B: Procurement negotiations 
 C: Procurement audits 
 D: Records management system 
 Question 385: You are completing the Close Procurements process and are 
informing sellers that the contract has been completed.    What is the BEST way to do this?
 A:  At the completion party 
 B: In person 
 C: Via email 
 D: By written letter 
 Question 386: You have entered into an agreement with a seller to provide the 
goods you require for your project. You have selected to use a fixed-price-incentive-
fee form of contract with a target cost of $100,000, a target price of $120,000, a ceiling 
price of $140,000, with a sharing ratio of 80/20 to the buyer.  What is your point of total 
assumption?
 A: $125,000 
 B: $140,000 
 C: $120,000 
 D: $130,000 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
98
 Project Stakeholder Management 
 Question 387:   You  are putting together your stakeholder management plan and have 
identified the need to gather information about all of the different project stakeholders as 
soon as possible. This recognizes that the ability of stakeholders to influence the project is 
greatest at which point in the project?
 A: During the project execution. 
 B: At the close of the project. 
 C: At the beginning of the project. 
 D: It is equal throughout a project. 
 Question 388:  You are compiling a register of all people, groups, and organizations 
that can potentially and actually be affected by the project.  What  is the collective term for 
this group?
 A: Sponsor 
 B: Customers 
 C:  Team members 
 D: Stakeholders 
 Question 389:  During work to initiate your project you have begun to identify 
stakeholders and gather information about them to allow you to successfully manage 
their expectations. All of the following  are  stakeholder attributes you should analyze as 
part of this work to identify stakeholders except?
 A: Their interest in the project. 
 B: Their expectations of the project. 
 C: Their influence on the project. 
 D: Their personal conflict resolution style. 
 Question 390:  During work to initiate your project you have begun to identify 
stakeholders and gather information about them to allow you to successfully manage 
their expectations. Which of the following is  not  an input you would use to complete this 
work?
 A: Procurement documents 
 B: Project charter 
 C:  Stakeholder register 
 D: Lessons learned 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
99
 Question 391: With the help of your project team, you identify all potential project 
stakeholders and information about them. You then interview all of the stakeholders 
you have identified in an effort to learn more about their interaction with your project 
and also to gain knowledge of any other stakeholders you may not be aware of. After 
completing this process, you then identify the potential impact or support each 
stakeholder could generate. Finally, you assess how the key stakeholders are likely to 
react in various situations so you can plan for this.  What are you carrying out?
 A: Stakeholder management strategy 
 B:  Stakeholder analysis 
 C: Stakeholder register assimilation 
 D: Stakeholder communications analysis 
 Question 392: You are showing your team the relative interest and power 
each identified stakeholder has in your project.  W hat is the BEST way to show this 
information?
 A: Salience model 
 B:  Control chart 
 C: Stakeholder register template 
 D: Power/interest grid 
 Question 393: You have just taken over a project that has been underway for 8 
months. The project is performing well and is currently reporting a CPI of 1.2 and an 
EAC of $1.2 m. As part of your familiarization process, you want to understand who the 
 stakeholders  on the project are. Where would you find this information?
 A: Stakeholder management strategy 
 B:  Organizational process assets 
 C: Stakeholder register 
 D: Email distribution list 
 Question 394: You have just taken over a project that is nearing the end of its life 
cycle. Shortly after taking control of the project you note that a particular stakeholder is 
having a negative impact on the project. You decide that this presents an unacceptable 
risk to the project and look for a way to manage the stakeholder.    Which document will 
you look for to help you do this?
 A:  Stakeholder analysis matrix 
 B:  Stakeholder analysis 
 C: Stakeholder register 
 D: Stakeholder management appropriation register    
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
100
 Question 395:  After considerable effort involving your project team members 
and experts with experience in communications, you have developed your project 
communications management plan. This can now be used as an input into which of  the 
 following PMBOK ®  Guide processes?
 A: Estimate Costs 
 B:  Plan Quality Management 
 C: Manage Stakeholder Engagement 
 D: Close Project or Phase 
 Question 396: You are completing the process of communication and working with 
stakeholders to meet their needs  and  addressing issues as they occur. Which process are 
you completing?
 A: Stakeholder Analysis 
 B:  Manage Communications 
 C: Manage Stakeholder Engagement 
 D: Control Communications 
 Question 397: Your project is halfway through its expected duration and has a CPI 
of 1.3 and an SPI of 1.2. Your project sponsor has told you during a meeting that in her 
eyes the project is a failure because of the feedback she has been getting from important 
stakeholders on the project. You are surprised at this because the project is performing 
well financially and is ahead of schedule and you are sure the quality of the work you 
are completing is of a high standard and meets customer requirements. As the meeting 
closes, your project sponsor asks  what  you intend to do about the situation. Your BEST 
response would be what?
 A: Revisit the manage stakeholder expectation process in your 
communications management plan. 
 B: Quit the project. 
 C: Say nothing. 
 D:  Send out an e-mail to all stakeholders telling them how 
great the project is performing financially and time-wise. 
 Question 398: What is your primary goal in managing and  identifying  stakeholder 
expectations?
 A: Your primary goal in identifying and managing stakeholder 
expectations is to be able to introduce key stakeholders to 
each other so they can exchange project information.  
 B:  Your primary goal in identifying and managing stakeholder 
expectations is to be able to contact stakeholders when you 
need to send project communications. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
101
 C: Your primary goal in identifying and managing stakeholder 
expectations is to either get stakeholders to support your 
project or at least not to oppose it. 
 D: Your primary goal in identifying and managing stakeholder 
expectations is to be able to determine which of the 
stakeholders can be most easily influenced and which will 
require a greater amount of effort. 
 Question 399: You and your project team are systematically gathering and analyzing 
quantitative and qualitative information to determine which stakeholder’s interests 
should be taken into account throughout the project. You have identified the interests, 
expectations, and influence of individual stakeholders and related to them the purpose of 
the project.  What tool or technique are you using?
 A: Meetings 
 B:  Expert judgment 
 C: Information gathering techniques 
 D: Stakeholder analysis 
 Question 400: You are using a classification model for stakeholder analysis that 
describes classes of stakeholders based on  their  power, urgency, and legitimacy. What is 
the name of this particular model of stakeholder analysis?
 A:  Pareto chart 
 B: Power/interest grid 
 C: Influence/impact grid 
 D: Salience model 
 Question 401: As part of your analysis of stakeholder engagement, you have 
classified each stakeholder as either being unaware, resistant, neutral, supportive, 
or leading when it comes to  the  level of their engagement with the project. This is an 
example of what sort of technique?
 A:  Stakeholder analysis 
 B:  Information gathering technique 
 C: Analytical technique 
 D: Expert judgment 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
102
 Question 402: As a senior project manager on a complex project with many 
stakeholders, you are consistently having to coordinate and harmonize stakeholders 
towards supporting the project and accomplishing the project objectives. In order to 
do this, you are using your skills to facilitate consensus, influence people, negotiate 
agreements, and modify organizational behavior  to  accept the project outcomes. These 
are examples of what?
 A: Information gathering techniques 
 B: Interpersonal skills 
 C:  Communication methods 
 D: Management skills 
 Question 403:  You are managing a complex project with many stakeholders, 
each with their own interest in the project. You have begun the process of monitoring 
overall project stakeholder relationships and adjusting your stakeholder expectation 
management strategies and plans for engaging stakeholders to suit the changing project 
circumstances. Your goal is to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of stakeholder 
 engagement  activity. What process are you are engaged in?
 A: Manage Stakeholder Engagement 
 B: Control Stakeholder Engagement 
 C:  Control Communications 
 D: Manage Communications 
 Question 404:  While controlling stakeholder engagement on your project, you are 
generating a number of updates relating to the state of project stakeholder relationships 
and their level of  engagement  and satisfaction with your project. Which of the following is 
not an Organizational Process Asset that would be updated as a result of this process?
 A: Issue log 
 B: Project records 
 C: Project presentations 
 D: Stakeholder notifications 
 Professional Ethics 
 Question 405:  A colleague of yours, who was your mentor in your earlier career, still 
claims to have the PMP ® credential but you know that  it  expired several years ago. What 
should you do FIRST?
 A:  Let your manager know and let them deal with it. 
 B: Report your colleague to PMI. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
103
 C: Approach your colleague and ask them to remove any 
reference to the credential. 
 D: Do nothing as it does not affect your colleague’s work 
performance. 
 Question 406: A project is nearing the end and is reporting a CPI of 1.01 and a SPI 
of 1.3. The project manager has been reassigned to another more urgent project, and you 
have been brought in to close the project. While reviewing the financial accounts for the 
project, you discover that the previous project manager made a large payment that was 
not approved in accordance with  the  policies of your company. What is the BEST thing 
you can do?
 A: Notify the project sponsor. 
 B: Do nothing as the project has come in under budget. 
 C: Confront the previous project manager and ask him to 
explain. 
 D: Carry on as if nothing had happened. 
 Question 407: The project administrator working for you on the project does not 
have the level of skills you assumed he had.  What  is your BEST course of action?
 A:  Assign him lower-level tasks and bring in another more 
qualified person. 
 B: Do nothing; he will learn on the job. 
 C: Assign the project administrator to another project. 
 D: Organize training for him. 
 Question 408: You and your project administrator have been working on a detailed 
project progress report to present to high-level stakeholders. You leave it up to the project 
administrator to complete the report, and he e-mails it to you on the day of the meeting. 
You are having a busy day and don’t get a chance to read the report, but as you walk into 
the meeting you notice some large errors in the financial  reporting   section of the report. 
What is your BEST course of action?
 A: Get the project administrator to appear before the 
stakeholders to explain the mistakes. 
 B:  Give the report to the stakeholders and point out the 
project administrators errors. 
 C: Give the report in the meeting and accept the blame 
personally for any errors. 
 D: Reschedule the meeting for another time to give you the 
chance to fix the errors. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
104
 Question 409:  You are completing a large infrastructure project in a foreign country. 
The government officials of the country are extremely grateful for the work you are doing 
and one of them sends a large cash payment to you to thank you  and   your team for the 
work they have done. What should you do?
 A: Gratefully accept the payment and send a thank you card to 
the donor. 
 B: Accept the payment and divide it up among team 
members. 
 C:  Refuse the payment. 
 D:  Ask the government official if you can have a car instead of 
cash. 
 Question 410:  You are currently preparing monthly status reports for your project 
and you are planning on reporting that the project has an SPI of 1.02 and a CPI of .83. 
Your project sponsor approaches you and says that she has been given a directive by the 
CEO of the company to report only positive figures or else he is afraid the shareholders 
in the company will demand changes to the organization. You are confident that the next 
 month’s  status report will show a CPI greater than 1. What should you do?
 A: Explain to your project sponsor the reasons why you 
believe the project reporting should be honest. 
 B: Report the CPI based on what you believe next months 
figures will be. 
 C:  Resign from the project. 
 D: Report the project sponsor’s behavior to the CEO. 
 Question 411: You are the project manager for a large project that has been 
completed on time and on budget. The customer and all of the stakeholders are very 
pleased with the results. As a direct result of the successful completion of the project, 
your project sponsor approves a bonus of $10,000 to you. There are twelve members on 
your project team. However, one of the people on the project team has been a very low 
contributor  t  o the project; the other eleven have all been above standard. What should 
you do with the money?
 A: Divide the money equally among all the team members.  
 B: Ask the team members how they would divide the money. 
 C:  Keep the money yourself; you deserve it, and the manager 
gave it to you. 
 D:  Divide the money equally among the team members 
except for the substandard team member. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
105
 Question 412: You are the project manager for a large software implementation 
project that is nearing completion when you discover that one of your technicians has 
been taking shortcuts with the code being written and it is below the standard  required 
 in the technical specification. You and a senior team member review the code and form 
the opinion that it will probably not affect the functionality of the final software product. 
What is your NEXT course of action?
 A:  Carry on as planned and submit a change request. 
 B:  Stop the project and start again, this time writing the code 
as per the specification. 
 C: Record the discrepancy, inform the customer, and look for 
ways to ensure the project won’t be affected. 
 D: Ignore the problem. 
 Question 413: You are the project manager for a project that has high visibility, 
and your project sponsor wants you to prepare a presentation for her to present at a 
conference. Most of the material in the presentation will be facts that are the results of 
your project. Your sponsor intends to present the  material   under her own name, and your 
name will not appear. What is your BEST course of action?
 A:  Do the work as you were told by your manager.  
 B:  Explain to the sponsor that the correct thing to do is to 
acknowledge all authors and contributors to the work and, if 
necessary, refuse to work on the presentation unless you are 
listed as a co-author. 
 C: Present your own presentation. 
 D: Meet with your project sponsor’s manager and discuss the 
problem. 
 Question 414: You are working in a foreign country delivering a reconstruction 
project after a large natural disaster. It is normal in this country for government officials to 
request bribes to assist with processing the consents you require. During a meeting with 
a government official, he mentions  that  if you pay a $500 bribe you can have the consent 
you require tomorrow. What is your BEST course of action?
 A:  Pay the $500 out of your own pocket. 
 B:  Refuse to pay the bribe. 
 C: Ask the official for an invoice so the payment can be made 
by the project. 
 D: Report the official to his manager. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 1 ■ QUESTIONS
106
 Question 415:  You are working on a project to construct a new water treatment plant 
and are waiting on consents required from the government before you can proceed with 
the work. During a meeting with a government employee to discuss the required consent, 
the employee mentions that the consent can be processed faster if  you  are willing to pay a 
processing fee. What is your BEST course of action?
 A: Walk out of the meeting and notify your project sponsor.  
 B: Explain that you are not permitted to pay bribes. 
 C: Pay the fee if your project budget has allowed for it. 
 D: Ask the employee if he will accept goods instead of cash so 
you can hide the transaction better. 
 Question 416: You have just completed the selection of a preferred seller for an 
upcoming project and have scheduled a meeting in 2 days to finalize the contract when 
your manager informs you that due to current economic conditions the project will now 
probably not be going ahead but the definite answer will be  provided  by the CEO in 3 
days. What is your BEST course of action?
 A: Go ahead with the meeting and complete the negotiations, 
knowing you can use the termination clause to end it.  
 B: Postpone the meeting until the fate of the project is clear. 
 C:  Go ahead with the meeting, but make an excuse to not sign 
the contract. 
 D: Cancel the meeting and let the other party know why. 
www.it-ebooks.info

107
© Sean Whitaker 2016 
S. Whitaker, PMP® Examination Practice Questions, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-1883-9_2
 CHAPTER 2  
 Answers 
 Foundational Concepts 
 Question 1: Your team is confused because they use terminology and words in project 
communications that appear to have interchangeable meanings, but other teams treat 
these terms as though they have specific, unique meanings. How can your team find out 
what the terms mean? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  This answer is incorrect because you are trying to get a 
standardized terminology and the sponsor may have their own 
words. The promotion of the profession of project management 
is  part of your professional responsibilities and using 
internationally recognized and standardized publications like 
the PMBOK ®  Guide is an example of this.  
 B: The promotion of the profession of project management 
is part of your professional responsibilities and using 
internationally recognized and standardized publications like 
the PMBOK ® Guide is an example of this.  
 C: This answer is incorrect because you are trying to get a 
standardized terminology and having the team develop a 
terminology in this way does not mean it will necessarily 
align with international best practice. The promotion of the 
profession of project management is part of your professional 
responsibilities and using internationally recognized and 
standardized publications like the PMBOK ® Guide is an 
example of this. 
 D:  This answer is incorrect because you are trying to get 
a standardized terminology and using an internationally 
recognized and standardized publication like the PMBOK ®  
Guide is the best way to achieve this. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
108
 Question 2:  You are delivering an introduction to a project management training 
session to new team members. One team member appears confused about the exact 
definition of a   project . What is the BEST definition of a project? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: A project is differentiated from operational activity by the fact 
that it is designed to deliver a unique product within a specified 
time period whereas operational work is ongoing and repetitive. 
 B: This answer is not correct because there are projects and 
operational activities that are constrained by finances and time. It 
must also have a unique product, service, or result to be a project.  
 C: This answer is not correct because it does not refer to the 
temporal nature of the work being completed.  
 D: This answer is not correct because it describes operational 
work that is repetitive and ongoing. 
 Question 3: Your team seems confused about whether the work they are doing meets 
the definition of a project. To help them understand the difference  between  projectized 
and operational work you give them the following examples. Which of the following is not 
an example of a project? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Designing a new software solution is an example of a project 
because it has a defined beginning and end, and a unique 
deliverable. 
 B: Building a new house is an example of a project because it has 
a defined time and delivers a unique product, service, or result. 
 C:  Achieving 3% growth on last year’s sales figures is an 
operational goal in line with on-going repetitive company 
activity and as such it is not an example of a project.  
 D:  Implementing a new business process is an example of 
a project because it has a defined beginning and end, and a 
unique deliverable. 
 Question 4:  You are planning to sit the PMP ® examination and as part of your study 
are referring to the PMBOK ® Guide for help in defining the project process groups. 
Which of the following is not one of the five  process groups   in the PMBOK ® Guide? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  Closing is one of the five PMBOK ® Guide process groups. 
 B:  Checking is not the correct answer because it is not the right 
term. You may have thought this described the Monitoring and 
Controlling process group. 
 C: Initiating is one of the five PMBOK ® Guide process groups. 
 D: Executing is one of the five PMBOK ® Guide process groups. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
109
 Question 5: You are the project manager on a project to develop a new piece of 
 customer management software for an external client. Through your approved change 
control process you are considering a request to alter the scope of the project. While 
considering the impact of the request on the project scope, you must also consider the 
impact on other areas of the project such as quality, schedule, budget, and risk. These 
other areas that you are considering represent what to the project? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  Opportunities is not correct because opportunities are the 
opposite of constraints. 
 B:  Constraints is correct because central to any successful 
project management is an awareness that a project manager 
must balance competing constraints on the project. A change in 
one area can and usually does also mean a potential change in 
another area. 
 C: Constrictions is not correct because the correct terminology is 
constraint, not constriction. 
 D: Risks is not correct because risks refer to any areas of positive 
or negative uncertainty on the project. 
 Question 6: The process of continuously updating, improving, and detailing a 
 project management plan , or parts of a project management plan, as more specific 
information becomes available is known as what? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: Iterative expectation management is not correct because it is 
not a term referenced within the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 B: Project life cycle is not correct because it refers to the entire 
project life cycle, which is subject to progressive elaboration.  
 C: Continuous improvement is not correct because it is a 
concept from the project quality management processes that 
seeks to improve all aspects of project quality. 
 D: Progressive elaboration is correct because very rarely will you 
encounter a project where every detail is known at the beginning 
of a project and there are no changes to the project. It is typical 
for a project management plan to be iterative in response to this 
potential for change. The process of knowing more detail as the 
project develops is known as progressive elaboration.    
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
110
 Question 7:  While delivering a presentation to senior management on the ways 
in  which   portfolio management can help your organization achieve strategic success 
you realize that not everyone in the room understands what portfolio management is. 
Portfolio management is BEST defined as what? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: A group of projects managed by a project director is not 
correct because a project director can manage projects, 
programs, or portfolios. 
 B: This answer is correct because portfolio management is 
typically used by more mature companies to align projects with 
their strategic aspirations in order to increase the chances of 
project success and of meeting strategic goals. 
 C: A group of related projects managed in a coordinated way is 
not correct because a group of projects managed in a related way 
is referred to as a program. 
 D:  A collection of projects relating to a single business unit 
within an organization is not correct because they may be 
managed as individual projects or a program. 
 Question 8: A group of projects that must be managed in a coordinated manner to 
ensure that common goals and potential resource conflicts are managed effectively is 
known as what? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Program is correct because a program is a group of projects 
that are interrelated in some way. A project may be part of a 
program, but a program will always have projects.  
 B: Portfolio is not correct because a portfolio describes all 
projects that an organization is undertaking and they may not be 
related in some way. 
 C: PMO is incorrect because a project management office (PMO) 
describes the center for excellence in project management for an 
organization. 
 D: Life cycle is not correct because a life cycle is a concept 
describing either a project or product from inception to 
completion. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
111
 Question 9: The CEO of your organization is considering the strategic reasons 
the  comp  any has for approving your project proposal. At times he seems confused 
about the definition of  strategic consideration . Which of the following is not a strategic 
consideration for authorizing a project? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  The chance to achieve a strategic opportunity is a clear 
strategic consideration for authorizing a project. 
 B:  Return on investment is not a strategic consideration. It is a 
method of calculating whether a project should proceed from a 
financial rather than a strategic point of view. 
 C: Customer demand is a strategic consideration because it is 
a forecast of what the customer will want in the future and the 
company’s strategic goals should include the desire to fulfill this 
demand. 
 D: Market demand is a strategic consideration because it is a 
forecast of how the market will be behaving in the future and the 
company’s strategic goals should include the desire to fulfill this 
demand. 
 Question 10:  The team, or function, assigned responsibility for the  centralized and 
coordinated management of projects within an organization is known as what? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A:  Project headquarters is not correct. Although the term may 
be used by some organizations, it is not part of the standardized 
terminology offered by the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 B:  Although sometimes the acronym PMO does stand for 
program management office, it is more commonly used to refer 
to a project management office, which is the most correct answer 
in this instance. 
 C: A project management office takes responsibility for providing 
organization-wide project management support functions, 
including common standards, templates, and processes. It is also 
directly responsible for project delivery. 
 D: A war room is a specific meeting room for project team 
members to be co-located and focus on doing the project work.    
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
112
 Question 11: Your organization has employed a person to head the PMO. During 
your first meeting with her, you discuss the extent of her  roles   and responsibilities to fully 
explain what tasks she will be responsible for and those she won’t be responsible for. 
Which of the following is not a primary function of a project management office? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: A PMO provides high-level support across several projects. It 
does not provide lower-level detail to a single project but instead 
provides a rolled-up summary report of the project. 
 B: A clear role of a mature PMO is to oversee and manage shared 
resources across several projects. 
 C:  A role of a PMO is to develop and improve an organization’s 
project management methodology. 
 D:  One very clear role of any sort of PMO is to ensure that 
communication across projects is done effectively.    
 Question 12: All of the following are points where projects can intersect with 
operational activity during the  product life cycle except? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: The project life cycle and the product life cycle certainly do 
intersect during the development of a new product, because it is 
a project. 
 B: Notice that this question uses the product life cycle, not 
the project life cycle. You will need to look out for this style of 
question and make sure you read it properly. The product life 
cycle covers all aspects of the product from inception, design, 
and manufacture to end of life, recycling, and obsolescence. 
Monitoring and Controlling is one of the five process groups.  
 C:  Improvements in operations can be delivered by defining 
them as a project, and as such projects do intersect with 
operational activities at this point. 
 D:  During closeout phases, the deliverable is handed over to 
operations, and as such there is a clear intersection between the 
project and operational activities. 
 Question 13: What is the best description of the relationship  between  project 
management and organizational strategy? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: Organizational strategy will not operate at a level that 
influences the appointment of the project manager. 
 B: Organizational strategy does not directly link to project 
governance. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
113
 C: Organizational strategy and project management do interact 
because project management as seen as a strategic enabler for 
organizations. 
 D: Successful projects enable organizations to deliver their 
strategic goals. 
 Question 14: Your team seems confused about roles and responsibilities in the 
project that you are leading. They are particularly confused  about   your role as project 
manager. How would you explain the primary purpose of your role? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: While a project manager does have responsibility for 
controlling the budget in most instances, this is not the best 
description offered from the available answers. 
 B:  A project team member would be responsible for delivery of 
the technical tasks. 
 C: The project manager is the person vested with the authority by 
the performing organization to achieve the objectives of the project.  
 D: A program manager is responsible for sharing resources 
among projects. 
 Question 15:  While using the PMBOK ® Guide to help you define and carry out 
processes on your project you notice that a very common input into nearly all the 
processes is enterprise environmental factors. Which of the following examples would not 
be considered an  enterprise environmental factor ? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A:  Government standards and industry regulations are a great 
example of enterprise environmental factors because they can 
affect a project. 
 B: The political climate that a project operates in is an enterprise 
environmental factor. 
 C: Net present value of investment is a tool for project selection. 
 D:  Project management information systems are an example of 
Organizational Process Assets, not enterprise environmental factors.    
 Question 16: You have volunteered your time to help your organization’s PMO carry 
out an assessment of your organization using the  OPM3 tool  . What does OPM3 measure? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A:  The interdependency of projects within a program of work is an 
example of an organization’s program management, not OPM3.  
 B: An assessment of the level of variance between project 
management best practices and the actual application of these 
practices would be part of an assessment of project management 
maturity, but it is not the best description of OPM3. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
114
 C:  The ability of a project manager to successfully deliver a 
project is an example of a individual project manager’s level of 
professional development and not OPM3. 
 D:  OPM3  stands for Organizational Project Management 
Maturity Model, and part of the model is used to assess where 
on a scale an organization sits in relation to its adoption and 
application of project management practices.    
 Question 17:  The  internal and external environmental factors that surround and 
influence, and sometimes constrain, a project are known as what? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A-C: Theses answers are not correct because they are 
made-up terms and they are not terms referenced within the 
PMBOK ® Guide. 
 D:  Enterprise environmental factors are a constant input 
into many of the processes. They can be thought of as the 
environment in which the project must operate and by which it 
will be influenced. 
 Question 18: The collection of generally  sequential and sometimes overlapping 
project phases differentiated by a distinct work focus is known as what? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A:  The project management information system is an example 
of an Organizational Process Asset and does not refer to a 
collection of overlapping phases. 
 B: A project management methodology is a prescribed and 
standardized approach to project management and does not 
describe overlapping project phases. 
 C: A project management office is the center of excellence for 
project management within an organization and does not refer 
to a collection of overlapping phases. 
 D: Knowing the project life cycle and how projects and 
project management fit gives you context and provides a basic 
framework for managing a project, regardless of the specific work 
involved. Do not get this confused with PRODUCT life cycle. 
 Question 19: All of the following are  basic  characteristics of the project life 
cycle except? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: Closing the project is the final step in the project life cycle. 
 B:  The generic level of the project life cycle features four key 
characteristics of starting the project, organizing and preparing, 
carrying out the project work, and closing the project. Checking the 
project is part of the Shewhart and Deming plan-do-check-act cycle, 
which elaborates more on a specific part of the project life cycle.  
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
115
 C: Starting the project is the first step in the project life cycle. 
 D: Carrying out the project work is a characteristic of the project 
life cycle. 
 Question 20: Divisions within a project where extra control is needed to effectively 
manage the completion of a major  deliverable are commonly known as what? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: You may decide to initiate phases in a project due to the size, 
complexity, or presence of defined major deliverables. Breaking 
such projects down into phases gives a greater level of control.  
 B: Stage gate may be a common term but it is not the term used 
in the standardized terminology offered by the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 C:  Decision trees are ways of assessing quantifiable risk and do 
not refer to divisions within a project. 
 D: Sub-projects is an informal term used to describe smaller 
subsets of work but it does not refer to divisions in the project. 
 Question 21: You are explaining to your project sponsor that the best approach to 
managing your project is a phase-to-phase relationship. Which of the following is not an 
example of a phase-to- phase relationship? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: Sequential projects are an example of a phase-to-phase 
relationship because each sequence forms a distinct phase. 
 B: Overlapping is an example of a phase-to-phase relationship 
and refers to the way in which the end of one phase may overlap 
with the beginning of another phase. 
 C: Iterative is an example of a phase-to-phase relationship 
because they can be repeated as necessary before moving on to 
the next phase. 
 D: The three types of phase-to-phase relationships are overlapping, 
iterative, and sequential. Progressive is not one of these. 
 Question 22: You are the project manager working in an organization where the 
functional manager, to whom some of your staff answer when not working on your 
project, controls the project budget and resource availability. This type of  organization   is 
commonly referred to as what? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: In a projectized structure, the project manager has full 
responsibility and authority. 
 B: In a strong matrix, the project manager, not the functional 
manager, has the most power. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
116
 C:  The question refers to some staff working for you, implying 
there are other staff from other functional areas working for you, 
and as such it indicates a matrix form of organization, specifically 
a weak matrix. 
 D:  This situation describes a matrix organization where the 
functional manager retains most of the power. Therefore, it is a 
weak matrix, reflecting the small amount of power the project 
manager has to influence resources and budget on the project. 
 Question 23: You work in an organization where staff members are grouped 
according to their specialty, such as production, engineering, and accounting, and 
projects are generally undertaken within these respective groupings. What is this type of 
organizational  structur e known as? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: In a projectized structure, the project manager has full 
responsibility and authority. 
 B: A weak matrix is a matrix organization where the project manager 
has less power than a functional manager but still has some.  
 C:  A strong matrix is a matrix organization where the project 
manager has more power than the functional manager. 
 D:  This situation describes an organization divided into its 
functional responsibilities. A project manager often has to 
deal with staff and resources from different areas across the 
organization that are ultimately controlled by the functional 
manager. As such, the project manager has little or no power in 
this type of organization. 
 Question 24: All of the following are examples of  Organizational Process Assets that 
can assist your project except? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Government regulations are an example of enterprise 
environmental factors. The other three are examples of 
Organizational Process Assets, which belong to the company, 
are the property of the company, and reflect the organizational 
culture. 
 B: Lessons learned are an example of Organizational Process 
Assets because they are owned by the organization and can be 
used to assist projects. 
 C:  Any sort of templates are an example of Organizational 
Process Assets because they are owned by the organization and 
can be used to assist projects. 
 D:  Configuration management knowledgebases are an example 
of Organizational Process Assets because they are owned by the 
organization and can be used to assist projects.    
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
117
 Question 25:  The process of determining which of the PMBOK ® Guide processes are 
appropriate to use on your project and the appropriate degree of rigor to be applied in 
any given project is known as what? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Customizing may generally describe the process of tailoring 
but it is not the terminology offered in the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 B: Taking a prudent view when deciding which processes, tools, 
and techniques are appropriate would be correct but tailoring is 
the term used to describe the process of doing this. 
 C: The processes described in the PMBOK ® Guide are not to be 
universally applied to every project. Each project is different. It 
is the responsibility of the project manager and project team to 
determine which processes are appropriate and how rigorously 
they should be applied to any project depending on its size, 
complexity, and impact. 
 D:  Standardization is not correct because every project is different.    
 Question 26: The process group consisting of those processes performed to define a 
 new project or a new phase of an existing project by obtaining authorization to start the 
project or phase is known as what? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: The Closing process closes the project. 
 B: The Executing process carries out the work planned. 
 C:  The Initiating process group is always the first performed 
in any project or phase of a project. It is the process group that 
formally establishes the project. 
 D: The Planning process builds on the work done during the 
initiating process. 
 Question 27: You are completing the work defined in the  project management plan 
to satisfy the project specifications. Which process group would your activities fall under? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A:  The Monitoring and Controlling process checks that the 
work being done matches what was planned and manages any 
requested changes. 
 B: The Planning process builds on the work done during the 
initiating process. 
 C:  The Initiating process group is always the first performed 
in any project or phase of a project. It is the process group that 
formally establishes the project. 
 D: The Executing process group consists of those processes that 
complete the work defined in the project management plan. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
118
 Question 28: Your team members are not aware of the differences between a 
 framework  , such as the PMBOK ® Guide, and a methodology, such as Kanban or Lean. 
How would you best explain this? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: A framework is an international standard of best practices 
and it to be used as a toolbox from which you choose processes, 
tools, and techniques to help you deliver projects successfully. 
A methodology has already taken the processes, tools, and 
techniques and developed them into a standardized approach to 
managing projects in a certain way. 
 B: This answer is incorrect because a framework does not 
prescribe how a project should be delivered whereas a 
methodology is prescriptive. This answer has presented the 
defintion of the terms in reverse order. 
 C: This answer is incorrect because a framework is not just 
used during the planning phase of a project and a methodology 
during the execution phase. Frameworks can be used to develop 
methodolgies to be used at any stage in a project life cycle. 
 D: This answer is incorrect because there is a difference 
between the two terms. It is important that you understand that 
a framework is a non-prescriptive collection of best practices, 
while a methodology is a specific set of processes, tools, and 
techniques taken from the framework. 
 Question 29: You have been asked to lead a project to improve the operations of a 
major company. The sponsor has requested you to  apply   Lean principles to facilitate the 
improvement program. Which of the following is not a principle of Lean? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A:  Seeking perfection, particularly through Kaizen or continous 
improvement, is a key principle of a Lean appproach to 
managing projects. 
 B: Identifying the value-add, especially as defined by the 
customer, is a foundational principle of a Lean approach.  
 C:  By eliminating waste, seeking perfection, and identifying 
the value add activities, you are creating an incredibly efficient 
environment - allowing value to be delivered through each 
activity you action. 
 D: Reducing the team size is not one of the key principles behind 
Lean. This may help if the team has identified waste associated 
with the team size, but it is not one of the principles. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
119
 Question 30: What does  eliminating waste refer to under the practice of applying Lean? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A:  Not having project meetings could be an example of waste 
that could be eliminated, but this answer does not explain the 
concept of eliminating waste. 
 B:  Avoiding documentation could be an example of waste 
that could be eliminated, but this answer does not explain the 
concept of eliminating waste. 
 C: Keeping a clear work area is not a practice usually associated 
with Lean. It is more of a Health and Safety matter. 
 D: Eliminating waste is the act of reducing or minimizing any 
unnecessary part of a process. This can include waiting times, 
meetings, documentation, or duplicated activities. If a process 
can be completed without a specific component, and the result 
still provides the value that is required/specified, then it is better 
that component to be removed. 
 Question 31: You are working through the planning phase for a project that will 
improve the production output of your employer’s automotive factory by 7.5%. As part 
of your approach to managing the engagement of your stakeholders, you are educating 
them on the benefits of Lean. What are the key benefits realized from applying  Lean 
practices ? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: By applying the practices of Lean to your project or product, 
your processes will be more efficient. Efficient processes are free 
from waste. Waste slows progress and results in unnecessary costs.  
 B:  This answer is incorrect because reducing duration, not 
increasing it, is a key benefit of applying Lean practices. 
 C: This answer is incorrect because both answers are the 
opposite of reducing duration and minimizing costs, which are 
key benefits realized from applying Lean practices. 
 D: This answer is incorrect because maximized costs is not a key 
benefit from applying Lean practicies. 
 Question 32:   Delays, duplication, over-production, and errors   are all forms of what? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: WIP (work in progress) can be considered another form of 
waste, along with the examples listed in the question.  
 B:  Delays, duplication, over-production, and errors are 
considered forms of waste because they do not add value to the 
project or the client, and result in unnecessary spending. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
120
 C:  Risks can include the potential for waste activities to occur in 
a process, project, or product. 
 D:  The items listed could be considered issues, but waste is 
the more correct answer. Issues could include waste activities 
slowing progress, reducing efficiency, and increasing costs. 
 Project Integration Management 
 Question 33: You are in the process of developing your project closure checklist and 
selecting those items and actions that need to be completed to ensure your project is 
closed properly. A team member asks to  hel p you do this work and asks how you know 
a project can be closed. A project can be considered finsihed under all of the following 
conditions except? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: The project doesn’t end simply because the project manager 
resigns. In this instance, a new project manager would be 
recruited and the project would continue. 
 B: If the project objectives have been achieved, then the project 
would end because there is no longer a need to continue the project.  
 C: If a project is terminated for any reason, it is considered as ended.  
 D: If the need for the project no longer exists, then the project 
would end. 
 Question 34: During the preparation of the business case for your project you 
outline and document several different compelling reasons why your project should 
proceed. These reasons include the high ROI, delivering strategic value, and an increase 
in  business value  . What is the BEST definition of business value? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Business value is defined as the sum of both tangible and 
intangible elements. 
 B: In addition to the value created by projects, business value 
also includes intangible elements. 
 C:  Business value is defined as the sum of all tangible and 
intangible elements including things such as monetary assets, 
fixtures, equity, good will, brand recognition, and trademarks. 
 D:  Business value is based on actual tangible and intangible 
value. Projects that are underway form a small part of this 
overall value. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
121
 Question 35:  You are explaining to your team that all changes on your project must 
be documented and assessed in relation to any extra costs incurred. This is particularly 
important at what point in  a  project’s timeline? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  The cost of changes is lowest at the beginning of the project 
because very little commitment has been made at this point in 
terms of resources and executing the work.  
 B:  As you near the end of the project, the cost and impact of any 
requested change increases. 
 C: There will be significant costs of changes during project execution 
but they won’t be as much as towards the end of the project.  
 D: The cost of changes increases the more you proceed through 
a project because greater commitment is made to the deliverable 
and the resources to produce the deliverable. 
 Question 36:  While studying towards the PMP ® examination, you memorize the 
processes in the PMBOK ® Guide. How many processes are there in the Project Integration 
Management knowledge area in the PMBOK ® Guide? 
 The correct answer is D because Project Integration Management has six processes 
in it. They are Develop Project Charter, Develop Project Management Plan, Direct and 
Manage Project Work, Monitor and Control Project Work, Perform Integrated Change 
Control, and Close Project or Phase. All the wrong answers contain the wrong number 
of processes. 
 Question 37:  You are involved in making choices about resource allocation on your 
project, making trade-offs among competing objectives and alternatives, and managing 
the interdependencies among the different project management  knowledge areas . Of 
which of the PMBOK ® Guide knowledge areas will it be most useful to have an in-depth 
understanding? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: Develop Project Management Plan is a specific process, not a 
knowledge area. 
 B: Project integration management is the process of 
understanding the interaction and interdependencies between 
all of the different knowledge areas. 
 C: Project risk management is related to anticipating and 
managing risk on the project, not trade-offs among competing 
objectives. 
 D: Perform Integrated Change Control is a specific process, not a 
knowledge area. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
122
 Question 38:  One of your team members has recently discovered the PMBOK ® 
 Guide and is intent on doing a project using each and every process, tool, and technique. 
You take this team member aside and explain to her that the knowledge and processes 
described in the PMBOK ® Guide should be applied in what way? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: The PMBOK ® Guide is a framework from which you select 
the appropriate  knowledge, skills, and processes   to apply a 
professional and rigorous project management approach 
appropriate to the size, industry, and complexity of your 
particular project. 
 B : This answer is incorrect because the information in the 
PMBOK ® Guide is not to be used rigorously and exactly as 
shown. It is stated several times in the guide that the information 
is to be tailored to your particular type of project. 
 C : This answer is incorrect because even though the PMBOK ® 
Guide is indeed a guide, you should make sure that you are able 
to use all the approriate parts and not be limited by applying 
only the parts you understand fully. 
 D : This answer is incorrect because you do not have to apply all 
of the knowledge areas and processes to your project. You should 
only apply those that are useful and provide benefit. 
 Question 39:  You are newly appointed to a project and are currently reading the 
 project charter  to gain an understanding of what is known about the project at this point. 
The project charter should contain enough information to do all of the following except? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: The project charter is like the birth certificate for a project. 
You need it to prove that the project exists and to provide basic 
but extremely important information about the project. The 
information it contains is generally quite high level; it is the first 
document developed in an iterative process, so it won’t contain 
enough information to complete a WBS. 
 B:  The project charter should always contain information about 
the project initiation. 
 C: The project charter should contain a high-level description of 
the work to be done on the project. 
 D: The project charter should be the document that appoints the 
project manager. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
123
 Question 40: You have been called in to evaluate a  project   that is experiencing some 
performance challenges. The team seems disorganized, and when you ask to meet the 
project sponsor, the project manager replies that she doesn’t know who the sponsor is. She 
also shares with you that the planned value (PV) is $20,000, earned value (EV) is $14,500, 
and the actual cost (AC) is $36,000. You decide that you should really go back to the 
beginning and figure out how this project got started. What document should you request? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  There are several issues outlined in this question but the 
root cause could be determined by examining a foundational 
document such as the project charter. 
 B:  The project charter is the document that formally authorizes 
a project. The project charter is the document issued by the 
sponsor that formally authorizes the project and provides the 
project manager with the authority to apply organizational 
resources to project activities. 
 C: The cost performance analysis and report won’t help deal 
with any underlying issues because it merely reports status.  
 D: The project authorization memo is not a term referenced 
within the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 Question 41: You and your team are currently developing the project charter and are 
looking for valuable inputs you can use to complete it. All of the following are inputs in 
the Develop Project Charter process except? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: The business case can definitely be used as an input into 
the project charter because it contains information about the 
financial justification for the project. 
 B: At the stage of developing the  project charter   you do not have 
a project management plan, so it can’t be an input. 
 C:  Enterprise environmental factors like market conditions and 
industry regulations would definitely be considered part of the 
development of the project charter. 
 D:  The project statement work is a high-level narrative 
description of the work to be done on the project and as such 
would be part of the development of the project charter. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
124
 Question 42: You have completed a business case and project charter for your 
project and are presenting it to senior management for consideration  an d approval. 
Which of the following have you included in this document? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: The project management plan is done after the development 
of the project charter and as such would not be included in the 
business case. 
 B: There is no need for the project charter to have a copy of 
the stakeholder register, and the project charter is an input 
into the Identify Stakeholders process, which processes the 
stakeholder register. 
 C:  Blank templates are part of the development of the project 
charter but are not necessarily part of the business case.  
 D:  The business case contains information to enable the project 
sponsor to authorize the project from a business perspective 
and as such must contain information about expected market 
demand for the product. 
 Question 43: There are many ways to describe the work to be done on a project. 
What is the high-level, narrative description of products or services to be delivered by the 
project more commonly referred to as? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: The project statement of work is a  high-level document used 
as an input in the development of the project charter. 
 B: The project scope statement is a detailed, not high-level, 
description of the work to be done. 
 C: The project scope is another name for the project scope 
statement which is a detailed, not high-level, description of the 
work to be done. 
 D: Product scope description is not a term referenced within the 
PMBOK ® Guide. 
 Question 44: Which of the following is not a method you would expect to see used in 
a  business case  to justify a project on financial grounds? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  External rate of investment (ERI) is not a term referenced 
within the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 B: You would expect to see return on investment (ROI) used to 
justify a project on financial grounds. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
125
 C: You would expect to see net present value (NPV) used to 
justify a project on financial grounds. 
 D: You would expect to see internal rate of return (IRR) used to 
justify a project on financial grounds. 
 Question 45: You are a project manager working for an organization and have been 
asked to help evaluate some potential projects and draft the statement of work (SOW) 
to be given to potential solution  pr oviders. One of the projects has an expected value of 
$50,000 in three years. Another project has an expected value of $60,000 in four years. The 
discount rate is 8.2%. You will want to make sure your statement of work indicates all the 
following except? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  The staffing plan is not part of the statement of work (SOW). 
Did you get confused by all the information in this question? You 
must be able to dissect a question and understand exactly what 
is it asking. In this instance, the question is in the last sentence. 
 B: The statement of work will include a description of the 
business need for the project. 
 C: The statement of work will include a high-level description of 
the project scope. 
 D: The statement of work will refer to the strategic plan and how 
the project delivers strategic goals. 
 Question 46:  You are in the process of developing a project charter for your 
project. Which of the following is a tool or  technique that you would find useful to 
complete this work? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: The Delphi technique is a specific type of information 
gathering technique, and it is not used in the Develop Project 
Charter process. 
 B: Expert judgment is used to assess the inputs used in the 
development of the project charter. 
 C: Analytical techniques are a tool or technique used in the 
Close Project or Phase process and the Monitor and Control 
Project Work process. 
 D: Although a business case may be part of the project charter, 
business case preparation is not one of the listed tools or 
techniques in the Develop Charter process. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
126
 Question 47: You have just taken over a project that has been underway for 10 months. 
The previous project manager left the project for health reasons. The project is performing 
well but you  wo uld like to become familiar with the way in which this particular project is 
being executed, monitored and controlled, and closed. What document will help you in 
this instance? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: The quality management plan relates to project quality 
and will not be detailed enough to give you all of the information 
you require.  
 B: The project statement of work will not be detailed enough to 
give you all of the information you require. 
 C:  The project charter will not be detailed enough to give you all 
of the information you require. 
 D: The project management plan is a product of all of the 
different knowledge areas and contains the information required 
to execute, monitor, control, and close the project. 
 Question 48: You and your team are carrying out the development of the project 
management plan for your project. You are unsure about which inputs are best to use to 
develop it. All of the following may  be  of assistance to you except? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: The communications management plan is an output 
from another process, specifically the Plan Communications 
Management process, and as such it is an input into the Develop 
Project Management Plan process. 
 B: The project charter provides the authorization to begin the 
planning processes, which delivers the project management plan.  
 C: The process improvement plan is an output from another process, 
specifically the Plan Quality Management process, and as such it 
is an input into the Develop Project Management Plan process.  
 D:  Work performance information is not a direct input into the 
development of the project management plan. 
 Question 49: After completing most of your project management plan, your  project   
sponsor is so impressed that she comments, “With this level of planning and detail, 
we know exactly where the project will be nine months from now.” What is the BEST 
response you should give to the sponsor? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Projects seldom run exactly according to the project 
management plan, which is why we have the integrated 
change control process. The project management plan and the 
project scope statement must be maintained by carefully and 
continuously managing changes. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
127
 B:  Using the critical chain method will not completely eliminate 
any possible changes. Projects seldom run exactly according 
to the project management plan, which is why we have the 
integrated change control process. The project management 
plan and the project scope statement must be maintained by 
carefully and continuously managing changes.  
 C: Unfortunately, good planning does not give precise knowledge 
about how a project will perform; it gives an idea of how you plan 
for it to perform. Projects seldom run exactly according to the 
project management plan, which is why we have the integrated 
change control process. The project management plan and the 
project scope statement must be maintained by carefully and 
continuously managing changes. 
 D: The application of professional project management practices 
does not guarantee project success, but it does increase 
the chances of project success. Projects seldom run exactly 
according to the project management plan, which is why we have 
the integrated change control process. The project management 
plan and the project scope statement must be maintained by 
carefully and continuously managing changes.    
 Question 50: Which of the following would your project  sponsor not expect to see in 
your project management plan? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  The project management plan can be either summary or 
detailed depending on the timing and complexity of the project 
and what is required to successfully plan it.  
 B:  This description outlines the contents of a project charter, not 
the project management plan. 
 C: The project management plan contains the project scope and 
how the work will be executed to achieve this scope. 
 D: The project management plan is a collection of all of the 
other planning documents and subsidiary plans from the other 
planning processes. 
 Question 51:  You and your project  team are busy putting together a first iteration of 
your project management plan. One of your team members seems confused about what 
exactly a project management plan is. Which of the following answers would be your best 
response to this team member? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A:  It is the last part of this answer that makes it incorrect. Project 
management plans are always used in practice. 
 B:  It is the last part of this answer that makes it incorrect. Project 
management plans are not similar, regardless of the complexity 
of the project. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
128
 C: While it may be your experience that a project management 
plan is rarely used, the best answer is that this document will vary 
depending on the application area and complexity of the project.  
 D:  It is the last part of this answer that makes it incorrect. 
Project management plans are not an input into the project 
charter process. 
 Question 52: Which of the following tool or techniques would you find useful when 
 d eveloping your project management plan? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Product scope analysis is not a term referenced within the 
PMBOK ® Guide. 
 B: Project management information systems are not used during 
the Develop Project Management Plan process. 
 C: Expert judgment is used to assess the inputs used in the 
development of the project management plan. 
 D:  Business case preparation is done as part of the Develop 
Project Charter process and is not used during the Develop 
Project Management Plan process. 
 Question 53: Your project management plan describes your  performance 
measurement baseline against which you will measure project performance in several 
interrelated areas. This baseline is most commonly a combination of what other 
baselines? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: There is no procurement baseline. 
 B: There is no risk management baseline. 
 C:  There is no communication baseline. 
 D:  The performance measurement baseline is a combination of 
the scope, schedule, and cost baselines. Remember that you use 
the performance measurement baseline for your earned value 
measurements. 
 Question 54: You and your project team are implementing a variety of approved 
 chan ges to your project. Which of the following would not be a type of approved change? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Lessons learned are not part of the change control process 
itself. However, you may use the change requests you received in 
an analysis of what went well and not so well on the project. 
 B: Preventative action is not correct because the Direct and 
Manage Project Work process requires implementation of 
preventative actions, which are a type of approved change.  
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
129
 C: The Direct and Manage Project Work process requires 
implementation of corrective actions, which is a type of 
approved change. 
 D: The Direct and Manage Project Work process does require 
implementation of any identified defects needing repair. 
 Question 55: The activities involved in performing the work defined in the project 
 man  agement plan to achieve the project’s objectives include all of the following except? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A:  Monitoring and controlling the work being done against what 
was planned is an essential part of the execution phase. 
 B: Managing identified risks is part of the work to be done 
because each risk response strategy represents project work. 
 C: Team members are essential for getting the planed work 
completed. 
 D: Development of the project charter is not part of the execution 
of the project management plan. It is part of project initiation. 
 Question 56: You are in the process of directing and managing the  work to be done 
on the project. Which of the following would not be of use to you during this process? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: The project management plan is used as a key input into the 
Direct and Manage Project Work process because it outlines all 
of the work to be done. 
 B:  Work performance data is an output of the Direct and Manage 
Project Work process. 
 C: Approved change requests are an input because they 
represent work to be done on the project. 
 D: Enterprise environmental factors such as market conditions 
and legislation are an important consideration and input into the 
Direct and Manage Project Work process. 
 Question 57: You are in the process of directing and managing the work to be done 
on the project. Which of the following would not be a useful type of  Organizational 
Process Asset to use during this process? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Issue and defect management procedures are examples of 
Organizational Process Assets used in the Direct and Manage 
Project Work process. 
 B:  The process measurement database is an example of an 
Organizational Process Asset used in the Direct and Manage 
Project Work process. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
130
 C:  This is a tough question that tests your knowledge of the 
difference between Organizational Process Assets and enterprise 
environmental factors. Stakeholder risk tolerances are an 
enterprise environmental factor because they are part of the 
environment in which the project operates. 
 D: Standardized guidelines and work instructions are an 
example of Organizational Process Assets used in the Direct and 
Manage Project Work process. 
 Question 58: You are the sponsor on a time-constrained project that must deliver the 
expected output by a defined date or your organization will face severe financial penalties. 
You meet with the project manager 20 days after the kick-off of the project and ask to have 
an  up  date on schedule progress, schedule activities that have been started, and the extent 
to which quality standards are being met. The project manager looks at you somewhat 
uncomfortably and tells you that he doesn’t have any of that information. What output 
from Direct and Manage Project Work process is the project manager missing? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: Change requests will not provide information about the 
schedule or quality standards. 
 B: Project management plan updates will not provide 
information about the schedule or quality standards.  
 C:  The project deliverables will not provide information about 
the schedule or quality standards. 
 D: Work performance data provides information on the status 
of the project activities being performed to accomplish the 
project work. 
 Question 59: The process of tracking, reviewing, and regulating the progress of your 
project to meet the  performance objectives defined in the project management plan is 
known as what? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: This answer is incorrect because the Perform Integrated 
Change Control process monitors, assesses, and controls 
change requests. 
 B: This answer is incorrect because the Direct and Manage 
Project Work process executes the project management plan. 
 C:  The question is the PMBOK ® Guide definition of the Monitor 
and Control Project Work process. 
 D: This answer is incorrect because the Develop Project 
Management Plan process produces the project 
management plan. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
131
 Question 60:  You and your team are completing work to monitor and control  proj ect 
work. Which of the following tools or techniques would not be of use to you to complete 
this work? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  Expert judgment is one of the tools and techniques used in the 
Monitor and Control Project Work process in the PMBOK ® Guide.  
 B: The Delphi technique is not a tool or technique used in the 
Monitor and Control Project Work process in the PMBOK ® 
Guide. It is a powerful information gathering technique that can 
be used in many situations where you want expert opinion but 
you want to build consensus as well. Key elements are that it is 
iterative and anonymous, which eliminates peer pressure.  
 C: Expert judgment is one of the tools and techniques used in the 
Monitor and Control Project Work process in the PMBOK ® Guide.  
 D: Meetings are one of the tools and techniques used in the 
Monitor and Control Project Work process in the PMBOK ® 
Guide. 
 Question 61:  You and your team are completing work to monitor and control project 
work. As part of this effort you are producing a variety of  outputs  . Which of the following 
is not one of these outputs? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: Change requests, work performance reports, project 
management plan updates, and project documents updates 
are the four outputs from the Monitor and Control Project 
Work process.  
 B:  Work performance information is an input to, not an output 
from, the Monitor and Control Project Work process. During the 
process, it becomes the work performance reports. 
 C: Change requests, work performance reports, project 
management plan updates, and project documents updates 
are the four outputs from the Monitor and Control Project 
Work process.  
 D: Change requests, work performance reports, project 
management plan updates, and project documents updates 
are the four outputs from the Monitor and Control Project 
Work process.  
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
132
 Question 62: You and your team are considering making an early change to a part of 
the project management plan when one of your team members says that it is too early to 
be considering any changes. At what points in the project would you perform  integrated 
change control ? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: Integrated change control is performed from project inception 
to completion and not just during project execution, so this is 
not the best possible answer of the choices given.  
 B: Changes can affect a project at any point in the life cycle and 
therefore you must be ready to proactively influence, monitor, 
and control change requests. 
 C:  You perform integrated change control during the monitoring 
and controlling phase, and you perform it from inception to 
completion, so this answer is not the best of the possible answers 
presented to you. 
 D:  This answer is not correct because it does not acknowledge 
that integrated change control is also performed during the 
project initiation and project planning phases. 
 Question 63: Your client has requested a change to the project and as a result you 
are preparing a change request according to the approved change control process that 
your project management methodology prescribes. A project administrator on your 
project asks to assist in the preparation and assessment of the change request but seems 
confused about the key characteristics of a  change request . You explain that all of the 
following are characteristics of a change request except? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: All change requests must have a decision made about them.  
 B: The word ALL in this answer makes it incorrect as the project 
manager can have a level of delegated authority to approve or 
decline requested changes so they don’t all need to go to the 
change control board. 
 C:  A change request may be initiated verbally but should always 
be recorded in a document of some sort. 
 D:  A change request in one area, such as quality, may have 
impacts in other areas such as cost, time, and risk.    
 Question 64: You have developed a  formal documented system and set of processes 
to assist with technical and administrative direction, control, and iteration management 
of project documents, records, accountability, physical characteristics, and required 
materials. What is this system called? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: A work authorization system is not focused on consistently 
validating and improving the project by recording and 
considering the impact of each change. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
133
 B: A risk management system is not focused on consistently 
validating and improving the project by recording and 
considering the impact of each change. It is focused on 
identification, assessment, and responses to risk.  
 C: A project management information systems (PMIS) is not 
focused on consistently validating and improving the project 
by recording and considering the impact of each change. It 
is focused on storage and retrieval of project management 
information. 
 D: Project-wide application of the configuration management 
system, including change control processes, accomplishes 
three main objectives: it establishes an evaluation method 
to consistently identify and request changes to established 
baselines; it provides opportunities to continuously validate and 
improve the project by considering the impact of each change; 
and it provides the mechanism for the project management team 
to consistently communicate all changes to stakeholders.    
 Question 65:  You are carrying out project-wide application of the configuration 
management system in order to accomplish three main  objectives  . Which of the following 
is not one of these objectives? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  Establishing an evolutionary method to consistently identify 
and request changes to established baselines is an important 
objective of the configuration management system. 
 B: This answer describes part of the change control process, not 
the configuration management system, so it is the correct answer 
to the question. 
 C: Continuously validating and improving the project by 
considering the impact of each change is an important objective 
of the configuration management system. 
 D: Providing a mechanism for the project management team  to 
  consistently communicate all approved and rejected changes to 
the stakeholders is an important objective of the configuration 
management system. 
 Question 66:  The configuration management system is a collection of formal 
documented procedures. Which of the following is not an objective of  configuration 
management ? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: The configuration management system controls and records 
changes, but it does not prevent them, so this is the correct answer.  
 B:  Recording and reporting each change to the functional 
characteristics is an important attribute of the configuration 
management system. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
134
 C:  Identifying and documenting the functional characteristics 
of a product is an important attribute of the configuration 
management system. 
 D:  Supporting the audit of the products to verify conformance 
to requirements is an important attribute of the configuration 
management system. 
 Question 67: You are in the process of documenting, assessing, and making a 
decision on a requested change to your project. Which of the following  configuration 
management activities would you not find useful at this time? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Configuration control and assessment may sound like a correct 
answer but it is not a term referenced within the PMBOK ® Guide.  
 B: Configuration identification is one the core activities of 
configuration management included in the Integrated Change 
Control process. 
 C:  Configuration status accounting is one the core activities of 
configuration management included in the Integrated Change 
Control process. 
 D:  Configuration validation and audit is one the core activities of 
configuration management included in the Integrated Change 
Control process. 
 Question 68: As an experienced project manager, you have been asked to review 
 a  project with an SPI of 0.86 and a CPI of 0.83. You quickly identify a number of changes 
that are required to fix defects and meet some critical customer needs. Which of the 
following PMBOK ® Guide processes will you need to perform first? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Project changes can require new or revised cost estimates, 
schedule dates, resource requirements, and other project 
deliverables. These changes can require adjustments to the 
project management plan project scope statement or other 
project deliverables. You have identified your changes and now 
need to put them in place. 
 B: The Direct and Manage Project Work process executes the 
planned work; it does not process change requests. 
 C: The Monitor and Control Project Work process identifies any 
variances from planned baselines and raises change requests but 
does not process change requests. 
 D: The Develop Project Management Plan process produces the 
project management plan; it does not process change requests. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
135
 Question 69:  You are carrying out work to document and  assess requested changes 
to your project. Which of the following would you find least helpful to you as an input as 
you complete this work? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A:  Organizational Process Assets are an input into the Perform 
Integrated Change Control process in the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 B: Change request are an input into the Perform Integrated 
Change Control process in the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 C: Project document updates are an output of, not an input to, the 
Perform Integrated Change Control process in the PMBOK ®  Guide.  
 D: Work performance reports are an input into the Perform 
Integrated Change Control process in the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 Question 70:  Your client  has  requested a change that is considered feasible but is 
outside of the already approved project scope, and your project is already significantly 
advanced. What should occur if the change is approved? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: The project sponsor was either consulted or informed about 
the change as part of the normal integrated change control 
process, which will approve the change, so there is no special 
reason to inform them now. 
 B: If the change request is feasible, it should definitely be 
considered and not just declined. 
 C:  Making changes to a project that are not part of the project 
scope is acceptable as long as the relevant process is followed 
and the relevant baseline is changed to reflect the new 
information. Remember that a baseline is the original baseline 
plus any approved changes. 
 D:  This answer is wrong because it is silly to think that 
there is conflict of interest simply because someone raises a 
change request. 
 Question 71:  You and your project team are carrying out the work described in the 
Close  Project or Phase process in the PMBOK ® Guide. You want your team to understand 
the exact characteristics of this work, so you tell them that the process includes all of the 
following except? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A:  Establishing the procedures to investigate and document 
the reasons for actions taken if a project is terminated before 
completion is an important characteristic of the Close Project or 
Phase process. 
 B: Finalizing all activities across all of the project management 
process groups is an important characteristic of the Close Project 
or Phase process. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
136
 C:  The process of closing and finalizing any contracts is done 
during the Close Procurements process in the PMBOK ® Guide, 
so this is the correct answer. 
 D:  Including all of the activities necessary for administrative 
closure of the project or phase is an important characteristic of 
the Close Project or Phase process. 
 Question 72: While carrying out the work to close the design phase of your  project 
 you are using a variety of useful inputs. Which of the following is not a useful input to you? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Organizational Process Assets are an input in the Close Project 
or Phase process in the PMBOK ® Guide, which is what the 
question is describing. 
 B: Accepted deliverables are an input in the Close Project or 
Phase process in the PMBOK ® Guide, which is what the question 
is describing. 
 C:  Work performance information is an input into several other 
processes but not the Close Project or Phase process in the 
PMBOK ®  Guide, which is what the question is describing, so this 
is the correct answer. 
 D: The project management plan is an input in the Close Project 
or Phase process in the PMBOK ® Guide, which is what the 
question is describing. 
 Question 73: You are a project manager and you have just been informed that 
due to budget cuts your project has been cancelled and your team should cease work 
immediately. The project was doing very well and will likely be restarted at a later time 
when  organizational finances are better. What is the BEST action to take next? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: If a project is terminated prior to completion, the formal 
documentation indicates why the project was terminated and 
formalizes the procedures for the transfer of the finished and 
unfinished deliverables of the project to others.  
 B: You cannot ignore a request like this because there is no 
funding to continue the project. 
 C: This answer is incorrect because it is entirely unprofessional 
to shred documents that could be used later when the project 
restarts.  
 D: The question clearly outlines that there is no budget for your 
project, so you must assume that this has already been done by 
those people responsible for funding projects. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
137
 Question 74:  You are just about to complete administrative closure of your 
project and are updating the relevant  Organizational Process Assets   for your company. 
Which of the following is not an example of an Organizational Process Asset that you 
would update? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A:  Project files, project closure documents, and historical 
information are all examples of Organizational Process Assets 
that would be updated. 
 B:  Project files, project closure documents, and historical 
information are all examples of Organizational Process Assets 
that would be updated. 
 C: The stakeholder risk tolerance register is not be considered an 
Organizational Process Asset. 
 D: Project files, project closure documents, and historical 
information are all examples of Organizational Process Assets 
that would be updated. 
 Question 75:  Your project is reporting a CPI of 1.02 and a SPI of 1.1. The project you 
are delivering is for a customer who is notoriously difficult to please. Your team comes 
up with a way to deliver more functionality in the project than the customer is expecting, 
at a lower  cost  , and the change will result in improvements to the schedule. What is your 
BEST course of action? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  This answer in incorrect because if you have the opportunity 
to deliver extra value you should investigate whether it can be 
done. You should also always expect and manage changes to a 
project. 
 B:  The necessary first step in the change control process in this 
instance is to contact the customer and explain the situation to 
them in order to get their approval, rather then risk gold plating. 
 C: This answer is incorrect because you do not do the work 
without first checking with the customer.  
 D: This answer is incorrect because without first checking with 
the customer you will not know if they will appreciate it or not. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
138
 Question 76: You are a project manager that is involved with the preparation of a 
business case to justify whether a particular project should go ahead. You are using  net 
present value (NPV) as a key financial filter. Your project will spend $100,000 in the first 
year, and then it will generate revenue of $33,000 in the first year, $62,000 in the second 
year, and $85,000 in the third year. Assuming a discount rate of 10%, what is the net 
present value? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: $100,000 represents the spend on the project in the first year, 
not the NPV. 
 B: The formula to calculate NPV is -$100,000+($33,000 / 
(1+.1)^1)+($62,000 / (1+.1)^2)+($85,000 / (1+.1)^3) which equals 
$45,101.43. 
 C: $80,000 represents the total revenue generated from the 
project with the cost of a project subtracted, not the NPV. 
 D:  You get $280,000 if you simply add the four figures in the 
question together, and they do not represent the NPV. 
 Question 77:  You are choosing between two potential projects that your organization 
could undertake. The first project,  Project Eagle , will cost $500,000 and will have a NPV 
of $50,000. The second project, Project Falcon, will cost $420,000 and will have a NPV of 
$48,000. Which of the two projects should you do? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: The question presents enough information to enable you to 
compare NPV between the two projects, and you should choose 
the project with a higher NPV. 
 B: The cost of Project Falcon has already been taken into account 
with the NPV calculation and therefore you should choose the 
project with a higher NPV, which is project Eagle. 
 C: Between the two projects Project Eagle has the higher NPV 
and as such it should be preferred option. 
 D:  In order for a project to go ahead, it must have a positive NPV, 
and both projects do. You should choose the project with the 
highest NPV. 
 Question 78: After measuring expected project benefits, your project  management 
office has four projects from which to choose. Project A has a NPV of $160,000 and will 
cost $10,000. Project B has a NPV of $470,000 and will cost $220,000. Project C has a NPV 
of $265,000 and will cost $33,000. Project D has a NPV of $335,000 and will cost $57,000. 
Which project would be BEST? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: This answer is incorrect because Project C has an NPV of 
$265,000, which is not the highest NPV. Don’t forget that the cost 
of the project has already been calculated in the NPV calculation 
so that information is not relevant. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
139
 B: This answer is incorrect because Project A has an NPV of 
$160,000, which is not the highest NPV. Don’t forget that the cost 
of the project has already been calculated in the NPV calculation 
so that information is not relevant. 
 C: The question gives you lots of information about NPV and the 
cost of each project but the only relevant information is the NPV 
because it is recalculated the cost. Therefore, you should choose 
the project with the highest NPV, which is project B which is also 
the correct answer. 
 D: This answer is incorrect because Project D has an NPV of 
$335,000, which is not the highest NPV. Don’t forget that the cost 
of the project has already been calculated in the NPV calculation 
so that information is not relevant. If you thought this was the 
correct choice, it is probably because you subtracted the cost 
from the NPV. 
 Question 79:  You are assisting your portfolio manager in making a decision about 
which of two possible projects should be given approval to proceed. Project A would 
generate $75,000 in benefit. Project B would generate $225,000 in benefit. Unfortunately, 
due to limited resources, your company can only perform one project, and they choose 
Project B because of the higher benefit. What is the  opportunity cost of performing Project B? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A, C, and D: These answers are incorrect because when faced 
with a choice between two projects, the opportunity cost is the 
benefit that would be derived by doing the other project. In this 
case, the opportunity cost of performing project B is the benefit 
of project A, which is $75,000. 
 B: When faced with a choice between two projects, the 
opportunity cost is the benefit that would be derived by doing 
the other project. In this case, the opportunity cost of performing 
project B is the benefit of project A, which is $75,000. 
 Project Scope Management 
 Question 80: The  processes that describe the work required to ensure that the project 
includes all the work and only the work required to complete the project successfully are 
collectively known as what? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  Project scope management makes it clear that at times you 
should ensure that you are delivering only what is documented. 
This allows for changes to occur but makes it clear that you 
should document all changes to the baseline and ensure you are 
delivering exactly what has been documented. 
 B: Project baseline delivery is incorrect because it is not a term 
referenced within the PMBOK ® Guide. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
140
 C: Project specification delivery is incorrect because it is not a 
term referenced within the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 D: Project management execution is incorrect because it is not a 
term referenced within the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 Question 81: You are completing the work defined in the project scope statement of 
a new software development project when a team member points out that you have an 
opportunity to deliver enhanced capability to the client at no extra cost, time, or risk to 
the project. What should you do NEXT? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  If you are able to assess the request and approve it via your 
approved change control process, there is no reason to simply 
decline it. You should always look for ways to deliver more that 
what was expected as long as it is documented. 
 B: This is an issue about “gold plating,” which means you are 
delivering more than what you were required to do. While this 
sounds like a good thing to do, it also means that you are not 
delivering what has been documented. There is no problem with 
seizing the opportunity to deliver more, but you must always 
be delivering what is agreed on and documented. In this case, 
you would formally assess the change; if it gets accepted by your 
change control process, you would then amend the necessary 
documents so that at all times you are delivering exactly what is 
documented. 
 C:  The first step before doing this option is to assess the change 
via your change control process. 
 D: If you are able to assess the request and approve it via your 
approved change control process, there is no reason to simply 
decline it. You should always look for ways to deliver more that 
what was expected as long as it is documented. 
 Question 82: You are new to a project that has been underway for some time. One of 
your first jobs as project manager is to familiarize yourself with and understand the  scope 
baseline  . What documents will you require in order to do this? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: The scope baseline is made up of the detailed project scope 
statement (which will include all approved changes), the WBS, 
and the WBS dictionary, which provides additional information 
needed to fully understand the WBS. 
 B: The scope baseline is made up of the project scope statement, 
the WBS, and the WBS dictionary. It does not include the risk 
register. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
141
 C: The scope baseline is made up of the project scope statement, 
the WBS, and the WBS dictionary. It does not include the change 
register. 
 D: The scope baseline is made up of the project scope statement, 
the WBS, and the WBS dictionary. It does not include the either 
the project management plan or the change register. 
 Question 83:  You are a project manager and you are working with your sponsor to 
define and plan a complex project. You plan to complete your initiation and planning 
documents sequentially to make sure  the  organization really understands and supports 
the project. What key deliverables will you produce in the correct order? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: The project charter comes before a project management plan 
and project scope statement. 
 B:  First, you must always have the project charter; with it, you 
can determine the requirements documentation. Both of these 
are then inputs into the Define Scope process, which produces 
the project scope statement. 
 C: Requirements documentation must be completed before the 
scope statement. 
 D: The project charter is completed first, then the part of 
the project management plan that details the requirements 
gathering, and then requirements documentation. 
 Question 84: What is the name of the planning document that describes how 
 requirements will be analyzed, documented, and managed? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A:  The requirements traceability matrix is an output from the 
Collect Requirements process and links product requirements 
from their origin to the deliverables that satisfy them.  
 B: The scope management plan is focused on the definition, 
documentation, and management of the entire project scope. 
 C: The requirements management plan is a part of the project 
management plan that describes how requirements will be 
analyzed, documented, and managed. 
 D: This answer is not correct because it is not a term referenced 
within the PMBOK ® Guide. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
142
 Question 85: Completion of the project scope is measured against the  scope 
management plan . What is completion of the product scope measured against? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: Client expectations are captured in the requirements 
documentation of which a subset is the product requirements. 
 B: The scope management plan is focused on the definition, 
documentation, and management of the entire project scope. 
 C: The project management plan contains the project scope and 
how the work will be executed to achieve this scope, not just the 
product scope. 
 D: The product scope is measured against the documented product 
requirements gathered during the Collect Requirements process. 
 Question 86: As part of your ongoing commitment to mentoring the next generation 
of professional project managers you have taken on an intern on your software 
development project. You are explaining to her the key differences between project 
 requirements and product requirements. How would you best explain this to her? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: This answer is incorrect because project requirements are 
much more than components of the project management 
plan and product requirements are more than just client 
specficiations and expectations. 
 B: This answer is incorrect because it is simply incomplete, and 
and product requirments do not include the method of delivery. 
 C: This answer is incorrect because project requirments are not 
just the detail included in the project management plan and 
product requirments are more than just the clients expectations. 
 D:  This is an important distinction that you must learn and 
look out for in the exam. Watch out for the use of PROJECT 
and PRODUCT when reading the questions because they are 
different things. Project requirements relate to the way the 
project is delivered while product requirements relate to the 
technical requirements of the product. 
 Question 87: You are carrying out the work to define and document the project 
 stakeholders ’ needs to meet the project objectives. What PMBOK ®  Guide process 
describes this work best? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: This answer is incorrect because it is not a PMBOK ® 
Guide process. 
 B: Project integration management is a PMBOK ® Guide 
knowledge area, not a process. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
143
 C: Project scope management is a PMBOK ®  Guide knowledge 
area, not a process. 
 D:  Collect Requirements defines and documents stakeholders’ 
needs by producing the requirements documentation, 
requirements management plan, and the requirements 
traceability matrix. 
 Question 88:  A team member on your project has questioned whether the project 
is delivering as per the original high-level  requirements and narrative high-level product 
description, and is concerned that what you are doing has deviated from this. What is 
your BEST course of action? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: The project scope statement is not the best place to look for 
the original requirements and product description. The project 
charter is the best place to look for original descriptions. 
 B: The project management plan is not the best place to look for 
the original requirements and product description. The project 
charter is the best place to look for original descriptions. 
 C: The project charter is the founding document for the project. 
At the time it is developed, agreed on, and approved, generally 
only high-level information about the project requirements 
and product description is known but at all times the project 
should be aligned with the project charter. If the project changes 
significantly, then the project charter should also be amended. 
This can only be done with the consent of the project sponsor. 
 D:  This answer is not correct because questioning should be 
encouraged among team members. 
 Question 89:  You are carrying out the work to define and document the project 
stakeholders’ needs to meet the project objectives. All of the following are tools  or 
 techniques that would be useful to you except? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: There are number of techniques for soliciting information 
about requirements from the relevant stakeholders. Focus 
groups are one of these techniques described in the Collect 
Requirements process in the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 B: A requirements traceability matrix is an output of the Collect 
Requirements process in the PMBOK ® Guide, not a tool or 
technique.  
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
144
 C: There are number of techniques for soliciting information 
about requirements from the relevant stakeholders. Group decision-
making techniques are one of these techniques described in the 
Collect Requirements process in the PMBOK ® Guide.  
 D:  There are number of techniques for soliciting information 
about requirements from the relevant stakeholders. Interviews 
are one of these techniques described in the Collect 
Requirements process in the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 Question 90: You have decided to use a technique to get a comprehensive set 
of project requirements that involves getting a group of experts to answer a series of 
questionnaires anonymously and provide feedback on information received in an 
 iterative   manner. What technique are you using? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: Mind mapping is incorrect because it is a graphical technique 
use to link ideas together. 
 B: The nominal group technique is an incorrect answer because 
it is a way to get a decisions from a group by considering all 
possible decisions and getting group members to rank their 
support for each one. 
 C:  Brainstorming is incorrect because it is a method of getting 
a group to think laterally, or outside the square, and consider a 
wide range of ideas. 
 D: The Delphi technique is a powerful information gathering 
technique that can be used in many situations where you 
want expert opinion but want to build consensus as well. Key 
elements are that it is iterative and anonymous, which eliminates 
peer pressure and groupthink. It takes its name from the Oracle 
of Delphi. 
 Question 91: You have just completed the work of gathering, documenting, and 
prioritizing the  project and product requirements, and  mapping them back to original 
project objectives. Which PMBOK ® Guide process best describes this work? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: Scope Definition is not a PMBOK ® Guide process. 
 B: The Develop Project Charter process provides the project 
charter, not the requirements documentation. 
 C: The Project Scope Management knowledge area contains all the 
processes for planning, defining, and checking the project scope, 
and the requirements documentation is a small subset of this.  
 D: The Collect Requirements process produces your 
requirements documentation, requirements management plan, 
and the requirements traceability matrix. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
145
 Question 92:  An experienced team member has taken responsibility for compiling 
the requirements documentation for the project. Which of the  following  components 
would you not expect to see included in this documentation? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A:  Business rules stating the guiding principles of the 
organization are important components of the requirements 
documentation. 
 B:  The business need is an important component of the 
requirements documentation. 
 C: Acceptance criteria are an important component of the 
requirements documentation. 
 D: The requirements documentation describes how individual 
requirements meet the business need for the project. 
Configuration management activities are a component of 
the requirements management plan, not the requirements 
documentation. 
 Question 93: You are a project manager working on a complex construction project 
and have begun the process of planning your project. You have the project charter, which 
is guiding you in preparing your project management plan. Using your requirements 
 documentation , you begin the process of developing a detailed description of the project 
and product. What process are you completing? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  The Collect Requirements process identifies and documents 
the project and product requirements from stakeholders and 
does not relate to using the requirements documentation to 
begin the process of developing a detailed description of the 
project and product. 
 B:  Define Scope is the process of developing your detailed 
description of both the project and product. Having a detailed 
scope statement is critical to project success. Remember that this 
process will be iterative and can be fully developed as the project 
moves along. 
 C: The Plan Scope Management process seeks to define the 
process for describing and controlling the project’s scope and 
requirements, and does not relate to using the requirements 
documentation to begin the process of developing a detailed 
description of the project and product. 
 D: The Define Activities process is part of the Project Time 
Management knowledge area and does not relate to using the 
requirements documentation to begin the process of developing 
a detailed description of the project and product. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
146
 Question 94: You are the project manager for a large project and have recently taken 
over the project from another project manager. On review of the project schedule, you 
learn that two major deliverables are missing. Your sponsor reminds you how important 
it is  to  complete this project on time and within budget. What part of scope management 
was likely not done properly and should be reviewed and perhaps even repeated? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: Although decomposition is an important step in Scope 
Management and is necessary to generate the WBS, it is 
the subdivision of project deliverables into smaller, more 
manageable work components. 
 B: Critical path analysis is not part of the Scope Management 
knowledge area. Critical path analysis is competed after the 
project schedule is done and is part of Time Management. 
 C:  The Integrated Change Control process receives, assess, and 
approves or declines change requests and is not part of the 
Scope Management processes. Integrated change control is done 
during the monitoring and controlling of a project. 
 D:  Stakeholder analysis is correct because it is likely that some of 
the stakeholders’ requirements were not incorporated into the 
scope definition of the project, resulting in deliverables missing 
from the WBS and the project schedule. 
 Question 95: You are completing the work to define the scope of your project. 
This work is best performed with a certain variety of documents  and  processes already 
available to you. Which of the following is not a useful input for you to have in order to 
complete this work? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: The project scope statement is an output from, not an input 
into, the Define Scope process. 
 B: The project charter is one of the inputs into the Define Scope 
process in the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 C: Requirements documentation is one of the inputs into the 
Define Scope process in the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 D: Your organization’s project management methodology is an 
example of an Organizational Process Asset, which is one of the 
inputs into the Define Scope process in the PMBOK ® Guide. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
147
 Question 96: You have been assigned as a new project manager for a  multi-phase 
project that is midway through phase 3 of 5 phases. While the overall work of the team 
seems pretty good, you feel that phase 3 is starting to drift from the original plan. You 
set up a meeting with the project sponsor to discuss your concerns. The sponsor is 
surprised and agrees that phase 3 includes work that was not documented in the original 
agreement. To prove this, the sponsor refers you to which document? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A:  The requirements traceability matrix links the original 
requirements to the deliverables that are supposed to be met and 
would not be of assistance in this situation. 
 B:  The project management plan contains all the subsidiary 
plans for executing the project. But the project scope statement 
is the best answer for this question. 
 C: The statement of work would not contain enough information 
to be useful in this situation. 
 D: During subsequent phases of multi-phase projects, the project 
scope statement defines and validates (if necessary) the project scope.  
 Question 97:  You and your project team have spent time decomposing the project 
scope statement using your organization’s  work breakdown structure template. What is 
the lowest level of the work breakdown structure called? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  You may use the term tasks but it is not a standard term used in 
the PMBOK ®  Guide.  
 B: When you undertake the process of decomposition to 
complete your WBS, you break down the deliverables into 
smaller, more manageable components. The smallest level in the 
WBS is the work package. A work package can be further divided 
into activities but this is beyond the WBS.  
 C: Activities are work packages that are decomposed even further, 
but they are too detailed to be included as part of the WBS.  
 D: Units is not a term referenced within the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 Question 98:  The PMBOK ® Guide process of subdividing project  deliverables   and 
project work into smaller components is known as what? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: The Collect Requirements process gathers stakeholder 
requirements for inclusion in the project scope but it does not 
subdivide project deliverables and project work into smaller 
components. 
 B:  The Define Activities process breaks down work packages 
even further than work packages and is not part of the Create 
WBS process, which is the best answer. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
148
 C: The Define Scope process does just what it sounds like. It 
defines the project and product scope, but does not break it down.  
 D:  Developing a robust WBS is critical to the success of your 
project because it defines all the work packages that must be 
completed. The process of doing this is the Create WBS process. 
 Question 99: You have just completed a workshop with all of your senior project 
technicians to break the project work down into its component parts and produce the 
first iteration of your work breakdown structure. All of the following are true about the 
 work breakdown structure except? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: Decomposition of the scope using the WBS does mean the 
planned work within the lowest levels can be scheduled, cost-
estimated, monitored, and controlled. 
 B: The WBS is a deliverable-oriented hierarchical decomposition 
of the work to be executed by the project team. 
 C: Each descending level of the WBS does represent an 
increasingly detailed definition of the project work down to the 
work package level. 
 D:  The work breakdown structure is an output of the Create WBS 
process, not Define Scope. 
 Question 100: The point in the decomposition of the WBS at which  cost and activity 
durations for the work can be reliably estimated and managed is called what? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: Tasks is incorrect because it is not part of the standard 
terminology in the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 B: Activities are work packages that are decomposed further for 
the purpose of building a project schedule. 
 C: Elements of the WBS dictionary provide additional 
information about each work package and not the point in the 
decomposition of the WBS at which cost and activity durations 
for the work can be reliably estimated and managed. 
 D: It is important that the WBS is decomposed down to the work 
package level. The appropriate level of decomposition means 
that the work package can be reliably estimated in relation to its 
cost and duration. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
149
 Question 101: You are consulting with senior technicians working on your project 
in order to decompose the project scope into its component parts to produce a work 
breakdown structure for your  project . One team member with extensive experience and a 
focus on detail wishes to continue decomposing the project scope further but you advise 
him against doing this because excessive decomposition of the WBS can lead to all of the 
following except? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: Going too far with decomposition means that the benefits 
derived from the additional work outweigh the costs incurred. 
This will result in non-productive management effort.  
 B: Going too far with decomposition means that the benefits 
derived from the additional work outweigh the costs incurred. 
These costs will be generated by inefficient use of resources. 
 C: Going too far with decomposition decrease the ability to get 
on with doing the actual work. 
 D: A properly decomposed WBS has the work packages defined 
at a level where their cost and duration can be accurately 
estimated and managed. Going beyond this level does not add 
further benefit or value and may in fact create adverse results in 
relation to efficiency and effort. 
 Question 102: You have a new team member on board and she is new to the 
profession of project management. How would you explain the work  breakdown   
structure to her? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: The WBS does not describe project risks. It decomposes the 
scope statement into work packages. 
 B: The WBS does not describe the resources by type. 
It decomposes the scope statement into work packages. 
 C: The WBS does not define the scope of any contracts. 
It decomposes the scope statement into work packages. 
 D: The work breakdown structure (WBS) organizes and defines 
the total scope of the project; subdivides the project work into 
smaller, more manageable pieces; and represents the work 
specified in the current approved project scope statement. 
A describes the risk breakdown structure, B describes the 
resource breakdown structure, and C describes the contract 
statement of work.  
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
150
 Question 103:  Your project team has largely completed the creation of the WBS. 
 However, some deliverables have not been decomposed because clarity is lacking. The 
project team decides to leave them and wait until more details are available. What is this 
an example of? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: One important aspect of project management is 
acknowledging that project planning is iterative and subject to 
progressive elaborations; work such as decomposition of the 
WBS may not always be entirely possible because there may be 
a lack of clarity or a particular deliverable may rely on another 
deliverable to be complete before it can fully be defined. This 
process of leaving these uncertain deliverables until more detail 
is known is called rolling wave planning. 
 B: This answer may seem correct at first glance but progressive 
decision making is not a term referenced within the PMBOK ® Guide.  
 C: This answer may seem correct at first glance but iterative 
expectation management is not a term referenced within the 
PMBOK ® Guide. 
 D:  A fundamental attribute of project management planning 
is that it will be iterative and subject to rolling wave planning 
because you can not generally plan the entire project in detail, 
so this approach is not an example of poor project management 
planning. 
 Question 104:  You are  having  trouble understanding some of the detail associated 
with your WBS work packages. To help you understand the components of your WBS in 
greater detail, which document would you use? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: The project scope statement does not contain enough 
information to help you gain a more in-depth understanding of 
WBS components. 
 B: The project charter does not contain enough information 
to help you gain a more in-depth understanding of WBS 
components. 
 C: The WBS dictionary is a useful document that lists additional 
detail about the work packages. Both the project scope statement 
and the project charter are too high-level to provide further 
detail on work packages contained in the WBS.  
 D: The activity list describes activities, not components of the WBS.  
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
151
 Question 105: A team member responsible for validating the scope of the project 
seems to be confusing this work with quality control work. How would you explain the 
difference between scope  validation and quality control work on the project? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Scope validation differs from quality control because scope 
validation means making sure that the deliverables match the 
defined, detailed scope, whereas quality control is concerned 
with making sure the technical attributes of the product meet 
the specific quality requirements. Quality control is generally 
performed before scope validation. 
 B:  This answer is incorrect because scope validation is not just 
about checking the output from the project, nor is quality control 
only concerned with the output of the product.  
 C: This answer is incorrect because scope validation is not 
primarily concerned with ensuring the scope management plan 
is being followed. 
 D: This answer is incorrect because scope validation is not about 
checking that the requirements documentation reflects the 
project charter. 
 Question 106: You are currently completing work associated with the process called 
 Validate  Scope in the PMBOK ® Guide. What is this process primarily focused on? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Performing variance analysis on the expected and actual 
deliverables is part of the Monitoring and Controlling process 
group not the Validate Scope process. 
 B: Finalizing the project and product scope statement is in the 
Define Scope process, not the Validate Scope process. 
 C: The Validate Scope process is the process where you formally 
check and accept completed project deliverables. 
 D:  Accepting approved change requests and amending the 
project scope baseline is not part of the Validate Scope process. 
 Question 107: You are using your project management plan, requirements 
documentation, and requirements traceability matrix, and you are undertaking 
inspection to validate the project and product. What PMBOK ® Guide  process  group are 
you involved in? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A, C, D: These examples define the Validate Scope process, 
which is part of the Monitoring and Controlling process group, 
not work done as part of the Closing process group. 
 B:  You are completing the Validate Scope process, which is part 
of the Monitoring and Controlling process group.    
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
152
 Question 108:  The customer has contacted you and has requested a change to the 
scope of your project, which is already well underway. They are in a hurry to get the 
change implemented and they tell you that they are prepared to pay whatever extra cost  is 
 associated with the change so you should just get on and do it. What is your BEST course 
of action? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: You can not simply refuse to consider change requests, but 
you should always process each change according to your 
defined change control process. 
 B: All requests for changes to the scope must be considered 
in light of your agreed integrated change control process. 
Additionally, as project manager, you should proactively 
influence any prospective change requests. 
 C:  You may do this, but only after referring to your change 
control process for controlling scope and submitting the request 
as detailed. 
 D: You may do this, but only after referring to your change control 
process for controlling scope and submitting the request as 
detailed.  
 Question 109:  Your team is receiving a large number of small change requests 
and some  are  being adopted without being fully documented and assessed. These 
uncontrolled scope changes are often referred to as what? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: Scope amendment is not a term referenced within the 
PMBOK ® Guide. 
 B:  Scope variance, if it was a real term, would refer to the difference 
between what your scope baseline is and what you are delivering. 
 C: Scope change is part of the formal documented, not 
undocumented, change process. 
 D:  Uncontrolled change on a project is a big No. All changes 
must be recorded, documented, and assessed as per the 
integrated change control process. Any approved changes should 
be reflected in updated baselines. 
 Question 110:  A team member is concerned that you have not documented how 
 requirements activities will be planned, tracked, and changed. What document will you 
show this team member to show him how you did the work? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: The requirements management plan documents all aspects of 
managing, reporting, and changing your project requirements.  
 B: The change control plan shows how changes, not 
requirements, will be managed, assessed, and tracked. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
153
 C: The project management plan is the overall plan comprising 
all other sub-plans, including the requirements management 
plan, which is the best answer to this question.  
 D: The scope management plan sets out how the scope, not the 
requirements, will be planned, tracked, and changed.    
 Question 111: You are assessing the magnitude of variation of actual work 
performed from  the  original scope baseline. What technique are you utilizing? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Scope baseline analysis is incorrect because it is not a term 
referenced within the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 B: Change control assessment considers the impact of change 
requests received, not the magnitude of variation from the 
original scope baseline. 
 C: You use your project performance measurements to assess the 
difference between what the scope originally said and what it is 
now doing. This must always be reflected in the scope baseline. 
 D:  Variation change analysis is incorrect because it is not a term 
referenced within the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 Question 112: You are leading a PMP ® study group within your organization. You are 
widely respected within the organization for your theoretical and practical knowledge, 
particularly in those areas required to pass the PMP ® . Several of the students in the class 
are struggling  with some of the concepts in the recommended study material, particularly 
the PMBOK ®  Guide. An area of concern to most of the class relates to the distinction 
between the focus of the Validate Scope and Quality Control processes. They look to you 
for clarification and a clear explanation. How do you best describe the difference between 
these two processes? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: This answer is incorrect because both Quality Control and 
Validate Scope are monitoring and controlling processes.  
 B:  This answer is incorrect because while Quality Control is a 
quality management process concerned with the correctness 
and quality of the project deliverables, Validate Scope is 
concerned not with completeness of deliverables but with 
the acceptance of the deliverables against the customer 
requirements. 
 C: Quality Control is a quality management process concerned 
with the correctness and quality of the project deliverables; 
Validate Scope is concerned with the acceptance of the 
deliverables against the customer requirements.  
 D:  This answer in incorrect because the project sponsor is not 
responsible for performing work in the Validate Scope process. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
154
 Project Time Management 
 Question 113:  You are helping a colleague to study for the PMP ®  exam, and as part of 
his study plan he is using the PMBOK ® Guide as one of his reference books. He is having 
difficulty understanding  the  Time Management knowledge area processes, particularly 
how inputs from one process are often outputs from other processes and as such there 
is an order in which the processes are generally performed. You offer some advice and 
describe the generally correct order of schedule development activities in the Time 
Management knowledge area in the PMBOK ® Guide. What is your answer? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  If you read the sequence carefully, it becomes apparent that 
each one must precede the next because outputs from one 
become inputs into the other. You start by defining activities and 
end by developing the schedule. Along the way, you first put the 
defined activities in sequence; then, using this information, you 
estimate the activity resources; and then you can estimate the 
activity durations. Some smaller projects may do the activities 
concurrently. 
 B: This answer is incorrect because if you read the sequence 
carefully, it becomes apparent that each one must precede the 
next because outputs from one become inputs into the other. For 
example, you must start, not end, with Define Activities. 
 C:  This answer is incorrect because if you read the sequence 
carefully, it becomes apparent that each one must precede the 
next because outputs from one become inputs into the other. For 
example, you generally sequence the activities immediately after 
defining the activities. 
 D: This answer is incorrect because if you read the sequence 
carefully, it becomes apparent that each one must precede the next 
because outputs from one become inputs into the other. In this 
answer, you should define the activities before sequencing them.  
 Question 114: You are using the work packages from your WBS to assist with  creating 
 your project schedule. You begin breaking the work packages down into the actual work 
necessary to complete the work package. What are you in the process of defining? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: WBS dictionary items provide more detailed information 
about each node of the WBS. They do not refer to any work below 
the level of work package. 
 B: Project tasks is an informal term used by some project 
managers. For the purpose of the exam, the correct term to use is 
activities. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
155
 C: When you developed your WBS, your process of decomposition 
went down to a level where the element of the scope could be 
accurately estimated for duration and cost. The next step in the 
decomposition process is to break it down into activities that 
represent the actual work needed to complete the work package. 
This is essential to achieve a robust project schedule.  
 D: Work package assignments refer to the resources allocated to 
complete the work packages. 
 Question 115: You are the project manager on a project that is currently in  the 
 planning stage. You are working on your project schedule and beginning the process of 
defining your activity list. Involving your team members in this process would result in 
what outcome? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  Involving the people who will actually be responsible for 
completing the work will result in more accurate information. 
It is not certain that the involvement of team members will 
add extra cost to the project because you are not given enough 
information to decide this. 
 B:  This answer is incorrect because involving the people who 
will actually be responsible for completing the work will result in 
more accurate information, leading to greater efficiencies. 
 C: This answer is incorrect because involving the people who 
will actually be responsible for completing the work will result in 
greater morale because people will feel valued. 
 D: This answer is incorrect because involving the people who 
will actually be responsible for completing the work will result in 
more accurate information. It is not certain the involvement of 
team members will add extra cost to the project because you are 
not given enough information to decide this.    
 Question 116: You have your activity list completed and are explaining to your  team 
 members what it contains. Which of the following is not contained on the activity list? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  The milestone list is found in your WBS dictionary. 
 B: The scope of work description is contained in the activity list. 
 C: All schedule activities required on the project are contained in 
the activity list. 
 D: Activity identifiers are contained in the activity list. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
156
 Question 117: You and your project management team are conducting the activity 
sequencing for a new project. The team has determined that Task A takes 3 days. Task B 
is dependent on Task A finishing and  has  a duration of 1 day. Task C takes 4 days. Task D 
is dependent on Task C starting and has a duration of 7 days. Task E is dependent on both 
Task C and Task D finishing and has a duration of 2 days. Task F is dependent on both Task 
E and Task B finishing and has a duration of 4 days. What is the duration of the project? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: 10 days is incorrect. Did you read this question properly? Did 
you notice that there is a start-to-start relationship between Task 
D and Task C? Try recalculating with this information.  
 B: 13 days is the correct answer. Well done for noticing that there 
is a start-to-start relationship between Task D and Task C. 
 C:  17 days is incorrect. Did you read this question properly? Did 
you notice that there is a start-to-start relationship between Task 
D and Task C? Try recalculating with this information.  
 D:  8 days is incorrect. Did you read this question properly? Did 
you notice that there is a start-to-start relationship between Task 
D and Task C? Try recalculating with this information.    
 Question 118:  You are leading your team in the preparation of your project schedule 
and are currently sequencing the activities and  determining  which type of precedence 
relationship exists between them. Which of the following is the most commonly used type 
of precedence relationship that you will use? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: Start-to-start is often used, but it is not the most common type 
of relationship. 
 B: Very few activities have start-to-finish relationships, 
which means that the successor activity can’t finish until its 
predecessor activity starts. 
 C: Finish-to-finish is often used, but it is not the most common 
type of relationship. 
 D:  Finish-to-start means that the successor activity can’t start 
until its predecessor activity is finished. Most activities have this 
sort of relationship. Very few have start-to-finish relationships, 
which means that the successor activity can’t finish until its 
predecessor activity starts. 
 Question 119:  You are using the precedence diagramming method to construct  your 
 project schedule network diagram. What other name is sometimes used to describe the 
precedence diagramming method? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: The activity on node diagram is called this because the activity 
and information about the activity is shown on a node in the 
diagram represented by a square or rectangle. The relationship 
between nodes is shown by arrows. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
157
 B:  Activity on arrow diagrams are referred to as arrow 
diagramming methods, not precedence diagramming methods.  
 C: Critical chain methodology refers to a process of including 
buffers throughout the schedule to deal with bottlenecks and 
uncertainty. 
 D: The precedence diagramming method can be used as part of the 
critical path methodology but the correct answer is activity on node.  
 Question 120: After talking with your team and the people responsible for completing 
the activity, you schedule two activities in  your  project so that the successor activity is able 
to start a week before the predecessor activity. What is this is an example of? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  Lag refers to the amount of time a successor activity must wait 
after the end of its predecessor before it can start. 
 B:  A lead means that one activity can get a start before its 
predecessor finishes. Even through it has a finish-to-start 
relationship, it can start prior to the predecessor finishing. It 
would be shown on a network diagram as having a finish-to-start 
relationship with a week lead time. 
 C: Slack refers to the amount of time that an activity can be 
delayed before it impacts on successor activities start dates. It is 
one of the few instances in the PMBOK ®  Guide where two terms, 
slack and float, are interchangeable. 
 D:  Float refers to the amount of time that an activity can be 
delayed before it impacts on successor activities’ start dates. It is 
one of the few instances in the PMBOK ®  Guide where two terms, 
slack and float, are interchangeable. 
 Question 121: You are leading your project scheduling specialists in the completion of 
your project schedule and you wish to add leads and lags into your schedule to accurately 
reflect the total project duration. Some members of your team are  confused  about the two 
terms. How would you describe the difference between a lead and a lag to them? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: A lead means that one activity can get a start on its predecessor 
finishing. Even through it has a finish-to-start relationship, it can 
start prior to the predecessor finishing. It is shown on a network 
diagram as having a finish-to-start relationship with a certain 
lead time. A lag, on the other hand, is a delay between related 
activities.  
 B: This answer is incorrect because a lead does not mean both 
activities can start at the same time and a lag does not mean that 
neither can start until the other one starts.  
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
158
 C:  This answer is incorrect because a lag does not mean the 
successor activity has a mandatory dependency and can not start 
until the predecessor activity is complete. 
 D:  This answer is incorrect because a lead does not mean the 
amount of time free on the critical path between activities. 
 Question 122: You are completing the sequence of activities and note that one  of 
 your activities can not proceed until consent is granted by the local government agency. 
This is an example of what sort of dependency? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: A discretionary dependency is one where a successor should 
come after the predecessor but there is some discretion particularly 
if a schedule requires compression to shorten duration.  
 B: An external dependency means that you are waiting on work 
being done by people or organizations outside of the project.  
 C:  There is no such term as environmental dependency in the 
PMBOK ® Guide. 
 D:  A mandatory dependency means that the successor must 
come after the predecessor. A mandatory dependency is also one 
which is internal, not external, to the project.    
 Question 123:  You have successfully completed the first iteration of  your   project 
schedule network diagram. This indicates that you have completed the work in which 
PMBOK ®  Guide process? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: The Control Schedule process produces work performance 
information as its primary output. 
 B: The Define Activities process produces the activity list as its 
primary output. 
 C: The Develop Schedule process produces the schedule 
baseline as its primary output. 
 D: The first iteration of the project network schedule diagram is 
an output of the Sequence Activities process. 
 Question 124: Your  project  sponsor has asked to see your resource calendar. What 
sort of information is included in this document? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A:  The length of time the project will require input from external 
resources is not shown in the resource calendar. This is part of 
the information shown in the network schedule. 
 B: The dates of annual holidays for project team members is part 
of the information included in the resource calendar, but it is not 
the best answer available. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
159
 C: The resource calendar does not show the duration of each 
activity. This is shown in the network schedule. 
 D: Your resource calendar is a useful input into the Estimate 
Activity Resources process because it clearly shows when and 
where resources will be available to the project. 
 Question 125: You are estimating your activity resources and breaking down the 
work within each activity to its lowest level, and then  aggregating  these estimates to get a 
total quantity for each activity’s resources. What tool or technique are you using? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  Published estimating data is a database of data about costs 
and quantities. 
 B:  There are a number of ways to complete an estimating 
process. When an activity can not be estimated with a reasonable 
degree of confidence, the work within it is decomposed 
further down to its lowest level and the resource needs are 
then estimated. Aggregating these low-level estimates is called 
bottom-up estimating because you are working from the bottom 
level and going upwards. 
 C: Expert judgment is not the correct answer because it uses the 
experience of experts to help your estimating process. 
 D: Parametric estimating is a process that multiplies known 
quantities by known financial rates. 
 Question 126: You are about to begin the work to estimate activity durations on your 
project. Which of the following would not be an input  you  could use to complete this work? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  The Estimate Activity Durations process has many inputs, and 
activity attributes is one of them. 
 B:  Activity duration estimates is an output, not an input, of the 
Estimate Activity Duration process, which is what the question is 
asking for. 
 C: The Estimate Activity Durations process has many inputs, and 
the project scope statement is one of them. 
 D: The Estimate Activity Durations process has many inputs, and 
the activity list is one of them. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
160
 Question 127:  While estimating the activity durations on your project, you come 
across a similar project completed by your organization last year. To save time, you use 
information from this project to  h elp estimate activity durations. This is an example of 
which tool or technique? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: This is not an example of bottom-up estimating. Bottom-up 
estimating breaks down work packages and activities into the 
smallest possible piece of work and then adds up the time and 
cost for each to get a total project cost or duration. 
 B: Analogous estimating involves using information from similar 
projects (i.e. an analogy) to estimate elements of your project, 
and it is generally less costly and time-consuming than other 
techniques.  
 C:  This is not an example of parametric estimating. Parametric 
estimating is a process that multiplies known quantities by 
known financial rates. 
 D:  This is not an example of three-point estimating. Three-
point estimating uses the optimistic, realistic, and pessimistic 
estimates to calculate a weight average. 
 Question 128:  As a result of a brainstorming session, your team determines that the 
most likely duration of an activity will be 8 days, the optimistic duration is 6 days, and the 
pessimistic  duration is 16 days. What it the expected activity duration? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: This answer is incorrect: it is arrived at by adding up the 
three duration estimates and dividing by 3, which is not the 
correct formula. 
 B: This answer is incorrect: it is arrived at by adding up the three 
duration estimates and dividing by 6, which is not the 
correct formula. 
 C: Using three-point estimating the expected duration is 
(6+(8 x 4)+16) / 6 = 9 days. 
 D:  This answer is incorrect: it is arrived at simply by adding up 
the three duration estimates, which is not the correct formula. 
 Question 129: There is some uncertainty over the duration of a particular activity 
on your project. You call your team together, all  of  whom have experience in completing 
the activity. After a brainstorming session, they are able to determine a most likely 
duration, an optimistic duration, and a pessimistic duration. You then use these numbers 
to calculate the expected activity duration. This is an example of which sort of tool or 
technique? 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
161
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  This is not an example of bottom-up estimating. Bottom-up 
estimating breaks down work packages and activities into the 
smallest possible piece of work and then adds up the time and 
cost for each to get a total project cost or duration. 
 B:  Three-point estimating, or PERT analysis, uses a weighted 
average method with emphasis given to the most likely data in 
order to estimate a duration. 
 C: This is not an example of analogous estimating. Analogous 
estimating involves using information from similar projects 
(i.e. an analogy) to estimate elements of your project, and it is 
generally less costly and time-consuming than other techniques. 
 D: This is not an example of parametric estimating. Parametric 
estimating is a process that multiplies known quantities by 
known financial rates. 
 Question 130: To estimate the amount of time it will take to install 500 meters of 
cable on your project, you divide the number of meters  required   by how many meters 
an hour the person laying the cable can lay. This is an example of which sort of tool or 
technique? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A:  This is not an example of three-point estimating. Three-
point estimating uses the optimistic, realistic, and pessimistic 
estimates to calculate a weight average. 
 B:  This is not an example of bottom-up estimating. Bottom-up 
estimating breaks down work packages and activities into the 
smallest possible piece of work and then adds up the time and 
cost for each to get a total project cost or duration. 
 C: This is not an example of analogous estimating. Analogous 
estimating involves using information from similar projects 
(i.e. an analogy) to estimate elements of your project, and it is 
generally less costly and time-consuming than other techniques. 
 D: Parametric estimating uses numbers and quantifiable 
measures to estimate. Remember if you see the word “metric” it 
means number of measure. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
162
 Question 131:  You are leading your team members in the development of your 
project schedule. You have just started the process and are checking that you have all 
the appropriate inputs required. Which  o f the following would not be an input into this 
process? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: There are many inputs into the Develop Schedule process, 
and resource calendar is one of them. 
 B: There are many inputs into the Develop Schedule process, 
and project schedule network diagrams is one of them. 
 C:  There are many inputs into the Develop Schedule process, 
and the activity list is one of them. 
 D: The project schedule is an output from the Develop Schedule 
process. 
 Question 132: What is the PMBOK ® Guide process of analyzing activity sequences, 
durations, resource requirements, and scheduled constraints to create the project 
schedule? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Project Schedule Development is not the name of a PMBOK ® 
Guide process. 
 B: Create Project Schedule is not the name of a PMBOK ® 
Guide process. 
 C:  This is the final stage in the planning process group for the 
Time Management knowledge area. It takes all the previous 
information from the previous planning processes and makes 
the project schedule. This process will be quite iterative because 
at the start of the project the available information is less 
accurate. 
 D: Schedule Management is not the name of a PMBOK ® 
Guide process. 
 Question 133:  You are completing a network diagram with the following 
information: Task A has a duration of 3 days and has the start as a predecessor; Task B 
has a duration of 5 days and also has the start as a predecessor; Task C has a duration of 
4 days and has Task A  as a predecessor; Task D has a duration of 4 days and has Task B 
as a predecessor; Task E has a duration of 6 days and has Tasks C and D as predecessors; 
Task F has a duration of 5 days and has Task D as a predecessor; the finish milestone has 
a duration of zero days and has Tasks E and F as predecessors. Using this data, what is the 
duration of the project? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: 16 is not the correct answer. This question requires you to 
draw a network diagram. In this case, once you draw the network 
diagram correctly, you can see that the duration of the project is 
15 days. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
163
 B:  14 is not the correct answer. In this case, once you draw 
the network diagram you can see that the duration of the project 
is 15 days. 
 C: 13 is not the correct answer. This question requires you 
to draw a network diagram. The duration of the project is 
represented by completing a forward pass over the network 
diagram. In this case, once you draw the network diagram you 
can see that the duration of the project is 15 days. 
 D: This question requires you to draw a network diagram. The 
duration of the project is represented by completing a forward 
pass over the network diagram. In this case, once you draw the 
network diagram you can see that the duration of the project is 
15 days. 
 Question 134: You are completing a network diagram with the following 
information: Task A has a duration of 3 days and has the start as a  predecesso r; Task B 
has a duration of 5 days and also has the start as a predecessor; Task C has a duration of 
4 days and has Task A as a predecessor; Task D has a duration of 4 days and has Task B 
as a predecessor; Task E has a duration of 6 days and has Tasks C and D as predecessors; 
Task F has a duration of 5 days and has Task D as a predecessor; the finish milestone has 
a duration of zero days and has Tasks E and F as predecessors. What is the critical path for 
this network diagram? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  Start-B-D-F-Finish is not a critical path. The critical path is 
obtained after you have completed both a forward pass and 
backward pass over the network diagram. In this instance, that 
forward pass reveals a duration of 15 days and the critical path is 
Start-B-D-E-Finish. 
 B:  The critical path is obtained after you have completed both a 
forward pass and backward pass over the network diagram. In 
this instance, that forward pass reveals a duration of 15 days and 
the critical path is Start-B-D-E-Finish. Activities on the critical 
path have no float in them, thus any delays on the critical path 
directly impact the project duration. 
 C: Start-A-C-E-Finish is not a critical path. The critical path is 
obtained after you have completed both a forward pass and 
backward pass over the network diagram. In this instance, that 
forward pass reveals a duration of 15 days and the critical path is 
Start-B-D-E-Finish. 
 D: Start-A-C-F-Finish is not a critical path. The critical path is 
obtained after you have completed both a forward pass and 
backward pass over the network diagram. In this instance, that 
forward pass reveals a duration of 15 days and the critical path is 
Start-B-D-E-Finish. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
164
 Question 135:  According to Goldratt’s critical chain theory, what should you  do   in 
order to reduce risk in project schedules? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: Starting activities in the feeder chains as late as possible would 
not reduce risk in the project schedule; it would add risk. 
 B: In critical chain theory, the feeder chains are activities that are 
not on the critical path. These tasks are scheduled to be done as 
late as possible and then buffered so that they start earlier than 
the late schedule dates. Buffer is also added to the critical path 
of the schedule to improve the probability that the project will 
finish on time. Feeder chain activities as well as critical chain 
activities are not started as early as possible or as late as possible. 
They are started as late as possible minus their buffer.  
 C: Starting activities in the critical chain as early as possible would 
not necessarily reduce risk, whereas the correct answer of adding 
a buffer would definitely reduce risk, making it the best answer.  
 D:  Starting activities in the feeder chains as early as possible would 
not necessarily reduce risk, whereas the correct answer of adding 
a buffer would definitely reduce risk, making it the best answer.  
 Question 136:  During a discussion with a fellow project manager you realize that she 
is using the terms  critical path method and  critical  chain method  incorrectly. You offer 
some pieces of advice and insight into how the two methods are different. Which of these 
statements about the critical path method and the critical chain method is FALSE? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: The critical chain method does not schedule only late start 
dates to planned activities, so this answer is incorrect. 
 B: Both methods seek to use accurate estimates. 
 C:  The critical path method is not just focused on managing the 
total float of network paths, so this answer is incorrect. 
 D:  Both the critical path method and the critical chain method 
account for resource availability. 
 Question 137:  You are adding duration buffers that are non-workable schedule 
activities to manage uncertainty in your project schedule.  Wh at tool or technique are 
you using? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: Parametric estimating is a process that multiplies known 
quantities by known financial rates. 
 B: The critical path method does not add in buffers between 
activities. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
165
 C: Three-point estimating uses the pessimistic, realistic, and 
optimistic estimates to get a weight average.  
 D: The critical chain method is a schedule network analysis 
technique that modifies a project schedule to account for limited 
resources by deliberately adding in non-working time buffers, 
which is intended to protect the target finish date from slippage 
along the critical chain. 
 Question 138: You are using a methodology that calculates the amount of float on 
various paths in the network diagram to determine the  minimu  m project duration. What 
tool or technique are you using? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Critical path methodology focuses on the amount of float in 
network paths to determine the critical path through a project. 
The critical path has no float associated with it and as such 
represents the greatest risk to the project duration. 
 B: The critical chain method is a schedule network analysis 
technique that modifies a project schedule to account for limited 
resources by deliberately adding in non-working time buffers, 
which is intended to protect the target finish date from slippage 
along the critical chain. 
 C: Parametric estimating is a process that multiplies known 
quantities by known financial rates. 
 D: Three-point estimating uses the pessimistic, realistic, and 
optimistic estimates to get a weight average.    
 Question 139: In the first attempt at resource leveling the project schedule,  what   
would you expect to occur? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  The logical analysis of the schedule often produces a 
preliminary schedule that requires more resources during 
certain time periods than are available, or requires changes 
in resource levels that are not manageable. Heuristics such as 
“allocate scarce resources to critical path activities first” can 
be applied to develop a schedule that reflects such constraints. 
Resource leveling, because of the limited availability of the 
resources, often results in a project duration that is longer than 
the preliminary schedule. 
 B: The number of resources required does not generally decrease 
during a first attempt at resource leveling. It is more likely that 
the duration will increase. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
166
 C: The number of resources required does not generally increase 
during a first attempt at resource leveling. It is more likely that 
the duration will increase. 
 D: The first attempt at resource leveling generally increases, not 
decreases, the project duration due to the reallocation of resources 
and the consequences on the timing of the work being done.    
 Question 140: You are the project manager on a software project. While examining 
your schedule you see that there has been a delay in  complet ing a task. The sensible 
choice seems to move a person, someone who is an expert on the work that is behind, 
from another task. There is a choice between two people who are working on different 
tasks. One person is working on a task that has 5 days of free float and the other is working 
on a task that has 8 days of total float and no free float. What is your BEST course of action? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: This answer is incorrect because you must choose the person 
with the least amount of float. 
 B: This answer is incorrect because the person working on the 
task that has total float of 8 days that can be used on the task that 
is in trouble, but since there is zero free float for this task, there 
will have to be a rescheduling of other tasks to allow this.  
 C:  This answer is incorrect because you must choose the person 
with the least amount of float. 
 D: The person who is working on the task that has free float of 5 
days can be used on the task that is in trouble for 5 days without 
affecting the other task schedules in the project. The person 
working on the task that has total float of 8 days can be used on the 
task that is in trouble, but since there is zero free float for this task, 
there will have to be a rescheduling of other tasks to allow this.    
 Question 141:  You are using a computer-based modelling technique that examines 
possible outcomes based on a range of potential probabilities if a particular situation 
occurs. What is this  technique  called? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: This is not an example of parametric estimating. Parametric 
estimating is a process that multiplies known quantities by 
known financial rates. 
 B: Schedule compression involves using fast tracking or crashing 
to reduce the project duration. 
 C: The critical chain method is a schedule network analysis 
technique that modifies a project schedule to account for limited 
resources by deliberately adding in non-working time buffers, 
which is intended to protect the target finish date from slippage 
along the critical chain. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
167
 D: A what-if scenario analysis runs through all the different 
outcomes if a particular scenario occurs. This level of 
information can assist with many types of estimating to get the 
full range of possibilities. The most comprehensive type of what-
if scenario analysis is a Monte Carlo analysis.    
 Question 142: Your project team is behind schedule and has decided to  compress 
the schedule. They have requested extra budget to bring in the additional resources 
required. Which schedule compression technique are they seeking to use? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  Compressing is not the correct answer because it is a generic 
term for all schedule compression techniques. 
 B:  Crashing a project schedule involves bringing in more 
resource to do the work. Extra resources usually cost more 
money. Fast tracking, on the other hand, involves completing 
activities in parallel that might normally be done in sequence. 
This does not always cost more money. 
 C: Fast tracking is a schedule compression technique but one 
that programs activities in parallel instead of in sequence. 
Crashing is the other main schedule compression technique and 
it uses extra budget to provide more resources. 
 D: Resource leveling is not the correct answer because it focuses 
on getting an optimal allocation of resources across the project. 
 Question 143: You have managed to bring forward the predicted completion date for 
your project by doing in parallel several of the  activitie s that were scheduled to be done in 
sequence. What is this technique called? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A:  It may seem like you are accelerating the project schedule but 
the correct term to use is fast tracking. 
 B:  Increasing priorities will not change the order in which work 
has to be done, nor the duration. 
 C: Fast tracking a schedule is finding activities that can be done 
in parallel that were originally scheduled to be done in sequence. 
 D: Crashing a project schedule involves bringing in more 
resources to do the work. Extra resources usually cost more 
money. Fast tracking, on the other hand, involves completing 
activities in parallel that might normally be done in sequence. 
This does not always cost more money. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
168
 Question 144:  You are working on a project to build a new house. Usually you 
 w ould wait until the concrete foundation dried, and then erect the wall on top of it. To 
speed up the project, you start putting the wall frame together off site while the concrete 
foundation is drying. This is an example of which schedule compression technique? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Fast tracking means running activities that might normally be 
run in sequence in parallel. It does not normally incur extra cost. 
 B: Compressing is not the correct answer because it is a generic 
term for all schedule compression techniques. 
 C:  Crashing a project schedule involves bringing in more 
resources to do the work. Extra resources usually cost more 
money. Fast tracking, on the other hand, involves completing 
activities in parallel that might normally be done in sequence. 
This does not always cost more money. 
 D:  Resource leveling is not the correct answer because it focuses 
on getting an optimal allocation of resources across the project. 
 Question 145: Your project sponsor asks you to attend a senior management 
meeting and present a brief update on your project progress. Which  of   the following 
would be best to use in the presentation? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: The question sets out that it is senior management and you 
only have a short amount of time, therefore you want to present 
only high-level information about the project. A bar chart, such 
as a Gantt chart, does this very well. 
 B: The project management plan would not be the best answer 
because it contains far too much detail to communicate 
effectively in this situation. 
 C: Work performance information would not be the best 
answer because it contains far too much detail to communicate 
effectively in this situation. 
 D: The schedule network diagram would not be the best 
answer because it contains far too much detail to communicate 
effectively in this situation. 
 Question 146: What is the name of the process in the PMBOK ®  Guide that monitors the 
 st atus of the project to update project progress and manage changes to the schedule baseline? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: The Develop Schedule process produces the project schedule 
and schedule baseline. 
 B:  Monitoring and Controlling is a process group, not an 
individual process. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
169
 C: This answer is not correct because it is a made-up process name. 
 D: Control Schedule is the only Time Management knowledge 
area process that appears in the Monitoring and Controlling 
process group. 
 Question 147: Your project is underway and you are measuring the forecast 
schedule against the actual schedule, checking for variances between the two and 
initiating corrective  action s if required. To successfully complete this work you require a 
range of inputs. Which of the following is not one of these inputs? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  The Control Schedule process has several inputs, and the 
project management plan is one of them. 
 B:  This is a tricky question that requires you to know the 
difference between inputs and outputs. Work performance 
information, such as the calculated SV and SPI values for WBS 
components, are outputs of the Control Schedule process. 
 C: The Control Schedule process has several inputs, and the 
project schedule is one of them. 
 D: The Control Schedule process has several inputs, and work 
performance data is one of them. 
 Question 148: While using the earned value management technique to measure 
project schedule progress on your project, you discover that your project’s schedule 
performance index (SPI) is 0.9.  Wh at does this mean? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A:  This calculation does not immediately tell you if your amount 
of buffer is less than optimal. 
 B:  This calculation does not immediately tell you if your network 
diagram was incorrectly put together. 
 C: An SPI of 1 means the project is on schedule, less that 1 means 
behind schedule, and greater than 1 means ahead of schedule. 
 D: This answer is incorrect because an SPI of 1 means the project 
is on schedule, less that 1 means behind schedule, and greater 
than 1 means ahead of schedule. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
170
 Question 149: You are a project manager on a project where your SPI has been 
calculated at .95. Your earned value (EV) has been calculated at $10,000,  an d your actual 
cost (AC) is $10,400, so what is your planned value (PV)? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  $10,000 is not the correct answer. To get this answer, you need 
to work backward from the normal equation for calculating SPI. In 
this case, the value equals $10,000 divided by .95, which is $10,526.  
 B: To get this answer you need to work backward from the 
normal equation for calculating SPI. In this case, the value 
equals $10,000 divided by .95, which is $10,526. 
 C: $9,500 is not the correct answer. To get this answer, you need to 
work backward from the normal equation for calculating SPI. In 
this case, the value equals $10,000 divided by .95, which is $10,526.  
 D:  $10,947 is not the correct answer. To get this answer, you need 
to work backward from the normal equation for calculating SPI. In 
this case, the value equals $10,000 divided by .95, which is $10,526. 
 Question 150:  As part of the development of your project schedule you are informed 
that a particular activity has an estimated  optimistic  duration of 7 days, an estimated 
pessimistic duration of 15 days, and will most likely take 10 days to complete. Using PERT 
analysis, what is the standard deviation? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: 0.5 is incorrect, and for the PMP ® exam you will need to know 
how to calculate standard deviation and variance by simple 
means. In this case, Standard Deviation = (P - O) / 6. 
 B: 10.33 is incorrect, and for the PMP ® exam you will need to 
know how to calculate standard deviation and variance by 
simple means. In this case, Standard Deviation = (P - O) / 6. 
 C: 1.76 is incorrect, and for the PMP ® exam you will need to know 
how to calculate standard deviation and variance by simple 
means. In this case, Standard Deviation = (P - O) / 6. 
 D:  For the PMP ® exam you will need to know how to calculate 
standard deviation and variance by simple means. In this case, 
Standard Deviation = (P - O) / 6. 
 Question 151:  As part of development of your project schedule, you are informed 
that a particular activity has an estimated  optimisti c duration of 7 days, an estimated 
pessimistic duration of 15 days, and will most likely take 10 days to complete. Your 
sponsor asks you the activity duration range in which you are 95% confident that the 
activity will be delivered. What is your response? 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
171
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  8-12 days is incorrect because the question is asking you to 
calculate 2 standard deviations on either side of the expected 
mean of 10 days. The 95% confidence interval is two standard 
deviations on either side of the mean. We know the mean equals 
10.33 and the standard deviation equals 1.33, so the duration 
range that we are 95% confident about is 10.33±(2 x 1.33).  
 B:  The 95% confidence interval is two standard deviations on 
either side of the mean. We know the mean equals 10.33 and the 
standard deviation equals 1.33, so the duration range that we are 
95% confident about is 10.33±(2 x 1.33). 
 C: 9-11.66 days is incorrect because the question is asking you 
to calculate 2 standard deviations on either side of the expected 
mean of 10 days. The 95% confidence interval is two standard 
deviations on either side of the mean. We know the mean equals 
10.33 and the standard deviation equals 1.33, so the duration 
range that we are 95% confident about is 10.33±(2 x 1.33).  
 D: 10 days is incorrect because the question is asking you to 
calculate 2 standard deviations on either side of the expected 
mean of 10 days. The 95% confidence interval is two standard 
deviations on either side of the mean. We know the mean equals 
10.33 and the standard deviation equals 1.33, so the duration 
range that we are 95% confident about is 10.33±(2 x 1.33).    
 Question 152: Yvette is the project manager for a software project. She and her team 
are determining the activity duration estimates  for the project. She has requested that 
each team member determine the estimates by multiplying the quantity of work to be 
performed by the known historical productivity rate of the individual department. Yvette 
has asked her team to generate the estimates using what technique? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  Parametric estimating is an estimating technique that uses 
a statistical relationship between historical data and other 
variables to calculate an estimate for activity parameters. 
 B: Analogous estimate use an analogy from a previous project 
and extrapolates from that an estimate for a current project. The 
question presents an example of parametric estimating.  
 C: Three-point estimating uses the pessimistic, realistic, and 
optimistic estimates to get a weight average.  
 D: Expert judgment uses the experience of experts to assist in 
preparing estimates. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
172
 Question 153:  Consider the following information. What is the critical path? Task 
A has a duration of 3 days and is a starting activity. Task  B   has a duration of 6 days and 
has Task A as a predecessor. Task C has a duration of 5 days and has Tasks A and B as 
predecessors. Task D has a duration of 4 days, and has Task B as a predecessor. Task E has 
a duration of 1 day and has Task C as the predecessor. Task F has a duration of 6 days and 
has Tasks D and E as predecessors. Task G has a duration of 4 days, and has Tasks E and F 
as predecessors. 
 The correct answer is A. 
 Once you have compiled information in the question into a table that lists task ID, 
duration, and predecessors, you need to map out a network diagram. This will show 
that the critical path is A-B-C-E-F-G. This question may have taken you quite a while to 
work out; if you get a question such as this in the exam, you must remember that every 
question is worth one point. In the time taken to answer this question you could have 
answered several other questions. 
 Question 154:  Consider the following information. How many tasks have a slack of 
2 days? Task A has a duration of 3 days and is a starting activity. Task B has a duration of 6 
days and has Task A as a predecessor. Task C has a duration of 5 days and has Tasks A and 
B as predecessors. Task D has a duration of 4 days and has Task B as a predecessor. Task 
E has a duration of 1 day and has Task C as a predecessor. Task F has a duration of 6 days 
and has  Task s D and E as predecessors. Task G has a duration of 4 days and has Tasks E 
and F as predecessors. 
 The correct answer is D. 
 Once you have compiled information in the question into a table that lists task ID, 
duration, and predecessors, you need to map out a network diagram. This will show that 
the critical path is A-B-C-E-F-G and that only Task D has slack of 2 days. This question 
may have taken you quite a while to work out; if you get a question such as this in the 
exam, you must remember that every question is worth one point. In the time taken to 
answer this question you could have answered several other questions. 
 Project Cost Management 
 Question 155:  You have finished putting together your project budget and notice that 
there is a point at which cost and staffing levels are highest. At which point in the project 
would this  gener ally be? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: There are costs associated with the start of the project part of 
the project life cycle but they are not as high as carrying out the 
project work, which has the greatest assignment of resources and 
activities. 
 B: There are costs associated with the organizing and preparing 
part of the project life cycle but they are not as high as carrying 
out the project work, which has the greatest assignment of 
resources and activities. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
173
 C: Generally speaking, cost and staffing levels are highest during 
the phase in the project life cycle where work is being carried out.  
 D: There are costs associated with the closure part of the project 
life cycle but they are not as high as carrying out the project work, 
which has the greatest assignment of resources and activities.  
 Question 156: You are completing the work of aggregating the estimated costs of 
individual activities or work packages to establish an  authori zed cost baseline. What 
PMBOK® Guide process are you completing? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: The cost performance baseline is an output, not a process. 
 B:  The Estimate Costs process does not aggregate individual 
cost estimates. 
 C: The Control Costs process monitors and controls change to 
the costs estimates and project budget and does not aggregate 
individual cost estimates. 
 D: This description matches the PMBOK ® Guide description of 
the Determine Budget process. 
 Question 157: You have completed the work required to develop your cost 
management plan and are introducing it to your team members  so   that they are aware 
of its purpose and limitations. The cost management plan can establish all of the 
following except? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A:  The cost management plan establishes several things relating 
to costs on the project, and the units of measure is one of them. 
 B:  The cost management plan establishes several things relating 
to costs on the project, and the level of accuracy is one of them. 
 C: Activity definition is performed during the project schedule 
management processes. 
 D: The cost management plan establishes several things relating 
to costs on the project, and the control thresholds is one of them. 
 Question 158: Costs that cannot be directly traced to a specific project  an d are 
accumulated and allocated equitably over multiple projects are known as what? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  This answer is correct because costs such as organization 
overheads that are spread over several projects are known as 
indirect costs. 
 B:  This answer is incorrect because costs that are directly 
attributable to a project are known as direct costs.  
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
174
 C:  This answer, allocatable costs, is not correct because it is not a 
term referenced within the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 D: This answer, non-projectized costs, is not correct because it is 
not a term referenced within the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 Question 159:  While completing the processes required to develop an approved 
project budget, you have started the work required to estimate costs on  y  our project. In 
order to do this successfully, you should have access to several important inputs. Which 
of the following is not an input you would find useful to complete this work? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Activity cost estimates is the output from the Estimate Costs 
process, which is what the question is referring to. 
 B: The question is asking about inputs into the Estimate Costs 
process in the PMBOK ® Guide. This process has several inputs, 
and the project schedule is one of them. 
 C: The question is asking about inputs into the Estimate Costs 
process in the PMBOK ® Guide. This process has several inputs, 
and the risk register is one of them. 
 D: The question is asking about inputs into the Estimate Costs 
process in the PMBOK ® Guide. This process has several inputs, 
and the scope baseline is one of them. 
 Question 160: Which of the following is not an Organizational Process Asset you 
would consider when estimating costs on your project? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: There are many Organizational Process Assets you could 
use when estimating costs, and any historical information your 
organization has would be one of them. 
 B:  There are many Organizational Process Assets you could use 
when estimating costs, and any cost estimating templates your 
organization has would be one of them. 
 C: Market considerations are an example of an enterprise 
environmental factor, not an Organizational Process Asset.  
 D: There are many Organizational Process Assets you could use 
when estimating costs, and any lessons learned database your 
organization has would be one of them. 
 Question 161: You are estimating the costs in your project and are using information 
from a previous, similar project as the basis for estimating  in  your current project. What 
technique are you using? 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
175
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  Parametric estimating is a process that multiplies known 
quantities by known financial rates. 
 B: Analogous estimating is used several times as a tool and 
technique in different estimating areas throughout the PMBOK ® 
Guide. 
 C: Three-point estimating uses the pessimistic, realistic, and 
optimistic estimates to get a weight average.  
 D:  Published estimating data is a database of data about costs 
and quantities. 
 Question 162: You and your team are currently breaking down all the project 
deliverables into the smallest useful unit so that you can then estimate costs for each of 
these units and then aggregate  the se estimates into a total project cost estimate. What is 
the name of the technique you are using to estimate costs? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: Parametric estimating is an estimating technique that uses 
a statistical relationship between historical data and other 
variables to calculate an estimate for activity parameters. 
 B:  Bottom-up estimating is a technique for estimating the cost of 
individual work packages with the lowest level of detail.  
 C: Low-level estimating may sound correct but it is not a term 
referenced within the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 D: Project management software may be useful for developing 
cost estimates but it is a tool, not a technique.    
 Question 163: While developing individual costs estimates for work packages 
on your project, you use a technique that requires you to  us  e a statistical relationship 
between historical data and other variables to calculate a cost estimate for a schedule 
activity resource. What is this estimating technique more commonly referred to as? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: This answer is incorrect because it is not a term referenced 
within the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 B: Bottom-up estimating is a technique for estimating the cost of 
individual work packages with the lowest level of detail.  
 C:  Parametric estimating is a technique that uses a statistical 
relationship between historical data and other variables to 
calculate a cost estimate for a schedule activity resource.  
 D:  Top-down estimating is a macro estimating technique that 
assigns costs to particular deliverables and work packages. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
176
 Question 164:  Your project sponsor has asked you to provide a cost estimate  qui ckly 
to give the project steering group an idea of what the costs for a particular work package 
will be. Which of the following estimating techniques would you choose to use? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Analogous estimating can be done faster than the other 
techniques. It is generally less costly than other estimating 
techniques but it is also generally less accurate. 
 B: Parametric estimating requires access to estimating databases 
and as such is generally more costly that analogous estimating. 
 C:  Resource rate estimating is not correct because it is a 
made-up term. 
 D:  Bottom-up estimating is not correct because the time and cost 
involved in decomposing the WBS means that it is more costly 
than analogous estimating. 
 Question 165:  While completing the cost estimating process for a  par ticular activity 
in your project, several members of your team disagree over the estimate to do the work. 
After a discussion with the team, you determine that the most likely cost of the activity 
will be $25, the optimistic cost of the activity will be $15, and the pessimistic cost will be 
$70. Using the three-point estimating technique what is the expected cost of the activity? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: $110 is not the correct answer. The three point-estimating 
technique, or PERT analysis, uses a weighted average method to 
arrive at what should be a more accurate estimate. In this case, 
the correct answer is (15+(4 x 25)+70) / 6 = $30.83. 
 B: $36.66. is not the correct answer. The three-point estimating 
technique, or PERT analysis, uses a weighted average method to 
arrive at what should be a more accurate estimate. In this case, 
the correct answer is (15+(4 x 25)+70) / 6 = $30.83. 
 C:  The three-point estimating technique, or PERT analysis, 
uses a weighted average method to arrive at what should 
be a more accurate estimate. In this case, the correct answer is 
(15+(4 x 25)+70) / 6 = $30.83.  
 D:  $25.83 is not the correct answer. The three-point estimating 
technique, or PERT analysis, uses a weighted average method to 
arrive at what should be a more accurate estimate. In this case, 
the correct answer is (15+(4 x 25)+70) / 6 = $30.83. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
177
 Question 166: While completing the cost estimating for a particular activity  in  your 
project, several members of your team disagree over the estimate to do the work. After a 
discussion with the team, you determine that the most likely cost of the activity will be 
$50, the optimistic cost of the activity will be $30, and the pessimistic cost will be $70. 
Using the three-point estimating technique, what is the expected cost of the activity? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A:  $150 is not the correct answer. The three-point estimating 
technique, or PERT analysis, uses a weighted average method to 
arrive at what should be a more accurate estimate. In this case, 
the correct answer is (30+(4 x 50)+70) / 6 = $50. 
 B:  $25 is not the correct answer. The three-point estimating 
technique, or PERT analysis, uses a weighted average method to 
arrive at what should be a more accurate estimate. In this case, 
the correct answer is (30+(4 x 50)+70) / 6 = $50. 
 C: $70 is not the correct answer. The three-point estimating 
technique, or PERT analysis, uses a weighted average method to 
arrive at what should be a more accurate estimate. In this case, 
the correct answer is (30+(4 x 50)+70) / 6 = 50. 
 D: The three-point estimating technique, or PERT analysis, 
uses a weighted average method to arrive at what should 
be a more accurate estimate. In this case, the correct answer is 
(30+(4 x 50)+70) / 6 = 50.  
 Question 167: During your cost estimating you include a figure for cost  uncertaint y 
on your project, and the project sponsor agrees to give you delegated authority to manage 
this reserve. What is this figure generally known as? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: Reserve analysis is the process of deciding what sort of reserve 
you need and once agreed on, reexamining it to make sure it is 
still appropriate. 
 B:  When you are preparing estimates, generally there are 
still a few unknowns in the project and it is wise to include a 
contingency reserve as part of your project budget. This can 
be reduced or given up as the project progresses and more 
information is known. 
 C: Management reserve is a fund held by management for 
unforeseen risks that emerge on projects. It is not generally 
calculated for individual projects. 
 D: Slush fund is an informal name sometimes given to 
management reserves. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
178
 Question 168:  You are using the three-point estimating method of scheduling  for   a 
project. The variance for the project is found to be 16 days and the duration of the project 
is found to be 90 days. What is the range of values for the project duration such that there 
will be at least a 95% probability that the actual project completion will fall between the 
high and low value of the range of values? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: 58-122 days is not the correct answer because the question is 
asking you to calculate 2 standard deviations on either side of 
the mean of 90, where the standard deviation is 4, which is the 
square root of the variance. 
 B: 74-106 days is not the correct answer because the question is 
asking you to calculate 2 standard deviations on either side of 
the mean of 90, where the standard deviation is 4, which is the 
square root of the variance. 
 C:  The question is asking for two standard deviations on either 
side of the mean of 90. So to get the answer you first get the 
square root of 16, which is 4. You multiply this by 2 to get 8, and 
then add 8, and then subtract 8 from the mean of 90.  
 D:  86-94 is not the correct answer because the question is asking 
you to calculate 2 standard deviations on either side of the mean 
of 90, where the standard deviation is 4, which is the square root 
of the variance. 
 Question 169:  You are aggregating the cost estimates of  individual activities  and 
work packages to establish an authorized cost baseline. Which PMBOK ®  Guide process 
are you engaged in? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: Budget preparation is not a PMBOK ® Guide process. 
 B:  Once you have done all your costs estimating, you can add 
them all together to get a cost baseline; this is known as the 
Determine Budget process. Although represented as sequential 
processes, they may be done concurrently. 
 C: The Estimate Costs process develops individual cost estimates, 
which are then aggregating over time in the Determine Budget 
process to establish an authorized cost baseline.  
 D: The cost performance baseline is not a PMBOK ® Guide process.  
 Question 170:  You have spent time with your team developing individual cost 
estimates and are now using the project schedule to  determine   your project budget. 
Which of the following inputs would you not find helpful to complete this work? 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
179
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  The cost baseline is an output, not an input of the Determine 
Budget process in the PMBOK ® Guide, so this is the correct 
answer. 
 B:  The basis of estimates is an input into the Determine Budget 
process in the PMBOK ® Guide, which is helpful. 
 C:  Activity cost estimates are an input into the Determine Budget 
process in the PMBOK ® Guide, which is helpful. 
 D: The scope baseline is an input into the Determine Budget 
process in the PMBOK ® Guide, which is helpful. 
 Question 171: What is the authorized time-phased budget at completion used to 
measure, monitor, and control overall cost performance on the  projec t more commonly 
known as? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: The approved project budget may sound like a correct term 
but it is not one that is in the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 B: The cost baseline is the aggregation of your Estimate Cost and 
Determine Budget processes. 
 C:  Activity cost estimates are an input into the Determine Budget 
process and they become the cost baseline once amalgamated 
with elements of the schedule. 
 D:  Total funding requirements may sound like a correct term but 
it is not one that is in the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 Question 172: You are monitoring the status of the project to update the project 
budget  and manage changes to the cost baseline. Which PMBOK ®  Guide process best 
describes the work are you carrying out? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: Determine Budget develops the project cost baseline, which is 
then monitored during the Control Costs process.  
 B:  The process of controlling costs is one of the more technical 
processes to understand for the PMP ® exam because it includes 
the earned value tools and techniques. 
 C: Earned value management is not a process but a tool that can 
be used during the Control Costs process. 
 D: Cost aggregation is when you add all your individual cost 
estimates together. It is not a Monitoring and Controlling process.  
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
180
 Question 173:  While using a technique that gathers a number of key metrics to 
assess,  tra ck, and forecast variances in both project cost and time, you discover that the 
tool is being used without all of the required inputs. Which of the following inputs would 
you not require to use this particular technique? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Work performance information is an input to the Control Cost 
process. The other three are key dimensions of the Earned Value 
Management tool. 
 B: Earned value is the value of the work actually performed and 
is a key element in earned value management.  
 C: Planned value is the planned value of work performed and is a 
key element in earned value management. 
 D: Actual cost is the cost to do the work performed and is a key 
element in earned value management. 
 Question 174:  After measuring your project performance you note that your 
 schedu le variance is $75,000. What would your BEST course of action be? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: You don’t need to fast track the schedule because a positive 
schedule variance means you are ahead of time. 
 B: You don’t need to crash the schedule because a positive 
schedule variance means you are ahead of time. 
 C: A positive schedule variance means you are achieving ahead of 
your baseline, so feel free to congratulate your team. Remember 
that you must always be delivering to the agreed documentation, 
including the relevant baseline documents. As such, you will 
need to take the information that informed you of your positive 
schedule variance and, after properly considering it through your 
Change Control process, update your baseline documents.  
 D:  You are doing well but you must process the variance through 
your agreed Change Control process. 
 Question 175:  The earned value on your project is $15,000, the planned value is 
$20,000 and the actual cost is $18,000. What is your  schedul e variance? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A-C:  These answers are not correct. If you arrived at one of 
these values, remember that schedule variance = earned value - 
planned value, so SV = 15,000 - 20,000 = -5,000. 
 D: Schedule variance = earned value - planned value, so SV = 
15,000 - 20,000 = -5,000.  
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
181
 Question 176: The earned value on your project is $18,000, the planned value is 
$20,000, and the actual cost is $15,000. What is  your cost variance? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  Cost variance = earned value - actual costs, so 
CV = 18,000 - 15,000 = 3,000. 
 B-D: These answers are not correct. If you arrived at one of these 
answers, remember that cost variance = earned value - actual 
costs (AC), so CV = 18,000 - 15,000  =  3,000. 
 Question 177: The earned value on your project is $26,000, the planned value is 
$20,000, and the actual cost is $18,000. What is your  schedu le variance? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  Schedule variance = earned value - planned value, so 
SV = 26,000 - 20,000 = 6,000. 
 B-D: These answers are not correct. If you arrived at one of these 
answers, remember that schedule variance = earned value - 
planned value, so SV = 26,000 - 20,000 = 6,000. 
 Question 178: The earned value on your project is $52,000, the planned value is 
$ 51,000 and the actual cost is $49,000. What is your cost variance? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  Cost variance = earned value - actual costs, so CV = 52,000 - 
49,000 = 3,000.  
 B-D: These answers are not correct. If you arrived at one of these 
answers, remember that cost variance = earned value - actual 
costs, so CV = 52,000 - 49,000 = 3,000. 
 Question 179: A new junior project manager seems to be having some difficulty 
understanding key terms used in the reports being prepared for the project. He is 
particularly confused by  the  earned value management system and the approved project 
budget. You explain to him that there are easy ways to understand what each element 
means and demonstrate this by point out that the total planned value of the project is 
better known as what? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A:  The approved project budget is more correctly called the cost 
baseline. 
 B: The cost baseline represents the approved budget for the project.  
 C: Actual cost is the cost to do the work performed and is a key 
element in earned value management. 
 D: Budget at completion (BAC) is the total planned value for 
the project. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
182
 Question 180:  W hat is the term for the measurement of the authorized work that has 
been completed and the authorized budget for such completed work? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: The cost baseline represents the approved budget for the project.  
 B: Earned value measures what work you have actually 
completed and compares this to the actual costs of completing 
the work. When compared to the planned value of the project at 
a given point in time, you can see if the project is on track or not.  
 C: Actual cost is the cost to do the work performed and is a key 
element in earned value management. 
 D: Budget at completion is the total planned value for the project.    
 Question 181: You are a project manager on a large software project using  the 
 earned value reporting system to manage your project. At this point in time the EV is 
$24,000, the BAC is $97,000, the PV is $29,000, and the AC is $45,000. What is the percent 
complete? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: 30% is incorrect. The percent complete is the work completed, 
or the earned value, divided by the total work to be done. EV / 
BAC = 24 / 97 = 25%. 
 B: The percent complete is the work completed, or the earned value, 
divided by the total work to be done. EV / BAC = 24 / 97 = 25%.  
 C:  46% is incorrect. The percent complete is the work completed, 
or the earned value, divided by the total work to be done. EV / 
BAC = 24 / 97 = 25%. 
 D:  53% is incorrect. The percent complete is the work 
completed, or the earned value, divided by the total work to be 
done. EV / BAC = 24 / 97 = 25%. 
 Question 182:  You are working on a large project and have determined that your CV 
is $50,000 and that your EV is $125,000. What is  yo ur AC? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: The formula for cost variance is CV = EV - AC. Therefore, if CV 
= $50,000 and EV = $125,000, then AC must equal $75,000. 
 B-D:  These answers are not correct. If you arrived at one of these 
anwers, remember that the formula for cost variance is CV = EV 
- AC. Therefore, if CV = $50,000 and EV = $125,000, then AC must 
equal $75,000. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
183
 Question 183: The earned value on your project is $20,000, the actual cost is $18,000, 
and the planned value is $25,000. What is your schedule performance index (SPI)? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A, B, and D: These answers are not correct. If you arrived at one of 
them, remember that the SPI = EV / PV, so SPI = 20000 / 25000 = 0.8.  
 C: Schedule performance index (SPI) = EV / PV, so SPI = 20000 / 
25000 = 0.8.  
 Question 184: The earned value on your project is $25,000, the actual cost is $20,000, 
and the planned value is $20,000. What is your SPI? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A, C, and D: These answers are not correct. If you arrived at one of 
them, remember that the SPI = EV / PV, so SPI = 25,000 / 20,000 = 1.25.  
 B: SP) = EV / PV, so SPI = 25,000 / 20,000 = 1.25. 
 Question 185: The planned value on your project is $120,000, the earned  v  alue is 
$100,000, the actual cost is $90,000, and your cost variance is $10,000. What is your cost 
performance index (CPI)? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A-C: These answers are not correct. If you arrived at one of them, 
remember that the CPI = EV / AC, so CPI = 100,000 / 90,000 = 1.11.  
 D: CPI = EV / AC, so CPI = 100,000 / 90,000 = 1.11. 
 Question 186: The planned value on your project is $9,000, the earned value is 
$9,000, the actual cost is $8,000, and your cost variance is $1,000. What is your cost 
performance index? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A, C, and D: These answers are not correct. If you arrived at one of 
them, remember that the CPI = EV / AC, so CPI = 9,000 / 8,000 = 1.125.  
 B: CPI = EV / AC, so CPI = 9,000 / 8,000 = 1.125. 
 Question 187: You are working on a large project and have determined that  your 
cost variance is $50,000 and that your earned value is $125,000. What is your cost 
performance index? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A-C: These answers are not correct. If you arrived at one of them, 
remember that the formula for cost variance is CV = EV - AC. 
Therefore, if CV = $50,000 and EV = $125,000, then AC must 
equal $75,000. The formula for CPI is CPI = EV / AC. Therefore, 
CPI = $125,000 / $75,000 or 1.66. 
 D: The formula for cost variance is CV = EV - AC. Therefore, if 
CV = $50,000 and EV = $125,000, then AC must equal $75,000. 
The formula for CPI is CPI = EV / AC. Therefore, CPI = $125,000 / 
$75,000 or 1.66.  
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
184
 Question 188: Your project control measurements show a CPI of 0.89. What does  thi s 
show about your project? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: A CPI of 0.89 means that for every dollar you are spending you 
are getting 89 cents of value. 
 B: A CPI below 1 tells you that you are experiencing a cost overrun 
on the project. This is true for the SPI measurement as well.  
 C: A CPI below 1 tells you that you are experiencing a cost overrun 
on the project. This is true for the SPI measurement as well.  
 D:  The CPI tells you about cost performance only and can’t tell 
you anything about schedule performance. 
 Question 189:  Your project has a CPI of 1.1 and a SPI of .9. What does this mean? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: This answer is incorrect because while a CPI above 1 does mean 
a cost underrun, an SPI below 1 means you are not achieving all the 
work you had planned within the timeframe you are measuring.  
 B: This answer is incorrect because a CPI above 1 means a cost 
underrun, not and overrun. An SPI below 1 means you are not 
achieving all the work you had planned within the timeframe 
you are measuring and are behind schedule. 
 C:  A CPI above 1 means a cost underrun, while an SPI below 
1 means you are not achieving all the work you had planned 
within the timeframe you are measuring. 
 D:  This answer is incorrect because while a CPI above 1 means 
a cost underrun, an SPI below 1 means you are not achieving 
all the work you had planned within the timeframe you are 
measuring and are behind, not ahead of, schedule. 
 Question 190:  You are forecasting your estimate to complete your project and are 
 i ncurring extra costs to do this work. What sort of estimating technique are you using? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: Earned value management is a valuable technique for 
assessing any cost and schedule variance. 
 B: Bottom-up estimating is a technique for estimating the cost of 
individual work packages with the lowest level of detail, and as 
such it incurs extra cost because of the effort involved.  
 C:  The estimate to complete (ETC) forecast does not require as 
much effort or incur as many costs as the bottom-up estimating 
technique. 
 D:  The To Complete Performance Index (TCPI) measures the 
rate at which you must work to achieve either the EAC or BAC. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
185
 Question 191: Your actual costs on your project are $75,000, the budget at 
completion is $100,000 and the earned value is $85,000. Your project has experienced 
some atypical variances to date  which have affected its financial performance but from 
this point forward you expect it to perform at the originally budgeted rate. What is your 
estimate at completion? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  In this instance, with the information provided, you are being 
lead to use EAC = AC+BAC - EV to calculate EAC. So, EAC = 
75,000+100,000 - 85,000 = 90,000.  
 B-D: These answers are incorrect. In this instance, with the 
information provided, you are being lead to use EAC = AC+BAC - 
EV to calculate EAC. So, EAC = 75,000+100,000 - 85,000 = 90,000.    
 Question 192: Your budget at completion is $50,000, your earned value is $40,000, 
and your actual cost is $45,000. Using an estimate at completion forecast for ETC work 
performed at the present CPI,  wha t is your estimate at completion? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A, B, and D: These answers are not correct. This question 
requires you to first work out the CPI, which is EV / AC = 40,000 / 
45,000 = 0.88. Then use this number in the equation EAC = BAC / 
cumulative CPI = 50,000 / .88 = 56,818. 
 C: This question requires you to first work out the CPI, which 
is EV / AC = 40,000 / 45,000 = 0.88. Then use this number in the 
equation EAC = BAC / cumulative CPI = 50,000 / .88 = 56,818.    
 Question 193: The calculated projection of cost performance that must be achieved 
on the remaining work to meet a specified management goal  su ch as the BAC or the EAC 
is known as what? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: Earned value is the value of work performed. 
 B:  The estimate to complete is the estimate of the amount of 
funds required to complete the project and is the difference 
between your EAC and AC. 
 C: The cost baseline is the approved project budget.  
 D: The To Complete Performance Index (TCPI) is a useful tool for 
assessing the actual financial performance of the project baseline 
against actual performance and the amount of cost-based work 
required to finish the project.    
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
186
 Question 194:  Your actual cost on the project is $10,000, the budget at  comple tion is 
$20,000, the earned value is $8,000, the cumulative CPI is 0.8, and the cumulative SPI is 
0.9. Using both your CPI and SPI factors, what is your estimate at completion forecast? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A-C: These answers are incorrect. If you arrived at one of 
them, remember that the EAC using both SPI and CPI factors 
= AC + [(BAC - EV) / (cumulative CPI x cumulative SPI)] = 
10,000+[(20,000 - 8,000) / (0.8 x 0.9)] = 10,000+[(12,000 / .72)] = 
26,666.  
 D:  EAC using both SPI and CPI factors = AC + [(BAC - EV) / 
(cumulative CPI x cumulative SPI)] = 10,000+[(20,000 - 8,000)/
(0.8 x 0.9)] = 10,000+[(12,000 / .72)] = 26,666.  
 Question 195:  You are approximately half way through a complex construction 
project and are presenting the data from earned value management analysis of the 
project to your team. You have a BAC of $500,000, an EV of $2,800,000, an AC of $260,000, 
and a PV  o  f $250,000. The team members are happy with these figures and want to know 
the rate at which they have to work to achieve the revised estimate at completion. What is 
your answer? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: 1.0 is incorrect and I suspect you guessed the answer. The 
question is asking for your TCPI to achieve your EAC. The 
formula for this is TCPI = (BAC - EV) / (EAC - AC). So first you 
must calculate EAC with the figures provided, and the easiest 
way to do this is to first calculate CPI, which is EV / AC. Then 
use these figures in the formula to get TCPI = (500000 - 280000) / 
(462963 - 260000) = 1.08. You may get a slightly different answer 
depending on how you rounded up the numbers but it should be 
very close to 1.08. 
 B: If you got this answer, you probably used the wrong formula to 
calculate TCPI. You may have used TCPI = (BAC - EV) / (BAC - AC), 
which is the formula for calculating TCPI for the BAC. This question 
is asking you to calculate TCPI for the EAC so try again and start by 
using the numbers given to calculate EAC = BAC / CPI.  
 C:  This is quite a lengthy calculation so well done for getting it 
right. The question is asking for your TCPI to achieve your EAC. 
The formula for this is TCPI = (BAC - EV) / (EAC - AC). So first 
you must calculate EAC with the figures provided and the easiest 
way to do this is to first calculate CPI, which is EV / AC. Then 
use these figures in the formula to get TCPI = (500000 - 280000) / 
(462963 - 260000) = 1.08. You may get a slightly different answer 
depending on how you rounded up the numbers but it should be 
very close to 1.08. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
187
 D: 0.5 is incorrect and I suspect you guessed the answer. The 
question is asking for your TCPI to achieve your EAC. The 
formula for this is TCPI = (BAC - EV) / (EAC - AC). So first you 
must calculate EAC with the figures provided, and the easiest 
way to do this is to first calculate CPI, which is EV / AC. Then 
use these figures in the formula to get TCPI = (500000 - 280000) / 
(462963 - 260000) = 1.08. You may get a slightly different answer 
depending on how you rounded up the numbers but it should be 
very close to 1.08. 
 Question 196: As part of the work to check if you are achieving your expected and 
approved spend on the project, you are completing a  pro  cess of controlling project costs. 
Which of the following is not an output from this process? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  Work performance information is an output from the Control 
Costs process in the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 B: Variance analysis is a tool that examines the difference 
between where you thought you should be in the project and 
where you actually are. It is used as a tool and technique in 
several of the Monitoring and Controlling processes.  
 C: Cost forecasts are an output from the Control Costs process in 
the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 D:  Change requests are an output from the Control Costs process 
in the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 Question 197: You are managing a project and the original scope baseline of the 
project was budgeted at $100,000. Since work on the project started there have been 13 
authorized and approved changes to  t he project. The changes have a value of $12,000 
and the cost of investigating them prior to their approval was $1,500. What is the current 
budget for the project? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: The current budget of the project contains all of the authorized 
funding for the project including additions to the project since 
the setting of the original baselines. This includes any and all 
authorized work done on the project, including the investigation 
of work that may be done to investigate the feasibility of changes.  
 B-D:  These answers are incorrect because the current budget of 
the project contains all of the authorized funding for the project 
including additions to the project since the setting of the original 
baselines. This includes any and all authorized work done on 
the project, including work that may be done to investigate the 
feasibility of changes, so in order to arrive at the correct answer 
you simply add all of the numbers up. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
188
 Question 198:  The project you are managing is going well and you are using the 
earned value management system to assess historical  informati on and forecast a likely 
future financial state of the project. You have a budget at completion of $120,000, earned 
value of $50,000, planned value of $55,000, and an actual cost of $45,000. What is your To 
Complete Performance Index to achieve the budget at completion? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A, B, and D: These answers are incorrect. If you arrived at one of 
them, remember that in order to calculate the TCPI you need to 
use the formula (BAC - EV) / (BAC - AC), which gives an answer 
of 0.93.  
 C:  In order to calculate the TCPI you need to use the formula 
(BAC - EV) / (BAC - AC), which gives an answer of 0.93. 
 Question 199:  You are nearing the end of a residential remodeling project and are 
presenting the data from earned value management  analys is of the project to your team. 
You have a BAC of $300,000, an EV of $2,500,000, an AC of $260,000, and a PV of $250,000. 
The team members are happy with these figures and want to know the rate at which they 
have to work to achieve the budget at completion. What is your answer? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: The question is asking you to calculate TCPI for the BAC. The 
formula for this is TCPI = (BAC - EV) / (BAC - AC). This gives 
you (300000 - 250000) / (300000 - 260000), which equals 50000 / 
40000, which equals a TCPI of 1.25. 
 B: If you got this answer you probably used the wrong formula to 
calculate TCPI. You probably used the formula to calculate TCPI 
for EAC when the question is asking you to calculate TCPI for the 
BAC, and the formula for this is TCPI = (BAC - EV) / (BAC - AC). 
 C:  1.1 is incorrect. If you thought this was the answer, you 
probably guessed rather than tried to work it out. The questions 
is asking you to calculate TCPI for the BAC, and the formula for 
this is TCPI = (BAC - EV) / (BAC - AC), which is 1.25. 
 D:  0.85 is incorrect. If you thought this was the answer, you 
probably guessed rather than tried to work it out. The questions 
is asking you to calculate TCPI for the BAC, and the formula for 
this is TCPI = (BAC - EV) / (BAC - AC), which is 1.25. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
189
 Project Quality Management 
 Question 200:  Customer satisfaction means that customer requirements are met. 
Meeting customer requirements requires a combination  o f what two factors? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A:  This answer is incorrect because both continuous 
improvement, or Kaizen, and prevention over inspection are a 
fundamental concepts underlying quality management but they 
do not directly link to customer satisfaction.  
 B: This answer is incorrect because prevention over inspection 
is a fundamental concept underlying quality management but it 
does not directly link to customer satisfaction.  
 C: This answer is incorrect because continuous improvement, 
or Kaizen, is a fundamental concept underlying quality 
management but it does not directly link to customer satisfaction.  
 D: The product’s conformance to the customer’s requirements 
and the fitness of use of the product are both factors in achieving 
customer satisfaction and defining quality of product. 
 Question 201:  You are successful using the FMEA approach to assess implications 
of quality decisions on your project. Your client asks you what FMEA stands for. What is 
your answer? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A-C: These answers are all made-up terms. The correct answer is 
failure mode and effects analysis. 
 D: Failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) is one of several 
non-proprietary approaches to quality management.    
 Question 202: Modern quality management complements project management 
very  hig hly, with both disciplines recognizing the importance of all the following 
characteristics except? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A:  Customer satisfaction is one of four characteristics shared by 
quality management and project management. 
 B:  Prevention over inspection is one of four characteristics 
shared by quality management and project management. 
 C: Continuous inspection is one of four characteristics shared by 
quality management and project management. 
 D: Total quality management is an approach to quality. The 
other three answers are all characteristics shared by quality 
management and project management. The fourth characteristic 
is management responsibility. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
190
 Question 203:   Quality  is planned, designed, and built into your project instead of 
being inspected in. What is the main reason that prevention of mistakes in quality is 
preferred over finding the mistakes via inspection? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: This answer is incorrect; you should not try to avoid 
inspection because it is a necessary part of quality management. 
 B: This answer is incorrect; carrying out preventive work does 
not mean you will be able to avoid inspection. 
 C:  Building in the quality systems to minimize the amount of 
defects found via inspection is generally cheaper in the long run 
than having to perform rework to fix defects found by inspection. 
 D:  This answer is incorrect; your quality management plan 
focuses on more than just prevention. 
 Question 204: How would you best describe to your client the difference  be tween 
precision and accuracy? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: This answer is incorrect. Precision means the values of the 
repeated measurements are clustered and have little scatter. 
Accuracy means that the measured value is very close to the 
true value. 
 B: This answer is correct, and you need to know that there is a 
difference between precision and accuracy. For the exam, you 
need to know how and when to use the two terms. 
 C:  This answer is incorrect. Precision means the values of the 
repeated measurements are clustered and have little scatter. 
Accuracy means that the measured value is very close to the 
true value. 
 D:  This answer is incorrect. Precision means the values of the 
repeated measurements are clustered and have little scatter. 
Accuracy means that the measured value is very close to the 
true value. 
 Question 205: A member of your project team seems confused about the differences 
between quality approaches to the project and product. How  would  you best explain 
these differences? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Quality of the project relates to the degree to which the 
project is run according to the agreed project management plan. 
Quality of the product relates to the ability of the product to meet 
customer requirements. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
191
 B:  This answer is incorrect because there is a distinct difference 
between the two concepts. Quality of the project relates to the 
degree to which the project is run according to the agreed project 
management plan. Quality of the product relates to the ability of 
the product to meet customer requirements. 
 C: This answer is incorrect because quality of the project relates 
to the degree to which the project is run according to the agreed 
project management plan. Quality of the product relates to the 
ability of the product to meet customer requirements.  
 D: Quality of the project relates to the degree to which the 
project is run according to the agreed project management plan. 
Quality of the product relates to the ability of the product to meet 
customer requirements. 
 Question 206: Your project is behind schedule and you have asked your project  te am 
to work longer hours to make up the time so that the customer’s needs are met as planned. 
As project manager, you should monitor your quality management plan for what reason? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  Quality on a project can be adversely affected in a number of ways. 
Overworking staff can cause human errors to creep into the process 
and should be recognized within the quality management plan.  
 B:  This answer is incorrect because the fact that customer 
requirements and specifications can change rapidly during 
periods of rework is not directly connected to the issue at hand: 
asking staff to work longer hours. 
 C: This answer is incorrect because the primary issue here is the 
potential errors caused by tired staff, and the issue is about not 
achieving customer needs. 
 D: This answer is incorrect because the primary and most pressing 
issue is the potential adverse impact on quality by tired staff. A 
subsequent issue may be overtime cost but it is not a quality issue.    
 Question 207: Your project team has completed a check of the project and the 
product you are managing. They discover that although you are meeting the quality 
requirements, the product is of a low  gr ade. What should you do FIRST? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  Quality and grade are different. You can manufacture a high- 
or low-grade product depending on what the customer specified, 
so finding a low-grade product is probably exactly in line with 
the customer specifications. 
 B-D: Did you read this question properly? There isn’t any problem 
with the scenario so there is no need to act. Quality and grade are 
different. You can manufacture a high- or low-grade product 
depending on what the customer specified, so finding a low-grade 
product is probably exactly in line with the customer specifications.  
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
192
 Question 208: What is  t he method of modern quality management that relies on 
continuing small improvements involving everyone from the top management to the 
lowest-level worker in the organization more most commonly known as? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: Kampai is not correct. It is a Japanese term used when making 
a toast usually when drinking alcohol. 
 B: Kanban is not correct. It is a Japanese term for visual card-
based system for inventory or work control. 
 C:  Kawasaki is not the correct term. Kawasaki is a Japanese 
manufacturer of motorized vehicles. 
 D:  Kaizen means improvement in Japanese. It means continuing 
improvement involving everyone, including managers and 
workers alike, from the top to the bottom of the organization. 
 Question 209:  The PMBOK ® Guide process groups of initiating, planning, executing, 
monitoring, and controlling a project are based on the work of Shewhart and Deming. 
What is their quality improvement model  know n as? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Six Sigma is a proprietary quality management tool focused 
on eliminating errors. 
 B: The Organizational Project Management Maturity Model 
(OPM3) is a tool for measuring the level of project management 
maturity within an organization. 
 C:  There are several important proprietary and non-proprietary 
quality management models that you should be aware of. The 
work by Shewhart and Deming produced the plan-do-check-act 
cycle for quality management. 
 D: Total quality management is a quality system that holds 
all parties involved in quality management accountable for 
ensuring quality. 
 Question 210: You are explaining to your project sponsor that the decision made to 
lower the quality of deliverables on the project  to save money will have long-lasting cost 
impacts beyond the project. The project sponsor does not seem convinced so you refer 
to the concept of cost of quality to make your point. How would you best describe cost of 
quality to your sponsor? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Cost of quality is not the total cost of the quality effort 
throughout just the project life cycle. The cost of quality refers to 
the whole of the product life cycle, which includes not only the 
cost of quality during manufacture but also the cost of product 
returns, warranty claims, and recall campaigns over the life of 
the product. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
193
 B: Cost of quality is not related to the amount of money required 
to complete your project quality management plan. The cost 
of quality refers to the whole of the product life cycle, which 
includes not only the cost of quality during manufacture but 
also the cost of product returns, warranty claims, and recall 
campaigns over the life of the product. 
 C: The cost of quality refers to the whole of the product life cycle, 
which includes not only the cost of quality during manufacture 
but also the cost of product returns, warranty claims, and recall 
campaigns over the life of the product. 
 D: Cost of quality is not best described as the total cost of 
implementing a prevention and inspection regime. The cost 
of quality refers to the whole of the product life cycle, which 
includes not only the cost of quality during manufacture but 
also the cost of product returns, warranty claims, and recall 
campaigns over the life of the product. 
 Question 211: The PMBOK ® Guide process that is focused on identifying quality 
 requirements  and standards for the project and product is known as what? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Control Quality is the process of monitoring and recording 
results of executing quality activities. 
 B: The cost of quality refers to the whole of the product life cycle, 
which includes not only the cost of quality during manufacture 
but also the cost of product returns, warranty claims, and recall 
campaigns over the life of the product. 
 C:  Plan Quality Management is the process of identifying quality 
requirements and standards for both the project and product. 
 D:  Perform Quality Assurance is the process of auditing quality 
requirements and processes. 
 Question 212: You are completing the work to identify and document quality 
requirements and standards for your project. Which of the following would you not use as 
an input into this process? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: The requirements documentation is one of the inputs into the 
Plan Quality Management process in the PMBOK ® Guide, so you 
would use it. 
 B: The stakeholder register is one of the inputs into the Plan 
Quality Management process in the PMBOK ® Guide, so you 
would use it. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
194
 C:  The risk register is one of the inputs into the Plan Quality 
Management process in the PMBOK ® Guide, so you would use it. 
 D: Quality checklists are an output, not an input, from the Plan 
Quality Management process in the PMBOK ® Guide, so you 
could not use them, making this the correct answer.    
 Question 213: When considering the cost of quality on your project you  sh  ould 
consider all of the following characteristics except? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Destructive testing loss is a specific cost of conformance, not a 
general characteristic of cost of quality. 
 B:  Cost of quality does include investment in preventing non-
conformance to requirements. 
 C: Cost of quality does include appraising the product or service 
for conformance to requirements. 
 D:  Cost of quality does include consideration of the impact of 
failing to meet requirements. 
 Question 214: Which of the following is not an example of a cost  o f conformance? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: Equipment is part of appraisal costs of conformance to assess 
the quality. 
 B:  Equipment is part of prevention costs of conformance to build 
a quality product. 
 C: Training is part of prevention costs of conformance to build a 
quality product. 
 D:  Rework is a cost of non-conformance in that it is incurred 
when you do not conform with the quality plan. 
 Question 215: You and your team are checking data that has been gathered and 
 pre sented in a control chart to determine whether the product you are producing is 
meeting the required quality objectives. What is your main objective in completing this 
work and representing it in this way? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: This answer is incorrect because it is refering to cost benefit 
analysis, not a control chart. 
 B:  This answer is incorrect becaue it is refering to quality 
assurance activities, not a control chart. 
 C: This answer is incorrect becaue it is refering to quality control 
activities, not a control chart. 
 D:  A control chart measures and tracks quality data and assesses 
it within predetermined upper and lower control limits. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
195
 Question 216: Control limits for the production rates for the machines your  p  roject 
is building are set at 3 and 9, with a mean value of 6 units per hour. The results this week 
are as follows: 4, 7, 10, 5, and 6. What should you do first? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  The third result is outside the control limits and should be 
investigated. 
 B:  You should not just continue working because the third result 
is outside the control limits and should be investigated. 
 C: The question does not give you the tenth result. 
 D: The first result is within the control limits so it does not need 
investigating. 
 Question 217: You have received the results of statistical sampling performed on the 
product of your project. The control chart shows nine data  point  s in a row just under the 
mean. What should you do first? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  You should not simply change the control limits. This scenario 
indicates the rule of seven; it requires investigation and for you to 
find the cause. 
 B: This is an example of the rule of seven where there are seven or 
more consecutive points either above or below the mean, which 
indicates the process is moving out of acceptable limits, so the 
team needs to investigate and determine the assignable cause.  
 C: This answer is not correct because the data is indicating that 
there is a potential problem, and doing nothing is not an option.  
 D: Firing the quality assurance team will not solve the problem. 
This scenario indicates the rule of seven, and requires 
investigation and for you to find the cause. 
 Question 218: Upper and lower control limits on a control chart are generally  set at 
how many standard deviations above and below the acceptable mean? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A, B, and D: These answers are not correct. Control limits are 
generally set at three standard deviations above and below the 
acceptable mean of data. 
 C: Control limits are generally set at three standard deviations 
above and below the acceptable mean of data. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
196
 Question 219:  Your project data, as shown on the control chart, indicates the latest 
seven consecutive points are above the mean but within the  up per control limit. What is 
your BEST course of action? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: This is a good option but not the best option. You should first 
refer to your quality management plan, which may direct you 
to stop work immediately and investigate the root cause of the 
problem. 
 B: This is an example of the rule of seven where there are seven or 
more consecutive points either above or below the mean, which 
indicates the process is moving out of acceptable limits so the 
team needs to investigate and determine the assignable cause.  
 C:  Data outside the upper or lower control limits, or seven 
consecutive points above or below the mean, indicates the 
process is out of control and requires corrective action.  
 D:  You should not simply change the control limits. This scenario 
indicates the rule of seven, and requires investigation and for you 
to find the cause.    
 Question 220:  Your project is generating useful data for your control chart.  Th e latest 
data indicates that the process of manufacturing the product has produced units below 
the lower control limit but above the lower specification limit. What is your BEST course 
of action? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Data that is beneath the lower control limit but above the 
lower specification limit indicates that the product is still within 
the customer specification but may be in need of corrective 
action to ensure it stays there. 
 B: You should not do nothing because data that is beneath 
the lower control limit but above the lower specification limit 
indicates that the product is still within the customer specification 
but may be in need of corrective action to ensure it stays there.  
 C:  This is a good option but not the best option. You should 
first refer to your quality management plan, which may direct 
you to stop work immediately and investigate the root cause of 
the problem. Data that is beneath the lower control limit but 
above the lower specification limit indicates that the product 
is still within the customer specification but may be in need of 
corrective action to ensure it stays there. 
 D:  You should not simply change the control limits. Data that is 
beneath the lower control limit but above the lower specification 
limit indicates that the product is still within the customer 
specification but may be in need of corrective action to ensure it 
stays there. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
197
 Question 221: While working on the project to assess and measure quality, you 
are determining the number and type of tests and their  impa ct on cost of quality. What 
technique are you using? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  Design of experiments is a statistical method for identifying 
which factors may influence specific variables or a product or a 
process under development. 
 B:  Analogous estimating is used for estimating time or cost. 
 C: Benchmarking is the technique of comparing your quality 
activities to another project or organization. 
 D: Cost of quality considers the cost of quality decision you make 
over the life of the product. 
 Question 222: You are comparing actual or planned project practices to those  of 
 comparable projects to identify best practices and generate ideas for improvement for 
your project. What quality technique are you using? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A:  Cost of quality considers the cost of quality decision you make 
over the life of the product. 
 B:  Analogous estimating is used for estimating time or cost. 
 C: Design of experiments is a statistical method for identifying 
which factors may influence specific variables or a product or a 
process under development. 
 D: Benchmarking is a process of comparing your projects to 
others in relation to quality management. 
 Question 223: A quality technique that chooses only a part of a population of 
interest for studying, and is often used to reduce cost, is  call ed what? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Inspection is physically inspecting a product for defects. 
 B:  Flowcharting is a technique for graphically mapping a 
quality process. 
 C: It is less expensive to examine only a part of the population. 
 D: This answer is incorrect because it is not a term referenced 
within the PMBOK ® Guide. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
198
 Question 224: Your project team is working on a software project with over two 
million lines of code and has just randomly  selected  a number of lines of code for 
inspection. What quality technique are they using? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Benchmarking is the technique of comparing your quality 
activities to another project or organization. 
 B: Design of experiments is a statistical method for identifying 
which factors may influence specific variables or a product or a 
process under development. 
 C:  When you have a large amount of data to check, it can be too 
time consuming and cost too much to examine every product. In 
this case, taking a relevant sample and extrapolating the quality 
of this sample to the whole data range is much more efficient. 
 D:  This answer is incorrect because it is a made-up quality term.    
 Question 225:  During a project to deliver a complex set of requirements for a wide 
range of stakeholders, you and your team have placed a great deal of importance on the 
quality of the project. You have decided to use a wide variety of tools and techniques  to 
 help you achieve the desired quality standards. Which of the following is not an example 
of a quality planning tool that you would find useful in this endeavor? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: An affinity diagram is a quality management tool and provides 
a graphical method of structuring and displaying a large number 
of discrete pieces of information. 
 B: A force field diagram is a quality planning tool that is used to 
weigh the points for and against a potential decision or action.  
 C: Matrix diagrams are a quality management tool and are used 
to compare information between two or more lists. 
 D:  Quality checklists are an output, not a tool, from the Plan 
Quality Management process in the PMBOK ® Guide, making this 
the correct answer. 
 Question 226: While completing work associated with ensuring quality in a project, 
it is important that you know the difference between several different quality-related 
terms. Several of your team members regularly get confused about the difference 
 betwe en the different terms, particularly understanding exactly what a quality metric is. 
To demonstrate to your team the difference, you point out that one of the following is not 
a quality metric. Which one do you point out? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: Failure rate is a quality metric that records the number of 
failures and their impact. 
 B: Budget control is a quality metric used to align quality 
decisions with the project budget. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
199
 C: Defect frequency is a quality metric that measures 
the frequency of defects discovered and is used for root 
cause analysis. 
 D: The upper control limit is part of the control chart tool; it is 
not a quality metric. 
 Question 227: You have completed the work to plan and document your  parti cular 
approach to quality on your project. Which of the following is not an output you would 
expect to produce as a result of this work? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  Quality metrics are an output from the Plan Quality 
Management process in the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 B: Flowcharting is not an output; it is a technique used in the 
Plan Quality Management process in the PMBOK ®  Guide, so this 
is the correct answer. 
 C:  The process improvement plan is an output from the Plan 
Quality Management process in the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 D:  The quality management plan is the primary output from the 
Plan Quality Management process in the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 Question 228: The process of continuous process improvements to reduce 
waste  a  nd eliminate activities that do not add value to a project is known as what? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A:  Progressive elaboration is a form of iterative planning. 
 B: Plan Quality Management is the process that produces the 
quality management plan. 
 C:  Control Quality is the process of monitoring and recording 
results of executing quality activities. 
 D:  Perform Quality Assurance is an executing process that is focused 
on constantly improving the quality processes on the project.  
 Question 229: You are using your quality management plan to guide the work being 
done to ensure that project quality  assurance expectations  are being met. Which of the 
following would not be a useful input to you? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  The process improvement plan is an important input into 
the Perform Quality Assurance process because it outlines how 
processes will be improved. 
 B: Quality audits are a technique used in the Perform Quality 
Assurance process, not an input. 
 C:  Quality metrics are an input into the Perform Quality 
Assurance process because they guide the assessment of quality 
assurance activities. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
200
 D:  Quality control measurements are an input into the Perform 
Quality Assurance process because they are used to determine if 
processes are being performed as planned. 
 Question 230: A project administrator has asked for guidance on completing a project 
audit as per the approved quality  management  plan for your project. They are seeking your 
guidance on what exactly a quality audit is. How is a quality audit best defined? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: This answer is incorrect because it refers to product 
specifications and the audit is focused on processes. 
 B: The quality audit focuses on the quality processes of the 
project and is not generally focused on the quality of the product 
of the project. 
 C: This anser is incorrect because it is focussed on product 
specifications, which is not a focus of a project audit. 
 D: This answer is incorrect because the quality audit will look at 
more than just whether the project management plan contains 
an appropriate quality management plan. 
 Question 231:  You are completing the work to ensure the required quality assurance 
levels are met on your project. Which of the following  is an output of this work? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Quality audits are a technique used in the Perform Quality 
Assurance process, not an output. 
 B: Quality metrics are an input into the Perform Quality 
Assurance process because they guide the assessment of quality 
assurance activities. 
 C:  Change requests are an important output from the Perform 
Quality Assurance process as a result of your constant examination 
of the quality processes and procedures of your project.  
 D: Process analysis is a technique used in the Perform Quality 
Assurance process, not an output. 
 Question 232:  What is the process of monitoring and recording results of  
executin  g the quality activities to assess performance and recommend necessary changes 
known as? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: The Perform Quality Assurance process examines the process 
of the project. 
 B: Control Quality is the correct answer and it is part of the 
Monitoring and Controlling process group. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
201
 C: The Plan Quality Management process produces the quality 
management plan. 
 D: Statistical sampling is a tool for taking a small sample from a 
large population and extrapolating the results of the sample to 
the entire population. 
 Question 233: During a workshop to define quality control processes on your 
project, you sense that team members are confused abut the difference between 
prevention and inspection. What is the  BES T description of the difference between 
prevention and inspection? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Prevention and inspection are two different concepts in the 
quality management area. Prevention is designed to keep errors 
out of the process while inspection is about discovering the 
errors prior to handover. 
 B-D: These answers are incorrect because prevention and 
inspection are two different concepts in the quality management 
area. Prevention is designed to keep errors out of the process 
while inspection is about discovering the errors prior to 
handover. 
 Question 234: What is the BEST description of the difference between  tolerances 
 and control limits? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A, B, and D: These answers are incorrect because tolerances 
specify the acceptable range of specifications while control limits 
indicate that a process may be out of control. 
 C: Tolerances specify the acceptable range of specifications while 
control limits indicate that a process may be out of control.    
 Question 235: All of the following are an example of one of  Ishikawa’s seven tools of 
q uality except? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A, C, and D: The seven tools of quality according to Ishikawa 
are the following: cause and effect diagrams, control charts, 
flowcharts, histograms, Pareto charts, run charts, and scatter 
diagrams. 
 B: Inspection is not one of Ishikawa’s seven tools of quality. The 
seven tools of quality according to Ishikawa are cause and effect 
diagrams, control charts, flowcharts, histograms, Pareto charts, 
run charts, and scatter diagrams. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
202
 Question 236: You are the project manager for a project where quality is an 
important constraint, and you are trying to correct a problem with a machine that makes 
parts that are used in complex medical imaging equipment. As a result of carrying our 
your Control Quality process, you discover that unfortunately  thes e parts are frequently 
made with defects. You have decided to hold a meeting to discuss the process of making 
the parts. You create a diagram that has branches that show the possible causes of the 
problems. Each of the branches breaks the cause down into more and more detail. What 
is this diagram called? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: This answer is not correct because it is not a term referenced 
within the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 B:  The diagram is a cause and effect diagram, also known as a 
fishbone or Ishikawa diagram. 
 C: A Pareto diagram or chart determines frequency of defects 
and arranges them in hierarchical order so you can determine 
which defects are causing the most problems. This is often called 
the 80:20 rule. 
 D: A scatter diagram plots the results of two variables on an x and 
y axis diagram. 
 Question 237: You  ar e trying to find the cause of an identified problem on your 
project by examining the various factors that might be linked to potential problems. What 
technique are you using? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: A cause and effect diagram, also known as an Ishikawa or 
fishbone (on account of its shape) diagram, tries to determine 
the root cause of a problem so the cause and not the symptom is 
identified. 
 B:  Control charts identify when a process may be going out of 
control. They do not help find the cause of the problem.  
 C: A Pareto diagram or chart determines frequency of defects 
and arranges them in hierarchical order so you can determine 
which defects are causing the most problems. This is often called 
the 80:20 rule. 
 D: A run chart plots a particular variable over a period of time. 
 Question 238: The quality manager on your project wishes to analyze the data that 
is being received in the form of a list of defects that  have occurred in the manufacturing 
department. The report comes with defects listed chronologically as they occurred, the 
cost of the repair necessary to correct each defect, the person involved, and a description 
of the defect. The quality manager would like to determine which of the defects should be 
corrected first according to the frequency of the defect occurring. Which of the following 
tools should she use? 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
203
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: A Pareto diagram is a histogram, ordered by frequency of 
occurrence, that shows how many results were generated by type 
or category of identified cause. By using this tool the manager 
can identify the defects that occurred most often. 
 B:  This answer is not correct. It is a combination of two familiar 
words but it is a made-up term. 
 C: A cause and effect diagram, also known as an Ishikawa or 
fishbone (on account of its shape) diagram, tries to determine 
the root cause of a problem so the cause and not the symptom is 
identified. 
 D: This answer is not correct because it is not a term referenced 
within the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 Question 239: You are explaining to your project team the ranking of causes for 
defects on your project to enable them to focus  their   corrective actions on those causes 
that are responsible for the greatest defects. What sort of diagram would you use for this? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: A Pareto chart is a type of histogram that shows the rank 
ordering of defects by type of category so that corrective action 
can be focused in the correct place. 
 B: A scatter diagram plots the results of two variables on an x and 
y axis diagram. 
 C:  Control charts identify when a process may be going out of 
control; they do not help find the cause of the problem. 
 D:  A histogram, or bar chart, can be used for graphically 
representing the frequency of events. 
 Question 240: While performing quality control inspections you note down relevant 
data and use a vertical bar chart to show how often a particular variable state occurred. 
What is this sort of bar  chart  more commonly called? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: A histogram or bar chart is one of the most commonly used 
and easiest to understand visual representations of information, 
especially to show relationships between different areas. 
 B: A Pareto diagram is a histogram, ordered by frequency of 
occurrence, that shows how many results were generated by type 
or category of identified cause. However, in this question you 
should see a Pareto chart as a subset of histograms, which is the 
best answer. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
204
 C:  Control charts identify when a process may be going out of 
control; they do not help find the cause of the problem. 
 D:  A scatter diagram plots the results of two variables on an x and 
y axis diagram. 
 Question 241:  While performing quality control inspections, you note down relevant 
data and use a chart similar to a control chart without  displayed   limits, which shows the 
history and pattern of a variation. What sort of chart are you using? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: A cause and effect diagram, also known as an Ishikawa or 
fishbone (on account of its shape) diagram, tries to determine 
the root cause of a problem so the cause and not the symptom is 
identified. 
 B: Control charts identify when a process may be going out of 
control; they do not help find the cause of the problem. 
 C: A Pareto diagram is a histogram, ordered by frequency of 
occurrence, that shows how many results were generated by type 
or category of identified cause. By using this tool the manager 
can identify the defects that occurred most often. 
 D:  A run chart is a simplified control chart without the displayed 
limits that can indicate a trend over time and forecast future 
outcomes based on historical results using such techniques as 
linear regression. 
 Question 242: A visual presentation of quality data gathered showing  th e 
relationship between a dependent and independent variable is known as what? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: A run chart is a simplified control chart without the displayed 
limits that can indicate a trend over time and forecast future 
outcomes based on historical results using such techniques as 
linear regression. 
 B: A Pareto diagram is a histogram, ordered by frequency of 
occurrence, that shows how many results were generated by type 
or category of identified cause. By using this tool the manager 
can identify the defects that occurred most often. 
 C:  Control charts identify when a process may be going out of 
control; they do not help find the cause of the problem. 
 D: A scatter diagram plots the relationship between two 
variables, one on the x axis and one on the y axis. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
205
 Question 243:  Y our team members have completed work to perform quality control 
on the project. Which of the following outputs would you not expect them to produce as a 
result of doing this work? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Quality metrics is an input, not an output, into the Control 
Quality process in the PMBOK ® Guide, so this is the correct answer.  
 B: Validated changes are an output; they are work required by an 
approved change request that has been checked for quality.  
 C: As a result of carrying out this monitoring and controlling 
process, it may be necessary to generate change requests as an 
output as a result of variances discovered. 
 D:  Quality control measurements are the primary output from 
the Control Quality process. 
 Question 244: You and your team are working hard to produce a quality wireless 
 hea dphone product capable of high-quality audio transmission. You are discussing an 
approach with your Quality Assurance Team Leader that will aim to reduce the variation 
the team is experiencing with the prototype headsets being produced. What technique 
are you discussing? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Six Sigma is a quality improvement method that seeks to 
improve the quality of the output of a process. It does this by 
identifying and addressing the factors that cause defects and 
variability. 
 B:  Lean is a process that focuses on eliminating waste and 
improving value, not reducing variation. 
 C: Scrum is an Agile methodology that is focused on delivering 
features in small iterations via the use of empowered teams. 
 D: Kanban is an Agile methodology that emphasizes the 
visualization of activities and limitations of a work in progress. 
 Question 245: If a process is considered to have only 3.4 defects per million 
 opport  unities, which sigma class is this defined as? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Two Sigma indicates that 69.15% of the products 
manufactured meet all quality specifications and are free from 
defects. This means that 308,500 products, for every 1 million 
manufactured, do not meet the desired level of quality. 
 B:  Three Sigma indicates that 93.32% of the products 
manufactured meet all quality specifications and are free from 
defects. This means that 66,800 products, for every 1 million 
manufactured, do not meet the desired level of quality. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
206
 C:  Six Sigma indicates that 99.99966% of the products 
manufactured meet all quality specifications and are free from 
defects. This means that only 3.4 products, for every 1 million 
manufactured, do not meet the desired level of quality. 
 D:  Twelve Sigma is a made-up term. This would be considered 
beyond the possibility of perfection. 
 Question 246: The terms Yellow Belt, Green Belt, and Black Belt are terms given to 
individuals that practice which methodology? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: Rapid Application Development (RAD) is a software 
development methodology that focuses on prototyping software 
quickly and iteratively. It does not use colored belts to class its 
practitioners. 
 B: The varying belt colors represent the level of expertise an 
individual has in the application of the Six Sigma methodology. 
 C: Scrum is an Agile methodology that is focused on delivering 
features in small iterations via the use of empowered teams. 
It does not use colored belts to class its practitioners. 
 D: Kanban is an Agile methodology that emphasizes the 
visualization of activities and limitations of a work in progress. 
It does not use colored belts to class its practitioners. 
 Question 247: You have been asked by senior management to focus on eliminating 
any bottlenecks that exist in your project’s  processe s. What methodology will be most 
effective in highlighting bottlenecks? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: Prince2 is a project management methodology, but it is not 
specifically aimed at reducing bottlenecks. 
 B: MPMM is a project management methodology, but it is not 
specifically aimed at reducing bottlenecks. 
 C: Lean is a project management methodology, but it is not 
specifically aimed at reducing bottlenecks. 
 D: Kanban is a project management methodology used to 
identify bottlenecks through the visualization of all tasks/
activities and the application of work in progress limits.    
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
207
 Question 248: Your Quality Assurance Manager has requested that you assist her  i  n 
mapping the value stream for the assembly of a new combustion engine. Value stream 
mapping is part of which methodology? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A:  Waterfall and Scrum are development methodologies that can 
be applied to the development of a combustion engine, but they 
do not include the concept of value stream mapping. 
 B:  Waterfall and Scrum are development methodologies that can 
be applied to the development of a combustion engine, but they 
do not include the concept of value stream mapping. 
 C: Value stream mapping is a principle of Lean. This activity 
involves formally documenting a process and assessing each 
component to understand which provides value and which 
does not. 
 D: Kaizen is a Japanese word, meaning continuous improvement. 
This method also does not include the concept of value stream 
mapping. 
 Project Human Resource Management 
 Question 249:  The PMBOK ® Guide processes that organize, recruit, reward, manage, and 
lead the project team are collectively known as what? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: This is the correct collective term for all of the processes that 
make up the Human Resource Management knowledge area. 
 B: This may seem like a sensible answer but managing the 
project team is only one part of Project Human Resource 
Management, which is the best answer. 
 C: Project management covers the entire profession and all the 
knowledge areas. Project Human Resource Management is the 
specific area that organizes, recruits, rewards, manages, and 
leads the project team. 
 D: This may seem like a sensible answer but team building 
and development is only one part of Project Human Resource 
Management, which is the best answer. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
208
 Question 250: The project sponsor has several responsibilities while working with 
the project management team. Which of the following is not a responsibility of the 
project sponsor? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: The project sponsor has the responsibility of influencing high-
level stakeholders to provide political and financial support for 
the project. 
 B: The project sponsor performs a high-level role and is 
responsible for ensuring the project has the funding it requires, 
monitoring progress, acting as project champion, influencing 
others in support of the project, and, when required, clarifying 
high-level scope questions. They are not responsible for detailed 
work such as completing the WBS. 
 C: The project sponsor has the responsibility of monitoring the 
progress of the project at a high level. They are not responsible 
for low-level monitoring; that is the responsibility of the project 
manager. 
 D: The project sponsor is responsible for securing financial 
support and funding for the project. 
 Question 251:  A team member is studying towards obtaining the PMP ® credential 
 a nd has asked for your assistance with her study. She is having difficulty remembering 
the generally correct order of activities in the PMBOK ® Guide Project Human Resource 
Management knowledge area. What is your answer to this question? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  This process generally takes the following sequence: first 
plan, then do what you planned, and then check that what you 
are doing is correct. So, first plan your approach to getting, 
developing, and managing your human resources. Next, using 
the plan, acquire your project team, then develop them, and 
finally monitor or manage them. 
 B-D: These answers are incorrect because the process generally 
follows the sequence of plan first, then do what you planned, and 
then check that what you are doing is correct. So first plan your 
approach to getting, developing, and managing your human 
resources. Next, using the plan, acquire your project team, then 
develop them, and finally monitor or manage them. 
 Question 252:  You have completed your human resource management plan for 
your project. You recognize that the profession of project management features a lot of 
 interdependenc ies, and you want to make sure that the human resource plan is used in 
other appropriate parts of your project work. This plan is used as an input into all of the 
following processes except? 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
209
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: The Identify Risks process uses information from the human 
resource management plan to identify risks associated with 
human resources. 
 B:  The Estimate Costs process using the human resource 
management plan to assist in estimating costs associated with 
human resources on the project. 
 C: The outputs from the Estimate Activity Resources process are 
used as inputs into the Plan Human Resource Management process.  
 D: The Acquire Project Team process uses the human resource 
management plan to recruit the team members. 
 Question 253: While completing initial planning work on your project, you begin to 
develop your human resource plan. Which of the  follow ing inputs would not be of use to 
you to complete this plan? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: You need the activity resource requirements to know what 
work you need people to complete and how much work is 
needed to be done. 
 B:  You don’t need the WBS to prepare your human resource 
management plan but any changes to the WBS may mean 
changes to your human resource plan. 
 C: Enterprise environmental factors such as external market 
conditions for salaries and employment law are an input into the 
Plan Human Resource Management process.  
 D: Organizational process assets such as existing recruitment 
policies are an input into the Plan Human Resource 
Management process. 
 Question 254: You are showing your project team members the organizational 
 struct ure, and you point out where in the structure their role is located. What tool would 
be useful to you in preparing this information? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A:  The responsibility assignment matrix (RAM) does not show 
any information about the organizational structure; it shows who 
is responsibility for individual work packages and activities.  
 B:  The work breakdown structure (WBS) does not show any 
information about the organizational structure; it decomposes 
deliverables down into work packages. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
210
 C:  The resource breakdown structure (RBS) does not show any 
information about the organizational structure; it breaks down 
the resources required for the project. 
 D:  The organizational breakdown structure (OBS) is arranged 
according to an organizations existing departments, units, or 
teams with the project activities or work packages listed under 
each department. 
 Question 255:  You are  using a matrix-based chart to give a clear indication of the 
connection between work packages and team members. Additionally, the chart shows 
who is responsible, accountable, consulted, and informed about the work. What is the 
common name of this type of chart? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: A RACI chart is a specific type of responsibility assignment 
matrix that lists additional information about who is responsible 
or accountable, and who should be consulted and informed in 
relation to project activities. 
 B: The organizational breakdown structure is arranged according 
to an organization’s existing departments, units, or teams 
with the project activities or work packages listed under each 
department. It does not show who is responsible, accountable, 
consulted, and informed about the work. 
 C: The work breakdown structure does not show any information 
about who is responsible, accountable, consulted, and informed 
about the work; it decomposes deliverables down into work packages.  
 D: A RACI chart is a specific type of responsibility assignment 
matrix, and as such it is the best answer. 
 Question 256:  As a  competent  project manager you should be aware of the leading 
and foundational theories relating to the management of human resources and their 
practical application. Which of the following is not one of these theories? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: This answer is not correct because it is not a term referenced 
within the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 B: Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs specifies a set of needs an 
individual will seek to fulfill, with the current need being the 
strongest motivator. 
 C: McGregor’s Theory X and Theory Y summarizes management 
views of employees as either naturally unmotivated and 
untrustworthy (Theory X) or naturally motivated and trustworthy 
(Theory Y). 
 D: Herzberg’s Motivation-Hygiene Theory says that employees 
requires hygiene factors to be present before motivation factors 
will work. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
211
 Question 257: As a competent project manager you should be aware of the leading 
and  f  oundational theories relating to the management of human resources and their 
practical application. Which of the following is not one of these theories? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Vroom’s Expectancy Theory states that the expectation 
of receiving a reward for a certain accomplishment will 
motivate people to work harder but this will only work if the 
accomplishment is perceived to be achievable. 
 B:  Ouchi’s Theory Z says that organizations should seek to fulfill 
a large role in an employee’s life beyond just an employment 
agreement. 
 C: This answer is not correct because it is not a term referenced 
within the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 D:  McClelland’s Human Motivation, Achievement, or Three 
Needs Theory states that people are motivated to work by the 
need for achievement, power, and affiliation. 
 Question 258: While completing initial planning work on your project, you begin to 
develop your human resource management plan. The human resource management plan 
can include all the following information except? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: The human resource management plan may have project 
organization charts so team members can see reporting lines 
and relationships within the organization. 
 B: The human resource management plan includes the staffing 
management plan, which specifies how and when project team 
members will be required on the project. 
 C:  Cost estimates for staff time will be included in your cost 
management plan. 
 D: The human resource management plan has a description of 
team member’s roles and responsibilities. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
212
 Question 259:   What  does a resource calendar show? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Annual leave may be a small part of the resource calendar but it 
is not the best answer to this question. The resource calendar will 
clearly show what resources you need, when you need them, and 
how much commitment they need to have when you need them 
as well as any constraints on the time they can give to the project 
such as other work commitments, working hours, and holidays.  
 B: The resource calendar does not show the cost of staff 
members over time. This will be in your project cost baseline. 
The resource calendar will clearly show what resources you 
need, when you need them, and how much commitment they 
need to have when you need them as well as any constraints 
on the time they can give to the project such as other work 
commitments, working hours, and holidays. 
 C:  The resource calendar will clearly show what resources you 
need, when you need them, and how much commitment they 
need to have when you need them as well as any constraints 
on the time they can give to the project such as other work 
commitments, working hours, and holidays. 
 D: Programmed team building activities throughout the project will 
not be shown on the resource calendar. The resource calendar will 
clearly show what resources you need, when you need them, and 
how much commitment they need to have when you need them as 
well as any constraints on the time they can give to the project such 
as other work commitments, working hours, and holidays.  
 Question 260:  You are currently attempting to acquire project team members 
on a project that is just about to start. You are meeting resistance from the functional 
managers of the staff you want to use on your project, and it appears that you may have to 
seek help  f rom external consultants. Your project sponsor is concerned about the impact 
this process is having on the project. All of following are potential adverse effects of not 
acquiring your project team except? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Reduced quality is a potential adverse effect caused by delays 
and by less experienced people working on the project. 
 B: Decreased customer satisfaction is a very real potential 
outcome because the work may not start on time or be produced 
to the expected quality. 
 C:  It is very doubtful that failure to acquire your project team 
would result in reduced project costs because there will most 
likely be delays associated with getting alternate team members. 
 D:  Failing to acquire the staff you need when you need them will 
result in delays to the project schedule. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
213
 Question 261: Your construction manager approaches you about a particular team 
member that has just been assigned to the project. She thinks that he does not have the 
required skills to complete  t he work expected of him and suggests that this team member 
be assigned to a different project. What is your BEST course of action? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  You have a responsibility, where possible, to provide training 
for your team members to ensure they have the appropriate skills 
to complete the work asked of them. 
 B:  Firing the team member would not solve the problem, which 
is a lack of training. 
 C: Learning on the job is not the safest or most efficient way to 
get team members trained. 
 D: Assigning the team member to another project does not deal 
with the real issue, which is a lack of training.    
 Question 262: You are in the process of obtaining the staff members you require 
on your project from other functional areas within your organization. You have made a 
request to a particular functional manager to have one of her staff members assigned part 
time to your project. The functional manager is concerned about the effect  t  his will have 
on her operational goals and suggests instead that the staff member be assigned to your 
project for 30% of her time instead of 50%. What technique are you engaged in? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  This is an example of a negotiation within a matrix 
organization for a human resource. 
 B:  Pre-assignment of staff does not involve negotiations such as 
outlined in the question. 
 C: Acquisition is the procedure of searching outside the 
organization for team members. 
 D: Acquire Project Team is the process that includes negotiation, 
which is the best answer to this question. 
 Question 263: The software project you are working on is using developers from 
different geographic areas around the world because the high  le vel of experience 
required for this project could not be obtained locally. With the different time zones you 
are having difficulty organizing regular meetings between all the project team members. 
What would be the BEST thing you could do to improve communication between your 
virtual team? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: Acquire Project Team is the process that includes negotiation, 
which is the best answer to this question. 
 B:  This will only cause problems in the long term as 10 AM 
your time may be 3 AM for someone else. Use of virtual teams 
is increasingly common and provides many potential benefits. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
214
There are additional risks associated with managing team 
members who you may never meet face to face but the use of 
electronic video conferencing is a great way to overcome some of 
the communication problems. 
 C:  Running multiple meetings on the same topic is not an 
efficient way to deal with this issue. Use of virtual teams is 
increasingly common and provides many potential benefits. 
There are additional risks associated with managing team 
members who you may never meet face to face but the use of 
electronic video conferencing is a great way to overcome some of 
the communication problems. 
 D:  Use of virtual teams is increasingly common and provides 
many potential benefits. There are additional risks associated 
with managing team members who you may never meet face to 
face but the use of electronic video conferencing is a great way to 
overcome some of the communication problems. 
 Question 264: What is the PMBOK ® Guide process of improving the competencies, 
team  i nteraction, and the overall team environment to enhance project performance 
known as? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Acquire Project Team is the process of obtaining your project 
team members as outlined in your human resource management 
plan. 
 B:  Plan Human Resource Management is the process of 
producing the human resource management plan. 
 C: Develop Project Team is the executing process of making sure 
your team is capable of performing the work expected of it.  
 D: Manage Project Team is the process of ensuring your team 
is performing optimally and of improving the performance of 
the team. 
 Question 265: You are holding a weekly project meeting when a disagreement 
between  t wo members of the project team begins. The disagreement is over a technical 
detail of the project. It is important that the conflicting opinions of the two team members 
be resolved as quickly as possible. It is even more important that the difference of opinion 
be resolved correctly. What is your BEST course of action? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: This answer suggests forcing as a method to resolve the 
conflict. There are several methods for resolving conflict: forcing, 
withdrawal, smoothing, compromise, and problem solving. Of 
these, problem solving is the best because the new facts allow the 
two disagreeing parties to resolve their differences with factual 
information and not opinion. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
215
 B:  This answer proposes withdrawing from addressing the 
conflict. There are several methods for resolving conflict: forcing, 
withdrawal, smoothing, compromise, and problem solving. Of 
these, problem solving is the best because the new facts allow the 
two disagreeing parties to resolve their differences with factual 
information and not opinion. 
 C: There are several methods for resolving conflict: forcing, 
withdrawal, smoothing, compromise, and problem solving. Of 
these, problem solving is the best because the new facts allow the 
two disagreeing parties to resolve their differences with factual 
information and not opinion. 
 D:  Compromise does not deal with the root cause of the problem. 
There are several methods for resolving conflict: forcing, 
withdrawal, smoothing, compromise, and problem solving. Of 
these, problem solving is the best because the new facts allow the 
two disagreeing parties to resolve their differences with factual 
information and not opinion. 
 Question 266:  Whic h of the following is not an objective of developing your 
project team? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: A key objective of the Develop Project Team process is to 
improving team members’ knowledge and skills. 
 B:  As project manager, you must recognize that when working on 
a project with people from different cultures, it is important to 
not try to assimilate everyone to one particular culture. 
 C: Improving trust and agreement between team members is a 
key objective of the Develop Project Team process. 
 D: Creating a dynamic and cohesive team culture is a key 
objective of the Develop Project Team process. 
 Question 267: The  Tuc kman theory of team development states that team development 
generally follows a sequence of stages. Which is the correct order of those stages? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  This answer is not correct because a team will first go 
through the forming stage, then storming, then norming, then 
performing, and finally adjourning. A team can also drop back 
several stages in the model when an existing team member 
leaves or a new team members joins. 
 B:  The Tuckman five-stage model of team development outlines 
the stages a group of people will go through. A team will first go 
through the forming stage, then storming, then norming, then 
performing, and finally adjourning. A team can also drop back 
several stages in the model when an existing team member 
leaves or a new team members joins. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
216
 C:  This answer is not correct because a team will first go 
through the forming stage, then storming, then norming, then 
performing, and finally adjourning. A team can also drop back 
several stages in the model when an existing team member 
leaves or a new team members joins. 
 D:  This answer is not correct because a team will first go 
through the forming stage, then storming, then norming, then 
performing, and finally adjourning. A team can also drop back 
several stages in the model when an existing team member 
leaves or a new team members joins. 
 Question 268:  You have offered everyone on your team an individual financial 
bonus if they are the first to complete a particular piece of work. Instead of motivating the 
team, your offer has caused  unhea lthy competition in some staff and apathy in others. 
What could be the problem with your offer? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: Whether or not your project team respect you as a project 
manager, it is more likely that this scenario is because your team 
culture does not support individualism. 
 B: The amount of money offered is probably not the problem; 
you will find that other motivations such as power, achievement, 
and affiliation are better. 
 C:  The amount of money offered is probably not the problem; 
you will find that other motivations such as power, achievement, 
and affiliation are better. 
 D:  Deciding the appropriate recognition and rewards requires 
the project manager to know exactly what motivates people. 
People generally only want rewards that they value, and recent 
research has shown that money is not generally the highest 
motivator for people. Praise and opportunity for advancement is 
often more highly sought after. 
 Question 269:  Your have decided that all of you project team members must move 
into their  own  space within the organization’s main headquarters to improve efficiency 
and team building. What is this commonly called? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Assignment generally refers to assigning team members to 
specific roles and responsibilities. 
 B: This answer is incorrect because it is not a term referenced 
within the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 C: Co-locating team members where possible improves team 
performance. 
 D: A war room is a specific meeting room for project team 
members to be co-located and focus on doing the project work. 
The best answer to this question is co-location.    
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
217
 Question 270: After  com pleting some work required to develop your project team 
members, you have noted several outputs that have been produced. Which of the 
following is an output that you would expect to produce? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: The Develop Project Team process is focused on ensuring the 
team has the necessary skills to complete the work required of 
them. To ensure that this is effectively done, you need to have 
team performance assessments. 
 B:  Team building activities may sound like the correct answer, 
but they are a tool or technique used during the Develop Project 
Team process. 
 C: Project staff assignments are an output from the Acquire 
Project Team process. 
 D: WBS dictionary elements are part of the WBS dictionary, 
which is created during the Create WBS process. 
 Question 271: As a project manager, your greatest challenge has been managing 
 you r project team. You have decided to gain extra skills to help you in this task. All of the 
following are areas you should focus on except? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A, B, and D: Team management involves a combination of skills 
with special emphasis on communication, conflict management, 
negotiation, and leadership. 
 C: Effective management of your project team is critical to the 
success of the project. Team management involves a combination 
of skills with special emphasis on communication, conflict 
management, negotiation, and leadership. Remuneration is not 
one of these key skills.  
 Question 272: Your project is more than halfway through and you have a CPI of 
1.08 and an SPI of 1.03. You attribute a lot of the success so far to the work being done 
by the team and the way in which they are working together. This has been as a result of 
the  work  you have done as project manager in managing the project team. In order to 
complete the work associated with managing the project team successfully you have used 
a variety of inputs to help your efforts. Which of the following is not an input that you 
would have used? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A:  Team performance assessments are a useful input into the 
Manage Project Team process because they get information 
about how well the team is performing. 
 B:  Project staff assignments are an input into the Manage Project 
Team process in the PMBOK ® Guide. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
218
 C:  The project management plan is an input into the Manage 
Project Team process in the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 D: Project performance appraisals are a tool or technique used in 
the Manage Project Team process in the PMBOK ®  Guide, so this 
is the correct answer. 
 Question 273:  In his theory  of  motivation of employees, Herzberg divided 
motivation factors into two classes: satisfiers and dissatisfiers. Which of the following are 
examples of satisfiers according to Herzberg? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: Vacation time and assignment of a personal staff assistant are 
factors that are classified as satisfiers in Hertzberg’s theory of 
motivation. 
 B: Work satisfaction and fringe benefits are classified as satisfiers 
in Hertzberg’s theory of motivation. 
 C: Plush office space and performance-based salary raises are 
classified as satisfiers in Hertzberg’s theory of motivation. 
 D:  This is an example of a question that the PMBOK ®  Guide does 
not answer. It requires you to have additional knowledge about 
leading theories of managing people. 
 Question 274:  As a project manager, you understand how important effective 
management of your team is to the success of the project. Which of the following is not 
a key interpersonal  skill  that you should have as a project manager to help you manage 
your team? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Strong and well-developed leadership skills that can operate 
in a variety of scenarios are an essential interpersonal skill for a 
project manager. 
 B: Having the ability to persuade people and having mature 
listening skills are key interpersonal skills for a project manager 
to have.  
 C: A focus on prevention over inspection and an eye for detail 
when reporting your project status reports is a strong technical, 
not interpersonal skill. Having good interpersonal skills is 
absolutely critical to the success of your project because it 
directly influences how well you manage your project team.  
 D:  A project manager must have effective decision-making skills 
as part of their suite of interpersonal skills. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
219
 Question 275: Your project has been underway for 18 months and currently has 
a CPI of 1.02 and an SPI of 1.07. During the project two of your project team members 
have disagreed constantly over non- tec hnical issues and on occasion have shown open 
hostility towards each other, often in front of other team members. Lately the situation 
has escalated, and during your last project team status meeting they openly shouted at 
each other. As project manager, you decide to call both team members into your office 
and explain to them that the best way to resolve this conflict is a give-and-take attitude 
and open dialogue. What conflict resolution technique are you using? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  Forcing a solution on participants in a conflict is not a long-
lasting solution; the conflict will eventually resurface. 
 B:  Confronting a problem and looking for a clear and permanent 
solution is the best way to resolve conflict. Your own personal 
conflict resolution style and any that you choose to adopt will 
dictate how successful you are in resolving conflict. Remember 
that conflict is not necessarily a bad thing but it can lead to poor 
performance if not managed well. 
 C: Smoothing over a conflict situation in the hope that it will go 
away will not result in a permanent solution to the conflict. 
 D: Withdrawing from and avoiding dealing with conflict does 
not resolve the issue in a proactive manner, and eventually the 
conflict will have an adverse effect on team performance and 
ultimately the chances of project success.    
 Question 276: As part of your own professional development plan, you have 
approval from your senior manager to undertake leadership training. As part of your 
training, you have asked your team members for their opinion on what constitutes the 
key elements and  chara cteristics of an effective leader. What are the key elements of 
effective leadership? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: Fear and submission are not good elements of effective 
leadership. Leadership is an important facet of the interpersonal 
skills you must be aware of and develop throughout your career 
as a project manager. Central to effective leadership are soft 
skills, including the ability to generate respect and trust for 
yourself from your team members, and also to give respect and 
trust to your team members. 
 B:  Friendship and admiration may arise from your effective 
leadership, but they are based on the key elements of respect and 
trust. Leadership is an important facet of the interpersonal skills 
you must be aware of and develop throughout your career as a 
project manager. Central to effective leadership are soft skills, 
including the ability to generate respect and trust for yourself 
from your team members, and also to give respect and trust to 
your team members. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
220
 C: Vision and humor are important elements of effective leadership 
but not as important as respect and trust. Leadership is an 
important facet of the interpersonal skills you must be aware of 
and develop throughout your career as a project manager. Central 
to effective leadership are soft skills, including the ability to 
generate respect and trust for yourself from your team members, 
and also to give respect and trust to your team members.  
 D: Leadership is an important facet of the interpersonal skills 
you must be aware of and develop throughout your career as a 
project manager. Central to effective leadership are soft skills, 
including the ability to generate respect and trust for yourself 
from your team members, and also to give respect and trust to 
your team members. 
 Question 277:  Which of the following is not one of the four basic decision- makin  g 
styles normally used by project managers? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Ideas to action is not one of the four basic decision styles 
normally used by project managers. The four basic decision styles 
are command, consultation, consensus, and coin flip or random.  
 B-D:  These answers are incorrect because the four basic 
decision styles are command, consultation, consensus, and coin 
flip or random. 
 Question 278:  You are faced with a large decision to make on your project. After 
fully defining the problem, you call in your team to brainstorm multiple solutions. You 
then define the evaluation criteria and rate  the pros and cons of different options. Prior to 
making a decision, you go through a process of problem definition, solution generation, 
ideas to action, solution action planning, solution evaluation planning, and evaluation of 
the outcome and process. What process are you using? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Kouzes and Posner are names generally associated with 
leadership development, not decision making. This answer is not 
a term referenced within the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 B:  Shewhart and Deming’s plan-do-check-act cycle is the basis of 
modern project management and modern quality management. 
It is not used to make decisions. 
 C: The six-phase model is outlined in Appendix X3 on 
interpersonal skills of the PMBOK ® Guide as an important 
interpersonal skill for managing your team. 
 D:  This answer is incorrect because it is made-up term.     
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
221
 Project Communications Management 
 Question 279:  It is commonly acknowledged that one of the most important sets of skills 
a project manager should develop is their communication skills. All of the following are 
examples of communication  skills except? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Reviewing the work breakdown structure is a technical, not 
a communication, skill. We can not stress enough the role that 
effective communications plays in project success. Many people 
seem to think that technical, financial, risk, quality, and scope 
management skills are more important contributors to project 
success. But without effective communication they are all useless.  
 B:  Setting and managing the expectations of stakeholders is 
achieved through the effective use of communication skills.  
 C: In order to persuade a person or organization to form an 
action, you will need to display very strong and well-developed 
communication skills. 
 D: Communication is a two-way process and therefore listening 
actively and effectively is a key communication skill. 
 Question 280: Your project is experiencing a range of variations that require  on  e of 
the contracts you are using to engage an external vendor to be amended. What sort of 
communication is most appropriate when dealing with changes to a contract? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: Informal written forms of communication are best used for 
memos and internal notes. When dealing with changes to a 
contract, formal written forms of communication are best. 
 B:  A contract is a legally binding document and as such all 
communication about contracts should be formal and in writing. 
 C: Formal verbal forms of communication are presentations 
and speeches. When dealing with changes to a contract, formal 
written forms of communication are best.  
 D: Electronic forms of communication include e-mails and 
the Internet. When dealing with changes to a contract, formal 
written forms of communication are best.    
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
222
 Question 281:  After conducting your stakeholder analysis you determine that  there 
  are, excluding you, 7 stakeholders on the project. How many communication channels 
are there? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: 7 is not the correct answer. Did you get this one wrong 
because you forgot to count yourself? There are 7 stakeholders 
and you, as the project manager, so that is 8 people, therefore the 
calculation is 8 (8 - 1) / 2 = 56 / 2 = 28. 
 B: 21 is not the correct answer. Did you get this one wrong 
because you forgot to count yourself? There are 7 stakeholders 
and you, as the project manager, so that is 8 people, therefore the 
calculation is 8 (8 - 1) / 2 = 56 / 2 = 28. 
 C: There are 7 stakeholders and you as the project manager so that 
is 8 people, therefore the calculation is 8 (8 - 1) / 2 = 56 / 2 = 28.  
 D:  35 is not the correct answer. Did you get this one wrong 
because you forgot to count yourself? There are 7 stakeholders 
and you as the project manager so that is 8 people, therefore the 
calculation is 8 (8 - 1) / 2 = 56 / 2 = 28. 
 Question 282:  There are 12 stakeholders including yourself on the project, so how 
 many  communication channels are there? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: The question makes it clear that including you there are 12 
stakeholders, so the formula is 12 (12 - 1) / 2 = 132 / 2 = 66.  
 B-D:  These answers are not correct. The question makes it clear 
that including you there are 12 stakeholders, so the formula is 12 
(12 - 1) / 2 = 132 / 2 = 66.  
 Question 283:  All of the following are factors that influence the method of 
 communicat  ion disbursement between team members except? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: The type and availability of technology will influence the 
method of communications on your project. You must always 
select an appropriate method of communication to ensure it is 
effective. 
 B: The duration of the project will influence what style of 
communication you choose because you will have to keep 
stakeholders effectively engaged over longer periods of time. You 
must always select an appropriate method of communication to 
ensure it is effective. 
 C:  Local government regulations are related to building and 
town planning matters and may effect your project in other ways, 
but will not effect the communication distribution method. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
223
 D: The urgency of the information will influence the choice of 
communication method. You must always select an appropriate 
method of communication to ensure it is effective. 
 Question 284: You are leading a team on a complex project that requires constant 
communication with influential stakeholders. Despite your best efforts, the message that 
you send to the stakeholders is disrupted and misunderstood. Communication  between 
 the sender and the receiver is often affected by communication barriers or noise. These 
include all of the following except? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A:  Educational differences can present problems in 
communication, particularly in the languages and the medium 
chosen to communicate. 
 B:  If one party is motivated to be part of the conversation 
occurring and one isn’t, there will be a disruption to the 
communication. 
 C: Communication involves at least two people who may have 
very different backgrounds, experience, and education. Many 
times these individuals come from different cultures, speak 
different languages, and certainly have different drivers.  
 D: Cultural differences represent noise because many 
misunderstandings can arise due to different cultural 
expectations around appropriate forms of communication. 
 Question 285: You are having difficulty concentrating on what a stakeholder is 
saying during a business meeting and you feel you are not fully  unders  tanding them. 
What technique could help you to understand them better? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  Part of effective communication is ensuring that the message 
from the sender to the receiver is decoded properly. An effective 
way to do this is to repeat the key points back to get clarity. 
 B:  Asking somebody to write down the message won’t improve 
your ability to understand it. The solution to this problem is 
actively engaging in effective listening. 
 C: It is your responsibility to ensure that you are actively engaged 
in effective listening to a conversation; postponing the meeting 
will only complicate communication matters.  
 D: The problem is not the speed at which the speaking; the 
problem is your ability to concentrate. To help you concentrate, 
you could simply repeat the message back to the stakeholder.    
 Question 286: Your project team is scattered over three countries in three different 
time zones. Each project office has a different  la nguage as its first language, so to improve 
communication you have asked that all correspondence be conducted in English. In 
doing this, what are you trying to minimize in your team’s communication? 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
224
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: By asking your project team to use English as a standardized 
language, you are not trying to minimize environmental 
constraints; you are trying to minimize noise and 
communications. 
 B: You are trying to minimize noise that may corrupt 
communications, not minimize cold references. 
 C: Noise is the term used to describe anything that gets in the 
way of the message between sender and receiver. Using English 
as a common language is an attempt to avoid the noise of 
different languages. 
 D:  Simply asking your team to use English as a first language 
does not minimize the use of foreign accents. 
 Question 287:  The skill of listening involves more than just hearing the sounds. 
Which of the following is a characteristic of a good  lis tener? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: Taking good notes is an example of a good note taker, not a 
good listener. 
 B: Good listening is an important skill for any manager. One of 
the ways that you can become a skilled listener is by repeating 
some of the things that are said. Summarizing gives yourself and 
others a repeat of important points and makes the speaker feel 
more relaxed and in a friendly atmosphere. 
 C:  Finishing the speaker’s sentences is often considered quite 
rude and is not the sign of a good listener. 
 D:  Simply agreeing with the speaker for no good reason is not a 
sign of a good listener. 
 Question 288:  You are in the process of sending out your weekly project update to a 
wide range of stakeholders. This is an example of what sort  o f communication method? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: The stakeholder management strategy may guide some 
of your communications, particularly those in relation to 
stakeholder expectation management, but it is not a type of 
communication method. 
 B: Pull communication occurs when the recipient must go to the 
source to get the communication. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
225
 C: Interactive communication occurs when both sender and 
recipient engage in mutual exchange of information concurrently.  
 D: In this instance, you are pushing the information out to 
stakeholders. Push communication occurs when the sender 
pushes the information to the recipient. 
 Question 289: You are using your intranet site to post large amounts of 
 i nformation that team members can log into to read. This is an example of what sort of 
communication method? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A:  Encoding and decoding is what senders and receivers do in 
the standard communications model. 
 B:  Push communication occurs when the sender pushes the 
information to the recipient. 
 C: Interactive communication occurs when both sender 
and recipient engage in mutual exchange of information 
concurrently. 
 D: It is called pull communication because recipients pull it 
down at their leisure, rather than having it pushed to them. 
 Question 290: Your project team has spent a considerable amount of time and 
 energy completing the stakeholder analysis and putting together the communications 
management plan but is now disagreeing what, how, and when different communication 
methods are to be used. Who should take responsibility for determining this? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A:  The responsibility does not lie with any representative or 
stakeholder; that could refer to anybody at all. The responsibility 
lies with the project manager. 
 B:  The project team should not be left make this decision; the 
project manager must take responsibility. 
 C: This issue does not need to be escalated to the project sponsor 
because it is the responsibility of the project manager to make 
this decision. 
 D: It is the responsibility of the project manager to decide 
what communication methods are to be used how and when in 
the project. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
226
 Question 291:  You are regularly referring to your communications  ma nagement 
plan to help guide your project communications. Which of the following would you not 
expect to find in your communications management plan? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: The communications management plan will refer to the 
person who has responsibility for authorizing the release of 
confidential information to stakeholders. 
 B: You wouldn’t normally find information as specific as team 
member addresses and phone numbers in the communications 
management plan. 
 C: For ease of use and standardization, it is common for the 
communications management plan to have a glossary of 
common terminology. 
 D:  At the core of the communication management plan is the 
stakeholder communication requirements. 
 Question 292:  As part of your project, you regularly hold status meetings with 
project team members and influential stakeholders.  You endeavor at all times to ensure 
that these meetings are productive and contribute to successful communication on the 
project. All of the following are techniques to ensure your project meetings are more 
productive except? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Meetings need to have structure around them, and setting 
an agenda, ground rules, and a set time for the meeting to run 
are good ways of improving efficiency. Teleconferencing is not a 
standardized way to make them more productive; the preference 
is for participants to be face-to-face. 
 B: Establishing ground rules for attendance, conduct, and 
follow-up at a meeting will make it more productive. 
 C:  Setting clear start and finish times for a meeting so that 
participants know when they should be there and when they can 
return to work is a way to make meetings more productive.  
 D:  Following a clear and defined agenda will make meetings 
more efficient and productive. 
 Question 293:  While carrying out the work described in your project 
communications plan you go to great lengths to ensure that relevant  i nformation is 
disseminated to the correct stakeholders in the right way at the right time. As a senior 
project manager you know that effective information distribution is a key factor in project 
success. This is because effective information distribution includes all of the following 
techniques except? 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
227
 The correct answer is C. 
 A:  Selecting the appropriate writing style to match stakeholder 
needs is an effective information distribution technique. 
 B:  Presentation techniques are a very effective way of 
distributing information to stakeholders.  
 C: The issue log can be used as a communications tool to let 
stakeholders know the issues are being monitored, but it is not a 
means of information distribution itself.  
 D: Selecting the correct and appropriate choice of media is an 
effective information distribution technique.    
 Question 294: You have decided to study for the PMP ® credential and are currently 
learning the way in which the project life cycle can be  descri  bed in terms of process 
groups associated with initiating, planning, executing, monitoring and controlling, 
and closing activities. You then move on to studying the ways in which successful 
communication occurs in a project. In order to demonstrate how much you have learned, 
you are able to describe to a colleague how some aspect of project communication occurs 
in different process groups. The Manage Communications process occurs within which 
PMBOK ® Guide process group? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A, B, and D: These answers are incorrect because Manage 
Communications is part of the Executing process group.  
 C: Manage Communications is part of the Executing process group.  
 Question 295: You and your project team have been in negotiations with a potential 
supplier for several hours over an important contract that will deliver a large part of the 
one product required to complete your project. You and your team are getting  frustrated 
at the slow rate of progress on the negotiations but know it is important that they are done 
thoroughly. How important is non-verbal communication to the negotiations? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Humans are complex communicators and the non-verbal 
communications we make are always very important, often more 
so than the verbal communications we make.  
 B-D  These answers are incorrect because humans are complex 
communicators and the non-verbal communications we 
make are always very important, often more so than the verbal 
communications we make. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
228
 Question 296:  You have called a team member into your office to deal with 
unacceptable behavior towards other project team members. After the meeting 
you decide to follow up to make clear what  was  discussed. What is the best form of 
communication to use in this instance? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Since this situation is a serious one that needs to be 
documented for future reference, it is best to use formal written 
forms of communication. 
 B: Using formal verbal or any verbal form of communication 
could mean that the message was understood and forgotten. In 
this instance, a formal written form of communication is best. 
 C: Since this situation is a serious one that needs to be 
documented for future reference, it is best to use formal, rather 
than informal, written forms of communication. 
 D:  Using informal verbal or any verbal form of communication 
could mean that the message was understood and forgotten. In 
this instance, a formal written form of communication is best. 
 Question 297: Your project sponsor has asked you to present a detailed project 
update to some high-level stakeholders who are concerned that the project is not meeting 
its agreed timeframes, its agreed budget, nor delivering the quality the customer is 
 expecting . What information and method would be BEST to use in this situation? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: A verbal presentation given casually during a 10-minute 
meeting will not contain the detailed information desired by the 
stakeholders.  
 B: A summary milestone report will not contain the detailed 
information desired by the stakeholders. 
 C:  A PowerPoint presentation outlining the major issues will not 
contain the detailed information desired by the stakeholders.  
 D:  Choosing the most appropriate information and the way 
in which you deliver it is an important decision to ensure the 
efficacy of your project reporting. 
 Question 298:  You are attempting to communicate with various project 
stakeholders, and despite your best efforts you find that the information that you send 
to them is misunderstood. Cultural differences and using unfamiliar technology are 
 the main problems contributing to this lack of understanding. What is the best term to 
describe these characteristics? 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
229
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Decoding is the process that the receiver of the message does 
once the message has been received. 
 B:  Feedback is a process where the receiver provides feedback to 
the sender of the message to facilitate more effective listening. 
 C: In the standard communications model, noise refers to any 
obstacle in the selected medium between sender and receiver 
that can impact the communication. 
 D: Transmission is the process of communicating the message 
via a selected medium. 
 Question 299: You are actively monitoring and controlling the  project 
 communications according to your approved communications management plan and are 
seeking to generate work performance information about the effectiveness of your project 
communications. Which of the following would be least useful to you? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A:  The question is asking about the inputs into the Control 
Communications process, and the project communications are 
an input in this process. 
 B:  The questions is asking about the inputs into the Control 
Communications process, and the issue log is an input in 
this process. 
 C: The questions is asking about the inputs into the Control 
Communications process, and work performance data is an 
input in this process. 
 D: The questions is asking about the inputs into the Control 
Communications process and change requests are an output 
from, not an input into, this process. 
 Question 300: You are using historical data about your project to forecast  an 
 estimated future outcome in your project performance reporting. This is an example of 
what forecasting method? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A:  Budget forecasts are part of earned management, which is an 
example of time series methods, which is the best answer. 
 B:  The judgmental forecasting method uses methods from 
experts such as the Delphi method. 
 C: Econometric methods use tools such as linear regression.  
 D: Earned value is one example of time series method. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
230
 Question 301: Your project team has just finished the first round of soliciting 
information from experts about what they think the forecasted  future  performance on 
your project will be using information supplied to them. You are currently assessing the 
information supplied anonymously by the respondents and plan to request a second 
round of opinions to use in your project forecasts. What forecasting method are you using? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: This is an example of using the Delphi technique, which is an 
example of a judgmental forecasting method.  
 B: Causal is another name for econometric methods, which use 
tools such as linear regression. 
 C: Earned value is one example of a time series method. 
 D:  Econometric methods use tools such as linear regression.    
 Question 302: Which of  the  following would you not expect to see in a detailed 
project performance report? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: Current status of risks and issues would definitely be included 
in a detailed project performance report. 
 B: Staff performance review information would not generally be 
included in project performance reports. This information would 
be included team assessments. 
 C:  The forecasted project completion would definitely be 
included in a detailed project performance report. 
 D:  A clear summary of changes approved since the last 
report would definitely be included in a detailed project 
performance report. 
 Question 303:  Several of your stakeholders are raising issues with you, and  you   are 
documenting their issues in an issue log and providing feedback to the stakeholders 
about the status and any resolution of the issues. Furthermore, you are using the issue log 
as an input into a process because it provides a repository for what has already happened 
in the project and a platform for subsequent communication to be delivered. Which 
process are you involved in? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: The issue log is an important input into the Control 
Communications process because it does identify and document 
what has already happened in the project and provides an 
effective platform for the subsequent communications to be 
delivered to stakeholders. 
 B-D:  These answers are incorrect because the issue log is an 
important input into the Control Communications process. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
231
 Question 304: A project manager should spend approximately how much of their 
 time  communicating to team members and stakeholders to effectively contribute to 
project success? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A:  50% is not correct. It is commonly accepted that communication 
is key to project success, and that a project manager should 
always be undertaking communication, and that 90% of a project 
manager’s time should be spent on communication, with 50% of 
this time spent communicating with the project team.  
 B:  5% is simply not enough time allocated to communications. 
It is commonly accepted that communication is key to 
project success, and that a project manager should always 
be undertaking communication, and that 90% of a project 
manager’s time should be spent on communication, with 50% of 
this time spent communicating with the project team.  
 C: It is commonly accepted that communication is key to 
project success, and that a project manager should always 
be undertaking communication, and that 90% of a project 
manager’s time should be spent on communication, with 50% of 
this time spent communicating with the project team.  
 D: 70% is not correct. It is commonly accepted that 
communication is key to project success, and that a project 
manager should always be undertaking communication, 
and that 90% of a project manager’s time should be spent on 
communication, with 50% of this time spent communicating 
with the project team. 
 Question 305: Which of  the following has been identified as one of the single biggest 
reasons for project success or failure? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: There are many enterprise environmental factors that can 
positively and adversely affect the project but appropriate 
communication is the single biggest reason for project success 
or failure.  
 B: Financial accountability and accuracy will contribute to project 
failure but a lack of appropriate communication is a larger reason.  
 C: Communication is the essential element of project success. 
People need to communicate to be effective. It is true that most 
project problems can be traced back to the lack of appropriate 
communication. A project manager should spend 90% of 
their time communicating, and 50% of this time should be 
communicating with members of the project team.  
 D: Is important that the project sponsor and the project manager 
have a professional relationship but one of the single biggest 
reasons for project success or failure is appropriate communication.    
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
232
 Question 306:  There are  36  communications channels on a project. How many 
stakeholders are there in the project? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A-C:  These answers are not correct. This question requires you 
to take the normal formula for calculating communications 
channels and use it backward. The formula is (n (n - 1)) / 2. So 
working backward, the answer is ((36 x 2) / 9)+1 = 9. 
 D:  This question requires you to take the normal formula for 
calculating communications channels and use it backward. 
The formula is (n (n - 1)) / 2. So working backward, the answer 
is ((36 x 2) / 9)+1 = 9. If pressed for time in the exam you could 
quickly work out all four answers. 
 Project Risk Management 
 Question 307: What is  the  best description of the objectives of the risk management work 
you will undertake on your project? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Risks can be both positive and negative. If they are positive, 
you want them to happen; if they are negative, you don’t want 
them to happen. 
 B: This answer is incorrect because it describes your risk 
management objectives the wrong way. Risks can be both 
positive and negative. If they are positive, you want them to 
happen; if they are negative, you don’t want them to happen.  
 C:  This answer is incorrect because you will aim to increase 
the probability and impact of positive risks. Risks can be both 
positive and negative. If they are positive, you want them to 
happen; if they are negative, you don’t want them to happen.  
 D: This answer is not the best answer because it does not 
describe all the work you will do in relation to positive risks. 
Risks can be both positive and negative. If they are positive, you 
want them to happen; if they are negative, you don’t want them 
to happen. 
 Question 308:  All of  the  following are characteristics of risks except? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: Risk is always in the future because once the timeframe for a 
risk has passed, it is no longer worth assessing.  
 B: Risk is an uncertain event or condition, and the point of risk 
management activities is to anticipate this uncertainty and the 
resulting impact on the project. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
233
 C: Is a risk occurs, it will have an effect on at least one project 
objective because if it didn’t, you wouldn’t be interested in it.  
 D: One of the risk strategies available to you is avoidance. 
 Question 309: When completing your risk management plan you also decide to 
 create  a contingency plan. What is the main reason for creating a risk contingency plan? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  Unknown risks cannot be managed proactively; contingency 
plans are for unknown risks. 
 B:  Risk contingency plans deal with all unknown risks, no matter 
if they are large or small. 
 C: Risk contingency plans deal with risks that haven’t been 
identified in the risk management plan.  
 D:  Risk contingency plans deal with unknown risks, 
not known risks.  
 Question 310:  While  completing your risk management plan you also decide to 
create a fallback plan. What is the main reason for creating a fallback plan? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  Risk fallback, or contingency, plans deal with all unknown 
risks, no matter if they are large or small.  
 B:  Unknown risks are risks that cannot be managed proactively, 
and fallback, or contingency, plans are for unknown risks.  
 C: Risk fallback, or contingency, plans deal with risks that 
haven’t been identified in the risk management plan. 
 D: Risk fallback, or contingency, plans deal with unknown risks, 
not known risks. 
 Question 311:  The  willingness to accept varying degrees of risk is called what? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  Risk tolerance is the degree to which you will or will not 
accept risk on your project. 
 B: Risk acceptance is a strategy for dealing with risk. It does not 
refer to the willingness to accept varying degrees of risk.  
 C: Risk planning is the process you undertake order to 
proactively manage uncertainty of a project. 
 D: Risk analysis is one of the tools that you can use to analyze the 
probability and impact of identified risks. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
234
 Question 312:  When  should you begin risk management on a project? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A-C:  These answers are incorrect because risks can occur at any 
stage in the project. You should begin risk management planning 
as soon as the project is initiated or conceived. 
 D: Risk can affect a project as soon as it is conceived, and you 
need to be aware, even at a basic level, of the potential impacts 
of these risks. Risk management occurs throughout the life of the 
project. 
 Question 313:  During  a  meeting to develop your risk management plan, a senior 
team member questions whether you have all the required inputs to develop a robust risk 
management plan that is appropriate for your project. Which of the following is not an 
input that you could use to complete this work successfully? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: The risk management plan is the output from, not an input to, 
the Plan Risk Management process in the PMBOK ®  Guide, so this 
is the correct answer. 
 B-D: The inputs into the Plan Risk Management process include 
the project management plan, project charter, stakeholder 
register, enterprise environmental factors, and organizational 
process assets. 
 Question 314:  You  and  your project team are currently involved in the process to 
plan your particular approach to risk management on your project and are using a variety 
of tools and techniques to assist you in producing the risk management plan. Which of 
the following is not a tool or technique used during the Plan Risk Management process? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Risk probability and impact assessment is a tool and technique 
used during the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process. 
 B: Analytical techniques are one of the three tools and 
techniques used during the Plan Risk Management process, the 
other two being expert judgment and meetings. 
 C: Expert judgment is one of the three tools used in the Plan Risk 
Management process, the other two being analytical techniques 
and meetings. 
 D: Meetings are one of the three tools and techniques used in the 
Plan Risk Management process, the other two being analytical 
techniques and expert judgment. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
235
 Question 315: As part  of  your risk management planning you develop a diagram 
showing the hierarchy of project risks arranged by risk category and subcategory. What is 
this diagram commonly called? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  The risk assessment register is merely a list of known risks and 
their assessments. It does not break risks down into categories 
and subcategories; this is the job of the risk breakdown structure. 
 B:  Your risk breakdown structure does what the other breakdown 
structures do (i.e. WBS and OBS): it takes a high-level items 
and breaks them down into easier-to-understand-and-manage 
subcomponents arranged by category. 
 C: The probability and impact matrix shows the combined 
probability and impact of identified risks should they occur on 
the project. The risk breakdown structure shows the hierarchy of 
project risks arranged by risk category and subcategory. 
 D: The risk register contains information about risk categories, 
risk events, qualitative risk analysis, quantitative risk analysis, 
and plan risk responses. The risk breakdown structure shows 
the hierarchy of project risks arrange by risk category and 
subcategory. 
 Question 316: Your  risk management planning session has produced definitions of 
risk probability and impact. These are used during which PMBOK ®  Guide process? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A:  The purpose of the standardized definitions of risk probability 
and impact is to assist with the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis 
Process, not the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process.  
 B: The purpose of the standardized definitions of risk probability 
and impact is to assist with the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis 
Process, not the Identify Risks process. 
 C:  Before qualitatively assessing risks, you must have a 
predetermined and pre-agreed definition of the different 
categories to make sure the subjective nature of qualitative 
analysis is standardized. 
 D:  The purpose of the standardized definitions of risk probability 
and impact is to assist with the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis 
Process, not the Plan Risk Management process. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
236
 Question 317:  Your  team  is carrying out the process of determining which risks may 
affect the project and documenting their characteristics. You are using a variety of tools 
and techniques, including documentation, reviews, information gathering techniques, 
checklist analysis, and SWOT analysis. What is the name of this process? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: The Perform Qualitative Risk analysis process is performed 
after the individual risks have been identified in the Identify 
Risks process. 
 B: Identify Risks is the first stage in the risk management process 
after you have completed your risk management plan and it uses 
these tools and techniques to prepare the first iteration of the 
risk register. 
 C:  The Perform Quantitative Risk analysis process is performed 
after the individual risks have been identified in the Identify 
Risks process. 
 D:  The Plan Risk Management process is the first process 
completed, and it produces the risk management plan. It is 
the Identify Risks process that uses these particular tools and 
techniques to produce the first iteration of the risk register.    
 Question 318:  You  are  congratulating your team for the time and effort taken to 
develop the first iteration of your project risk register. You are now contemplating the 
many uses that your risk register will have in your project and the many different areas 
in which it can be used as an input into the work being done. Which of the following 
PMBOK ®  Guide processes does not use the risk register as an input? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: The Control Risks process does use the risk register as an input 
so it knows what risks it is intending to monitor and control.  
 B: The risk register is not used as an input into this process. 
 C: The Plan Procurement Management process does use a risk 
register as an input so it can take into account contract-related 
risks that have been identified. 
 D:  The Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process does use a risk 
register as an input so it knows which risks to perform qualitative 
risk analysis on. 
 Question 319:  You and your team are in the process of identifying all potential 
uncertainty and risk on your project. You wish to ensure that your risk register is as 
comprehensive as possible; as  such  you are looking for as many relevant inputs as 
possible to assist you in this process. Which of the following is not an input into this 
process? 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
237
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  Activity duration estimates are a useful input when identifying 
risks because they allow you to focus on specific time allowances 
that may be required. 
 B:  Assumptions analysis is a tool and technique, not an input, 
used in the Identify Risks process in the PMBOK ®  Guide so this is 
the correct answer. 
 C:  The stakeholder register is a useful input because it identifies 
stakeholders, and they can then be asked for input to assist with 
the identified risks. 
 D:  Activity cost estimates are useful in identifying risks because 
they provide a quantitative assessment of the risk.    
 Question 320: You are using your risk management plan to guide the work needed 
 to  identify both positive and negative risks on your project. Which of the following is not a 
tool or technique you would find useful to complete this work? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Assumptions analysis allows you to document any and all 
assumptions made as part of the risk of unification process. 
 B: Risk registers are typically built up using a variety of 
information-gathering techniques in order to solicit information 
from people with experience in your type of project. 
 C: Risk urgency assessment is a tool and technique from the 
Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process, not the Identify Risks 
process in the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 D: Diagramming techniques are useful tools to use to identify 
risks and their root causes. 
 Question 321: You and your team are completing the process of identifying risks 
 on  your project, and you wish to use a particular type of diagram to represent risk 
characteristics. All of the following are diagramming techniques used during the Identify 
Risks process except? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: The process flowchart can be used to identify points in a 
process where risk or uncertainty is greatest. 
 B: The cause and effect diagram can be used to get to the root 
cause of any identified risks. 
 C: A Pareto chart is a type of histogram that shows the rank 
ordering of quality defects by type of category so that corrective 
action can be focused in the correct place. 
 D:  An influence diagram can show how one risk may impact on 
the probability or impact of another risk occurring.    
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
238
 Question 322:  Your team has successfully identified many categories of risks, and 
 within each category they have identified specific risk events that may impact your 
project. You have documented all of this information in an initial list of identified risks as 
part of the iterative development of your risk register. At this early stage, this document 
will generally have all of the following information on it except? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: Your initial list of identified risks may describe the known 
causes of individual risk events. 
 B: Your initial list of identified risks will describe individual 
risk events. 
 C: Your initial list of identified risks will describe the 
consequences of individual risk events should they occur. 
 D:  You don’t determine probability of risks until completing 
qualitative and quantitative risk analysis, so the first iterations of 
your list of identified risks may not have probability information 
on it. 
 Question 323:  Your team is carrying out the process to identify the risks to the 
project and is identifying  strengths and weaknesses of the   organization by looking at 
the way these strengths offset threats and opportunities that may serve to overcome 
weaknesses. What technique are they using? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: SWOT stands for strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, 
and threats. 
 B: Expert judgment relates to soliciting people’s opinion and 
experience. 
 C: PERT analysis is used in other parts of project management, 
particularly the critical path method and three-point estimating.  
 D: PEST analysis describes political, economic, social, and 
technological analysis of a particular event or organization.    
 Question 324: As project manager on a project, you have begun the  process  of 
qualitatively assessing the probability and impact to risks that have been identified on 
your project. Which of the following is not an input you would find useful in completing 
this work? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: The project charter is used as an input into several processes, 
but not the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process in the 
PMBOK ® Guide, so this is the correct answer. 
 B: The risk management plan is an essential input into this the 
Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process in the PMBOK ® Guide. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
239
 C: The risk register is an essential input into the Perform 
Qualitative Risk Analysis process in the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 D: The scope baseline is used as an input into the Perform 
Qualitative Risk Analysis process in the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 Question 325:  Your  team is using the project risk register and has started a 
quantitative assessment of the risks. You tell your team that it is better to start with 
qualitative analysis first. What reasons do you give your team for this decision? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: This answer is incorrect because quantitative analysis does 
not use any form of intiuitve interpretation of risks. 
 B:  This answer is incorrect because qualitative analysis is 
subjective and does not assign quantifiable and accurate 
numerical values. 
 C: This answer is incorrect because qualitative risk analysis is 
generally done first to prioritize risks quickly and to indicate 
which risks can and should be subject to the more accurate 
quantitative analysis. 
 D: Qualitative risk analysis is done first to prioritize risks quickly 
and indicate which risks can and should be subject to the more 
accurate quantitative analysis. 
 Question 326: Your team is using your risk register to prioritize risks  for  further 
analysis by assessing their probability of occurrence and impact. What PMBOK ® Guide 
process best describes the work they are carrying out? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: The Plan Risk Management process is the process that outlines 
how your risk management activities will be executed on the project.  
 B:  Quantitative risk analysis uses numerical data of probability 
and impact to get an assessment of time or dollars.  
 C: The Identify Risks process is the first of the risk processes that 
identifies individual risks but does not carry out any assessment 
of probability or impact. 
 D:  Assessing probability and impact to determine priorities is a 
characteristic of the Qualitative Risk Analysis process. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
240
 Question 327:  While completing your assessment of the risks on your project, you 
begin to examine the ones with the greatest potential threat  to   your project. You are 
using a diagram to help you complete this task, and you are currently looking at the high 
priority risks for further analysis. What diagram would best help you? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: The probability and impact matrix shows the low, medium, 
and high risks on the project. 
 B: A scatter diagram is generally used during quality 
management, and it plots two variables on the X and Y axis.  
 C:  A Pareto chart lists the hierarchical order of the frequency 
of known events or defects to allow you to assess which 20% of 
events or defects are causing 80% of the problems.  
 D:  The risk register contains information about risk categories, 
risk events, qualitative risk analysis, quantitative risk analysis, 
and plan risk responses. It is the risk breakdown structure. It 
shows the hierarchy of project risks by risk category. 
 Question 328:  An important aspect of your qualitative risk analysis is determining 
 the  validity of the information you are using. What is this technique commonly called? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Since qualitative analysis contains a high degree of subjectivity, 
it is important that you determine the quality of the data you 
are using. 
 B: Assumptions analysis documents the assumptions made 
during the risk management processes. 
 C: Risk urgency assessment looks at the timeframe for risks 
occurring, with those risks in the near future deemed to be more 
urgent than those that may occur further off.  
 D: Risk categorization is one of the tools that is used to create the 
risk breakdown structure. 
 Question 329:  Your team is completing the process of numerically analyzing the 
effect of  identified risks on your project objectives. Which PMBOK ®  Guide process best 
describes the work they are carrying out? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: The Plan Risk Responses process develops potential responses 
to identified risks. 
 B:  Qualitative risk analysis does not use objective numerical data.  
 C:  The key word here is  numerical , which clearly indicates a 
quantitative approach. 
 D: The Identify Risks process is the process where risk and 
uncertainty are identified and the risk register is created. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
241
 Question 330: After  completing  work to perform qualitative risk analysis on 
identified risks in your risk register, you have produced several updates to your risk 
register. Which of the following processes described in the PMBOK ® Guide indirectly uses 
these updates? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: The risk register update is indirectly used as an input into the 
Identify Risks process because the risk register is refined and 
subject to iterations. 
 B: The Project Integration Management knowledge area of the 
PMBOK ® Guide contains six processes, none of which uses risk 
register updates as an input. 
 C: The Project Time Management knowledge area of the 
PMBOK ® Guide contains seven processes, none of which uses 
risk register updates as an input. 
 D: The Plan Risk Responses process does not utilize risk 
register updates. 
 Question 331: Three- point  estimating is a commonly used technique for gathering 
and analyzing data. It is used in all of the following project areas except? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Three-point estimating is useful for quantifying the impacts of 
risks using an optimistic, realistic, and pessimistic assessment of 
the risk probability or impact. 
 B: Three-point estimating is used in project time management 
for getting a weighted average of optimistic, realistic, and 
pessimistic time estimates. 
 C: Any time you are using numbers such as dollar values, length 
of time, or quantifying the impact of risks, the three-point 
estimating technique will come in handy. 
 D: Three-point estimating is used in project cost management 
for getting a weighted average of optimistic, realistic, and 
pessimistic cost estimates. 
 Question 332: If a  project  has a 40% chance of achieving a $17,000 profit and a 60% 
chance of achieving a $20,000 loss, what is the expected monetary value of the project? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A-C:  These answers are incorrect. Remember that EMV = total 
probability x impact = (.4 x $17,000)+(.6 x -$20,000) = $6,800 - 
$12,000 = -$5,200.  
 D: EMV = total probability x impact = (.4 x $17,000)+
(.6 x -$20,000) = $6,800 - $12,000 = -$5,200.  
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
242
 Question 333: If a project has a 65% chance of a $200,000  profit  and a 35% chance of 
a $100,000 loss, what is the expected monetary value for the project? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A-C:  These answers are incorrect. Remember that EMV = total 
probability x impact = (.65 x $200,000)+(.35 x -$100,000) = 
$130,000 - $35,000 = $95,000.  
 D:  EMV = total probability x impact = (.65 x $200,000)+
(.35 x -$100,000) = $130,000 - $35,000 = $95,000.  
 Question 334:  If a risk  event has a 80% chance of occurring, and if it does occur, 
the consequence will be a $10,000 cost to the project, what does -$8,000 represent to 
the project? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: This may look like the correct answer in the sense that the 
-$8000 does represent a quantified risk, but the correct answer is 
the expected monetary value. 
 B: This answer is incorrect because it is not a term referenced 
within the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 C: What-if analysis is generally performed by a computer and 
involves complex statistical analysis of events and probabilities.  
 D: This represents the expected monetary value of the risk 
event occurring. 
 Question 335: After completing your risk register and a quantitative assessment of 
 the  financial value of prioritized risks on your project, you have a dollar amount added to 
your project budget. What is this amount typically called? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: A contingent response strategy is a type of risk response that is 
triggered by a predefined trigger or event. 
 B: A management reserve is generally an amount held and 
controlled by management; projects that encounter completely 
unforeseeable risk events can apply to use some of it.  
 C: A slush fund is a common term used by some organizations 
to describe an amount of money used for various unspecified 
purposes. 
 D: A contingency reserve is budget included in the cost baseline 
that is allocated to identified risks that have been assessed 
quantitatively. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
243
 Question 336: Which of  the  following is not an example of a probability distribution? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A, C, D: Beta, Normal, and Triangular distributions are all used 
in quantitative risk analysis. 
 B: Obtuse distribution is not a term referenced within the 
PMBOK ® Guide. 
 Question 337: Your team  is  completing an exercise to determine which risks have 
the greatest potential impact on your project. They are assessing the extent to which the 
uncertainty of each element of the project affects the risk being examined when all other 
uncertain elements are held at static baseline values. What is this technique commonly 
known as? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: A tornado diagram graphically represents risk areas of the 
project and the relative degree of uncertainty or sensitivity of 
each risk category. 
 B:  Expected monetary value analysis takes the probability 
and known numerical impact to determine a financial or time 
analysis of the risk. 
 C: Sensitivity analysis is the technique to determine the 
relative impact of a particular risk on independent project 
variables. A tornado diagram can be used to show the results of 
the sensitivity analysis. 
 D: Modeling and simulation of risk are generally completed by 
computers because there is statistical analysis that needs to be 
completed. 
 Question 338: You are currently performing risk analysis on a large and extremely 
complex project. Your project team decides that the  most  comprehensive way to 
approach the process of risk analysis is to examine all the possible outcomes using 
an iterative computer simulation process to model a range of variables taken from a 
probability distribution. What is this technique known as? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Sensitivity analysis is the technique used to determine the 
relative impact of a particular risk on independent project 
variables. A tornado diagram can be used to show the results of 
the sensitivity analysis. 
 B:  Expected monetary value analysis takes the probability 
and known numerical impact to determine a financial or time 
analysis of the risk. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
244
 C:  Monte Carlo, or what-if, analysis examines a range of possible 
outcomes from different project variables to present a risk profile 
for the project. 
 D:  Ishikawa analysis is the process of using a cause and effect, or 
fishbone, diagram to determine the root cause of risk events.    
 Question 339:  You  have  documented and quantitatively assessed the risk to your 
project and the potential outcomes in a diagram to show the different outcomes of events 
should a particular probability occur, in order to determine the expected monetary value. 
What is this technique generally called? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: What-if scenario analysis uses computer simulations to 
look at all the potential risk pathways, probability, and impact 
throughout the project to get a likely probability of each risk path.  
 B: A decision tree analysis sets out in a diagram the various 
probability of outcomes and a value of each outcome so that an 
overall expected monetary value can be determined. 
 C:  Ishikawa analysis is the process of using a cause and effect, or 
fishbone, diagram to determine the root cause of risk events.  
 D:  A tornado diagram graphically represents risk areas of the 
project and the relative degree of uncertainty or sensitivity of 
each risk category. 
 Question 340:  Your team has completed the process of assessing and documenting 
 risks  that may occur on your project. What is the next step to complete? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Identifying risks is not the next process because it would have 
already been completed in order to get to this stage.  
 B: Control risks is not the next step becuase you first have to plan 
your risk responses. 
 C:  After identifying your project risks, the next step is to plan a 
response to each one. 
 D:  Execution of the project tasks is not related to whether you 
have completed the process of assessing and documenting risks 
that may occur on your project. 
 Question 341:  A project manager is faced with making a large decision about a risk 
that her project team has identified. The risk involves the design of a car component. 
It has been found that the weld of the component where the load-bearing flange is 
located will corrode in a high salt environment. If this takes place, the component may 
fail and injure the driver and passenger. The project team decides that the design of the 
component should be modified by using corrosion-resistant materials.  This  will eliminate 
the risk from consideration. What is this risk response technique called? 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
245
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Risk rejection is not a term referenced within the PMBOK ® 
Guide and not one of the appropriate risk response strategies. 
 B: Risk acceptance is allowing the risk to happen and dealing 
with it if it occurs. 
 C:  Risk avoidance is eliminating the risk from consideration by 
doing something that will eliminate it as a possibility.  
 D: Risk transfer is transferring the risk to someone other than the 
project team, such as an insurance company or outside supplier. 
 Question 342: You are managing a project to build a large hydro dam for electrical 
power generation, which will be built over a known  seismically  active area. Your 
team decides to strengthen the core structure of the dam to better tolerate any earth 
movements that may occur. This is an example of what sort of risk response? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A:  This is an example of risk mitigation; acceptance would be 
taking no action and accepting the consequences should the 
dam be struck by an earthquake. 
 B: This is an example of risk mitigation; risk transfer is usually in 
the form of insurance. 
 C:  This is an example of risk mitigation; risk avoidance would 
mean building the hydro dam in a less seismically active area.  
 D: Strengthening the dam shows that you are trying to mitigate 
the damage to the structure should an earthquake occur.    
 Question 343: You have decided to take out insurance on your project to cover  your 
 project financially if a risk occurs. This is an example of what sort of risk response? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  This answer is correct because buying insurance is a process 
of transferring the impact of the risk to another party. 
 B: Taking out insurance is an example of risk transference, not 
risk mitigation. 
 C:  Taking out insurance is not an example of a sharing risk 
response. Partnering with another organization to minimize the 
risk would be an example of sharing. 
 D: Taking out insurance is not an example of avoidance. 
Deciding not to do the project would be an example of 
avoidance. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
246
 Question 344:  All of  the  following are acceptable responses to positive risks except? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: You can choose to accept positive risks as an acceptable risk 
response. 
 B: Mitigation is a response to negative risks. 
 C:  You can choose to enhance the chances of positive risk 
occurring as an acceptable risk response. 
 D:  You can choose to exploit the strengths you have to increase 
the chances of a positive risk occurring as an acceptable risk 
response. 
 Question 345:  You are about  to  tender for a large, multi-billion dollar infrastructure 
project, and your general manager has just announced a joint venture with another 
company to help with risk management. This is an example of what sort of risk response? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Sharing involves allocating some or all of the ownership of the 
risk to a third party. 
 B: Avoidance is a strategy for a negative risk response, and the 
question outlines a positive risk. 
 C: Mitigation is a strategy for a negative risk response, and the 
question outlines a positive risk. 
 D: If you were to use an exploit strategy, it would, for example, be 
to appoint senior members of your team to the project. 
 Question 346:  You and your project team have completed your risk register, 
including planned responses to identified risks. What is your next step? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Planned risk responses represent extra work to be done on the 
project and as such they must be included in the scope baseline 
for the project. The scope baseline includes the scope statement, 
the work breakdown structure, and work breakdown structure 
dictionary. 
 B: Before beginning any other processes, the extra work required 
and the planned responses should be captured in the scope 
baseline, which includes the work breakdown structure. You 
cannot yet begin to control the risks. 
 C:  Before updating the risk register, you should ensure that the 
required work was included in the scope baseline. 
 D: Before updating the sponsor, the planned responses should 
be captured in the scope baseline, which includes the work 
breakdown structure. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
247
 Question 347: You  have  completed the final steps to develop a complete risk 
register with identified risks, a priority assessment, a qualitative assessment of all risks, a 
quantitative assessment of the top priority risks, and you have also identified appropriate 
risk responses for each risk. Which of the following is not an expected output from 
completing this work? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: The specific project documents that will be updated will be 
the risk register to include your planned risk responses. 
 B:  Once you have produced your plan risk responses, you may 
need to update several aspects of the project management plan 
to reflect the plan risk responses. 
 C: A specific part of the project management plan that may be 
updated as a result of the plan risk responses will be the cost 
management plan, especially if there are costs associated with 
your planned risk responses. 
 D: Contingent response strategies are techniques used in the 
Plan Risk Response process in the PMBOK ®  Guide, which is what 
the information contained in the question is indicating you have 
just completed. 
 Question 348: Your project  has  been underway for 9 months when a major problem 
occurs that is not included in the risk register. What is your BEST course of action? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Given that the question outlines that this is a major problem, 
you will not have time to evaluate the risk in any manner. 
 B:  Given that the question outlines that this is a major problem, 
you will not have time to evaluate the risk in any manner. If you 
were to do so, however, you would perform qualitative analysis. 
 C: In this case, the risk has occurred and has created an 
impact on the project, so there is no need to begin a formal 
evaluation process. Your risk response plan would identify that a 
workaround is the best option for unanticipated risks. 
 D: Given that this has been identified as a major problem, your 
best course of action in this instance is to create a workaround 
first and then contact your project sponsor.    
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
248
 Question 349:  Despite  your  best efforts at anticipating and documenting all risk 
and uncertainty on your project, you have encountered a completely unforeseeable risk 
that will incur significant extra cost to your project. You decide to approach your project 
sponsor and ask for permission to get these extra funds from a pool of money that they 
control. What is this pool of money generally referred to as? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: A slush fund is a generic term sometimes used by companies 
to refer to a pool of money used for various purposes, not all of 
which are risk-related. 
 B: A contingency reserve is an amount added to a project budget 
to reflect the quantitative analysis of probability and the financial 
impact of identified risks. 
 C: The management reserve is a pool of money controlled by 
project sponsors and senior management to be used for projects 
that encounter unforeseeable risks. 
 D:  The control account is a management control point where 
scope, budget, actual cost, and schedule are integrated and 
computed to an end value for performance measurement.    
 Question 350:  The  project  you are working on is over halfway through, and you have 
begun to measure that price increases on the steel that you require for the project have 
gone 8% over your estimate for price increases over the timeframe of the project. As a 
result, you put in place a policy to procure all the remaining steel required for the project 
and pay for it to be stored in a warehouse instead of ordering the steel as you require it. 
This is an example of what? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: In this instance, your contingent response strategy would 
have documented that should prices increase over the estimates, 
this would constitute a trigger to enact a particular contingent 
response strategy. 
 B: This is not an example of risk mitigation; it is an example of 
a contingent response strategy being enacted in response to 
defined triggers. 
 C:  This is not an example of transference; it is an example of 
a contingent response strategy being enacted in response to 
defined triggers. 
 D:  This is not an example of exploiting; it is an example of a 
contingent response strategy being enacted in response to define 
triggers. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
249
 Question 351: You are  using  your risk management plan and your risk register 
to check if your assessment of risks is accurate, if there are any new risks, or if new 
information is available about existing risks. Which of the following inputs would not be 
of use to you to complete this work? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  The project management plan is an input into the Control 
Risks process because it contains several subsidiary plans that 
will be useful in effectively monitoring and controlling risks.  
 B: Quality control measurements are not an input into the Control 
Risk process in the PMBOK ® Guide, so this is the correct answer.  
 C: In order to effectively control risks, you need some sort of 
information about what is occurring on the project in order to 
determine if there is a variance between what you are planned in 
relation to risks and what is occurring. 
 D:  The risk register is an essential input into the Control 
Risks process because it outlines all the identified risks, their 
probability, and impact, plus the plan risk responses. 
 Question 352: You are conducting the process of implementing your risk  response 
 plans, tracking identified risks, monitoring residual risks, and identifying new risks. What 
is this PMBOK ®  Guide process called? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: There is no process called Assess and Control Risks.  
 B: Risk management is the broad term used for the Risk 
Management knowledge area. 
 C: There is no process called Risk Assessment.  
 D:  The Control Risks process is where you continually track the 
identified risks and look out for new risks.    
 Question 353: During  your  regular monitoring of the risks identified on your project, 
you examine and document the effectiveness of risk responses in dealing with identified 
risks and their root causes. What technique are you using? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: Ishikawa analysis uses fishbone, or cause and effect, diagrams 
to look at root causes of identified effects. 
 B:  Conducting a risk audit is a useful technique for ensuring that 
your planned risk responses are effective.  
 C: Risk urgency assessment looks at the timeframe for the risk 
occurring, with those risks in the near future deemed to be more 
urgent than those that may occur further off. 
 D: Trend analysis is used to document and determine any trends 
that may be developing in quality management. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
250
 Question 354:   The  project team members assigned responsibility for controlling 
risks on your project are doing a great job. Which of the following is not an expected 
output of the work they are completing? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: Specific parts of the project management plan that will be 
updated as a result of carrying out the Control Risks process risks 
will be the risk management plan. 
 B: Change requests are an output from the Control Risks process 
in the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 C:  Organizational Process Assets updates are an output from the 
Control Risks process in the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 D:  Work performance data is an input into, not an output from, 
the Control Risks process in the PMBOK ® Guide, so this is the 
correct answer. 
 Project Procurement Management 
 Question 355:  During the  process of  procurement management the organization you 
work for can be all of the following except? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: You can be both a buyer and seller of products and services on 
your project. 
 B: You can be the seller of services responding to some form 
of request. 
 C: During procurement management processes you need to be 
aware that any question on the PMP ® exam could indicate your 
company as either a buyer or a seller of products or services.  
 D: You can be the buyer of goods and services from other 
providers as part of your procurement strategy on your project. 
 Question 356:  As part of your commitment to advancing the profession of project 
management you are tutoring candidates wishing to sit the PMP ®  examination. The 
session you are about to give  is  focused on the Project Procurement Management 
knowledge area in the PMBOK ® Guide. What is the generally accepted correct sequence 
of processes in the Project Procurement Management knowledge area? 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
251
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  The logical order of this knowledge area is to Plan, then 
Conduct, then Control, and finally Close Procurements. 
Remember, though that this knowledge area, like all the others, 
has a strong iterative component and there will be feedback 
loops throughout the processes. 
 B-D: These answers are incorrect because the logical order of this 
knowledge area is to Plan, then Conduct, then Control, and finally 
Close Procurements. Remember, though, that this knowledge 
area, like all the others, has a strong iterative component and 
there will be feedback loops throughout the processes. 
 Question 357: You are carrying out the Contract Management and Change  Control 
 processes required to develop and administer contracts for you project. What is this 
PMBOK ® Guide knowledge area called? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: Plan Procurement Management is a specific process whereas 
the Project Procurement management knowledge area includes 
all the processes referred to in the question. 
 B: Close Procurements is a specific process whereas the Project 
Procurement management knowledge area includes all the 
processes referred to in the question. 
 C: Project integration management does not specifically address 
all of these processes. 
 D: Plan Procurement Management is the knowledge area 
focused on the processes necessary to purchase or acquire 
products, services, or results from external sources.    
 Question 358: All of  the  following are examples of legally binding agreements except? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: An agreement when used to mean a legal contract between 
two or more parties is a legally binding agreement.  
 B:  A subcontract is a legally binding agreement. 
 C: Organizational Process Assets do not constitute a legally 
binding agreement. Depending on the industry, country, 
context, or project type, there are many types of legally binding 
documents in addition to the usual contracts.  
 D: A purchase order given by a buyer to a seller is a legally 
binding agreement and promises to pay for goods or services 
rendered. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
252
 Question 359:  You are  just  about to begin the process of procuring services from 
external providers and you think there may be a standard set of rules governing this 
process. Where would it be BEST to look for these rules? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: Any lessons learned from a previous project may give you an 
insight into what went well and what did not go so well, but it will 
not contain the standard set of rules governing the processes in 
the organization. 
 B: The Organizational Process Assets will describe the processes, 
templates, and other documents the organization uses in the 
procurement process. 
 C: The PMBOK ® Guide does not contain a standard set of rules or 
procuring services from external providers. The Organizational 
Process Assets would, though. 
 D:  Your organization’s legal team will most likely directly access 
any Organizational Process Assets that the organization has.    
 Question 360: You have completed the work described in the contract as per the 
 required   specifications but the customer is complaining that the product is not what they 
wanted. What is your BEST course of action? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A-C:  These answers are incorrect because the question clearly 
states that you have completed the contract work as per the 
contract specifications. You must enter the Close Procurements 
process. This process should have provision for any contractual 
disputes. 
 D:  The question clearly states that you have completed the 
contract work as per the contract specifications. You must enter 
the Close Procurements process. This process should have 
provision for any contractual disputes. 
 Question 361: Which of  the  following is not a term used to describe the buyer 
in a contract? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: Your client is a good example of a buyer in a contract, and 
your organization would be the seller. 
 B: The term entrepreneur is never used to describe the buyer in 
a contract. The term buyer is a very formal way of describing a 
variety of more usual descriptions. This is one of those situations 
where you may need to translate a formal PMBOK ®  Guide term 
into one you use more regularly. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
253
 C: Somebody requesting services from you is a good example of 
a buyer in a contract. 
 D: The prime contractor to a contract will go on to buy services 
and goods from other sellers, and as such they are buyer in a 
contract. 
 Question 362: Which of  the  following is not a term used to describe the seller 
in a contract? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: A service provider will sell goods or services to a buyer. 
 B:  A vendor is simply another way of saying seller. 
 C: The term seller is a very formal way of describing a variety of 
more usual descriptions. This is one of those situations where 
you may need to translate a formal PMBOK ® Guide term into one 
you use more regularly. 
 D: A contractor will provide goods and services to the buyer in 
contract, and as such they are a seller. 
 Question 363: You and your project team are completing the process of producing 
your procurement management plan and want to make sure that you  have   completed a 
robust process and used all possible and appropriate inputs. Which of the following is not 
an input into the work to plan procurement management on your project? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A:  Your requirements documentation will be a very valuable 
input into this process because it will outline any contractual or 
legal implications that need to be taken into consideration when 
making procurement decisions. 
 B: The activity resource requirements is a useful place for you to 
be able to determine whether there are particular resources you 
will have to procure from external providers.  
 C:  The stakeholder register will provide useful information 
on individual stakeholders and their interest in the project, 
particularly as they relate to contractual decisions.  
 D:  Make-or-buy decisions are an output of the Plan Procurement 
Management process. It is worth noting that with 11 inputs this 
process is the one with the most inputs.    
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
254
 Question 364:  You are carrying out the procurement of services necessary for 
your project.  After consulting with your Organizational Process Assets, specifically the 
procurement guidelines, which specify that you are to use the most commonly used 
contract type, you offer the seller what type of contract? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: A time and materials form of contract is generally only used in 
small or emergency works and as such is not the most common 
form of procurement contract. 
 B: The firm-fixed-price is the most common form of 
procurement contract. 
 C:  The Fixed-price-incentive-fee form of contract is a popular 
form of contract, but the most popular form of contract is the 
firm-fixed-price contract. 
 D:  The cost-plus-incentive-fee form of contract is a popular form 
of contract, but the most popular form of contract is the firm-
fixed-price contract. 
 Question 365: You discover that there is a part of the project that contains some risk. 
 Your strategy to deal with this risk is to subcontract the work to an outside supplier by 
using a firm-fixed-price contract. Which of the following must you do? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: This answer is incorrect. Assigning one of your staff members 
does not address an issue that the suplier should be dealing with. 
 B: This answer is incorrect. You should ensure that the supplier 
is aware of all potential risks before the contract is signed. 
 C:  This answer is incorrect. It is suggesting you engage in 
unethical behavior. 
 D: In a fixed-price contract, the supplier is obligated to deliver the 
contracted-for item at a fixed price. The supplier is aware of the 
risk and will put an allowance for the risk in the contracted price. 
This often means that the project team will pay the supplier for 
the cost of the risk regardless of whether the risk occurs.    
 Question 366: You are the project manager for a project that is well underway. You 
are using a contractor that has agreed to a fixed-price contract that calls for a single, lump 
sum payment on completion of the contract. The contractor’s project manager contacts 
you and informs you that cash flow problems are making it difficult for the contractor to 
 pay  employees and subcontractors. The contractor then asks you for a partial payment for 
work accomplished to date. What is your best course of action? 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
255
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  This may seem to be the technically correct thing to do, but it 
will cause major problems for your project and for the contractor. 
You would be better off making a provision to pay the contractor 
by negotiating a change to the contract. 
 B:  Although it is not to exactly to the letter of the contract, you 
are going to have much more trouble if the seller cannot make 
the payroll and cannot complete the contract because their 
employees will not work without pay. The best thing would be to 
change the contract in some way that is mutually beneficial. This 
is not really a procurement question but an ethical one, although 
there is considerable overlap. 
 C: You may end up paying for the work, but you must first 
negotiate a change to the current contract to allow such 
payments to the contractor. 
 D: You may end up paying for the work, but you must first 
negotiate a change to the current contract to allow such 
payments to the contractor. 
 Question 367: Your organization is providing services to another organization as 
part of  a   project. Which of the following contract types would your organization most 
prefer to engage in to carry out the work? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A-C: These answers are incorrect because as the seller (in this 
instance, you) would prefer a form of contract that is not fixed-price.  
 D: The type of contract selected will reflect which party adopts 
the most risk for carrying out the work. The seller prefers one 
where the price is not fixed. In fact, you would probably prefer to 
work with a time and materials contract but it is not one of the 
options presented. 
 Question 368: Your project has begun with a planned series of iterations that will 
gradually define the scope of work required. You are  negotiating  with a potential supplier 
of services. What is the BEST form of contract to enter into? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Fixed-price-with-incentive-fee is best when the scope of 
work can be fully defined. Where the scope or work is not fully 
defined, a cost-reimbursable contract, such as cost-plus-fixed-
fee, is the best for both seller and buyer because it allows for 
continued development of the scope. 
 B: Time and materials is best for small work or emergency work. 
Where the scope or work is not fully defined, a cost-reimbursable 
contract, such as cost-plus-fixed-fee, is the best for both seller and 
buyer because it allows for continued development of the scope.  
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
256
 C: Where the scope or work is not fully defined, a cost-
reimbursable contract, such as cost-plus-fixed-fee, is the 
best for both seller and buyer because it allows for continued 
development of the scope. 
 D: Any form of fixed-price contract is best in the scope of 
work can be fully defined. Where the scope or work is not fully 
defined, a cost-reimbursable contract, such as cost-plus-fixed-
fee, is the best for both seller and buyer because it allows for 
continued development of the scope. 
 Question 369: During your project there has been an unforeseen amount of work 
 that  requires urgent and immediate attention from an external contractor to ensure it 
does not adversely affect the project. What sort of contract for services is BEST to use in 
this instance? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: Given that the situation in question is urgent and requires 
immediate attention, you do not have the time to go through the 
process of negotiating any form of fixed price contract; therefore 
a time and materials contract is best. 
 B: A time and materials contract is suitable when the work is 
urgent or when the scope of work is largely undefined. 
 C:  Given that the situation in question is urgent and requires 
immediate attention, you do not have the time to go through the 
process of negotiating any form of cost reimbursable contract; 
therefore, a time and materials contract is best.  
 D:  Given that the situation in question is urgent and requires 
immediate attention, you do not have the time to go through the 
process of negotiating any form of cost reimbursable contract; 
therefore, a time and materials contract is best.    
 Question 370:  You  are  leading your team through the process of making 
procurement decisions and selecting the appropriate procurement documentation to use 
when procuring services from external contractors. Which of the following is not a form of 
procurement document? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Request for fixed price contract is not a term referenced within 
the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 B: A request for proposal is a form of procurement document 
that goes to potential sellers, outlining the work required and 
asking for a response from them. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
257
 C: A request for quotation is a form of procurement document 
that goes to potential sellers, asking for a quote for a prescribed 
scope of work. 
 D: A request for information is a formal procurement document. 
It goes to all potential sellers, requesting information about the 
seller, their capabilities, and the organization.    
 Question 371: Several procurement specialists on your team have completed the 
 procurement  management plan for your project. Which of the following is not an output 
you would expect from them? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A:  The source selection criteria, which outlines how you will 
select potential sellers, is an output from the Plan Procurement 
Management process. 
 B: The procurement statement of work, which describes the 
work to be completed as part of the contract, is an output of the 
Plan Procurement Management process.  
 C: The procurement management plan is the primary output 
from the Plan Procurement Management process.  
 D: The project scope statement is not an output from the Plan 
Procurement Management process. It is an output from the 
Define Scope process. 
 Question 372: You are the project manager on a large project to develop a new 
customer information database for your organization. You are currently assessing the 
merits of developing key components of the required software in-house by your own 
development  team  compared to getting an external contractor to complete the work. 
What technique are you using? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: Risk-related contract decisions would be completed as part 
of project risk management and not as part of make-or-buy 
analysis. 
 B:  Make-or-buy analysis is exactly what it says it is: the decision 
to make something in house or buy it from outside of the 
organization.  
 C: Source selection criteria are other criteria you developed to 
help you choose which sellers will be invited to be part of the 
procurement process and how successful sellers will be selected. 
 D: Expert judgment is a tool or technique used to solicit 
information with people with experience in a particular area. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
258
 Question 373:  You are letting your project team analyze responses received to some 
of your procurement documents and you  are  beginning the process of selecting the 
successful seller. Which of the following is not an example of selection criteria used to 
select sellers? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: Technical capability would most certainly be one of the 
criteria by which you would judge potential sellers. 
 B: Make-or-buy decisions are an output of the Plan Procurement 
Management process. 
 C:  Management approach would most certainly be one of the 
criteria by which you would judge potential sellers. 
 D:  The issue of proprietary rights and who owns the service or 
goods produced as a result of the contract would most certainly 
be one of the criteria by which you would judge potential sellers.    
 Question 374:  You are currently obtaining seller responses to an RFP you issued 
and,   after assessing the responses, you expect to select a seller and award a contract for 
delivery for services on your project. What process are you carrying out? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: The Close Procurements process is focused on making sure 
that all contracts used in the project are successfully closed. 
 B: The Plan Procurement Management process produces the 
procurement management plan and the procurement statement 
of work, which are then used to assist the Control Procurement 
process, which is the correct answer. 
 C:  The Conduct Procurement process is where you put into 
practice the process of acquiring external contractors outlined in 
your procurement management plan. 
 D:  The Control Procurements process is focused on checking 
whether the procurement management plan is working and if 
any changes are required. 
 Question 375:  You are carrying out the process of obtaining seller responses, 
selecting a seller, and an awarding a contract. You wish to  make   sure that you complete 
the process thoroughly and use any and all inputs that may be useful to you. Which of the 
following is not an input into the Conduct Procurements process? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: The procurement statement of work is an essential input 
because it describes the work to be done as part of contract. 
 B: Source selection criteria are other criteria you developed to 
help you choose which sellers will be invited to be part of the 
procurement process and how successful sellers will be selected. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
259
 C: Resource calendars are an output from the Conduct 
Procurements process. 
 D: The project management plan, particularly the procurement 
management plan, will be an essential input to help you carry 
out the planned work in procurements. 
 Question 376: You have just finished preparation of an exhaustive RFP for your 
project and are about to send it out to  potential  service providers. Based on past 
acceptable performance, you decide to send the RFP to a small group of potential 
suppliers and not all of the suppliers who may be interested in providing a response. 
What technique are you using? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: A bidder conference is a real and virtual meeting of all sellers 
bidding to be part of the contract. 
 B:  It is not uncommon for organizations to have a predetermined 
list of sellers who are qualified to offer services or products in 
a particular area. Inclusion on the list is usually dependent on 
prior experience or meeting defined criteria. 
 C: The procurement management plan is an output from the 
Plan Procurement Management process and it outlines how you 
will carry out your project procurement.  
 D: Proposal evaluation techniques assist you in evaluating 
responses from sellers. 
 Question 377: After soliciting responses from prospective sellers, you are in the 
process of considering each seller’s response against a set of criteria in order to determine 
who will be the  seller  selected to provide the required services. The process is giving a 
greater weight to previous experience in this type of work than it is giving to the price 
submitted. What technique are you using? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: A weighted average calculation would be used in something 
like three-point estimating. 
 B: It is common to have a predetermined set of criteria to assess 
responses from sellers. The buying organization may decide to 
give greater or lesser weight to certain of these criteria depending 
on the circumstances. 
 C: Expert judgment is a tool or technique that is used to solicit 
information from people with experience in a particular area. 
 D: Procurement negotiations are carried out prior to signing 
the contract. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
260
 Question 378:  You are carrying out a bidder conference that is attended by five 
potential sellers of services to your project. You have spent a  considerable   amount of time 
explaining the statement of work and answering questions from the sellers at the bidder 
conference. During a break in the afternoon, one of the sellers approaches you and asks a 
question relating to the statement of work. What is your BEST course of action? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: What the seller has done is not an ethical mistep. As long as 
it is handled correctly, they do not need to be removed from the 
room or process. 
 B: You should refuse to provide an answer to the seller right 
there, but you should make it clear that you will provide an 
answer to all sellers. 
 C:  You should not provide an answer to just that seller. Instead, 
you should provide an answer to all sellers. 
 D:  A bidding conference should be fair to all those involved in 
the process. In this instance, the seller is not doing anything 
unethical, and it is up to you to ensure that all sellers hear the 
question and answer. 
 Question 379:  You are in the process of ensuring that the seller you have engaged to 
provide a product for your project is meeting the  contractual  requirements expected of 
them. What PMBOK ® Guide process are you carrying out? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: Conduct Procurements is the process of procuring goods and 
services from external sellers. 
 B: The Control Procurements process is completed as part of 
the Monitoring and Controlling process group. Both parties in a 
contract will administer the contract to ensure the other party of 
completing the work as per the contract documentation. 
 C: Close Procurements is the process of making sure that all 
contracts used on the project are closed. 
 D: Plan Procurement Management is the process that produces 
the procurement management plan and the procurement 
statement of work. 
 Question 380:  As part of your project you are looking to make sure that you complete 
the Control Procurements process properly in order to ensure that you are managing 
procurement relationships,  monitoring  contract performance, and making changes and 
corrections to contracts as appropriate. As part of this process, you want to make sure 
that you are using all the appropriate inputs. Which of the following processes does not 
provide an input into the work to control procurements? 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
261
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  The Control Procurements process requires a lot of 
information from other processes to ensure you are capable of 
judging whether or not the other party to a contract is fulfilling 
their obligations. Control Costs is not one of these processes. 
 B: The Monitor and Control Project Work process provides 
work performance reports as an input into the control 
procurements process. 
 C: The Perform Integrated Change Control process provides 
approved change requests as an input into the control 
procurements process. 
 D: The Direct and Manage Project Work process provides 
work performance data as an input into the control 
procurements process. 
 Question 381: As part of your project you are looking to make sure that you complete 
the Control Procurements process properly in order to ensure that you are managing 
procurement relationships,  monitoring  contract performance, and making changes and 
corrections to contracts as appropriate. In order to do this process thoroughly, you have 
decided to review all the possible tools and techniques that you could use. All of the 
following are tools or techniques used in the Control Procurements process except? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Inspections and audits are a tool and technique used to ensure 
that both the processes outlined in the contract and the expected 
deliverable of the contract are being delivered as per the terms of 
contract.  
 B: Performance reporting is a valuable tool to use during the 
Control Procurements process because it allows you to determine 
whether the terms of the contract are being met as planned.  
 C: Work performance information is an input, not a tool or 
technique, into the Control Procurements process. 
 D: Claims administration is a tool and technique for dealing with 
any disputes over the terms of contracts.    
 Question 382: You are the project manager on a large project that has been 
underway for five years. Your project has consistently reported a CPI of 1.2 and an SPI 
of 1.3. Delivery of the  expected  product of the project has been in accordance with the 
customer’s expectations and you are beginning the process of closing the project. Your 
project team is confused about which process to complete first, the Close Procurements 
process or the Close Project process. What is your BEST advice to your project team? 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
262
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: You must first complete the Close Procurements process 
before completing the Close Project process because contract 
closure comes before project closure. 
 B:  The Close Project process and Close Procurements process are 
separate and distinct processes. You must first complete the Close 
Procurements process before completing the Close Project process.  
 C:  A contract is just one part of a project. As such, before you can 
close the project, you need to ensure that all contracts are closed. 
 D: You must first complete the Close Procurements process 
before completing the Close Project process because contract 
closure comes before project closure. 
 Question 383: You and your project team are completing the work required by 
 contract   with a buyer when your general manager decides to suddenly terminate the 
contract due to factors that are outside of your control. What is your BEST course of action? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: You may do this as part of closing your procurement but the 
best answer is to begin the Close Procurements process. 
 B: This is a tricky question that you may have had difficulty 
answering. The question itself does not give a lot of information 
about why the general manager has decided to terminate the 
contract so we must assume it is for legitimate reasons, in which 
case the best answer is to begin the Close Procurements process. 
 C:  This may end up being part of your lessons learned process. 
The best answer is to begin the Close Procurements process. 
 D:  This is a tricky question that you may have had difficulty 
answering. The question itself does not give a lot of information 
about why the general manager has decided to terminate the 
contract so we must assume it is for legitimate reasons, in which 
case the best answer is to begin the Close Procurements process. 
 Question 384:  As part of closing out all contracts used on a project, you want to 
make sure that you demonstrate to your team what is considered best practice in this area 
and have  available   to you all of the potential tools and techniques that could assist. Which 
of the following is not a tool or technique used in the Close Procurements process? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Bidder conferences are a tool from the Conduct 
Procurements process. 
 B: Not all contracts end cleanly, and procurement negotiations 
and negotiated settlements are an effective tool or technique to 
use during this process. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
263
 C: A procurement audit is a structured review of the 
procurement management process from the beginning to the 
end to see whether it was followed, whether it was appropriate, 
and whether any improvements could be made.  
 D: A records management system is a tool and technique 
used in the Close Procurements process to manage contracts, 
procurement documentation, and records with archiving.    
 Question 385: You are . completing the Close Procurements process and are 
informing sellers that the contract has been completed. What is the BEST way to do this? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A-C: These answers are not correct because contracts are a formal 
written form of communication. It is best that all communication 
about the contract be in the same formal written form. 
 D: A contract is a formal written document, and all 
correspondence about the contract should also be completed in 
a formal written format. 
 Question 386: You have entered into an agreement with a seller to provide the 
goods you require for your project. You have selected to use a fixed-price-incentive-
fee form of contract with a target  cost  of $100,000, a target price of $120,000, a ceiling 
price of $140,000, with a sharing ratio of 80/20 to the buyer. What is your point of total 
assumption? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A:  To calculate the point of total assumption you need to use the 
following formula: ((ceiling price - target price) / buyer’s share 
ratio)+target cost), which gives a point of total assumption of 
$125,000. 
 B-D: These answers are not correct because to calculate the 
point of total assumption you need to use the following formula: 
((ceiling price - target price) / buyer’s share ratio)+target cost), 
which gives a point of total assumption of $125,000. 
 Project Stakeholder Management 
 Question 387:  You are putting together your stakeholder management plan and  have 
 identified the need to gather information about all of the different project stakeholders as 
soon as possible. This recognizes that the ability of stakeholders to influence the project is 
greatest at which point in the project? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Stakeholders are able to influence the project during project 
execution but not as much as they can at the beginning of the project.  
 B:  Toward the end of the project stakeholders have less influence 
because the deliverable is close to completion. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
264
 C:  The higher levels of uncertainty at the beginning of project, 
reflecting the process of progressive elaboration, mean that 
stakeholders can have more influence during this time. 
 D:  Stakeholder influence is greatest at the beginning of a project 
and slowly diminishes as the project progresses. 
 Question 388:  You are compiling a register of all people, groups, and organizations 
that  can  potentially and actually be affected by the project. What is the collective term for 
this group? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: A sponsor is a specific type of stakeholder. Stakeholder is the 
best answer to this question. 
 B: A customer is a specific type of stakeholder. Stakeholder is the 
best, or most correct, answer to this question.  
 C:  A team member is a specific type of stakeholder. Stakeholder 
is the best, or most correct, answer to this question.  
 D:  A stakeholder is anyone or any organization who can 
affect or be affected by the project. It is important to identify 
all stakeholders on a project and manage or influence their 
expectations. 
 Question 389:  During work to initiate your project you have begun to identify 
 stakeholders  and gather information about them to allow you to successfully manage 
their expectations. All of the following are stakeholder attributes you should analyze as 
part of this work to identify stakeholders except? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: As part of identifying stakeholders, you should identify and 
document their interest in the project. 
 B: As part of identifying stakeholders, you should also identify 
and document their expectations of the project so that you can 
effectively manage them. 
 C:  As part of identifying stakeholders, you should identify and 
document their influence on the project. 
 D: It is doubtful that you would be able to document the personal 
conflict resolution style of stakeholders. Having a thorough 
stakeholder analysis completed early in the project is an effective 
aid into several processes. When analyzing stakeholders you 
should note their interests, expectations, importance, and 
influence. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
265
 Question 390: During work to initiate your project you have begun to identify 
 stakeholders   and gather information about them to allow you to successfully manage their 
expectations. Which of the following is not an input you would use to complete this work? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Procurement documents are used as an input into the Identify 
Stakeholders process because parties to the contract are key 
project stakeholders. 
 B:  The project charter is used as an input into the Identify 
Stakeholders process because it can provide information about 
internal and external parties related to the project.  
 C: The stakeholder register is an output from the Identify 
Stakeholders process in the PMBOK ® Guide, so this is the 
correct answer.  
 D:  Lessons learned, which are a part of Organizational Process 
Assets, are an important input into the Identify Stakeholders 
process in the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 Question 391: With the help of your project team, you identify all potential project 
stakeholders and information about them. You then interview all the stakeholders 
you have identified in an effort to learn more about their interaction  with   your project 
and also to gain knowledge of any other stakeholders you may not be aware of. After 
completing this process, you then identify the potential impact or support each 
stakeholder could generate. Finally, you assess how the key stakeholders are likely to 
react in various situations so you can plan for this. What are you carrying out? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: The stakeholder management strategy is not a term found in 
the PMBOK ® Guide. Although it may be a commonly used term, 
it does not analyze stakeholder impact and interest in the 
project. 
 B:  You are completing the stakeholder analysis. You may choose 
to show the results in a diagram such as a power/interest grid, 
which shows the relative power and interest each stakeholder 
has in the project. 
 C: This answer is incorrect because stakeholder register 
assimilation is not a term referenced within the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 D: Although this answer may sound correct, the best answer is 
stakeholder analysis. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
266
 Question 392:  You  are  showing your team the relative interest and power 
each identified stakeholder has in your project. What is the BEST way to show this 
information? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: The salience model maps the degree of power, urgency, and 
legitimacy of each stakeholder. 
 B: A control chart is a tool used in the project quality 
management. 
 C: A stakeholder register template is an organizational process asset 
for listing and documenting information about stakeholders.  
 D: A power/interest grid plots the relative power and interest 
each identified stakeholder has in your project. 
 Question 393:  You have just taken over a project that has been underway for 8 
months.  The  project is performing well and is currently reporting a CPI of 1.2 and an 
EAC of $1.2 m. As part of your familiarization process, you want to understand who the 
stakeholders on the project are. Where would you find this information? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: The stakeholder management strategy, if such a thing exists, 
would not document who the individual stakeholders are. 
 B: Your Organizational Process Assets may include a blank 
stakeholder register. If you wish to get the information you 
are seeking in this question, the stakeholder register is the 
best answer. 
 C:  The stakeholder register contains all the information you 
know about all stakeholders on the project. 
 D:  A simple e-mail distribution list may be part of your 
communications plan but it would certainly not document all 
stakeholders on the project. 
 Question 394:  You have just taken over a project that is nearing the end of its life 
cycle.  Shortly after taking control of the project you note that a particular stakeholder is 
having a negative impact on the project. You decide that this presents an unacceptable 
risk to the project and look for a way to manage the stakeholder. Which document will 
you look for to help you do this? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: A stakeholder analysis matrix lists the stakeholders, plus their 
potential impact and assessment, as well as potential strategies 
for dealing with any impact on the project. 
 B: This answer is incorrect because the term is too vague. 
The correct term is stakeholder analysis matrix.  
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
267
 C: The stakeholder register documents each stakeholder and 
their interest in the project. It is not the best answer to this 
question because the stakeholder analysis matrix analyses the 
impact and interest each stakeholder has on the project.  
 D: This answer is incorrect because it is not a term referenced 
within the PMBOK ® Guide. 
 Question 395: After considerable effort involving your project team members 
 and  experts with experience in communications, you have developed your project 
communications management plan. This can now be used as an input into which of the 
following PMBOK ® Guide processes? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: The communications management plan is not used as an 
input into the Estimate Costs process. 
 B: The communications management plan is not used as an 
input into the Plan Quality Management process.  
 C:  Communication with stakeholders represents a positive risk 
if done effectively and a negative risk if done poorly. As such, the 
communications management plan is an important input into 
the Manage Stakeholder Engagement process.  
 D: The communications management plan is not used as an 
input into the Close Project or Phase process. 
 Question 396: You are completing the process of communication and working  with 
 stakeholders to meet their needs and addressing issues as they occur. Which process are 
you completing? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: Stakeholder analysis is a tool and technique, not a process.  
 B: The Manage Communications process is focused on creating, 
collecting, distributing, and storing project information in 
accordance with the communications management plan.  
 C:  Managing stakeholder engagement is one of the most 
important processes a project manager can focus on to 
contribute to project success. 
 D:  The Control Communications process is focused on 
monitoring and controlling communications throughout 
the project. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
268
 Question 397: Your project is halfway through its expected duration and has a CPI 
of 1.3 and an SPI of 1.2. Your project sponsor has told you during  a   meeting that in her 
eyes the project is a failure because of the feedback she has been getting from important 
stakeholders on the project. You are surprised at this because the project is performing 
well financially and is ahead of schedule and you are sure the quality of the work you are 
completing is of a high standard and meets customer requirements. As the meeting closes 
your project sponsor asks what you intend to do about the situation. Your BEST response 
would be what? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: The problem is that you are paying too much attention to 
the cost and time metrics and not paying enough attention 
to what it is that stakeholders consider to be a measure of 
success. By revisiting your communications management plan, 
especially the manage stakeholder process, you will increase the 
probability of project success. 
 B: Quitting the project is not be what a professional project 
manager would do. The problem is that you are paying too much 
attention to the cost and time metrics and not paying enough 
attention to what it is that stakeholders consider to be a measure 
of success. By revisiting your communications management 
plan, especially the manage stakeholder process, you will 
increase the probability of project success. 
 C: Saying nothing would be withdrawing from the problem, 
and this is not what a professional project manager would 
do. The problem is that you are paying too much attention to 
the cost and time metrics and not paying enough attention 
to what it is that stakeholders consider to be a measure of 
success. By revisiting your communications management plan, 
especially the manage stakeholder process, you will increase the 
probability of project success.  
 D:  This would not solve the issue. The problem is that you are 
paying too much attention to the cost and time metrics and not 
paying enough attention to what it is that stakeholders consider 
to be a measure of success. By revisiting your communications 
management plan, especially the manage stakeholder process, 
you will increase the probability of project success. 
 Question 398:  What is  your  primary goal in managing and identifying stakeholder 
expectations? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A, B, and D: These answers are incorrect because with any of 
the activities undertaken in association with managing and 
identifying stakeholder expectations, your primary goal is to 
get stakeholders to support your project. Failing this, your goal 
should be to ensure that they do not oppose the project. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
269
 C: With any of the activities undertaken in association with 
managing and identifying stakeholder expectations, your 
primary goal is to get stakeholders to support your project. 
Failing this, your goal should be to ensure that they do not 
oppose the project. 
 Question 399: You and your project team are systematically gathering and  analyzing 
 quantitative and qualitative information to determine which stakeholder’s interests 
should be taken into account throughout the project. You have identified the interests, 
expectations, and influence of individual stakeholders and related to them the purpose of 
the project. What tool or technique are you using? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A:  Meetings are an effective communications and information 
distribution tool, but they are not related to assessing attributes 
about individual stakeholders. 
 B: Expert judgment is a tool and technique used to solicit 
information from people with experience in a particular area. 
 C: There are several information gathering techniques, all of 
which are used to gather information you require on the project 
from subject matter experts and technicians. 
 D: The purpose of stakeholder analysis is to document 
information about individual stakeholders, their interest in the 
project, and their impact on the project, so that you are able to 
influence them if required. 
 Question 400: You are using a classification model for stakeholder analysis  that 
 describes classes of stakeholders based on their power, urgency, and legitimacy. What is 
the name of this particular model of stakeholder analysis? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: A Pareto chart is used primarily during quality management to 
determine which 20% of the issues are causing 80% of problems.  
 B: The power/interest grid is used to classify stakeholders based 
on the amount of power and interest they have on the project. 
 C: The influence/impact grid is used to classify stakeholders 
based on the amount of influence and impact they have on 
the project.  
 D: The salience model is used to describe classes of stakeholders 
based on their power, urgency, and legitimacy. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
270
 Question 401:  As part of your analysis of stakeholder engagement, you  have 
 classified each stakeholder as either being unaware, resistant, neutral, supportive, 
or leading when it comes to the level of their engagement with the project. This is an 
example of what sort of technique? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: This question outlines a situation in which you are using a 
specific form of analytical technique to carry out stakeholder 
analysis. The best answer is analytical techniques. 
 B: This is not an example of information gathering techniques. 
There are several information gathering techniques, all of which 
are used to gather information from subject matter experts, 
technicians, and other stakeholders. 
 C:  Classifying stakeholders by the level of engagement (either 
unaware, resistant, neutral, or support) is an example of 
an analytical techniques used during the Plan Stakeholder 
Management process. 
 D: Expert judgment as a tool and technique used to solicit 
information from people with experience in a particular area. 
 Question 402: As a senior project manager on a complex project with many 
stakeholders, you are consistently having to coordinate and harmonize stakeholders 
towards supporting the project and accomplishing the  project   objectives. In order to 
do this, you are using your skills to facilitate consensus, influence people, negotiate 
agreements, and modify organizational behavior to accept the project outcomes. These 
are examples of what? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: This is not an example of information gathering techniques. 
There are several information gathering techniques, all of which 
are used to gather information from subject matter experts, 
technicians, and other stakeholders with information you 
require on the project. 
 B: The best answer to this question is management skills, 
which are a specific subset of interpersonal skills that facilitate 
consensus toward project objectives, influence stakeholders to 
support the project, negotiate agreements to satisfy the project 
needs, and modify organizational behavior to accept project 
outcomes. 
 C:  This is not an example of communications methods. It is an 
example of management skills. 
 D:  This answer is correct because management skills include the 
ability to facilitate consensus toward project objectives, influence 
stakeholders to support the project, negotiate agreements to 
satisfy the project needs, and modify organizational behavior to 
accept project outcomes. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
271
 Question 403: You are managing a complex project with many stakeholders, 
each with their own interest in the project. You have begun the process of monitoring 
overall project stakeholder relationships and adjusting your stakeholder expectation 
management strategies and plans for engaging stakeholders to suit the changing project 
circumstances. Your goal is to increase  the  efficiency and effectiveness of stakeholder 
engagement activity. What process are you are engaged in? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: Manage Stakeholder Engagement is the process of working 
with the stakeholder management plan and communicating when 
working with stakeholders to ensure their needs and objectives.  
 B:  Control Stakeholder Engagement is the process focused 
on monitoring overall project stakeholder relationships, 
engagement, and satisfaction, and of adjusting your stakeholder 
engagement strategies to ensure they remain effective.  
 C: Control Communications is the process of checking, 
monitoring, and controlling your project communications 
against the communication management plan. 
 D: Manage Communications is the process of preparing to 
create, collect, and distribute project information in accordance 
with the communications management plan.    
 Question 404: As a result of controlling stakeholder engagement on your project you 
are generating a number of  Organizational Process Asset   updates relating to monitoring 
overall project stakeholder relationships and their level of engagement and satisfaction 
with your project. Which of the following is not an Organizational Process Asset that 
would be updated as a result of this process? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: The issue log is not an Organizational Process Asset; it is a 
project document. This question is asking about the types of 
Organizational Process Asset updates that may be done as a result 
of the Control Stakeholder Engagement process being carried out.  
 B:  This question is asking about the types of Organizational 
Process Asset updates that may be done as a result of the Control 
Stakeholder Engagement process being carried out. The specific 
Organizational Process Assets that may be updated as a result of 
carrying this process out are stakeholder notifications, project 
reports, project presentations, project records, feedback from 
stakeholders, and lessons learned documentation.  
 C: This question is asking about the types of Organizational 
Process Asset updates that may be done as a result of the Control 
Stakeholder Engagement process being carried out. The specific 
Organizational Process Assets that may be updated as a result of 
carrying this process out are stakeholder notifications, project 
reports, project presentations, project records, feedback from 
stakeholders, and lessons learned documentation.  
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
272
 D:  This question is asking about the types of Organizational 
Process Asset updates that may be done as a result of the Control 
Stakeholder Engagement process being carried out. The specific 
Organizational Process Assets that may be updated as a result of 
carrying this process out are stakeholder notifications, project 
reports, project presentations, project records, feedback from 
stakeholders, and lessons learned documentation.     
 Professional Ethics 
 Question 405:  A colleague of yours, who was your mentor in your earlier career, still 
claims  to  have the PMP ® credential but you know that it expired several years ago. What 
should you do FIRST? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 Complying with the professional code of ethics means reporting ethical, 
professional, or legal violations to the appropriate authority. In this case, the appropriate 
authority is the Project Management Institute. 
 Question 406: A project is nearing the end and is reporting a CPI of 1.01 and a SPI 
of 1.3. The project manager has been  reassigned  to another more urgent project, and you 
have been brought in to close the project. While reviewing the financial accounts for the 
project, you discover that the previous project manager made a large payment that was 
not approved in accordance with the policies of your company. What is the BEST thing 
you can do? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: Your best course of action is always to be up front and honest 
with information as soon as you become aware of it. In this 
instance, you should first inform the project sponsor. 
 B-D:  These answers are not correct because your best course of 
action is always to be up front and honest with information as 
soon as you become aware of it. In this instance, you should first 
inform the project sponsor. 
 Question 407: The  project  administrator working for you on the project does not 
have the level of skills you assumed he had. What is your BEST course of action? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A: You should not assign him lower-level tasks and bring in 
another more qualified person because you have an professional 
obligation to ensure people have the right amount of training to 
complete their job. 
 B: You cannot simply do nothing and assume that he will learn 
on the job. You have an professional obligation to ensure people 
have the right amount of training to complete their job.  
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
273
 C: You cannot simply assign the project administrator to another 
project. You have an professional obligation to ensure people 
have the right amount of training to complete their job.  
 D: You have an professional obligation to ensure people have the 
right amount of training to complete their job.    
 Question 408: You and your project administrator have been working on a detailed 
project progress report to present to high-level stakeholders. You leave it up to the project 
administrator to complete  the  report, and he e-mails it to you on the day of the meeting. 
You are having a busy day and don’t get a chance to read the report, but as you walk into 
the meeting you notice some large errors in the financial reporting section of the report. 
What is your BEST course of action? 
 The correct answer is D. 
 A:  As project manager, you are ultimately responsible for 
information presented to project stakeholders. Your best course 
of action is to reschedule the meeting to give you time to fix 
the errors.  
 B:  It is important that you always present accurate information, 
so you should reschedule the meeting to give you time to fix 
the errors. 
 C: Although this answer seems like a noble thing to do, your first 
commitment is to provide accurate information, so you can’t 
present the report. You should reschedule the meeting to give 
you time to fix the errors. 
 D: In this instance, you must not give wrong information to the 
stakeholders, so you must reschedule the meeting to give you 
time to fix the errors. 
 Question 409: You are completing a large infrastructure project in a foreign country. 
The government officials of the country are extremely grateful for the work you are doing 
and one of them sends a large  cash  payment to you to thank you and your team for the 
work they have done. What should you do? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A, B, and D: These answers are incorrect because to accept 
payment would be unethical. Your only choice is to refuse the 
payment and let your project sponsor or manager know that it 
was offered. 
 C: To accept payment would be unethical. Your only choice is 
to refuse the payment and let your project sponsor or manager 
know that it was offered. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
274
 Question 410:  You are currently preparing monthly status reports for your project 
and you are planning on reporting that the project has an SPI of 1.02 and a CPI of .83. 
Your project sponsor approaches you and says that she has been given a directive by the 
CEO of  the  company to report only positive figures or else he is afraid the shareholders 
in the company will demand changes to the organization. You are confident that the next 
month’s status report will show a CPI greater than 1. What should you do? 
 The correct answer is A. 
 A: In order to be a professional and ethical project manager, you 
are required to show honesty at all levels of the profession and in 
all instances. 
 B: You cannot submit a report based on what you believe next 
month figures will be. In order to be a professional and ethical 
project manager, you are required to show honesty at all levels of 
the profession and in all instances. 
 C: Resigning from the project is an extreme action to take. You 
should first explain to your project sponsor the reasons why 
you believe the project reporting should always be honest. In 
order to be a professional and ethical project manager, you are 
required to show honesty at all levels of the profession and in 
all instances.  
 D:  Your first step should be to explain to your project sponsor the 
reasons why you believe the project reporting should be honest.    
 Question 411: You are the project manager for a large project that has been 
completed on time and on budget. The customer and all of the stakeholders are very 
pleased with the results. As a direct  result  of the successful completion of the project, 
your project sponsor approves a bonus of $10,000 to you. There are twelve members on 
your project team. However, one of the people on the project team has been a very low 
contributor to the project; the other eleven have all been above standard. What should 
you do with the money? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: Given that there is some disparity between team members 
and their contribution to the project, the best way to address this 
issue would be to ask the team members how they would divide 
the money. 
 B: Probably the best thing to do in this situation would be to 
divide the money in the way determined by the team. This is an 
example of participative management and good leadership. It 
acknowledges that your efforts and successes were a result not 
just of your efforts, but that of your team’s as well. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
275
 C: Probably the best thing to do in this situation would be to 
divide the money in the way determined by the team. This is an 
example of participative management and good leadership. It 
acknowledges that your efforts and successes were a result not 
just of your efforts, but that of your team’s efforts too.  
 D: Given that there is some disparity between team members 
and their contribution to the project, the best way to address this 
issue would be asked to team members how to divide the money.    
 Question 412: You are the project manager for a large software implementation 
project that is nearing completion when you discover that one  of   your technicians has 
been taking shortcuts with the code being written and it is below the standard required 
in the technical specification. You and a senior team member review the code and form 
the opinion that it will probably not affect the functionality of the final software product. 
What is your NEXT course of action? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A:  It would be difficult to get a change request approved for a 
deliberate error in the project. Instead, you should record the 
discrepancy, inform the customer, and look for ways to ensure 
the project won’t be affected. 
 B:  Since you have formed the opinion that the error will probably 
not affect the functionality of the final software product, it would 
not make sense to stop the project and start again. You do need 
to record the discrepancy and inform the customer of the issue, 
however. 
 C: In this instance, the best solution is to record the issue and 
make an effort to remedy it to the satisfaction of all parties. 
 D: You cannot simply ignore the problem. In this instance, the 
best solution is to record the issue and make an effort to remedy 
it to the satisfaction of all parties. 
 Question 413: You are the project manager for a project that has high visibility, 
 and your project sponsor wants you to prepare a presentation for her to present at a 
conference. Most of the material in the presentation will be facts that are the results of 
your project. Your sponsor intends to present the material under her own name, and your 
name will not appear. What is your BEST course of action? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: Intellectual property belongs to the author of the property. If 
you create a presentation based on your own work, you have a 
right to receive credit for it. 
 B: Intellectual property belongs to the author of the property. If 
you create a presentation based on your own work, you have a 
right to receive credit for it. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
276
 C: You should not present your own presentation because the 
invitation was extended to your project sponsor. The best course 
of action is to explain to your sponsor that intellectual property 
belongs to the author of the property. If you create a presentation 
based on your own work, you have the right to receive credit for it.  
 D: Meet with the project sponsor’s manager and explain to the 
sponsor that the correct thing to do is to acknowledge all authors 
and contributions to the work. 
 Question 414:  You are working in a foreign country delivering a reconstruction 
project after a large natural disaster. It is normal  in  this country for government officials to 
request bribes to assist with processing the consents you require. During a meeting with 
a government official, he mentions that if you pay a $500 bribe you can have the consent 
you require tomorrow. What is your BEST course of action? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A: It doesn’t matter how the money is paid; at no time can you 
pay a bribe. A bribe is an illegal payment regardless of accepted 
custom.  
 B: At no time can you pay a bribe. A bribe is an illegal payment 
regardless of accepted custom. 
 C:  At no time can you pay a bribe. A bribe is an illegal payment 
regardless of accepted custom. 
 D: Reporting the official to his manager will probably do no good 
because bribery is probably ingrained with and culture. 
 Question 415:  You are working on a project to construct a new water treatment plant 
and are waiting on consents required from the government  before  you can proceed with 
the work. During a meeting with a government employee to discuss the required consent, 
the employee mentions that the consent can be processed faster if you are willing to pay a 
processing fee. What is your BEST course of action? 
 The correct answer is C. 
 A: You should not walk out of the meeting and notify your project 
sponsor because the question does not say that this is a bribe. It 
clearly says that it is a processing fee, so you should assume that 
it is a legal form of fee to rush applications. 
 B: The question does not say that this is a bribe. It clearly says 
that it is a processing fee, so you should assume that it is a legal 
form of fee to rush applications. 
 C: The questions does not say that the fee is a bribe. As such, 
you can go ahead and pay it if your project has allowed for it. 
If not, you may wish to submit a change request to acquire the 
funds needed.  
 D: There is no need to hide the transaction because it is a legal 
fee that he is requesting in order to rush your application. 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 2 ■ ANSWERS
277
 Question 416: You have just completed the selection of a preferred seller for an 
upcoming project and have scheduled a meeting in 2 days to finalize the contract when 
your manager informs you that  due  to current economic conditions the project will now 
probably not be going ahead but the definite answer will be provided by the CEO in 3 
days. What is your BEST course of action? 
 The correct answer is B. 
 A:  You should inform the other party that the meeting have been 
postponed for at least three days. You must act ethically at all 
times, and clearly there is no way you can act in good faith if the 
meeting goes ahead. 
 B:  You should inform the other party at the meeting have been 
postponed for at least three days. You must act ethically at all 
times, and clearly there is no way you can act in good faith if the 
meeting goes ahead. 
 C: You should inform the other party at the meeting have been 
postponed for at least three days. You must act ethically at all 
times, and clearly there is no way you can act in good faith if the 
meeting goes ahead. 
 D: Cancelling the meeting and telling the other party why may 
cause a rift in the relationship if the project does go ahead. 
You should inform the other party at the meeting have been 
postponed for at least 3 days. You must act ethically at all times, 
and clearly there is no way you can act in good faith if the 
meeting goes ahead. 
www.it-ebooks.info

279
© Sean Whitaker 2016 
S. Whitaker, PMP® Examination Practice Questions, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-1883-9_3
 CHAPTER 3  
 Formulae to Remember 
 Communications (how many people in a communications network) 
 N = (n (n - 1)) / 2 
 Present value (PV) 
 PV = (FV / (1 + r) n ) 
 where
  FV = Future value in $ 
 r = Discount rate percentage expressed as a decimal number 
(i.e. 10% = 0.1)  
  n = The time period (i.e. 5 years) 
 Net present value (NPV) 
 NPV = Initial outlay + the sum of all subsequent present value 
calculations 
 Earned value management 
 Planned value (PV) = Time % complete x BAC 
 Earned value (EV) = PV x % complete 
 Schedule variance (SV) = EV - PV 
 Schedule performance index (SPI) = EV / PV 
 Cost variance (CV) = EV - AC 
 Cost performance index (CPI) = EV / AC 
www.it-ebooks.info

CHAPTER 3 ■ FORMULAE TO REMEMBER
280
 Estimate at completion (EAC) - 1 of 4 formulae
 EAC = BAC / CPI 
 EAC = AC + ETC 
 EAC = AC  +  (BAC - EV) 
 EAC = AC  +  ((BAC - EV) / (CPI x SPI))    
 Estimate to complete (ETC) = EAC - AC 
 Variance at completion (VAC) = BAC - EAC 
 To Complete Performance Index (TCPI) 
 TCPI = (BAC - EV) / (BAC - AC) if you are aiming for BAC 
 TCPI = (BAC - EV) / (EAC - AC) if you are aiming for EAC 
 Three-point estimating from PERT (Program Evaluation and Review  Technique ) 
 Three-point estimate = (O  +  (M x 4) + P) / 6 
 where
 O = Optimistic 
 M = Most likely (sometimes appears as an R for Realistic)
   P = Pessimistic    
 Standard deviation = (P - O) / 6 
 Variance = ((P - O) / 6) 2 
 Point of total assumption (PTA) 
 PTA = Target cost + ((ceiling price - target price) / buyers % share of cost overruns))    
www.it-ebooks.info

281
© Sean Whitaker 2016 
S. Whitaker, PMP® Examination Practice Questions, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-1883-9








 A, B 
 Appropriate degree of rigor , 7, 117 








 C 
 Centralized and coordinated 
management , 4, 111 
 Customer management software , 2, 109 








 D 
 Delays, duplication, over-production, 
and errors , 9, 119 
 Deliverables , 6, 115 








 E 
 Earned value management , 279 
 Eliminating waste , 8, 119 
 Enterprise environmental 
factor , 5, 113–114 








 F 
 Framework , 8, 118 








 G, H 
 Group of project , 3, 110 








 I, J 
 Initiating process group , 7, 117 








 K 
 Knowledge, skills, and processes , 10, 122 








 L, M 
 Lean practices , 9, 119 
 Lean principles , 8, 118 








 N 
 Net present value (NPV) , 279 
 New project , 7, 117 








 O 
 Operational goal , 2, 108 
 OPM3 tool , 5, 113 
 Organizational Process Assets , 7, 116 
 Organization’s project management 
maturity level (OPM3) , 5, 114   
 Organization type , 6–7, 115–116 








 P 
 Phase-to-phase relationship , 6, 115 
 Point of total assumption (PTA) , 280   
 Portfolio management , 3, 110 
 Present value (PV) , 279 
 Process groups , 2, 108 
 Product life cycle , 4, 112 
 Professional ethics 
 acknowledging contributors , 105, 275  
 bonus , 104, 274 
 Index 
www.it-ebooks.info

■ INDEX
282
 bribery , 105, 276 
 cash rewards , 104, 273 
 errors in reports , 103, 273 
 expired credentials , 102, 272 
 honest project submission , 104, 274 
 postponing the meeting , 106, 277 
 processing fee , 106, 276 
 shortcuts eff ect , 105, 275 
 skill insuffi  ciency , 103, 272 
 unapproved accounts , 103, 272 
 Program Evaluation and Review 
Technique (PERT) , 40, 170, 
176, 280 
 Project communications management 
 barriers , 73, 223 
 communications channels , 78, 232 
 contract , 72, 221 
 detailed project performance 
report , 77, 230 
 detailed project update , 76, 228 
 disbursement , 73, 222 
 eff ective communication , 73, 223 
 eff ective information 
distribution , 75, 226 
 forecast method , 77, 229–230 
 intranet site information , 74, 225 
 issue log , 78, 230 
 language , 74, 223 
 listening skills , 74, 224  
 Manage Communications 
process , 75, 227 
 misinterpretation of 
information , 76, 228 
 monitoring and controlling , 77, 229 
 non-verbal and verbal 
communications , 76, 227 
 plan disagreement 
responsibility , 74, 225 
 plan guide , 75, 226 
 project meetings , 75, 226 
 project success/failure reason , 78, 231 
 skills , 72, 221 
 stakeholders , 73, 222 
 time spent , 78, 231 
 unacceptable behavior , 76, 228 
 weekly project update , 74, 224 
 Project cost management 
 AC , 48, 182 
 accumulation and allocation , 42, 173 
 accurate estimation , 44, 176–177  
 authorized work , 47, 182 
 controlling project costs , 51, 187  
 cost and staffi  ng levels , 42, 172  
 cost performance index (CPI) , 48–49, 
183–184  
 cost performance projection , 50, 185 
 cost uncertainty , 44, 177 
 cost variance , 46–47, 181  
 current budget , 51, 187  
 estimate at completion , 50, 185 
 estimation at completion 
forecast , 50, 186 
 estimation inputs , 42, 174 
 extra costs , 49, 184 
 historical data and variables , 43, 175 
 individual activities , 42, 45, 173, 178 
 input tools , 46, 180  
 organizational process asset , 43, 174  
 original budget rate , 50, 185 
 percent complete , 47, 182  
 planning , 42, 173 
 previous project information , 43, 174 
 project budget , 45, 178  
 project deliverable 
breakdown , 43, 175  
 project scheduling , 44, 178  
 quick cost estimation , 44, 176  
 revised estimation , 51, 186 
 schedule variance , 46–47, 180–181 
 status monitoring , 45, 179 
 time-phased budget , 45, 179 
 To Complete Performance 
Index (TCPI) , 51, 188  
 total planned value , 47, 181  
 work rate for budget , 52, 188   
 Project defi nition , 2, 108 
 Project human resource management 
 confl ict resolution 
technique , 71, 219 
 decision-making , 72, 220 
 developing the plan , 66, 211 
 disagreement, team 
members , 69, 214  
 eff ective leadership 
characteristics , 71, 219 
 enhancing performances , 68, 214  
 failure acquiring project team , 67, 212  
 gaining extra skills , 70, 217 
 human resource plan , 65, 208 
Professional ethics (cont.)
www.it-ebooks.info

■ INDEX
283
 human resource plan 
development , 65, 209 
 individual fi nancial bonus , 69, 216 
 interpersonal skills , 71, 218 
 leading and foundational 
theories , 66, 210–211 
 matrix-based chart , 66, 210 
 moving into headquarters , 70, 216 
 order of activities , 65, 208 
 organizational structure , 66, 209 
 project sponsor 
responsibility , 65, 208 
 requesting staff s , 68, 213 
 resource calendar , 67, 212 
 satisfi ers , 71, 218 
 successfull inputs , 70, 217 
 team development , 69, 215 
 team members output , 70, 217 
 terminologies , 64, 207 
 time zone variations , 68, 213 
 training , 67, 213 
 Tuckman theory , 69, 215 
 Project integration management 
 business value , 9, 120 
 change request , 17, 132 
 client request , 18, 135 
 Close Project/Phase process , 19, 135 
 closure checklist , 9, 120 
 confi guration management , 18, 
133–134  
 Direct and Manage Project Work 
process , 130 
 document and assess 
request , 18, 135 
 formal documented system , 17, 132 
 inputs , 19, 136 
 knowledge areas , 10, 121 
 net present value , 20, 138 
 objectives , 17, 133 
 opportunity cost , 21, 139 
 organizational fi nances , 19, 136 
 organizational process asset , 15, 20, 
129, 137 
 outputs , 16, 131 
 processes , 10 
 project charter 
 business case , 11–12, 124 
 development , 11, 123 
 evaluation , 11, 123 
 high-level document , 12, 124 
 information , 11, 122 
 tool/technique , 12, 125 
 Project Eagle , 20, 138 
 project functionality , 20, 137 
 project management plan 
 application area and 
complexity , 14, 127  
 change control process , 15, 128  
 development , 13, 126 
 direct and manage work 
process , 15–16, 129 
 document , 13, 126 
 integrated change control , 16, 132 
 performance measurement 
baseline , 15, 128 
 performance objectives , 16, 130 
 sponsor , 13–14, 126–127 
 tools/techniques , 14, 16, 128, 131 
 work , 15, 129 
 project review , 18, 134 
 project’s timeline , 10, 121 
 projects types , 21, 138 
 statement of work , 12, 125 
 Project life cycle characteristics , 6, 114 
 Project management plan , 3, 7, 109, 117 
 Project management  vs. organizational 
strategy , 4, 112 
 Project procurement management 
 bidder conference , 95, 260 
 buyer contract , 91, 252 
 close procurement process , 96, 261 
 completion and inputs , 91, 253 
 contracts , 90, 251 
 contract specifi cations , 91, 252 
 contractual requirements , 95, 260  
 control procurement process , 96, 260 
 fi rm-fi xed-price contract , 92, 254 
 fi xed-price-incentive-fee 
form , 97, 263 
 from external providers , 91, 252 
 in-house/external contractor , 94, 257 
 legal binding agreements , 90, 251 
 partial payment , 92, 254 
 planned series of iterations , 93, 255 
 plan output , 93, 257 
 process , 90, 250 
 procurement contract , 92, 254 
 selecting sellers , 94, 258 
 seller contract , 91, 253 
 seller list , 95, 259 
www.it-ebooks.info

■ INDEX
284
 seller responses , 94, 258 
 sellers, close procurements process 
tools , 97, 263 
 sellers criteria , 95, 259 
 sequence , 90, 250 
 services from external 
contractors , 93, 256 
 services to another 
organization , 92, 255 
 sudden termination , 97, 262 
 tools, close procurements 
process , 97, 262 
 tools, control procurement 
process , 96, 261 
 urgent work , 93, 256 
 Project quality management 
 assurance expectations , 59, 199 
 audit , 60, 200 
 belt colors , 64, 206 
 bottlenecks , 64, 206 
 cause of a problem , 62, 202 
 chart without displayed limits , 63, 204 
 comparing projects , 58, 197 
 continuous process 
improvements , 59, 199 
 control chart , 56, 194 
 control limits , 56, 195 
 cost of conformance , 56, 194 
 cost of quality , 55–56, 192, 194 
 customer requirements , 52, 189 
 defects frequency , 62, 202 
 defects, ranking order , 62, 203 
 dependent and independent 
variable , 63, 204 
 diagram for problem , 61, 202 
 FMEA , 52, 189 
 improvements involving 
everyone , 54, 192 
 infl uencing factors , 58, 197 
 Ishikawa’s seven tools , 61, 201 
 level of quality , 63, 205 
 lower control limits , 57, 195–196 
 low grade , 54, 191 
 modern quality management , 52, 189 
 monitoring and controlling , 60, 200 
 planning tools , 58, 198 
 precision and accuracy , 53, 190 
 preventing mistakes , 53, 190 
 prevention and inspection , 60, 201 
 process , 59, 199 
 project and product quality , 53, 190 
 quality control output , 63, 205 
 quality metric , 59, 198  
 random selection , 58, 198 
 reducing variations , 63, 205 
 required assurance levels , 60, 200  
 requirements and standards , 55, 193  
 Shewhart and Deming quality 
improvement model , 55, 192  
 statistical sampling , 57, 195  
 studying part of population , 58, 197 
 tolerance and control limits , 61, 201 
 upper control limits , 57, 195–196 
 value stream mapping , 64, 207  
 variable state , 62, 203  
 working long hours , 54, 191 
 Project risk management 
 acceptable responses , 87, 246 
 acceptance , 80, 233 
 accuracy , 89, 249 
 added amount in budget , 85, 242 
 beginning , 80, 234 
 categories , 82, 238 
 characteristics , 79, 232 
 completing , 86, 244 
 contingency plan , 79, 233  
 determining risks , 81, 236  
 diagramming techniques , 82, 237  
 expected monetary value , 84–85, 
241–242  
 fallback plan , 79, 233  
 fi nal steps , 88, 247 
 hierarchy of risks , 80, 235 
 high priority risks , 83, 240 
 identifying new risks , 89, 249 
 increase in price , 88, 248 
 information validity , 84, 240  
 inputs , 80, 234 
 iterative computer simulation 
process , 86, 243 
 joint venture , 87, 246  
 numerical analysis , 84, 240  
 objectives , 79, 232 
 occurrence and impact , 83, 239  
 planning session , 81, 235  
 pool of money , 88, 248 
 positive and negative risk , 82, 237 
 potential uncertainty , 81, 236 
 probability and impact , 83, 238  
Project procurement management (cont.)
www.it-ebooks.info

■ INDEX
285
 probability distribution , 85, 243 
 probability outcomes , 86, 244 
 qualitative analysis , 83, 239 
 risk response , 87, 245 
 risk response technique , 86, 244 
 root cause , 89, 249 
 strengths and weaknesses , 82, 238 
 team members performance , 89, 250 
 three-point estimating 
technique , 84, 241 
 tools/technique , 80, 234 
 unanticipated risks , 88, 247 
 uncertain elements , 85, 243 
 updates, risk register , 84, 241 
 uses of risk register , 81, 236 
 Project scope management 
 changing requests , 29, 152 
 costs , 29, 152 
 deliverables , 25–26, 146–147 
 documentation , 25–26, 145–146 
 high level requirements , 24, 143 
 initiation and planning 
documents , 22, 141 
 magnitude of actual work , 30, 153 
 multi-phase project , 26, 147 
 processes , 21, 139 
 process group , 29, 151 
 project and product 
requirements , 23, 25, 142, 144 
 project management plan , 25, 145 
 requirements , 23, 141 
 requirements activities , 30, 152 
 scope baseline , 22, 140 
 scope management plan , 23, 142 
 stakeholders , 24, 142 
 tools/techniques , 24, 143–144 
 validation and quality control , 28–30, 
151, 153 
 work breakdown structure 
 components , 28, 150 
 cost and activity durations , 27, 148 
 decomposition , 27, 149 
 defi nition , 27, 149 
 lack of clarity , 28, 150 
 project scope statement , 26, 147 
 workshop , 27, 148 
 Project stakeholder management 
 analysis , 99, 265 
 classifi cation model for 
analysis , 101, 269 
 communication , 100, 267 
 coordinating , 102, 270 
 expectations of stakeholders , 98, 
264–265  
 feedback , 100, 268 
 increasing effi  ciency and 
eff ectiveness , 102, 271  
 infl uence on project , 98, 263 
 information , 99, 266 
 interest and power , 99, 266 
 level of engagement , 101, 270 
 needs and issues , 100, 267 
 negative impact , 99, 266  
 organizational process 
asset , 102, 271 
 primary goal managing , 100, 268 
 register compilation , 98, 264 
 tools and technique for 
analysis , 101, 269 
 Project time management 
 activity duration , 34–35, 159–160 
 activity list , 31, 155 
 activity resource , 34, 159 
 activity sequencing , 32, 156  
 cable , 35, 161 
 computer-based modeling , 38, 166 
 confi dence interval , 40, 170 
 critical path , 41, 172  
 critical path and critical chain 
method , 37, 164 
 dependency , 33, 158 
 fl oat, network path , 37, 165 
 forecast schedule , 39, 169 
 free fl oat , 38, 166  
 Goldratt’s critical chain theory , 36, 164  
 historical productivity rate , 41, 171 
 lead and lag , 33, 157 
 monitoring project status , 39, 168  
 network diagram , 36, 162–163 
 non-working time buff ers , 37, 164  
 order of schedule , 31, 154 
 parallel schedule , 38, 167 
 precedence diagramming 
method , 32, 156 
 precedence relationship , 32, 156 
 project presentation , 39, 168 
 project schedule creation , 36, 162 
 project schedule development , 35, 162 
 project schedule network 
diagram , 33, 158 
www.it-ebooks.info

■ INDEX
286
 resource calendar , 34, 158 
 resource leveling , 37, 165 
 schedule compression , 38–39, 
167–168  
 schedule performance 
index (SPI) , 40, 169–170 
 slack , 41, 172 
 standard deviation , 40, 170 
 successor and predecessor 
activities , 32, 157 
 work packages , 31, 154 








 Q 
 Quality Control process , 30, 153 








 R 
 Roles and responsibilities, 
PMO , 4–5, 112–113 








 S, T, U 
 Sequential and overlapping project 
phases , 6, 114 
 Standardized terminology, project 
communications , 1, 107 
 Strategic consideration , 3, 111 








 V, W, X, Y, Z 
 Validate Scope process , 29, 151 
Project time management (cont.)
www.it-ebooks.info

