
 Police and Society 
in Brazil 

 Advances in Police Theory and Practice Series 
 Series Editor: Dilip K. Das 
 Police and Society in Brazil 
 Edited by Vicente Riccio and Wesley G. Skogan 
 Ethics for Police Translators and Interpreters 
 Sedat Mulayim and Miranda Lai 
 Delivering Police Services Effectively 
 Garth den Heyer 
 Civilian Oversight of Police: Advancing Accountability in Law Enforcement  
 Tim Prenzler and Garth den Heyer 
 Corruption, Fraud, Organized Crime, and the Shadow Economy 
 Maximilian Edelbacher, Peter C. Kratcoski, and Bojan Dobovsek 
 Collaborative Policing: Police, Academics, Professionals, and Communities 
Working Together for Education, Training, and Program Implementation  
 Peter C. Kratcoski and Maximilian Edelbacher 
 Policing in Israel: Studying Crime Control, Community, and Counterterrorism  
 Tal Jonathan-Zamir, David Weisburd, and Badi Hasisi 
 Policing Terrorism: Research Studies into Police Counterterrorism Investigations  
 David Lowe 
 Policing in Hong Kong: History and Reform 
 Kam C. Wong 
 Cold Cases: Evaluation Models with Follow-Up Strategies for Investigators, 
Second Edition 
 James M. Adcock and Sarah L. Stein 
 Crime Linkage: Theory, Research, and Practice 
 Jessica Woodhams and Craig Bennell 
 Police Investigative Interviews and Interpreting: Context, Challenges, and 
Strategies 
 Sedat Mulayim, Miranda Lai, and Caroline Norma 
 Policing White-Collar Crime: Characteristics of White-Collar Criminals 
 Petter Gottschalk 
 Honor-Based Violence: Policing and Prevention 
 Karl Anton Roberts, Gerry Campbell, and Glen Lloyd 
 Policing and the Mentally Ill: International Perspectives 
 Duncan Chappell 
 Security Governance, Policing, and Local Capacity 
 Jan Froestad and Clifford Shearing 
 Police Performance Appraisals: A Comparative Perspective 
 Serdar Kenan Gul and Paul O’Connell 

 Police and Society 
in Brazil 
 Edited by 
Vicente Riccio 
 Graduate Program on Law and Innovation 
 Federal University of Juiz de Fora 
 Juiz de Fora, Brazil 
 Wesley G. Skogan 
 Institute for Policy Research 
 Northwestern University 
 Evanston, IL, USA 

 First published 2018 
 by Routledge 
 711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017 
 and by Routledge 
 2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN 
 Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business 
 © 2018 Taylor & Francis 
 The right of Vicente Riccio and Wesley G. Skogan to be identified as the authors of the editorial material, 
and of the authors for their individual chapters, has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of 
the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. 
 All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by 
any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying 
and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the 
publishers. 
 Trademark notice : Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used 
only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe. 
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 Names: Riccio, Vicente, editor. | Skogan, Wesley G., editor.
Title: Police and society in Brazil / edited by Vicente Riccio, Graduate 
 Program on Law and Innovation, Federal University of Juiz de Fora, Juiz de 
 Fora, Brazil; Wesley G. Skogan, Institute for Policy Research, 
 Northwestern University, Evanston IL USA.
Description: New York, NY : Routledge, 2018. | Series: Advances in police 
 theory and practice series
Identifiers: LCCN 2017019050 | ISBN 9781498769037 (hardback)
Subjects: LCSH: Police—Brazil. | Police corruption—Brazil. | 
 Police-community relations—Bazil.
Classification: LCC HV8183 .P64 2018 | DDC 363.20981—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017019050 
 ISBN: 978-1-4987-6903-7 (hbk) 
 ISBN: 978-1-315-15411-4 (ebk) 
 Typeset in Minion Pro
by Apex CoVantage, LLC 

v
Series Editor’s Preface 
ix
Dilip K. Das
Preface 
xi
Ricardo Balestreri
Editors 
xiii
Contributors 
xv
 1 
Police and Society in Brazil 
1
Wesley G. Skogan and Vicente Riccio
Crime and Policing in Brazil 
5
Policing the Favelas 
10
Paths to Reform: Organizational Restructuring 
13
Paths to Reform: Internal Accountability 
and External Oversight 
14
Paths to Reform: Finding a Community Focus 
17
Paths to Reform: Building Legitimacy 
19
Discussion 
23
References 
24
SECTION I
The Organization of Brazilian Police 
27
 2 
The Dual Civil and Military Models for 
Policing in Brazil 
29
Luis Flavio Sapori
The Origins of the Brazilian Dual Model 
29
Institutional Design of the Police 
31
Policing: A Loosely Coupled System 
32
The Corporatist Dispute 
34
System Dysfunctions 
35
Attempts to Reform the Dual System of Policing 
37
Conclusion: The Failure of Reform 
39
References 
41
 Contents 

vi 
Contents
 3 
Hierarchy, Career and Professional 
Advancement in the Civil Police 
43
Vicente Riccio, André Zogahib, Janaína Lawall and 
Mario Aufiero
Who Are the Civil Police? 
45
Public Security in Amazonas 
46
The Civil Police of Amazonas 
47
The Amazonas Survey 
49
Profile of Participants 
50
Hierarchy and Career Satisfaction 
50
Conclusion 
52
References 
54
 4 
Police Culture and Organizational Reform in 
Brazilian Policing 
55
Eduardo Cerqueira Batitucci, Marcus Vinícius 
Gonçalves da Cruz, Amanda Matar de Figueiredo and 
Letícia Godinho de Souza
Dilemmas of the Incorporation of the 
Professional-Bureaucratic Model 
56
Community Policing and the Military Police 
58
Criminal Investigations in the Civil Police 
60
Conclusion 
64
References 
67
 5 
Managing Gender Relations in the 
Brazilian Police 
71
Ludmila Mendonça Lopes Ribeiro
The Survey 
72
Female Participation in Policing 
73
Gender Relations in Brazilian Policing: Towards Sex Equality? 
77
The Importance of a Gender Policy 
87
References 
89
SECTION II
The Police and Their Problems 
91
 6 
Police Action and the Drug Business in Brazil 
93
Paulo Fraga and Joyce Keli do Nascimento Silva
Drug Laws in Brazil 
94
The Production of Cannabis in Brazil 
94

Contents 
vii
The Repression of Illicit Plantations 
97
Discussion 
104
References 
104
 7 
Race, Class and Law Enforcement in Brazil 
107
Renato Sérgio de Lima and Jacqueline Sinhoretto
Racial Inequalities, Violence and Black Youth 
108
The Role of Brazil’s Military Police 
110
Police Officers’ Origins and Views 
112
A Discontinuous Democracy 
115
References 
118
 8 
Use of Force and Police Reform in Brazil 
121
Wesley G. Skogan
The Survey 
123
Use of Force on the Street 
124
Impact of the Risk Environment 
124
Impact of Personal Factors 
125
Upgrading Police Professionalism 
127
Perspectives on Crime and Policing 
129
Multivariate Analysis 
130
Conclusion 
131
References 
133
 9 
Gangs, Drugs and Urban Pacification 
Squads in Rio 
135
Vicente Riccio and Wesley G. Skogan
Police and Community in Developing Democracies 
137
The Birth of UPPs in Rio 
140
Consolidation of the UPPs 
142
The Future of UPPs 
147
Further Reading 
149
References 
149
10 
Community Policing in the Favelas of 
Rio de Janeiro 
151
Vicente Riccio, Marco Aurélio Ruediger, 
Steven Dutt Ross and Wesley G. Skogan
Community Policing in Rio de Janeiro 
152
Developing the Concept in Rio 
155
Community Policing in Dona Marta and 
Cidade de Deus 
157

viii 
Contents
Conclusions and Implications for Policy in Brazil 
161
References 
162
SECTION III
The Police and Public Policy 
165
11 
Professionalizing the Military Police Through 
Training 
167
Vicente Riccio, Marcio Rys Meirelles de Miranda and 
Angélica Müller
The Origins of Police Educational Reform 
168
Brazil’s National Curricular Plan 
171
Training Military Police Officers in Amazonas 
172
Views of Participants 
173
Conclusion 
179
References 
180
12 
Police Reform in Brazil: The Rise and 
Demise of PRONASCI 
183
Marco Aurélio Ruediger
Evaluating Reform 
184
The Political Genesis of PRONASCI 
187
The Political Process and PRONASCI 
189
Dismantling PRONASCI 
195
Conclusion 
198
References 
199
Index 
201

ix
 While the literature on police and allied subjects is growing exponentially, its 
impact upon day-to-day policing remains small. Th e two worlds of research and 
practice of policing remain disconnected even though cooperation between the 
two is growing. A major reason is that the two groups speak in diff erent languages. 
Th e research work is published in hard-to-access journals and presented in a 
manner that is diffi  cult to comprehend for a layperson. On the other hand, the 
police practitioners tend not to mix with researchers and remain secretive about 
their work. Consequently, there is little dialogue between the two and almost no 
attempt to learn from one another. Dialogue across the globe, among researchers 
and practitioners situated in diff erent continents, are of course even more limited. 
 I attempted to address this problem by starting the IPES (International 
Police Executive Symposium), www.ipes.info, where a common platform has 
brought the two together. IPES is now in its 17th year. The annual meetings, 
which are the major events of the organization, have been hosted in all parts 
of the world. Several publications have come out of these deliberations, and a 
new collaborative community of scholars and police officers has been created 
whose membership runs into the several hundreds. 
 Another attempt was to begin a new journal, aptly called  Police Practice 
and Research :  An International Journal ,  PPR , that has opened the gate to prac-
titioners to share their work and experiences. The journal focuses on issues 
that help give scholars and police officers a single platform.  PPR  is completing 
its 18th year in 2017. It is certainly evidence of growing collaboration between 
police research and practice, given that  PPR  began with four issues a year, 
expanded into five issues in its fourth year and is now issued six times a year. 
 Clearly, these attempts, despite their success, remain limited. Conferences 
and journal publications do help create a body of knowledge and an association 
of police activists but cannot address substantial issues in depth. The limitations 
of time and space preclude larger discussions and more authoritative exposi-
tions that can provide stronger and broader linkages between the two worlds. 
 It is this realization of the increasing dialogue between police research and 
practice that has encouraged many of us—my close colleagues and I connected 
closely with IPES and  PPR  across the world—to conceive and implement a 
new attempt in this direction. This led to the idea of a book series,  Advances 
in Police Theory and Practice , that seeks to attract writers from all parts of the 
world. Further, the attempt is to find practitioner contributors. The objective 
is to make the series a serious contribution to our knowledge of the police as 
 Series Editor’s Preface 

x 
Series Editor’s Preface
well as to improve police practices. The focus is not only on work that describes 
the best and most successful police practices but also challenges current para-
digms and breaks new ground to prepare the police for the 21st century. The 
series seeks comparative analysis that highlights achievements in distant parts 
of the world as well as one that encourages an in-depth examination of specific 
problems confronting a particular police force. 
 The chapters in this volume, Police and Society in Brazil, examine the relation-
ship between policing and Brazilian society. There are tight linkages between many 
of the most important features of Brazilian life and the police and their problems. 
These include poverty, inequality, racial divisions, debilitating levels of violence 
and a state that cannot protect large segments of its population. Individually, each 
of these issues presents a daunting challenge to reformers; collectively, address-
ing them will require heroic levels of policy effort, coordination and investment. 
Although most of the chapters focus on the problems facing Brazil, along the way 
each addresses avenues toward reform. The editors of this book are experienced 
observers of the Brazilian scene, and much of what they report is presented here in 
English for the first time. A few of the chapters originally appeared in a special issue 
of  Police Practice and Research , and they have been updated for this book. 
 It is hoped that through this series it will be possible to accelerate the pro-
cess of building knowledge about policing and help bridge the gap between 
the two worlds—the world of police research and the world of police practice. 
This is an invitation to police scholars and practitioners across the world to 
come and join in this venture. 
 Dilip K. Das, Ph.D. 
 Founding President, 
 International Police Executive Symposium, IPES, www.ipes.info 
 Founding Editor-in-Chief,  Police Practice and Research: 
An International Journal , 
 PPR, www.tandf.co.uk/journals 

xi
 Th e post-authoritarian Brazil is a complex society marked by many challenges 
and a lot of potential. Th e democratic institutions have passed through chal-
lenges in this period, and the return to an authoritarian model is improbable. 
Th e consolidation of a network of social policies has allowed the reduction of 
misery and poverty in the last few years. Additionally, the Brazilian society is 
watching more critically the role of its rulers independently of their partisan 
background. Despite the conjuncture of crisis, this tendency will not change 
in the future. 
 However, the Brazilian post-authoritarian agenda has an open issue that 
is hard to solve: public security. The problem of public security is well known 
by Brazilians on a daily basis and most affects the population in need. This 
problem not only affects a specific group in society, but also brings suffering 
to different social segments, regardless of social class, gender, ethnicity or way 
of life. Thus, the need for action to reduce the levels of violence in the country 
is urgent. 
 Despite public security being considered one of the top issues on the Bra-
zilian agenda, the political leaders of all parties still persist on policies based 
on old models and keep acting only after the eventual crisis. The success of 
innovative public security policies in Brazil depends on a cultural change to 
a more responsive model of policing based on the integration of police and 
society. There is need for a long-term perspective instead of the prevailing 
short-term logic. 
 To implement this paradigm change, it is necessary to rethink the role of 
police officers in Brazilian society. The prevailing model places them in con-
flict situations when interacting with communities. This logic raises the risks 
inherent to the police work and does not promote a real integration with the 
communities, especially the poorer ones. As a consequence, police legitimacy 
has been low in Brazil. 
 The institutional structure of the police in Brazil does not allow a differ-
ent role for a police officer. To sustain the principles erected in the Brazilian 
Constitution proclaimed in 1988—the respect for human rights and the pro-
motion of social justice—public security’s traditional practices and police 
action must change. Thus, the police officer must be seen not only as a law 
enforcer, but also as a promoter of human rights and social change. 
 This is relevant because public security is a fundamental asset for the 
impoverished communities in the country that suffer mainly the effects of 
 Preface 

xii 
Preface
violence. In some cases, the action of armed groups does not allow people 
to exercise their right to come and go. The control of territories by criminal 
gangs prevents the right to work freely for the poorest population. In many 
popular communities in Brazil, it is possible to find an entrepreneurial popu-
lation running small businesses to fulfill the neighborhoods’ demands and to 
have a source of income. Crime directly affects these businesses. Those prob-
lems can also be observed at the associative level, because the population does 
not have freedom to organize their fight for citizenship rights. 
 For these reasons, the search for innovative solutions in the public secu-
rity field needs to place the police work in another perspective. The police 
officer can be a leading figure on deep social changes. The enforcement of 
basic civil rights in poor communities is true democratic revolution in Brazil. 
It will never be achieved without legitimate policing. There is still a huge gap 
between the daily reality and the desired change, but the search for a new 
model cannot be abandoned. 
 Finally, it was a great pleasure to receive this work that aims to highlight 
the dilemmas of Brazilian police forces in their interactions with society. The 
multidimensional look adopted by the book depicts the police problems in all 
their complexities and avoids reductionisms and one-sided perspectives. The 
publication of this book in English will provide the international public with 
a deeper understanding of the context and the challenges faced by Brazilian 
police forces. I hope that this work will promote an exchange among research-
ers and public security professionals in Brazil and abroad. I also expect that 
this book will stimulate the needed cultural change to adopt a new paradigm 
of policing in Brazil. 
 Ricardo Balestreri 
 Former Brazilian National Public Security Secretary 2008–2010 

xiii
Vicente Riccio  is a Professor in the graduate program of Law and Innovation 
at Federal University of Juiz de Fora, Brazil. He also has worked as a consultant 
for many public institutions in Brazil, such as the Ministry of Justice, Public 
Security Secretary of Rio de Janeiro, and the Civil Police of Amazonas, among 
others. He has coordinated many educational programs for police offi  cers and 
criminal justice professionals in diff erent states of Brazil. His research inter-
ests cover diverse topics such as police reform, police cultures, legal systems 
in developing democracies, media and justice, and video evidence. 
Wesley G. Skogan is Professor of Political Science and a Faculty Fellow of the 
Institute for Policy Research at Northwestern University. His research focuses 
on policing, community responses to crime, victimization, and fear of crime. 
He is a Fellow of the American Society of Criminology, and was a Senior Fel-
low of the Center for Crime, Communities, and Culture of the Open Societies 
Institute. He organized the Committee on Police Policies and Practices for the 
National Research Council and served as its chair. He is the co-author (with 
Kathleen Frydl) of the committee report  Fairness and Eff ectiveness in Policing: 
Th e Evidence . Earlier, he spent two years at the National Institute of Justice as 
a Visiting Fellow. In 2015, he received the Distinguished Achievement Award 
in Evidence-Based Crime Policy from the Center for Evidence-Based Crime 
Policy. 
 Editors 


xv
 Mario Aufi ero 
 Civil Police of Amazonas 
 Manaus, Brazil 
 Ricardo Balestreri 
 Former Brazilian National Public Security Secretary 
 Independent Consultant 
 Natal, Brazil 
 Eduardo Cerqueira Batitucci 
 Graduate Program on Public Administration 
 Fundação João Pinheiro 
 Belo Horizonte, Brazil 
 Marcus Vinícius Gonçalves da Cruz 
 Graduate Program on Public Administration 
 Fundação João Pinheiro 
 Belo Horizonte, Brazil 
 Amanda Matar de Figueiredo 
 Researcher 
 Fundação João Pinheiro 
 Belo Horizonte, Brazil 
 Paulo Fraga 
 Graduate Program on Social Sciences 
 Federal University of Juiz de Fora 
 Juiz de Fora, Brazil 
 Janaína Lawall 
 Habitation Studies Center 
 Federal University of Juiz de Fora 
 Juiz de Fora, Brazil 
 Contributors 

xvi 
Contributors
 Renato Sérgio de Lima 
 Business Management School 
 Getulio Vargas Foundation (University) 
 São Paulo, Brazil 
 Marcio Rys Meirelles de Miranda 
 Amazonas Society for Cultural Development 
 Law School (Uninorte) 
 Manaus, Brazil 
 Angélica Müller 
 History Department 
 Fluminense Federal University 
 Niterói, Brazil 
 Ludmila Mendonça Lopes Ribeiro 
 Center for Crime and Public Safety Studies 
 Federal University of Minas Gerais 
 Belo Horizonte, Brazil 
 Vicente Riccio 
 Graduate Program on Law and Innovation 
 Federal University of Juiz de Fora 
 Juiz de Fora, Brazil 
 Steven Dutt Ross 
 Mathematics and Statistics Department 
 Rio de Janeiro State University 
 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 
 Marco Aurélio Ruediger 
 Applied Policies Directory 
 Getulio Vargas Foundation (University) 
 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 
 Luis Flavio Sapori 
 Graduate Program on Social Sciences 
 Catholic University of Minas Gerais 
 Belo Horizonte, Brazil 

Contributors 
xvii
 Joyce Keli do Nascimento Silva 
 Ph.D. Candidate 
 Graduate Program on Social Sciences 
 Federal University of Juiz de Fora 
 Juiz de Fora, Brazil 
 Jacqueline Sinhoretto 
 Graduate Program on Social Sciences 
 Federal University of São Carlos 
 São Carlos, Brazil 
 Wesley G. Skogan 
 Institute for Policy Research 
 Northwestern University 
 Evanston, IL, USA 
 Letícia Godinho de Souza 
 Graduate Program on Public Administration 
 Fundação João Pinheiro 
 Belo Horizonte, Brazil 
 André Zogahib 
 Business Management School 
 State University of Amazonas 
 Manaus, Brazil 


1
 Contents 
 Crime and Policing in Brazil 
5 
 Policing the  Favelas 
10 
 Paths to Reform: Organizational Restructuring 
13 
 Paths to Reform: Internal Accountability and External Oversight 14 
 Paths to Reform: Finding a Community Focus 
17 
 Paths to Reform: Building Legitimacy 
19 
 Discussion 
23 
 References 
24 
 Police and Society 
in Brazil 
 Wesley G. Skogan and 
Vicente Riccio 
 1 
 Th e chapters in this volume examine many aspects of the relationship between 
policing and society in Brazil. As will become clear, there are very tight link-
ages between many of the most important features of Brazilian life and the 
police and their problems. Crime is among the issues facing the police, but 
the list is much longer. In this essay, we describe this police-society nexus, and 
examine the possibilities for reform in Brazilian policing. Along the way, we 
point to specifi c chapters in this book that address the issues we raise, but in 
more detail. Th ese chapters are based on research by experienced observers of 
the Brazilian scene, and much of what they report is presented here in English 
for the fi rst time. 
 The first fact about Brazil is that it is very large. At 3.3 million square miles, 
it is slightly larger than the continental United States. In 2017, the population 
was just over 207 million, or about two-thirds that of the U.S. It features vast, 
rolling plains, semi-arid regions, jungle and mountains. Forty percent of the 
country falls in the Amazon region. The largest state in the area, Amazonas, is 
featured in several chapters of this book. But while the nation’s economy fea-
tures large agricultural and forest products sectors, Brazil is an urban society. 
Most of its citizens (about 85%) live in cities. Even in Amazonas, more than 
2 million people live in Manaus, its largest city, and they account for about half 
the state’s population. The largest Brazilian city, São Paulo, is home to 12 mil-
lion people and is the country’s economic leader. 

2 
Wesley G. Skogan and Vicente Riccio
 Like many physically large countries (ranging from India to Australia and 
the United States), Brazil has a federal system of governance. The constitu-
tion limits the powers of the national government and reserves a great deal of 
authority for its 26 states and the federal capital district. As we shall see, polic-
ing is one of those functions. Rio de Janeiro is another big city (6.4 million) 
that is featured in this book, but most of its policing is controlled by Rio de 
Janeiro State, which encompasses the city and its surrounding metropolitan 
area and includes an additional 12 million residents. There are another 15 
cities in Brazil with populations above 1 million, and 24 of the 27 states have 
populations at least that large. São Paulo State is home to a total of 45 million 
residents. 
 Locally and nationally, Brazil has a multiparty political system, a vibrant 
mass media and a strong civil society, so many policies are hotly contested and 
fought out in elections at all levels of government. Voter turnout is compul-
sory, and thus high, at over 80%. There is currently a debate over the country’s 
very fragmented party system. The current party structure inhibits the forma-
tion of policy-oriented coalitions in the legislature. Executive branch policies, 
including those affecting the police and crime prevention, pass through the 
legislature only after difficult and often corrupt bargains are struck. Legisla-
tors themselves often dutifully represent powerful economic elites in their 
constituencies, especially in rural areas. The federal nature of Brazil also limits 
the reach of national policies, and bargaining has to take place downward as 
well if the states are to cooperate with national policy initiatives. One chapter 
of this book examines the national politics of police reform and the difficulties 
involved in promoting federal policies among the states. 
 But an important footnote to the fundamentally democratic character 
of contemporary Brazil is that in the not-too-distant past the nation passed 
through an authoritarian abyss that still affects the nature of its institutions, 
especially the police and the military. April 1964 began with a military coup 
that was politically aligned with the United States government. This ush-
ered in a 21-year military dictatorship. During this period, most political 
and human rights were suspended, censorship was imposed and the elected 
national Congress was shut down. The army took general control of domes-
tic society, and both branches of local policing in Brazil were converted into 
tools for political repression. Police shared information with army intel-
ligence units. Even today, the Military Police branch of local policing is 
considered an auxiliary unit of the army, and its military identity is strong 
even at the state level. During the military dictatorship, thousands of people 
were tortured and many hundreds are known to have been killed, or they 
simply disappeared. Civilian rule was restored in 1985, but the overhang 
of this repressive period—and, until recently, some of those who did the 
repressing—has lingered on into the contemporary period. Before the mili-
tary left power, an amnesty law was imposed that protected those in power 

Chapter 1: Police and Society in Brazil 
3
during the dictatorship period from prosecution, and their immunity was 
recognized following the handover. 
 Another feature of Brazil is that it is among the most unequal societies on 
earth. The gap between those at the very top and bottom of the income dis-
tribution is about five times as great as similar gaps in Northern Hemisphere 
industrial nations. This is despite the fact that economic inequality in Brazil 
was falling until its recent financial crisis. In Brazil, the richest 10% of house-
holds consistently received almost two-thirds of all household income, and 
they have done so for decades. In some years, the top 0.1% received as much 
as 15% of total national income (Souza and Medeiros 2015). In early 2017, 
the  Financial Times  estimated that the wage of Brazilian factory workers was 
US$2.70 per hour and that it was falling. 1  Inequality spreads beyond income 
and wealth; other social cleavages are closely linked to them. For example, 
wage gaps are reflected in educational attainment. Differences in reading and 
math scores between students coming from households in the top and bottom 
income groups are larger than in other countries with similar levels of devel-
opment. The United Nations Development Programme’s (UNDP) “Human 
Development Index” (HDI) assesses three quality-of-life dimensions across 
many countries: longevity, levels of education and gross national income per 
capita. In the last HDI global ranking, Brazil scored 75th. It ranked below 
nations with lower levels of GDP per capita because of violence, health and 
education issues linked to income inequality. The nation’s education, health 
and security services have not contributed much to a broad range of social 
inequalities among poorer and richer Brazilians. The country’s high violent 
crime death rate is emblematic of this, and it is discussed in several chapters 
in this book. 
 There is also a great deal of inequality among the states. The Brazil-
ian National Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) is responsible for 
monitoring economic statistics. In a report issued in 2014, the IBGE reported 
GINI indices for the nation’s regions. This indicator rates the distribution of 
wealth in a society based on the difference in income between the poorest 
and the richest individuals. It ranges from 0 (an even distribution of wealth) 
to 1 (highly concentrated wealth). The results showed some progress toward 
a more equal distribution of wealth in many areas. The Northeast (the poorest 
region in the country) scored 0.563 in 2004 and 0.509 in 2013; the Southeast 
(a rich area) scored 0.531 in 2004 and 0.483 in 2013. However, the recession 
that began in Brazil in 2015 has brought any reduction in inequality across 
the country to a halt. 
 A big social fact about Brazil is that it is significantly a mixed-race soci-
ety. This is deeply linked to the issue of inequality. Long a colony of Portugal, 
Brazil was a slave-holding country until 1888. Many slaves were imported 
from West Africa, and there was originally a substantial native population. In 
contemporary Brazil, the result has produced a very complex racial dynamic. 

4 
Wesley G. Skogan and Vicente Riccio
The 2010 census set the population at about 47% white. The remainder was 
divided among persons classifying themselves as “black” (8%), “yellow” (1%), 
or “indigenous” (fewer still), with the largest group (43%) classing themselves 
as mixed race, or “brown.” But all of these categories are situational and shift-
ing, and each subsumes subtly defined subcategories that vary in significance 
from occasion to occasion. What these categories mean has been contested 
among Brazilians for almost two centuries. This includes vigorous debates 
over the role of class versus race in determining life chances in Brazil, a dis-
cussion that most recently has begun to feature statistical analyses weighing 
the significance of the two factors. However, for our purposes, there are two 
important facts about race. The first is that it overlaps sharply with inequal-
ity. The result is that where people live and how they live are clustered both 
economically and socially, and that clustering has a lot to do with crime. The 
second feature of race is that it overwhelms virtually every statistic produced 
by the criminal justice system. Victims, offenders and prisoners—and espe-
cially those in each of these categories who  died —are overwhelmingly persons 
of color (Cano 2010). 
 Finally, several chapters in this volume consider the fate of Brazil’s  fave-
las , or concentrated urban slums. Favelas are one of the places where poor 
people of color live, and their prevalence and visibility is another of the dis-
tinctive features of Brazilian society. Favelas are numerous. In Rio de Janeiro 
city, there are approximately 800 favelas, and in 2010, about 1.4 million of 
the city’s 6.4 million inhabitants lived there.  Favelado s are not just poor; they 
are isolated in many ways from mainstream society. Residents often live far 
from shops or transportation routes. Mostly, these communities have run-
ning water, but often there is no provision for the sewage they generate, so 
health is an endemic problem. Social services may be nonexistent. Electrical 
service can be sporadic, and there may be few if any streetlights. Few residents 
have formal claim to the places where they live, and homes are often patched 
together from cardboard, corrugated iron and scrap wood. The streets are 
mostly not paved, and buildings have been thrown up without attention to a 
conventional street grid. 
 Many favelas are governed not by the formal political system but by crimi-
nal gangs that dominate the territory. Governing gangs extort money from 
residents and the informal businesses that are located there, they fend off 
incursions by other gangs that want to set up shop, they conduct sometimes 
large-scale criminal enterprises from their home base, and they form alli-
ances with politicians and corrupt police officials to secure these operations. 
In a modestly sized area, these gangs might number about 50 or 60 members. 
Some (but fewer) favelas are under the control of vigilante militia groups. 
They differ from criminal gangs largely in that they are made up of former 
or off-duty police officers and other security employees, and they are often 
under the influence of economic elites and their political allies. They also are 

Chapter 1: Police and Society in Brazil 
5
in the business of extracting protection money from local people and busi-
nesses, and they illegally resell electricity, cable television and other services to 
residents (see Magaloni, Franco and Melo 2015). No significant inroads into 
Brazil’s crime and policing problems will be made without directly confronting 
conditions in the favelas. (For a great deal more on favelas, see Jovchelovitch 
and Priego-Hernandez 2013.) 
 To be sure, it would also be a mistake to consider favelas as uniformly 
organized and disadvantaged. Preteceille and Valladares (1999) have ques-
tioned the “ideal type” that has been constructed regarding favelas. In fact, 
there is great diversity among and within them. There are “richer” and 
“poorer” favelas, and different levels of public services delivered in those 
areas. The incidence of crime also varies from place to place. The favelas in 
Rio de Janeiro (featured in several chapters of this book) have been a target 
of public policies since the 90s, with the  Favela-Bairro  program. It focused 
on paving the roads, building sidewalks and providing basic infrastructure 
in those areas. Some of these projects were supported by the Interamerican 
Development Bank and the World Bank. Understanding this diversity should 
be important in the design of public policies targeting these areas. 
 Crime and Policing in Brazil 
 Violence is endemic in Brazilian society. Most reports on crime in Brazil 
focus on homicide. Th ese are used to compare Brazil to other countries, or 
to compare Brazilian cities to each other or over time, because body counts 
are seemingly the most reliable of the generally unreliable crime statistics 
produced by the country’s police forces. Th e absence of reliable statistics in 
Brazil presents a signifi cant obstacle to developing and evaluating the eff ec-
tiveness of security policies. Th ere is also no equivalent to the National Crime 
Victimization Survey in the U.S. or the British Crime Survey. Th e most reli-
able source of information on violence are mortality data assembled by the 
Ministry of Health, and these provide the only basis for counting homicide 
in Brazil. However, there are problems even in that database. “Death by inde-
terminate causes” is the classifi cation given to over 10% of fatalities registered 
in this database. Beyond homicide, there is also a lack of systematic informa-
tion regarding drug dealing, rates of imprisonment and even police personnel 
(Cerqueira 2013). 
 Analyses of homicides on a national basis can be found in reports from the 
Ministry of Health Statistics that are published annually by Sangari Institute 
in partnership with  Faculdade Latino-Americana de Ciências Sociais (Latin-
American Faculty of Social Sciences). They produce the  Mapa da Violência 
(Violence Map). This report analyzes data on homicides and other violent 
crimes. Each year the report includes a special focus on a specific issue. The 

6 
Wesley G. Skogan and Vicente Riccio
2016 report examined homicides by firearms and documented the spread of 
gun murders across the Brazilian states. The Northeast region (the poorest in 
the country) faced the largest increase in violence from 2004 to 2014; it went 
up an astonishing 124%. Other states showing major growth over this period 
included Rio Grande do Norte (237 gun homicides in 2004, 1,292 in 2014), 
Maranhão (up 367%), and Ceará (up 314%) (Waiselfisz 2016). An exception to 
this trend is the state of Pernambuco, where gun homicides dropped by 25%. 
This decrease may have been related to a program developed by the state called 
 Pacto pela Vida  (Pact for Life) that aimed to reduce levels of homicides in Per-
nambuco. This aimed at integrating the state’s police forces, public attorneys 
and the judiciary to curb the homicide rate. The participation of civil society 
was also essential to the program. The adoption of formal goals for the program 
and measures of its success were another salutary feature of the project. The ini-
tial results were very positive, and homicide levels began to decrease. Recently, 
critics have charged that  Pacto pela Vida  has been faltering and needs to regain 
the resources it needs to reduce violence and fear of crime in the area. 2 How-
ever, Pernambuco continues to  not  follow the trend of seemingly intractable 
increases in violence that characterize many states in the poor Northeast. 
 The Southeast region in Brazil, which is the nation’s richest area, is com-
posed of the states of São Paulo, Minas Gerais, Rio de Janeiro and Espírito 
Santo. Collectively they have high rates of crime, but they too have witnessed 
a decrease in homicide. Over the same period we considered above, gun 
homicides there decreased by 36%. The largest decreases were in the states of 
São Paulo (down 54%) and Rio de Janeiro (down 42%). These decreases are 
important, because these are the largest Brazilian metropolitan areas. In gen-
eral, the rise of violence has occurred in states that have lowered their levels 
of inequality the most in the last decade (Kahn 2013). In turn, rising crime 
rates can jeopardize other gains in quality of life that can be observed in Brazil. 
Chapters in this book address policies dealing with violence and measures to 
improve the quality of policing and police legitimacy. 
 Comparatively, Brazil ranks among the violent countries in the world. 
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime’s (2014) most recent report 
rates nations by their homicide rates. They count “homicide related to other 
criminal activities; interpersonal homicide; and socio-political homicide” (The 
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 2014, p. 11). This definition dis-
counts deaths due to war or suicide, for example. Based on their calculations, 
the  world  homicide rate is 6.2 per 100,000. In Southern Africa and Central 
America, the aggregate homicide rate was just over 24 per 100,000, and in 
South America, Middle Africa, and the Caribbean, it varied between 16 and 
23 per 100,000. According to the same report, Brazil stood number three on 
the list for South America, with a homicide rate of 25 per 100,000 inhabitants. 
Venezuela was number one by a wide margin, at 54 homicides per 100,000, 
followed by Colombia at 31 per 100,000. In Central America, Honduras scored 

Chapter 1: Police and Society in Brazil 
7
90 per 100,000, and El Salvador 41 per 100,000. Brazil as a whole does not 
reach these peaks, but its rate has been stable at a relatively high level. 
 In addition to homicide, other fearsome crimes are not reliably counted, 
but they are widely reported in the media and discussed in political debates. 
These include kidnapping, illegal weapons sales, extortion from business, all 
manner of drug crimes and robberies committed at roadblocks set up between 
airports and their city centers. Drugs have had a particularly toxic effect on 
Brazilian society, because the trade is dominated by powerful and violent 
street gangs. Shootouts between them and the police account for a significant 
portion of the police-involved killings that are registered each year. 
 As in many societies, it is those at the bottom of the economic and social 
ladder who bear the brunt of this violence.  Chapter 7  in this volume, by 
Renato Sérgio de Lima and Jacqueline Sinhoretto, cites figures for inequali-
ties in homicide. Young black males from 12 to 29 years of age are on average 
2.6 times more likely to be murdered than young white males, and in some 
states of Brazil’s poverty-stricken Northeast, such as Paraíba and Pernambuco, 
they are 11 times more likely to be killed. Fatal shootings by police are just 
as racially disparate. As  Chapter 9  documents, in 2011 police in the state of 
Minas Gerais were twice as likely to kill blacks as whites. This disparity ratio 
stood at a factor of three in São Paulo, and in Rio de Janeiro police killed 
blacks at almost four times the rate for whites. 
 Through 2015, crime had been trending downward in some Brazilian 
states and for the country as a whole. During the 1990s, Rio de Janeiro was 
one of the most violent cities on the planet. In the early 2000s, Rio faced about 
3,500 homicides per year. This number dropped by about a third through 
2008 and 2009, and then dropped significantly more over the next few years. 
By 2015, the homicide count had fallen to about 1,700 per year. The run-up to 
the 2016 Olympic Games boosted this total significantly. Homicides peaked 
earlier in São Paulo (in 1998), and then dropped steadily, to about 50% of its 
peak. Crime has fallen more in the wealthier areas of the country, which are 
concentrated in the south, and remain stubbornly high in the poor Northeast. 
But whatever the trend, the level of homicide in Brazil continues to keep it 
high on the list of the most violent societies. 
 An important feature of Brazilian policing is also its violence. The Mili-
tary Police in particular usually patrol with heavy weapons, and they are quick 
to use them. They bring heavy weaponry plus armored vehicles and other 
military equipment to bear during encounters with the criminal gangs that 
control many of Brazil’s favelas. In the next section, we describe policing in 
those poor communities, and it frequently involves extensive violence. It is 
widely reported that police perform “extrajudicial” killings of suspects. As a 
result, the police shoot and wound or kill very large numbers of people. Official 
reports usually list these as deaths during confrontations or due to resistance 
to arrest. Fatal incidents involving the police are tracked by various human 

8 
Wesley G. Skogan and Vicente Riccio
rights groups, which analyze and report them independently. For example, the 
Brazilian Forum on Public Safety reports that between 2009 and 2015, Brazil-
ian police killed an average of six persons per day, for a total of 17,688 people 
over that five-year period (Fórum Brasileiro de Segurança Pública 2016). They 
report that during 2015, police killed 3,320 people, up from 2,212 three years 
before. In the state of Rio de Janeiro alone, police killed 563 people in 2014. On 
a fairly consistent basis, police killings account for about 20% of all homicides 
each year. Studies examining whom they shoot inevitably conclude that the 
victims of police violence are overwhelmingly poor racial minorities. Another 
facet of Brazilian violence is the victimization of police officers. More than 
358 police officers were killed during 2014. Among this group, only 91 police 
officers were killed while they were on duty; the remaining 267 were murdered 
while they were off duty. Due to their low wages, many police officers work as 
private guards when they off duty, and this can be a risky assignment. Despite 
being illegal, this off-duty employment practice is tolerated by police com-
manders. The number of killings of police in Brazil while they are on duty is 
110% higher than the number of police officers killed in the U.S. while they are 
on duty (41), in 2015 (Fórum Brasileiro de Segurança Pública 2016). 
 Police are also widely reported to use torture. Torture is employed to 
extract information from prisoners, retaliate when criminal gangs injure an 
officer, deter opponents from seeking to harm officers or exact revenge on 
persons who were uncooperative or who disrespected them. Torture victims 
may well end up a subject for summary execution as well. 3  Few of these actions 
result in any judicial review. More than one of the community-oriented polic-
ing projects that are described in the next section have blown up following 
allegations of police torture of residents and indiscriminant police shootings 
in retaliation for gang violence against them. 
 For all of this, by the few measures available, the Brazilian police and 
the criminal justice system are not particularly effective. There are few useful 
statistics on crime solution rates that could be used to evaluate the effective-
ness of police forces and the criminal justice system as a whole. According to 
the Fórum Brasileiro de Segurança Pública, the solution rate for homicide is 
below 15% of the cases registered. Only small states such Santa Catarina or 
the Federal District report better performance measures, with solution rates 
of 43% and 69%, respectively. In general, the police forces in Brazil do not 
solve complex cases or those linked to organized crime. The majority of cases 
solved in Brazil are those in which the perpetrator is easily known, such as in 
cases involving domestic homicide or disputes between rivals (FBSP 2013). 
 Another facet of policing in Brazil is corruption. Brazilian police are 
badly trained and very poorly paid, and many struggle to survive by working 
off-duty private security jobs or arranging to do paid work while they are on 
duty. In February 2017, police in the Brazilian state of Espírito Santo went 
on strike for ten days to protest their wages. Police routinely extract bribes 

Chapter 1: Police and Society in Brazil 
9
from ordinary citizens in exchange for overlooking offenses, including traffic 
infractions. Others work for the informal militias that were described earlier. 
Higher on the earnings scale, they may cooperate with drug traffickers or 
work with a drug gang in eradicating a rival group. Opportunities for col-
lecting bribes are endemic, because the officers’ daily routines provide them 
access to corrupters, while their managers provide little in the way of super-
vision, and the organization generally ignores street-level corruption. At the 
upper echelons, there can be cozy relations between police leaders and local 
political and economic elites. This is especially true in poorer and more rural 
states. There, defenders of land rights and environmental activists can find 
themselves without protection. The public knows of all of this. Davis, Hen-
derson and Merrick (2003) cite surveys from the 1990s indicating that people 
overwhelmingly believed that police were involved with organized crime and 
with informal death squads operating within the ranks, and that many Bra-
zilians feared police as much as they feared crime. The Latinobarometro is 
a survey that is conducted yearly in all Latin American countries. For 2016, 
they report that the issue of corruption was second on the list of concerns of 
Brazilians, putting them close to Bolivia and Peru ( Economist 2016). 
 Together, these factors describe a toxic combination of police violence, 
corruption and ineffectiveness, combined with public cynicism. In a society 
that needs to build confidence in the police, they are most often viewed as 
corrupt and dangerous. Later sections of this chapter consider what could be 
done to address these issues. 
 Chapters in this book also examine some fundamental features of police 
organization in Brazil. The first is that there is not one body conducting rou-
tine policing, but two. 4  Ordinary policing is divided between two distinct 
bodies: the Military Police and the Civil Police. The Military Police provide 
the routine street policing familiar to readers from many cultures. They stand 
by to respond to emergencies, engage in preventive patrol and respond to 
calls and other forms of complaint. They are organized along military lines 
and often patrol with heavy weapons. The Civil Police provide what in the 
Northern Hemisphere is known as “detective work.” They investigate crimes 
and prepare cases for prosecution when they are successfully concluded. Luis 
Flavio Sapori describes the historical origins of this distinction and some of its 
implications for practice in  Chapter 2  of this volume. In  Chapter 4 , Eduardo 
Cerqueira Batitucci and colleagues describe the strong and distinct cultures 
that dominate each of them. These often impede the kind of routine coopera-
tion that one might expect between policing agencies that share the task of 
keeping a jurisdiction safe. They frequently engage in turf wars, competing to 
take credit when trends look favorable, and their relationship is generally one 
of distrust. Their strong cultures and political connections have also shielded 
them from efforts to reform police operations, and have forestalled efforts in 
some states to merge the two into a single police service. 

10 
Wesley G. Skogan and Vicente Riccio
 A further feature of both policing branches in Brazil is that there are deep 
divisions within them, between staff members in managerial positions and 
rank-and-file officers. In the Military Police, the two groups are recognized 
as “officers” and “soldiers.” Traditional military culture surrounding the divi-
sion between officers and the enlisted ranks has been imported wholesale into 
policing as well. In the Civil Police, the split is between unit leaders and lower-
level investigators and staff.  Chapter 3  in this volume, by Vicente Riccio and 
colleagues, details the many negative organizational consequences that flow 
from the strict and impenetrable hierarchy of the Civil Police. Around the 
world, policing is organized into hierarchical bureaucracies, so these divisions 
are not a surprise. However, they take on added significance because there is 
essentially no possibility of advancement between the top and bottom ranks, 
in either organization. The division between management and street work is 
both hierarchical and social, based on educational requirements and thus the 
background of candidates. For the Civil Police, educational requirements to 
taking the top jobs are even written into the national constitution. Reports 
by Julita Lemgruber (2002) and chapters in this volume examine some of the 
pathologies of the resulting divisions between them. These splits undermine 
internal cohesion and morale, cut managers off from the daily life of street 
officers, discourage forward thinking among the bottom ranks and create two 
separate forces with their own cultures inside each of the branches. 
 A final feature of Brazilian policing is that its military character continues 
in important ways to resonate with the country’s relatively recent experience 
as an authoritarian dictatorship. During that period, officers policed the peo-
ple; they were not a police that was  of  the people or  for  the people, which is 
the tradition of policing that follows the model of Robert Peel’s first London 
police force. Elisabeth Leeds (2007) concluded that, since the return of the 
country to civilian control, the policing sector has made the least progress 
toward becoming a truly democratic institution.  Chapter 11  in this volume, by 
Vicente Riccio and his co-authors, described a police training program aimed 
at democratizing and humanizing the face of the Military Police. They found 
in their interviews that officers in the higher echelons of the Military Police 
still thought of themselves as a military rather than a civilian force. They did 
not see themselves as reflecting civilian society, which they saw as weak and 
in need of their strong arm. 
 Policing the  Favelas 
 Several chapters of this book focus on policing in Rio de Janeiro’s favela com-
munities by Military Police units. Favelas are places that concentrate all of the 
crime and policing problems we consider in this book. Residents are poor 
and isolated from many aspects of mainstream society. Th ey are stigmatized 

Chapter 1: Police and Society in Brazil 
11
because they are favela residents. Th ey are plagued by violent and property 
crime, and by drug markets which operate openly around them. Th ey fre-
quently live under the control of organized crime groups or armed militias 
rather than the government. Th e “taxes” they pay are extortion payments, 
which bring them little in the form of municipal services. Th e arrival of the 
police in their community usually presages an armed struggle between invad-
ing Military Police units and heavily armed gang members protecting their 
turf. Gang members, police and resident bystanders are all at risk of being 
victims of the resulting gunfi re. Th e gangs themselves frequently have cor-
rupt relations with politicians, economic elites and police offi  cials, so these 
invasions frequently do not signal any long-term changes in the conditions 
of residents’ lives. 
 Before about the mid-2000s, the major actors in Rio’s favela policing were 
Special Operations Battalions (or BOPE, in their Portuguese acronym). They 
are heavily armed military units trained in counter-insurgency warfare. Their 
approach to policing the favelas could be described (as above) as a “clear 
and leave” strategy for repressing crime. Their crime-fighting approach was 
to crash into these communities, engage with the heavily armed gangs that 
claimed them, spread as much terror of policing as they could among the 
residents, and pull away. Their occupation duties were few. 
 But beginning in the late 2000s, Rio’s government pressed for a new 
approach to favela policing, one a bit more in accord with the principles of 
community policing. This became the task of UPPs (or, Pacifying Police Units). 
In contrast to the BOPE, they pursued a “clear and hold” strategy. BOPE units 
were still employed to gain control of a targeted area, but then new special 
teams of officers were to remain behind. Their task was to build relationships 
with the community and engage in crime prevention and civic education proj-
ects. There was also the promise that successful pacification would bring with 
it new public services, such as better schools and health clinics. The UPPs 
presented a new approach to policing in Rio’s poor communities. Their strate-
gies were actually markedly different from those of BOPE units alone and the 
crash-in tactics of others that preceded them. In their 2015 report, Magaloni, 
Franco and Melo reported that since 2008, UPP projects had been launched 
in over 100 favelas.  Chapter 9 in this volume, by Vicente Riccio and Wesley G. 
Skogan, describes in detail the origins and evolution of the UPPs and many 
organizational details regarding their pacification activities. 
 Inevitably, the UPPs had mixed results, for theirs was a hard target. Some 
evaluations were conducted of their impact on crime, using the best data 
that could be assembled—which are often not very good. For example, many 
observers cited the visible decline in violent crime in Rio during the post-2009 
period as evidence of the impact of the UPPs in favelas. One of the best actual 
studies of the impact of UPP interventions in favelas in Rio de Janeiro was 
conducted by a research team from Stanford University in the United States. 

12 
Wesley G. Skogan and Vicente Riccio
They carefully assembled and analyzed official records on homicides of all 
kinds, including those perpetrated by police. They examined before-and-after 
changes in homicide in targeted favelas (depending on the analysis, as many 
as 155 favelas), and compared them with changes over the same period in 
matched parts of Rio that were not involved in the effort. They also reported 
on three in-depth analyses of specific UPP interventions that they could care-
fully document on the ground, through interviews and field observations 
(Magaloni, Franco and Melo 2015). 
 The findings were striking. They found that the UPPs had no direct effect 
on overall homicide. Crime trend lines did not correspond to the entry of the 
BOPE and UPP teams across their large sample of areas. However, they did 
identify a dramatic reduction in a particular form of homicide—killings by 
police officers. These went down by an estimated 60% following BOPE plus 
UPP interventions. As we noted earlier, by changing the nature of their work, 
it was hoped that UPP officers would adopt and practice a more community-
oriented, democratic style of policing. The UPP interventions seemed to have 
this desired effect, as measured by a very important statistic in Brazilian soci-
ety, homicides by the police. The research team also reported another, less 
surprising, finding: the UPP interventions worked better at reducing homi-
cide in better-off favelas. In Brazil, as elsewhere, one effect of social programs 
is that the (slightly) better off become better off. 
  Chapter 10  in this volume, by Vicente Riccio and colleagues, found paral-
lel evidence of a reduction in police violence. They surveyed residents of two 
Rio de Janeiro favelas that had been occupied by UPP teams. They found a 
very strong link between resident’s satisfaction with the community policing 
program that they had introduced and the belief that police violence had gone 
down significantly in their community. In these areas, positive assessments of 
the UPPs were also linked to the view that homicide in general had declined, 
and residents of all backgrounds thought that open drug dealing had dimin-
ished. Those who thought police were doing a good job also reported feeling 
safer and that they could more easily come and go in their community. 
 However, having developed, pilot-tested and fielded a highly visible and 
apparently successful new approach to dealing with crime in its favela com-
munities, Rio’s attention to the program faltered, and currently it is at risk of 
collapsing. The proximate causes of this lapse were two: money and the 2016 
Olympic Games. The Games consumed the city’s cash, and during the run-up 
to the Games, they could not even pay the police. Only an emergency infusion 
of federal funds kept officers on the street. Official attention shifted to pro-
viding security to better-off parts of the city where tourists would gather and 
around Olympic venues. Further, the collapse of the international price of oil 
in the mid-2010s hit Rio de Janeiro State’s revenues hard. In  Chapter 9  of this 
volume, Riccio and Skogan assess future prospects for UPP, and they stress the 
resource-intensive nature of the UPP project. Even in better times, there was 

Chapter 1: Police and Society in Brazil 
13
never a realistic prospect that Rio de Janeiro could mount similar operations 
in a significant fraction of the city’s 800 favelas. Even more discouragingly, it 
turns out that there was no money—or political will—to actually deliver on 
the promise that new education and health services would be delivered to 
targeted communities as part of the follow-up, consolidation stage of UPP’s 
pacification model. Further, Magaloni, Franco and Melo (2015) report that, 
into the 2010s, drug traffickers had adapted to UPP strategies. They spread 
their operations to more corners of the city, found unpacified turf to control 
and eventually began to move back into previously reclaimed areas. 
 Paths to Reform: Organizational Restructuring 
 A question addressed by many chapters in this volume is what their fi nd-
ings suggest regarding police reform for Brazil. Here we address several main 
pathways to reform, applying what police researchers suggest could be done 
to promote reform to the situation in Brazil. 
 Among reformers, there often is an instinct to force change by reorga-
nizing established institutional arrangements. Police agencies have been 
amalgamated while others have been split up; they have been centralized, with 
control shifted to the national capital, and they have been decentralized to the 
localities; some lost their insularity while others were largely freed to control 
their own agenda. With few exceptions, there has been little research on what 
is the best model of police organization, or even how much of a difference 
such changes in organizational arrangements actually make. 
 In particular, observers have been quick to point to inefficient and inef-
fective features of Brazil’s distinction between the Military Police and the Civil 
Police. Julita Lemgruber (2002), an experienced student of the Brazilian polic-
ing scene, suggests that this jurisdictional split has hindered the development 
of a more comprehensive perspective in law enforcement planning and bud-
geting, and has forestalled comprehensive criminal justice reform by dividing 
the authority over large swaths of the case processing cycle among the two. 
The two institutions 
 duplicate efforts, activities, and resources. They frequently engage in turf wars, 
struggling with each other over space and competing to take credit for results. 
Their organizational cultures are very distinct and their relationship is gener-
ally marked by distrust, if not open hostility. 
 (p. 4) 
 In  Chapter 2  of this volume, Luis Flavio Sapori also notes that the two 
have become opposing organizations, vying intensively for resources and 
power. He describes how they lobby against each other in the state and federal 

14 
Wesley G. Skogan and Vicente Riccio
legislatures and the dysfunctional effects this competition between them 
have on their crime-fighting effectiveness. He later documents the failure of 
attempts to merge the two branches in several states, and the negative political 
consequences that reverberated from this effort. 
 There may indeed be inefficiencies in case processing, but this may not 
be among the largest issues facing Brazilian policing or a solution to any of its 
most fundamental problems. As David Bayley (2006) points out, there usu-
ally is no clear link between any common form of police organization and the 
exercise of effective democratic policing. The extremely decentralized model 
of American policing rates high on achieving political accountability at the 
local level, but in truth the results of that are not always attractive. It certainly 
has stymied the spread of innovation and limited the extent of professional-
ism in police management. Like Brazil, German police are organized at the 
state level. They are both effective and efficient, and they have never notably 
overstepped the bounds placed upon them by their relatively new democratic 
institutions. Sweden’s single national police force is held in high regard, while 
Italy has multiple and often competing national and local police forces that 
operate with mixed results. In the last two decades, Dutch police have gone 
from being highly decentralized and locally oriented bodies that were directly 
responsible to their mayors to a group of regional forces, and then to an even 
more consolidated number of agencies that are run nationally. Most recently, 
municipal councils have gotten back into the local policing business, hiring 
their own supplemental officers. The Dutch people seem not to have been 
much affected by these changes. Even more recently, the British have begun 
electing police commissioners to provide popular political oversight over their 
very professional regional agencies, but without giving them much say over 
the levels of funding they will receive. Bayley would argue that it is really the 
missions assigned to them and what police  do  that are central to their demo-
cratic prospects, not the details (within limits) of how they are organized. 
 Paths to Reform: Internal Accountability 
and External Oversight 
 Matters involving external and civilian oversight of the police, and their 
accountability to the rule of law, are a more serious matter. Th ese relate to 
identifying, investigating and disciplining offi  cers who breech the boundaries 
set by law and the constitution. Of course, among the issues facing policing, 
these are among the hardest to resolve. Th e perennial question, “Who will 
watch the watchman?” has never successfully been answered in a general way; 
any solutions are always local and perhaps temporary. Police are the armed 
wing of the state, and the appropriate use of their lethal and non-lethal powers 
will always be contested territory. 

Chapter 1: Police and Society in Brazil 
15
 Internal accountability involves vigorous internal investigations and 
levying of punishments in response to documented misconduct. Officer mis-
conduct covers a broad range of issues, and inevitably, the police themselves 
will have to take responsibility for investigations and disciplining for many 
kinds of cases. In the police reform literature, a distinction is usually made 
between infractions of agency rules (e.g., being late for work) and state crimi-
nal statutes (including bribery and theft) on one hand, and complaints from 
the public regarding police misconduct that involves the public on the other. 
Agencies typically treat these as separate streams of problems to be dealt with. 
In unpublished research on Chicago, the first author found that about half of 
all reports and complaints of rule and law violations were generated internally, 
by supervisors and managers within the organization, and about half came 
from the general public. In Chicago’s system, the former were dealt with inter-
nally, and the latter were investigated by an external civilian agency. 
 How internal issues are handled is actually a topic of great interest in 
policing. Clearly, one goal of internal accountability is to deter future miscon-
duct. If the mechanism for doing so is to be individual punishment, the first 
goal would be individual deterrence; managers could conclude “they won’t do 
that again” after passing judgment. It is hoped that most managers would take 
a larger view, one of general deterrence. They could hope that punishing indi-
vidual officers will send a message to the organization’s employees that clarify 
management’s expectations regarding their behavior. If successful, a general 
deterrent message could ensure that many other officers would not consider 
breaking the rules in the first place. In addition, active internal accountabil-
ity processes could send a message to the community the agency serves, one 
that action can successfully be taken when employees misbehave. Because 
some of the most economically significant issues dealt with by departments 
are  internal—a big one is abuse of medical leave—investigations and their 
resulting actions also send a message to political leaders that the agency is 
acting on behalf of the voters and taxpayers. 
 In even larger scope, internal rule enforcement raises questions about 
the functions of punishment itself. If the goal of the organization is to guide 
the behavior of its employees and set the bounds that define unacceptable 
behavior, is punishment always the best way to do that? For example, an alter-
native to punishment could be training. In some agencies, officers who drop 
their Taser in the locker room and it discharges are sent immediately to inten-
sive Taser training; when they return they are among their district’s experts on 
Taser deployment. Officers who are perennially late for work and inattentive 
to duty may need counseling regarding problems that they are having at home, 
or with alcohol. In the 21st century, agencies’ human resources departments 
(now frequently called “talent managers” in the private sector) could play a 
significant role in advancing the goals of the organization, as an alternative to 
placing a letter of reprimand in their file or denying them some of their pay. 

16 
Wesley G. Skogan and Vicente Riccio
 Current thinking is that external oversight and control procedures in 
agencies should incorporate at least two functions. The first is to monitor the 
outcomes of the vigorous internal investigations of police misconduct that we 
have already described. As an external body, much of this work could be to 
serve as the final “appeals court” for the final conclusions of internal agency 
investigations. Second, an important role for external oversight agencies is to 
monitor agency practices and patterns of officer behavior. Rather than just 
focus on individual cases, their remit should include data analysis and man-
agement review. The role of the external watchdog should include monitoring 
patterns of misconduct and the effectiveness of the internal investigations 
being conducted by the police. Among the questions they should ask are, 
“Which units are causing the most problems with the public, and why?” and 
“How long are investigations taking, and why?” In addition, current think-
ing about best practices recommends that an external body be charged with 
ensuring effective management and efficient performance by their policing 
counterparts. The questions they should address include, “How are the agen-
cy’s resources being allocated?” and “Are they getting the most bang for their 
buck?” Policing is a governmental function, and attention needs to be paid to 
its effectiveness and efficiency as well as to its fairness. This is usually referred 
to as an “auditing function” in discussions of external review. 
 One of the most thoroughgoing reform efforts in recent history has been 
the reform of policing in Northern Ireland. This project followed decades 
of tense Protestant-Catholic tension and intercommunal terror campaigns in 
that part of Great Britain. In the eventual political settlement between them, 
two bodies were created that carry out external oversight functions. A police 
board was created that focused on the effectiveness of the new Police Ser-
vice for Northern Ireland. It was charged with monitoring trends in agency 
activity and crime and reporting out its findings and management recom-
mendations. This was coupled with the designation of a policing ombudsman, 
who receives and investigates complaints about police misconduct. Together, 
these bodies speak to the most important external and internal oversight 
issues facing policing, and they provide an effective example of how to “watch 
the watchman.” 
 Brazil’s police ombudsman offices were created in a few states in the late 
1990s, and since then about half the states have instituted a version of this 
office in order to receive and process complaints from the community. They 
independently investigate the complaints that are brought to them, but then 
pass them on to the internal affairs units of the departments that are the target 
of the complaints. Police ombudsmen were not charged with the responsibil-
ity of auditing patterns of police practice or dealing with inefficiencies or their 
managerial problems. And, like external review bodies around the world, 
police ombudsman have been met with hostility and even outright resistance 
by the agencies they oversee. Ignacio Cano (2006) observed that in actual 

Chapter 1: Police and Society in Brazil 
17
operation they were falling far short of expectations. They rarely had their 
own staff and had to borrow workers from other parts of state government. 
They were not effective at following up with complainants or in communicat-
ing with the general public about their efforts, and the reports they released 
indicate that few cases that were concluded led to any punishment for the 
accused. 
 Internally, Brazilian police forces typically have only weak organizational 
controls. Cases against individual officers are rarely pursued by prosecutors, 
who almost always decline to carry them forward. Lemgruber (2002) con-
cluded that one of the main limitations to the prevailing Brazilian oversight 
model is its dependency on what are known to be biased and ineffective inter-
nal affairs mechanisms within the police forces, coupled with the reluctance 
of prosecutors to proceed independently and ombudsman offices with little 
actual influence. 
 Bayley (2006) further cautions that there are prerequisites for ensuring 
that accountability and review functions are carried out effectively. One is 
that the external monitors are independent of both the police and the political 
branches of government. This is a difficult issue, for someone must appoint 
the watchman. A second requirement is that they are adequately funded. Both 
in the U.S. and Australia, there have been examples of politicians creating 
external oversight bodies in response to crisis, and then ensuring that they 
remain largely ineffective by starving them of staff and funding. Caps on 
their budgets have been one of the obstacles faced by many of Brazil’s police 
ombudsmen. The instinct of many in the political system will be to avoid 
earning the wrath of organized police officers and their friends and relatives, 
for they can be a significant political force in local politics. 
 Paths to Reform: Finding a Community Focus 
 In a democracy, police must maintain the confi dence of the people. In the 
Northern Hemisphere, one common approach to building this confi dence has 
been community policing. In the North, Bayley (2006) deems community 
policing to have been the most popular police reform of the 20th century. 
Th ere are many defi nitions of community policing, but at root, it requires 
responsiveness to input by the public concerning both the needs of the com-
munity and the best ways by which the police can help meet those needs. 
It takes seriously the public’s defi nition of its own problems. Community 
policing requires that departments develop new channels for learning about 
neighborhood problems, and when they learn about them, they have to have 
systems in place to respond eff ectively. Civic engagement could also extend 
to involving the public in some way in eff orts to enhance community safety. 
Community policing promises to strengthen the capacity of communities to 

18 
Wesley G. Skogan and Vicente Riccio
prevent crime on their own. In the United States, the idea that the police and 
the public are “co-producers” of safety, and that they cannot claim a monopoly 
over fi ghting crime, predates the community policing era. Th e community 
crime prevention movement of the 1970s was an important precursor to com-
munity policing. 
 Finally, community policing may need to be supported by new orga-
nizational structures and training for police officers. Departments need to 
reorganize in order to provide opportunities for citizens to come into con-
tact with their officers under circumstances that encourage these exchanges. 
There has to be a significant amount of informal “face time” between police 
and residents, so that trust and cooperation can develop between the prospec-
tive partners. In the U.S., many departments hold community meetings and 
form advisory committees, establish storefront offices and survey the public. 
However, it is important that community policing is an organizational strat-
egy but not a set of specific programs or structures. How it looks in practice 
should vary considerably from place to place, in response to unique local situ-
ations and circumstances. Remaining flexible about the exact organizational 
forms that are required is particularly important when we consider trans-
planting the philosophy of community policing to distant places and cultures. 
 There have been transplantation efforts in a number of places around 
the globe. Davis, Henderson and Merrick (2003) described several of 
them in Brazilian cities. Among the goals of the projects were to improve 
community relations with the police and to infuse more cooperative, demo-
cratically compatible values within the police force. In Rio de Janeiro, an 
NGO (nongovernmental organization) with external backing partnered 
with one police battalion serving favelas near a better-off area of the city. 
Officers were assigned to regularly patrol particular neighborhoods. They 
worked on foot, and they were to try to foster good relations with residents 
and business operators they encountered during their shift. Police also met 
with local community groups. In a São Paulo experiment, officers were 
specially selected and trained for a similar effort. They were assigned to 
small community stations, and they worked with resident groups and the 
media to encourage dialogue about safety issues and to facilitate commu-
nity involvement in crime prevention. In Belo Horizonte, a project involved 
more intensive crime analysis and a problem-solving orientation by police, 
coupled with community meetings to elicit the public’s concerns. 
 Evaluations of these efforts found some evidence of their effectiveness in 
addressing crime, but none of them could be sustained. They were all con-
ducted by state Military Police forces, and top officials remained nervous 
about giving up control to working officers on the street. “Compromising the 
police hierarchy” is how the authors put it (Davis, Henderson and Merrick 
2003, p. 289). Vocal opponents of the concept within the force dismissed com-
munity policing as soft and easy policing and “women’s work.” While there 

Chapter 1: Police and Society in Brazil 
19
were NGOs fostering these efforts, little grassroots support developed among 
ordinary people in the areas being served. Surveys of officers and residents 
found that few even knew there was a program going on. 
 In  Chapter 4 , Eduardo Cerqueira Batitucci and his colleagues describe 
how the organization and culture of the Military Police in the state of Minas 
Gerais derailed efforts to establish community policing units there. Their 
organization, culture and military tradition all worked against efforts to cre-
ate local community councils and engage in problem-solving policing. The 
Military Police of Minas Gerais never really understood the concept or the 
values it represented, and they were not in favor of the operational changes 
that would be required to promote any real change in their policing style. 
They were also unwilling to give up their heavy weapons while engaging in 
community-oriented contacts. 
 Paths to Reform: Building Legitimacy 
 Our fi nal point relates to the importance of legitimacy in securing democ-
racy, and the role of the police in that. What is legitimacy? Legitimacy is 
one of the fundamental cornerstones of democracy. It underlies obedience 
to the law and to the requests or commands of the authorities who protect 
it. Legitimacy is a belief in the rightness of the state. Legitimacy supports an 
 obligation  to obey, one that is based on citizens’ duty. Where police are viewed 
as legitimate, people will defer to their authority and to the law, because the 
police are viewed as generally trustworthy. Th ey can hope that when they 
stop people or give them instructions they will obey quietly, so that offi  cers 
can do their jobs effi  ciently and safely. Police also hope that when they make 
decisions, the public will accept them as the right decisions. Th ey also rely on 
most of the people obeying most of the laws, most of the time. Th ere is some 
evidence that legitimacy beliefs are linked to reduced levels of off ending, 
and particularly lower levels of youth delinquency. Societies with suffi  ciently 
high levels of legitimacy do not need an offi  cer on every street corner in order 
to secure order. 
 How can police build their legitimacy? Research suggests that there are 
three major pathways to legitimacy, and this section will briefly examine each 
of them. First, legitimacy can be built through procedurally fair treatment 
by the police, or “procedural justice.” Second, it can be enhanced through 
policies and practices that demonstrate adherence by the police to norms 
regarding equal treatment of social groups (e.g., “people like me”) in society. 
This is usually known as “distributive justice.” Finally, police have to be suf-
ficiently effective at providing security. They must be able to protect the public 
and provide a sufficiently orderly environment, so that democratic processes 
can prosper. Most researchers would place these factors in this order: fair 

20 
Wesley G. Skogan and Vicente Riccio
treatment followed by distributive justice, with effectiveness coming up last. 
However, most of their research has been conducted in Northern Hemisphere 
countries where many neighborhoods are already fairly safe, force policies are 
professional and police are general well-meaning. Conditions in Brazil differ 
significantly on all three of these dimensions, and it is unclear how each of 
them would fare when it comes to setting priorities for police reform. 
 A large body of survey research supports the view that it is  procedurally 
fair treatment that generates trust in the police, because citizens infer from 
how they are treated whether or not the police have good intentions—that 
they are trustworthy. Treating people in ways that are recognized to be fair 
and respectful, and making fair and neutral decisions, strengthens the social 
bonds between individuals and the police. Trust is evidenced when citizens 
believe that police try to do the right thing, acting on behalf of the best inter-
ests of the people they deal with. In this view, people may trust police if they 
seem to embody the norms and values of the community and when they 
think police are sincere and well intentioned (Van Craen 2016). The latter 
means that they have the community’s interests at heart and respond to the 
needs of the community (Jackson, Bradford and Hohl 2012). In Tyler’s (2004) 
view, the resulting trust is one of the most crucial components of procedural 
justice theory, because it underlies legitimacy. The more people trust the 
police, the more likely they are to support them and act in accordance with 
their requests. Trust is also easier to achieve where police are seen as honest 
and concerned about the well-being of the people they deal with. 
 Of course, achieving procedurally fair policing is linked to other police 
reform issues discussed already. One is confidence that the police organiza-
tion takes officer conduct seriously and acts when its rules are breached. 
Strong, independent police oversight can help build legitimacy and pub-
lic trust, through increased transparency and accountability to the public 
that the police serve. As we have seen, oversight fosters this accountabil-
ity through both independent investigations and systematic analyses of 
police operations. These can identify needed changes in police practices 
and training and provide a meaningful voice for the public in ensuring 
community safety. 
 Another set of popular concerns is linked to the idea of  distributive fair-
ness . There are fairness concerns at the level of groups and society, as well as 
within individuals. Distributive fairness relates to perceptions that the out-
comes people receive—for example, to be arrested or ticketed, or to be the 
target of abuse or humiliation—are distributed appropriately across groups. 
This might involve comparisons between rich and poor, or between ethnic 
and racial groups. They will often involve fairness judgments between the 
treatment of “my group” and “others,” although distributive concerns can 
also arise from analyses of patterns of operational practice. Distributive 
fairness also is involved in the perceived allocation of police resources. 

Chapter 1: Police and Society in Brazil 
21
Being under (or over) policed, or living in a neighborhood where police 
seem to come more slowly when they are called, can be seen as distributive 
fairness issues. 
 In Brazil, most research linked to legitimacy has focused on distributive 
justice. In 2010, Cano summarized what was known regarding racial dispari-
ties in the operation of the criminal justice system. As he noted, as in many 
societies, the criminal justice system is a venue in which biases can openly 
present themselves. In summary, this research found that, in the judicial sys-
tem, blacks are least likely to be represented by a private attorney and more 
likely to be convicted and get stricter sentences if they offend against whites. 
Official data on police violence in Brazil are mostly terrible, but independent 
surveys find that blacks are more likely than whites to be stopped and searched. 
They are also most likely to report being assaulted by police, even more so than 
they are disproportionately victimized by conventional assaultive violence. 
Blacks are most afraid of the police, and the only group to be more afraid of the 
police than they are of crime. Cano’s own study of fatal police violence in Rio 
de Janeiro and São Paulo combined data on police use of force from multiple 
sources, including autopsy and ombudsman records, and also compared them 
to population statistics for the city and for the demographics of the local con-
vict population. He found that blacks were more likely to be targets of police 
violence, and they were more likely to be injured accidently during shootouts 
involving others. When they were wounded, blacks were more likely to die of 
their injuries. 
 A third pathway to legitimacy is police  effectiveness . This relates to their 
ability to secure acceptable levels of community safety and order. Where police 
are effective enough that everyday life can be conducted safely, concern about 
the quality of police service may shift to other, customer-oriented dimensions, 
such as politeness and showing respect. But where effectiveness seems want-
ing, an emphasis on improving the professional crime-fighting capabilities of 
the police and associated agencies may be included on the legitimacy-build-
ing agenda. Being able to protect its people is a bedrock feature of a legitimate 
state. As Justice Tankebe (2013, p. 112) put it, 
 When citizens demand that the police demonstrate effectiveness in tackling 
crime and disorder in their local areas . . . they are not simply making crude 
instrumental demands; on the contrary, they are expecting the police to fulfill a 
normative condition for their legitimacy. 
 While research conducted in wealthy Northern Hemisphere countries typi-
cally fi nds that the eff ects of eff ectiveness are overshadowed by concerns 
about procedural justice, Tankebe’s (2011) work in Ghana found a much 
stronger relationship between perceived police eff ectiveness and judgments 
regarding their legitimacy. Th is could be taken as evidence that a modicum of 

22 
Wesley G. Skogan and Vicente Riccio
eff ectiveness, and thus personal security, is required before demands for other 
kinds of reforms emerge. 
 Of course, this point links to the extremely high rate of violence in Brazil-
ian society, coupled with the ineffectiveness and corruption that characterizes 
local law enforcement. Effectiveness is important because Brazil is a vibrant, 
if flawed, democracy. Views of police effectiveness can make a difference. 
Crime is always on the political agenda when elections are contested. The 
public’s understandable concern about crime is backstopped by the nation’s 
feisty mass media, which is quick to highlight security lapses. Leeds (2007) 
notes how the press drives cycles of crisis and demands for quick reform. 
But as she notes, media-driven crises, when combined with aggressive office 
seeking, tend to generate only short-term solutions to problems, including 
crime. Almost inevitably, this quick-fix political environment fosters repres-
sion. The get-tough policies that follow range from invasions of favelas that 
seem threatening to surrounding areas to vehicle checkpoints and aggressive 
stop-and-frisk operations. This in turn escalates resistance by the powerful 
gangs that are inconvenienced by these tactics, which next sparks retaliatory 
violence by police. 
 One factor behind the almost inevitable repetition of this cycle is the fact 
that there is a significant pool of at least tacit support for repression among 
better-off voters. Tough talk wins elections. In  Chapter 7  of this volume, Lima 
and Sinhoretto cite a common Portuguese-language expression, that “good 
criminals are dead criminals— bandido bom é bandido morto. ” They note that 
many Brazilians at least tacitly support the use of violence in order to guar-
antee peace for law-abiding citizens. In a recent survey conducted by Fórum 
Brasileiro de Segurança with DataFolha, more than 3,600 respondents were 
interviewed around the country. In that survey, 57% of the respondents sup-
ported this statement (FBSP 2016). Reviewing survey findings, Magaloni, 
Franco and Melo (2015) set the number of supporters for repressive crime 
policies at about one-third of Rio de Janeiro’s population. On the other hand, 
in  Chapter 7 , Lima and Sinhoretto cite polling evidence that Brazilian society 
is “split down the middle” over this issue. 
 In turn, these political instincts can undermine attempts to change polic-
ing. As Bayley argues (2006, p.  69), “In political life, the requirements of 
security trump aspirations to reform, a pattern to be found in stable as well as 
struggling democracies.” At some level of concern, crime may crowd out con-
cerns about the niceties of law enforcement practices. In the political realm, 
it is common to pit lawfulness (or “legal nit-picking”) versus effectiveness. 
There is ample evidence that this is a false choice, at least in the developed 
Northern Hemisphere (Skogan and Frydl 2004). However, where effective-
ness is currently low, the choice may seem like a real one. “Unleashing” the 
police may seem to be the best that can be accomplished. Police resorting to 
violence can be seen as the inevitable collateral damage of effective crime 

Chapter 1: Police and Society in Brazil 
23
control. Efforts to get them to organize their work in a different fashion can 
be seen as putting the public at risk in some untried social experiment, and 
police will be quick to support that concern. 
 Discussion 
 As the essays in this volume document, Brazil is a large country facing large 
problems. At the core lies some of the basic features of Brazilian life: poverty, 
inequality, racial divisions, debilitating levels of violence and a state that can-
not protect large segments of its people. Individually, each of these problems 
presents a daunting challenge to reformers; collectively, addressing them will 
require heroic levels of policy eff ort, coordination and investment. 
 It has been tried. In 2007, the administration of President Luiz Inácio 
Lula da Silva (known to all as “Lula”) mounted a well-financed and broadly 
conceptualized reform effort at the national level. It was aimed at all of the 
security services of Brazil, so it included prisons and prison guards, fire-
fighters and others, in addition to the police. On the crime prevention front, 
elements of the program addressed police hiring, training and equipment; 
organizing in poor communities; social programs for youths; education and 
employment opportunities for offenders; and special programs for favelas. It 
promised to increase police pay. And it failed.  Chapter 12  in this volume, by 
Marco Aurélio Ruediger, examines the policy system in Brazil. It identifies the 
key structural features that stifled reform there. These ranged from bureau-
cratic resistance within the federal government to turnovers in leadership of 
the project and the limits that Brazilian federalism place on change efforts 
originating at the center. The states resisted the new state-federal relationship 
imposed by the program, with its rules controlling spending and (this was 
new) actual monitoring of program implementation at the local level. When 
the new president’s attention to the project waned, well-organized interests in 
the bureaucracy and legislature gutted the budget. It was a top-down program 
that never developed a constituency at the grass roots. 
 There is nothing unique about this failure of reform. While researchers 
working in the United States write frequently about innovations in policing, 
in truth many of them are not widely adopted or well implemented, and too 
many are just press releases. The obstacles to police reform are formidable 
even in Northern Hemisphere countries. In the end, over a modest period 
of time, many reforms fail and most disappear. This is true even though they 
may seem to be successful; that is not a determinative fact in the policy pro-
cess (Skogan 2008). 
 So, it should be no surprise that we anticipate that reform in Brazil will 
take time. Change will be at best slow, and success uncertain. Reform must 
involve changing the habits and mindsets of many actors throughout the 

24 
Wesley G. Skogan and Vicente Riccio
criminal justice system and in political life. Fostering public trust in the police 
will be at least as hard. 
 Notes 
 1. www.ft .com/content/f4a260e6-f75a-11e6-bd4e-68d53499ed71 
 2. http://jconline.ne10.uol.com.br/canal/politica/pernambuco/noticia/2016/09/24/pacto-
pela-vida-morreu-diz-mentor-do-programa-254101.php 
 3. Th ese and other analyses of Brazilian police violence can be found on the Human Rights 
Watch and Amnesty International web sites. Th e web site for the Fórum Brasileiro de Segu-
rança Pública has some English-language pages. 
 4. In addition to state police forces, there is a national policing body that broadly resembles 
the scope and duties of the Federal Bureau of Investigation in the United States, and other 
forces guard the nation’s borders and perform specialized functions. Many cities also employ 
Municipal Guards to perform watchman duties; since 2014, they have also been armed. 
 References 
 Bayley, D. 2006.  Changing the guard: Developing democratic policing abroad . New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
 Cano, I. 2006. Public security policies in Brazil: Attempts to modernize and democratize versus 
the war on crime.  SUR: International Journal on Human Rights 3: 136–155. 
 Cano, I. 2010. Racial bias in police use of lethal force in Brazil.  Police Practice and Research 11: 
31–43. 
 Cerqueira, D. 2013. Mapa dos Homicídios Ocultos no Brasil [Map of Hidden Homicides in 
Brazil]. Text for discussion 1848. Brasília, IPEA. Available at http://www.ipea.gov.br/portal/
index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=19232 on 15th June 2017. 
 Davis, R., Henderson, N., and Merrick, C. 2003. Community policing: Variations on the west-
ern model in the developing world.  Police Practice and Research 4: 285–300. 
 Economist . 2016. The Latinobarometro Poll. September 3. 
 Fórum Brasileiro de Segurança Pública. 2013. A Investigação de homicídios no Brasil. Available 
at http://www.forumseguranca.org.br/publicacoes/a-investigacao-de-homicidios-no-brasil/ 
on 15th June 2017. 
 Fórum Brasileiro de Segurança Pública. 2016. Anuário Brasileiro de Segurança Pública 2016, 
v.  10. Available at http://www.forumseguranca.org.br/publicacoes/10o-anuario-brasileiro-
de-seguranca-publica/ on 15th June 2017. 
 Jackson, J., Bradford, B., and Hohl, K. 2012.  Just authority: Trust in the police in England and 
Wales . London & New York: Routledge. 
 Jovchelovitch, S., and Priego-Hernandez, J. 2013.  Underground sociabilities: Identity, culture, 
and resistance in Rio de Janeiro’s favelas . Brasilia: UNESCO Office in Brazil. 
 Kahn, T. 2013. Crescimento econômico e criminalidade: uma interpretação da queda de crimes no 
Sudeste e aumento no Norte/Nordeste.  Revista Brasileira de Segurança Pública 7(1): 152–164. 
 Leeds, E. 2007. Serving states and serving citizens: Halting steps toward police reform in Brazil 
and implications for donor intervention.  Policing & Society 17: 21–37. 
 Lemgruber, J. 2002.  Civilian oversight of the police in Brazil: The case of the ombudsman’s offices . 
Rio de Janeiro: Center for Studies on Public Security and Citizenship, University Candido 
Mendes. 

Chapter 1: Police and Society in Brazil 
25
 Magaloni, B., Franco, E., and Melo, V. 2015.  Killing in the slums: An impact evaluation of police 
reform in Rio de Janeiro . Stanford University Center on Democracy, Development and the 
Rule of Law, December. 
 Preteceille, E., and Valladares, L. 1999.  Favelas no plural . Caxambu; paper presented at the 
XXIII Annual Meeting of National Association of Post-Graduates on Research in Social 
Sciences: Anpocs. 
 Skogan, W. 2008. Why reforms fail.  Policing & Society 18: 23–34. 
 Skogan, W., and Frydl, K. 2004.  Fairness and effectiveness in policing: The evidence . Washington, 
DC: National Academies Press. 
 Souza, P., and Medeiros, M. 2015. Top income shares and inequality in Brazil, 1928–2012.  Soci-
ologies in Dialogue: Journal of the Brazilian Sociological Society 1: 119–132. 
 Tankebe, J. 2011. Explaining police support for the use of force and vigilante violence in Ghana. 
 Policing & Society 21: 129–149. 
 Tankebe, J. 2013. Viewing things differently: The dimensions of public perceptions of police 
legitimacy.  Criminology 51: 103–135. 
 Tyler, T. 2004. Enhancing police legitimacy.  The Annals of the American Academy of Political 
and Social Science 593: 84–99. 
 United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. 2014.  Global study on homicide . Vienna: Author. 
 Van Craen, M. 2016. Understanding police officers’ trust and trustworthy behavior: A work 
relations framework.  European Journal of Criminology 13: 274–294. 
 Waiselfisz, J. J. 2016. Mapa da Violência 2016. Homicídios por Armas de Fogo no Brasil. Rio 
de Janeiro FLACSO. 


 Section I 
 The Organization 
of Brazilian Police 


29
 Contents 
 The Origins of the Brazilian Dual Model 
29 
 Institutional Design of the Police 
31 
 Policing: A Loosely Coupled System 
32 
 The Corporatist Dispute 
34 
 System Dysfunctions 
35 
 Attempts to Reform the Dual System of Policing 
37 
 Conclusion: The Failure of Reform 
39 
 References 
41 
 The Dual Civil and 
Military Models for 
Policing in Brazil 
 Luis Flavio Sapori 
 2 
 Police systems around the world display a diversity of institutional designs. 
In comparative perspective, national police systems are distinguished by 
(a) the level of fragmentation, which may be local, regional or federal; (b) the 
diversity of responsibilities conferred upon them; (c) their degree of profes-
sionalism; (d) their level of accountability; and (e) their degree of autonomy 
from the political system. Th e form that each system takes is generally evolu-
tionary rather than planned. Police systems are products of the history of each 
country, refl ecting their singular political and social dynamic (Bayley 1975). 
 The Origins of the Brazilian Dual Model 
 In Brazil, the police acquired its fi rst institutional features at the beginning 
of the nineteenth century, when the country was still a colony of Portugal. In 
1808 and 1809,the “Intendance General of Police and the Military Division of 
the Royal Guard Police” was created in Rio de Janeiro. It was organized along 
the lines of the system prevailing in Lisbon, the capital of Portugal, at that 
time. However, in parts of the country there already existed military units that 
conducted surveillance of the streets. In fact, the origins of the Brazilian police 
system could also be seen in the gold and diamond mining regions of the late 
eighteenth century, when the Regular Regiment of Minas Gerais Cavalry was 

30 
Luis Flavio Sapori
created with the mission of keeping justice and the “good order and public 
safety” (Cotta 2012, p. 316). 
 After independence in the 1830s, Brazil briefly experimented with an 
alternative police model, one that lasted less than ten years, during a historical 
period known as the Regency. At that time, local municipalities were authorized 
to exercise police and judicial powers, and a justice of the peace took center 
stage when it came to public safety. From 1840, however, the  provinces—now 
Brazil’s states—assumed control of their police forces, a model that prevails 
in Brazilian society to this day. In 1871, the Police Inquest, a public notarial 
body charged with prosecutorial powers, was established by the reform of the 
Criminal Procedure Code. This consolidated responsibility for conducting 
the investigation of crimes to delegates of the police (Holloway 1997). 
 Importantly, at this time Brazil established a dual model for policing. Each 
state formed an investigative police, commanded by delegates responsible 
for the criminal investigation. Initially called Judicial Police, over time they 
became known as the Civil Police. The other wing of policing is militarized, 
with a structure and discipline similar to that of the army. They provided 
services that today we call “street policing.” In some states, this militarized 
police was called the Military Brigade and in others, the Public Force. In the 
state constitutions developed during the twentieth century, the term Military 
Police came to be their common name (Batitucci 2010; Ege 2013). 
 A fundamental aspect of the institutional history of the police in Brazil is 
the fact that, from the mid-nineteenth century until the late 1960s, the Mili-
tary Police acted more as state armies than what in other parts of the world 
would be considered as police organizations. Street patrolling existed, but the 
organization maintained large contingents of officers quartered in barracks. 
In important moments in history, the state Military Police forces fought as 
if they were engaged in warfare. These moments included the constitutional 
revolution of 1932 and the military coup of 1964. In the first case, the state of 
São Paulo rebelled against President Getulio Vargas, who came to power in 
1930 promising to hold a national constituent assembly. When by 1932 this 
promise was not fulfilled, large segments of the population mobilized in resis-
tance, leading to an armed confrontation with federal forces. In 1964, in turn, 
amid the political crisis of President João Goulart’s government, the armed 
forces succeeded the federal executive and imposed serious restrictions on 
Federal Congress. They ruled Brazil until 1984. 
 As a result of their emphasis on military duties, some Brazilian states cre-
ated new uniformed police departments that did engage in “conventional” 
policing; often they were called Civil Guards. 1 This lasted until 1969, when 
the Civil Guards were abolished and their staff and responsibilities were taken 
over by the Military Police during the military dictatorship. 
 This brief historical narrative helps us understand how Brazil has become 
one of the countries in the world that maintains a police system separating 

Chapter 2: The Dual Civil and Military Models 
31
criminal investigations (by the Civil Police) and street policing (by the Mili-
tary Police). This in turn has led to chronic conflict between the two policing 
models, and it is also a source of inefficiency in actually responding to crime. 
These issues are the main issues examined in this chapter. 
 Institutional Design of the Police 
 Th e current Brazilian institutional design for policing was established by 
the Federal Constitution in 1988. At that historic moment, the country was 
redefi ning the institutional parameters of a new democracy that was being 
launched. Aft er 20 years of military dictatorship between 1964 and 1984, 
Brazilian society was able to overcome its authoritarian past and formed a 
Constituent National Assembly. 
 The new Federal Constitution addressed public safety in Article 144. It 
distinguished it from national security. For the first time in the constitutional 
history of Brazil, safety was conceived as a right of citizenship, requiring the 
protection of life and property, and assigned this responsibility to domes-
tic police. The defense of the country and state institutions were the sole 
responsibility of the armed forces, and any involvement by the armed forces 
in domestic public safety matters was placed under very strict restrictions. 
Despite these changes, the 1988 constitution maintained the same police sys-
tem prevailing since the military dictatorship. 
 The Brazilian police system is structured as follows: 
 a) at the federal level there are two police organizations: the Federal 
Police (PF) and the Federal Highway Police (PRF). Both fall under the 
Ministry of Justice. It is the responsibility of the PF to patrol national 
borders and investigate interstate and international crimes, such as 
drug trafficking and smuggling, as well as crimes against property of 
the federal government. The PRF is responsible for patrolling federal 
highways and cannot investigate other crimes that may occur. A Fed-
eral Railroad Police is also constitutionally provided for, but has not 
been instituted to date; 
 b) at the state level there are two police organizations: the Military 
Police and the Civil Police. Every state, including the Federal District 
(Brasilia), is organized following this dual model. Both branches fall 
under the authority of the state governors and are overseen by state 
boards of public safety. The Military Police are responsible for street 
policing and cannot investigate criminal offenses, with the excep-
tion of military offenses. The Civil Police are limited to investigative 
activity and work at collecting evidence concerning crime. As judicial 
police, they are also responsible for preparing cases for prosecution; 

32 
Luis Flavio Sapori
 c) at the city level municipalities can create Municipal Guards. They are 
restricted to minor watchman roles, acting largely as security guards. 
The authority to create Municipal Guards rests in the National Status 
of Municipal Guards legislation, which was enacted in 2014; 
 d) the Fire Brigade is also mentioned in Article 144. They are responsible 
for fire and civil defense activities and are seen as an integral part of 
Brazil’s public safety establishment. In many Brazilian states, the Fire 
Brigade is organized along military lines. 
 Th e Military Police also serve as auxiliary armed forces, and they have con-
stitutional permission to act in situations threatening national security. Th e 
Military Police are subject to their own disciplinary legislation, the Mili-
tary Penal Code. Disciplinary and possibly criminal off enses committed by 
their offi  cers are investigated, prosecuted and judged in accordance with the 
Military Criminal Procedure Code. Th e hierarchy of the Military Police is 
pyramidal, incorporating the rank nomenclature of the army. Th ere is a broad 
divide between the careers of lower-ranked offi  cers (soldier, sergeant) and the 
careers of the top offi  cers (lieutenants, captains, majors, lieutenant colonels 
and colonels). Th ere is little or no mobility across these two career paths. 
 The Civil Police are subject to the Criminal Code and the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, like any Brazilian citizen. The main feature of the organizational 
hierarchy of the Civil Police is the supremacy of delegates. They hold bachelor 
of law degrees, which are required for this position. Others in the organization 
are subordinate to them, like investigators, registrars and coroners. 
 Brazil has at present 56 police organizations, including 54 state police 
forces and two federal police. In some Brazilian states, a third force was cre-
ated, called the Scientific Technical Police. These divide the responsibility for 
criminal investigations and coroner’s work. In most of the country, however, 
both of these functions remain the job of the Civil Police, composing the 
Criminal Expertise Department. 
 Policing: A Loosely Coupled System 
 Th e fi rst impression one gets of the Brazilian police system may be that these 
divisions of responsibility are complementary and rational. Military Police 
offi  cers maintain their presence on public roads, perform overt uniformed 
surveillance and detain criminals. Th ey manage call centers, and when citizens 
dial the 190 emergency number, they are connected to the Military Police. Th e 
main product of all of this activity is a formal record of crimes committed and 
some arrests at the scene. 
 The Civil Police, in turn, do their work from police stations. They act in 
response to reports of criminal activity brought by the Military Police and 

Chapter 2: The Dual Civil and Military Models 
33
collect evidence regarding what happened. Their product is inquests that are 
referred to the courts. The Public Ministry and the judiciary are organizations 
that then take over the flow of cases. The Public Ministry has the prerogative 
of charging the individual investigated in the police inquest. The judge, in 
turn, accepts the prosecutor’s charge and coordinates the criminal proceed-
ings when the defense has active participation. The product of this phase is 
the court judgment. Upon conviction, the defendant may go on to serve time 
in the prison system, administered mainly by the states. 
 As noted, there is a clear division of functions between these organizations, 
forming a seemingly continuous and interdependent flow of activity. In its for-
mal representation, the criminal justice process could be described as a “system.” 
However, the daily functioning of the criminal justice system in Brazilian society 
actually is characterized by chronic conflict and breakdowns in coordination. In 
reality, it should be considered a “loosely coupled” system (Sapori 2007b; Paixão 
1982). Importantly for us, it is the organizational segmentation between the Mili-
tary and Civil Police that creates this loose linkage. In past decades, they have 
become opposing organizations, vying intensively for resources and power. This 
conflict pervades the performance of both groups on a daily basis. 
 Outsiders visiting Brazil and walking the streets of its big cities will not 
notice this conflict. It generally is not visible, and it is unknown even to most 
Brazilians. However, there have been occasional physical confrontations 
between branches of the police, such as the confrontation between the Civil 
Police of São Paulo who went on strike and the riot squad of the Military 
Police that protected state buildings, in October 2008 (Rede Record 2011). At 
least 25 people were injured in that episode. In the city of Belo Horizonte, the 
capital of Minas Gerais State, Civil and Military Police officers argued, shoved 
and threatened to attack each other in February 2011 (UOL Notícias 2008). 
 Situations like those described are not everyday occurrences. The main 
contest between the Military and Civil Police takes place backstage, in the 
offices of governors, and is invisible to the public. It is present in all Brazilian 
Criminal report
(MILITARY
POLICE)
Police inquest
(CIVIL
POLICE)
Charge 
(PUBLIC
MINISTRY)
sentence
(JUDICIARY)
prison
(PRISON
SYSTEM)
 Figure 2.1 The criminal justice system in Brazil 

34 
Luis Flavio Sapori
states to a greater or lesser extent. This is never publicly recognized by their 
leaders. Instead, they hew to the line that the police are “sisters” and wholly 
complementary. 
 The Corporatist Dispute 
 Th e rhetoric that they are “sister organizations” hides antagonism between 
the Civil and Military Police, a tension that has grown in the last 20 years. Th e 
instigators of this antagonism are the elites of both organizations: the del-
egates of the Civil Police and high offi  cers of the Military Police. 
 These organizational elites lobby the national Congress intensively, defend-
ing their corporatist interests through representative bodies such as the National 
Association of Police Delegates of Brazil and the National Federation of State 
Military Officers Entities. At the moment, the main clash between delegates and 
military officials is over their ability to attain a legal career status, so that their 
salaries would be equivalent to the salaries of judges and prosecutors, who are 
among the most highly paid civil servants. Civil Police delegates have claimed 
this status for many years, and military officers are also pleading for the same 
benefit. As one outcome of this struggle, several state Military Police agencies 
changed their statutes, requiring undergraduate degrees in law as a prerequisite 
for hiring. Formal legal training has historically been required only of the del-
egates, who publicly express disagreement with this political move by military 
officers. The political confrontation between organizational elites pervades the 
everyday activities of both organizations. The dispute between Civil Police del-
egates and military officials has become a dispute between the police as a whole. 
 This is only one of the factors that has led to the decoupling of the Brazil-
ian police system. There is also intense competition between them for power, 
especially with regard to the scope of their duties. Military police claim the 
authority to create Detail Occurrence Terms (TCO), which have been con-
ceived as the exclusive responsibility of the Civil Police. The TCO is simply 
formal recording of the occurrence of lesser offenses, so-called misdemean-
ors. According to the Law on Special Criminal Courts, promulgated in 1995, 
the TCO should be referred directly to the judge of the criminal special court, 
which then proceeds to scheduling a hearing for the case. The task of the police 
is simply reporting the TCO as much detail as possible, collecting information 
about the crime that has occurred, including about victims and offenders. 
 Military Police want to take charge of TCO and the Civil Police do not 
agree. The delegates believe that they alone constitute what the law defines as 
“police authority,” and thus only they are legally competent to take such an 
action. Military officials, in turn, are severe critics of any monopoly of TCO by 
the Civil Police. In other words, the Military Police want to add to their con-
stitutional allocation of authority the competence to act as the investigative 

Chapter 2: The Dual Civil and Military Models 
35
police in misdemeanors. The Civil Police, in turn, understand this as break-
ing their monopoly of criminal investigations under the Federal Constitution. 
 In the background of this competition for assignments is vagueness of the 
legal boundary between street and investigative police. Complaints that the 
“other police” are going beyond their competence are recurrent. The Civil Police 
has expressed dissatisfaction with the strengthening of the intelligence arm of 
the Military Police, called P2. Civil delegates understand rightly that this sec-
tor often performs criminal investigations, identifying alleged perpetrators and 
enabling their arrest. P2 is composed of military officers working undercover. It 
is not uncommon for both branches of the police to be involved in the investiga-
tion of the same crime, usually ones of great public impact. The Military Police, 
in turn, complain that the Civil Police unduly invest in tactical street operations 
using uniformed officers with military training and escalating crisis situations, 
such as bank robberies with hostages and riots in prisons. It is not uncommon 
for tactical forces of both police organizations to present themselves in these 
situations, prompting long discussions about who should manage the crisis. 
 These chronic disputes between the Military and Civil Police make rou-
tine cooperation between them an exception, not the rule. It is true that some 
street-level officers in both organizations are friends and even develop work-
ing relationships over time, enabling cooperation in some situations. However, 
this cooperation is based strictly on low-level personal relations, and they last 
only as long as “police friends” find themselves working on the same problems. 
Conflict at the organization level confounds the solution of some crimes, leads 
to turf wars over geographical areas, makes intelligence gathering more difficult 
and even affects the training of police officers and operational planning. Every 
aspect of this institutional dysfunctionality deserves greater attention in Brazil. 
 System Dysfunctions 
 Th ere are two sources of reported crimes in Brazil: (1) reports completed by 
Military Police offi  cers when they are contacted by the public or they view 
events while on patrol (called here “BOs”); and (2) investigations initiated 
by the Civil Police, of incidents referred to them by the Military Police or 
reported to them directly by the public. Th e numbers reported by the Military 
Police and Civil Police are always diff erent. Th is presents problems in diag-
nosing crime problems, because these fi gures are inconsistent and duplicative 
with regard to both time and space. 
 Each of these organizations reassures everyone that their data are the most 
correct and tries to discredit criminal statistics produced by their competi-
tor. Homicide data in Brazil, for example, varies between BOs and Civil Police 
inquests, with the incidence of homicides always higher in the Civil Police data-
base. The reason is simple: attempted homicides recorded in BOs commonly 

36 
Luis Flavio Sapori
turn into homicides in inquests, because victims frequently die in the days after 
being registered by the Military Police. In the case of robberies, in turn, the 
numbers of the Military Police are always higher than those of the Civil Police. 
There is evidence that the latter initiate criminal investigations in this crime 
category only when the Military Police have arrested an offender in the act, 
which happens in only a small percentage of occasions (Lima 2011; Costa 2004). 
 Another disjunction resulting from the dual Brazilian system of policing 
is the lack of overlap between the geographic areas their respective units serve. 
The Military Police are organized as battalions and then in companies, and both 
serve very precise territorial boundaries, which may include a number of cities 
or even neighborhoods in the same city. The Civil Police, on the other hand, are 
organized around regional police offices that coordinate work in smaller district 
police stations. Similarly to the military, their regional and district police sta-
tions have territorial boundaries. However, in many Brazilian states, the subunit 
boundaries of the Civil Police do not match those of the Military Police. This 
often disrupts the daily work of both agencies, for example in the delivery of 
BOs to police stations. In the early mornings, weekends and holidays, when 
the district police stations are closed, the time spent on this by the military is 
quite high, requiring traveling tens of kilometers. This waste of resources occurs 
because the location of investigative police stations and their opening hours do 
not match the needs of the street police (Muniz and Paes-Machado 2010). 
 Not only that, but the Military and Civil Police rarely share information 
and background knowledge about crime. Both agencies have IT systems that 
optimize their administrative and operational activities. Both organizations 
have banks of qualitative and quantitative data on crimes and criminals. How-
ever, their bureaucratic stance is to restrict as much as possible access by their 
counterparts to these databases. They often resist implementation of informa-
tion systems that threaten to integrate their respective data and activities. It is 
common, for example, for traffic control crackdowns by the Military Police to 
identify suspicious vehicles and individuals. However, investigation of vehicle 
registries and databases recording outstanding arrest warrants can only be per-
formed in consultation with the central office of their state’s Civil Police. The 
Military Police thus depend upon the goodwill of the civil officer to be able to 
make a query of the organization’s database. The Military Police, in turn, hold 
databases on criminals, their modes of action and areas of operation, and they are 
often concentrated in the P2 sectors. They use this data sporadically to monitor 
contacts with hardened criminals, but do not automatically provide information 
to the Civil Police, which need to request information through formal channels. 
Criminal investigation could be enhanced if such data access were available on a 
shared computer system (Sapori and Andrade 2008; Misse 2010). 
 Not sharing information leads the two agencies in the direction of com-
pletely uncoordinated operational planning. Military and Civil Police allocate 
their staff and resources to the cities and areas they are responsible for without 

Chapter 2: The Dual Civil and Military Models 
37
considering each other’s plans. Their tactical operations in various places and at 
various times are also treated as independent issues. One organization does not 
know how the other plans to deal, for example, with crises of violence plaguing 
a particular city. This operational disarticulation often leads to public disputes 
between them, with Military Police leaders claiming they are acting repres-
sively in the arrest of many criminals but that Civil Police inquests are not being 
initiated. The Civil Police, in turn, accuse the military of inefficiency in street 
policing and failing to prevent the occurrence of crime, which thus ends up 
overloading their investigative capacity (Kant de Lima 1995; Sapori 2007a). 
 Another example: the Civil and Military Police have their own teaching 
academies, with distinct training courses and curricula. They are very resis-
tant to suggestions that they integrate some or all of their training efforts. 
Training of mixed groups of Military and Civil Police officers happens only 
occasionally, depending on the initiative of one or another state. However, 
the prevailing view is that Military and Civilian officers should not mix and 
should retain their distinct identities. They are like “oil and water” (Riccio, 
Meirelles and Muller 2013;Santos 1997;Poncioni 2005). 
 Attempts to Reform the Dual System of Policing 
 Th e operational pathologies that result from the decoupling of the Military 
and Civil Police, and the obstacles that it creates for eff ective crime control, 
have been pointed out by scholars since the late 1980s. Only in the next decade, 
however, were these problems perceived as a public issue. By the second half 
of the 1990s, the integration of the police rose to the agendas of state govern-
ments (Sapori 2007b). 
 The state of Pará, at the north of the country, was the first to move (from 
1995 to 2002) toward the integration of their police in the areas of informa-
tion systems, training and the geographical boundaries of the two units. These 
efforts were implanted in the state capital, Belém, creating an Integrated 
Center of Operations (CiOp) that brought together the radio dispatching 
operations of the Military and Civil Police and the fire department. In addi-
tion, Pará created the Safety Training Institute of Pará(IESP), integrating the 
academies of the two agencies. 
 The state of Ceará, in northeastern Brazil, also made reforms in the public 
safety sector in the late 1990s, doing so in response to serious allegations of 
corruption within the police. Ceará created a Model District in Fortaleza, the 
state capital. It brought together subunits of the Military and Civil Police in 
the same building, standardized their geographical areas, and—like Pará—
integrated policing operations. 
 In the same period, the state of São Paulo, in the southeast of the country, 
formulated a comprehensive crime control policy that, among other things, 

38 
Luis Flavio Sapori
created a criminal justice information system (INFOCRIM) that integrated 
the databases of their Military and Civil Police. 
 In 2003–2010, the state of Minas Gerais, also located in the Southeast, 
implemented the most audacious police integration policy to date in the 
country. It could serve as a model for the other states. The integration model 
designed by Minas Gerais created integrated communications and informa-
tion centers as strategic bodies to integrate police organizations. They oversee 
geographically integrated territorial areas, and their central role in control-
ling communications and information systems was designed to facilitate joint 
operational planning regarding street policing and investigative activities. Inte-
gration revolved around three projects: information integration (Integrated 
System of Social Defense, or SIDS); geographical integration (Integrated Areas 
of Public Safety, or AISP); and operational integration (Integrated Manage-
ment in Public Safety, or IGESP). Alongside this followed the integration of 
prison personnel and integrated police training (Sapori and Andrade 2008). 
 At the end of the 2000s, the states of Pernambuco (Northeast) and Rio 
de Janeiro (Southeast) were inspired by these projects, particularly Integrated 
Areas of Public Safety and Integrated Management in Public Safety, to develop 
their own police integration initiatives. This also happened in the state of 
Espírito Santo (Southeast), which since 2012 has invested in police integra-
tion as one of the core elements of its public safety policy. 
 Throughout this period, other Brazilian states incorporated some of these 
integration models in their respective police systems. Two initiatives were the 
most widespread: (1) integrated operations centers, assembling radio com-
munications by the Military and Civil Police in the same building; and (2) the 
creation of integrated geographies for all policing, so that branches of the two 
agencies began to work in common territorial spaces. In practice, this means 
that each Military Police battalion or company has a regional or district Civil 
Police station sharing its territory, bringing together street policing and the 
further investigation of crimes. 
 Moves toward integrating policing in the states received a direct con-
tribution from the federal government, through the National Public Safety 
Secretariat (SENASP), which is embedded in the Ministry of Justice. The 
first national public safety plan formulated by the federal government was 
launched in 2000 during the government of Fernando Henrique Cardoso. It 
proposed 124 discrete actions, one being the integration of the Military and 
Civil Police. In 2003, the first Lula government released a public safety plan 
for Brazil, which provided basic guidelines for the reform of the police sys-
tem. The integration of the police was again contemplated, under the label of 
the Unified Public Safety System. This plan included the creation of unified 
police academies, unified intelligence units, joint internal affairs bureaus and 
an independent police ombudsman. It called for the further coordination of 
police with other organizations in the criminal justice system, particularly 

Chapter 2: The Dual Civil and Military Models 
39
the judiciary and prosecution, to be facilitated by the creation of state-level 
integrated management offices. In 2007, during the second Lula government, 
another national plan was released, the National Safety Program with Citizen-
ship, or PRONASCI. Once again, the integration of police was considered one 
of the pillars of this plan (Soares 2007). In every case, the federal government 
promised funds for state governments once they satisfied the guidelines estab-
lished by the national government. 
 Conclusion: The Failure of Reform 
 However, eff orts to integrate Brazil’s Military and Civil Police have not been 
able to fundamentally alter their dual structure and chronic dysfunctions. 
National eff orts to do so since the mid-1990s were not sustained. Th e states of 
Pará, Ceará, São Paulo and Minas Gerais proved unable to institutionalize the 
relationship they tried to develop between their policing agencies, particu-
larly in the areas of training and operational planning. Aft er an initial period 
of cooperation, antagonism and corporatism continued to prevail. Eff orts to 
accomplish something continue in Pernambuco State, but these also threaten 
to fail, and those in Espírito Santo are only in their infancy. 
 The case of Minas Gerais is emblematic of this failure of reform. The 
police integration policies adopted by this state involved the preparation of a 
complex framework for coordinating their activities, and this led to a tangle 
of new nomenclatures and acronyms that have become part of the dynamics 
of the current police system (SIDS, IGESP, AISP, SICODS, TPI). There was 
to be an intense formalization of procedures and the development of joint 
standards, resolutions and decrees. All of this was to be accomplished by gov-
ernment and police agency representatives. 
 However, what looked like progress toward the institutionalization of 
reform began to fall apart when events in the political sphere renewed the clas-
sic corporatist dispute between police organizations. In 2010, controversial 
laws were passed, the first of which (as described earlier) was the redefinition 
of Civil Police delegates as legal professionals in the state civil service. Months 
later, a second law granted similar legal status to high officers of the Military 
Police of Minas Gerais. Union leaders in the Civil Police questioned in court 
the constitutionality of this new civil service legal status for Military Police 
officers, on the grounds that street policing did not require the legal train-
ing that their new status made mandatory. Another achievement of the Civil 
Police was months later also obtained by their military counterparts, namely 
the requirement of higher education for entry into higher police careers. This 
led to further dissatisfaction among delegates within the Civil Police. Since 
then, delegates have tried to break agreements that had been reached regard-
ing integration policy, which included calls for wage parity between police, 

40 
Luis Flavio Sapori
especially between Civil Police delegates and higher military officers. In short, 
the Civil Police continue to defend their more advanced professional status, 
while the Military Police persist in claiming the higher wages this would imply. 
 The result of this corporatist struggle was the loss of legitimacy of the 
joint bodies that had been established by the state government. The goal of 
integrated operational planning, which was the initiative that promised the 
best hope for reducing crime, did not happen, and provisions for the coordi-
nation of the efforts of the two agencies on a daily basis no longer are in effect. 
 The decisive political reality that underlay this collapse of police inte-
gration in Minas Gerais was the weakening of the authority of the governor. 
Police integration was an agenda item established by the governor, and while 
he was at his most powerful the police were collaborating with each other. 
When that political leadership faltered, old antagonisms resurfaced (Sapori 
and Andrade 2013). 
 This example suggests that the Brazilian dual system of police and its 
resulting problems will not easily be overcome. Across all of the states, the 
separation of street policing and investigative assignments in different orga-
nizations invariably has fostered competition for resources. Competition and 
antagonism between police agencies is not unique to Brazil, but the unique-
ness of the Brazilian case seems to be the operational inefficiency generated 
by such a system. Disjunctions between the Military and Civil Police have not 
led to virtuous competition for better results, leading to public benefits. On 
the contrary, the more the police compete with each other, the greater the ten-
dency toward increased inefficiency in both patrol and criminal investigation. 
The ability to prevent and suppress crime is inevitably weakened. 
 This situation also reflects a major shortcoming that characterizes the 
governance of Brazil, one with implications for the high crime levels observed 
there in recent decades. The problem is the limited effectiveness of the state in 
ensuring public safety, which manifests itself in the low degree of certainty of 
punishment facing potential criminals. Available data show that the chances 
that someone committing a robbery or murder will be investigated by the 
police, prosecuted, judged and found guilty are very small in Brazil (Sapori 
and Soares 2014;Beato 2012). 
 A recent victimization survey conducted by the Center for Public Safety 
of Federal University of Minas Gerais (CRISP-UFMG; DATAFOLHA/CRISP 
2013) in partnership with the Datafolha Institute shows, for example, that 
more than half the Brazilians who are victims of thefts and robberies do not 
report this to the police in the first place. They do not do so because they do 
not believe in the ability of the police to take effective action. This mistrust has 
foundation. A report of the National Council of the Public Ministry in 2012 
estimated that only 8% of homicides annually registered in the country are 
solved by the police with an identification of the perpetrator (ENASP 2012). 
In robberies, this gap is even greater, according to a survey conducted by Sou 

Chapter 2: The Dual Civil and Military Models 
41
da Paz Institute in São Paulo city from 2009 to 2011. Only 6% of robber-
ies recorded by the Military Police were thoroughly investigated by the Civil 
Police and only 4% were solved by the identification of an offender. 
 The realization that the Brazilian police system needs to be reformed is 
spreading. There is a growing conviction that the Federal Constitution needs 
to be changed, redefining at that level how policing and the criminal justice 
system are organized. However, the likelihood of constitutional change is low 
for now, for the corporate interests of the Military and Civil Police currently 
prevail in the Federal Congress. 
 Note 
 1. In São Paulo State, the Civil Guard was established in 1926, exclusively dedicated to street 
policing, and was subordinate to the chief of the Civil Police. In the following years, this 
model was copied by other states. Th e Civil Guard was uniformed and worked indepen-
dently of the Military Police, performing foot, vehicle and horse patrols. Later, the Civil 
Guard used radio dispatching. It was disbanded by Decree Law No. 667 of 2 July 1969, in the 
government of General Costa e Silva. 
 References 
 Batitucci, E. 2010. A evolução institucional da Polícia no século XIX—Inglaterra, Estados 
Unidos e Brasil em perspectiva comparada [The institucional development of the police in 
the nineteenth century: England, United States and Brazil in comparative perspective]. São 
Paulo.  Revista Brasileira de Segurança Pública 4(7):30–46. 
 Bayley, D. 1975. The police and political development in Europe. In  The formation of national 
states in Western Europe , ed. C. Tilly, 328–379. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
 Beato, C. 2012.  Crimes e Cidades  [Crimes and cities]. Belo Horizonte. Federal University of 
Minas Gerais Press. 
 Costa, A. T.C. 2004.  Entre a lei e a ordem: a reforma das polícias do Rio de Janeiro e de Nova 
Iorque  [Between law and order: Reform of the police of Rio de Janeiro and New York]. Rio 
de Janeiro: Fundação Getulio Vargas Press. 
 Cotta, F. A. 2012.  Matrizes do sistema policial brasileiro [Brazilian police system matrices]. Belo 
Horizonte: Crisálida Press. 
 DATAFOLHA/CRISP. 2013.  Survey Nacional de Vitimização  [National victimization survey]. 
São Paulo: Author. 
 Ege, F. T. 2013.  Uma breve história da Polícia no Brasil—revisão da militarização e do caráter 
oligárquico  [A brief history of the police in Brazil—review of militarization and its oligarchic 
character]. São Paulo: Clube dos Autores Press. 
 ENASP. 2012.  Estratégia Nacional de Justiça e Segurança Pública. Relatório Nacional de imple-
mentação da Meta 2—um diagnóstico da investigação de homicídios no país  [National strategy 
of justice and public safety: National report of the implementation of the goal 2: A diagnosis 
of homicide investigation in the country]. Brasília: Conselho Nacional do Ministério Público 
[National Council of the Public Ministry]. 
 Holloway, T. H. 1997.  A polícia do Rio de Janeiro: repressão e resistência em uma cidade do século 
XIX  [Police in Rio de Janeiro:Repression and resistance in a city of the 19th century]. Rio de 
Janeiro: Fundação Getulio Vargas Press. 

42 
Luis Flavio Sapori
 Kant de Lima, R. 1995.  A Polícia da cidade do Rio de Janeiro: seus dilemas e paradoxos [Police 
in the city of Rio de Janeiro: Their dilemmas and paradoxes]. Rio de Janeiro: Forense Press. 
 Lima, R. S. 2011.  Entre palavras e números: violência, democracia e segurança pública no Brasil 
[Between words and numbers: Violence, democracy and public safety in Brazil]. São Paulo: 
Alameda Editorial Press. 
 Misse, M. 2010. A investigação policial no Brasil: resultados gerais de uma pesquisa [The police 
investigation in Brazil: General results of a research] Dilemas: Revista de estudos sobre con-
trole social e conflitos.  Rio de Janeiro 3(7):35–50. 
 Muniz, J., and Paes-Machado, E. 2010. Polícia para quem precisa de Polícia: contribuições aos 
estudos sobre policiamento [Police for who need police: Contributions to studies on polic-
ing]. Salvador.  Cadernos CRH 23:437–447. 
 Paixão, A. L. 1982. A organização policial em uma área metropolitana [The police organiza-
tion in a metropolitan área].  Dados: Revista de Ciências Sociais Rio de Janeiro 25(1): 63–85. 
 Poncioni, P.2005. O modelo professional de Polícia e o modelo de treinamento profissional 
da futura academia de polícia do estado do Rio de Janeiro [The professional police model 
and professional training of future police academies in the State Police of Rio de Janeiro]. 
 Sociedade e Estado 20(3): 585–610. 
 Rede Record. 2011.  Video mostra briga entre policiais civis e militaris em Minas Gerais , February 
3. Retrieved from http://noticias.r7.com/cidades/noticias/video-mostra-briga-entre-polici-
ais-civis-e-militares-em-mg-20110203.htm 
 Riccio, V., Meirelles, M.R., and Muller, A. 2013. Professionalizing the Amazonas military police 
through training.  Police Practice and Research: An International Journal 14(4): 295–307. 
 Santos, J. V. 1997. A arma e a flor: treinamento da organização policial, consenso e violên-
cia [The gun and the flower: Training of police organization, consensus and violence]. São 
Paulo.  Tempo Social: Revista de Sociologia da USP 9(1): 38–64. 
 Sapori, L. F. 2007a.  Os desafios da polícia brasileira na implementação da ordem sob a lei [The 
challenges of the Brazilian police in the implementation of the order under the law]. In  Polí-
cia, Democracia e sociedade  [Police, democracy and society], ed. Ratton, J. L. and M. Barros, 
97–137. Rio de Janeiro: Lumen Juris Press. 
 Sapori, L. F. 2007b.  Segurança pública no Brasil: desafios e perspectivas  [Public safety in Brazil: 
Challenges and perspectives]. Rio de Janeiro: Fundação Getulio Vargas Press. 
 Sapori, L. F., and Andrade, S. C. 2008. A integração policial em Minas Gerais: os desafios da 
governança da política de segurança pública [Police integration in Minas Gerais: Gover-
nance challenges of public safety policy].  Civitas 8(3):428–453. 
 Sapori, L. F., and Andrade, S. C. 2013. Os desafios da governança do sistema policial no Brasil: 
o caso da política de integração das polícias em Minas Gerais [Governance challenges of the 
police system in Brazil: The case of the police integration policy in Minas Gerais].  Revista 
Brasileira de Segurança Pública 7(1):102–130. 
 Sapori, L. F., and Soares, G.A. 2014.  Por que cresce a violência no Brasil?  [Why is violence grow-
ing in Brazil?] Belo Horizonte: Autêntica Press. 
 Soares, L.E. 2007. A política nacional de segurança pública: história, dilemas e perspectivas 
[The national public safety policy: History, dilemmas and perspectives].  Estudos Avançados 
21(61):77–97. 
 Sou da Paz Institute. 2013.  Investigação e esclarecimento de roubos em São Paulo  [Research and 
clarification of robberies in São Paulo]. 7th Encontro do Fórum Brasileiro de Segurança 
Pública [7th Meeting of the Brazilian Forum on Public Safety], Cuiabá, July. 
 UOL Notícias. 2008.  Tropa de choque da PM em confront com policiais civis em grave em SP , 
October 16. Retrieved from http://noticias.uol.om.br/cotidiano/2008/10/16/ult5772u1118.
jhtm 

43
 Contents 
 Who Are the Civil Police in Brazil? 
45 
 Public Security in Amazonas 
46 
 The Civil Police of Amazonas 
47 
 The Amazonas Survey 
49 
 Profile of Participants 
50 
 Hierarchy and Career Satisfaction 
50 
 Conclusion 
52 
 References 
54 
 Hierarchy, Career 
and Professional 
Advancement in the 
Civil Police 
 Vicente Riccio, 
André Zogahib, 
Janaína Lawall and 
Mario Auﬁ ero 
 3 
 Police in Brazil are a target of constant criticism. Th eir ineff ectiveness is 
widely recognized, including by public administrators, academics, human 
rights activists and even police offi  cers who can take a critical view of the sta-
tus quo. To a great extent, this criticism is levelled at the daily practices of the 
police, with special emphasis on abuses committed against the population and 
misconduct by its members. Critics emphasize the low effi  ciency of the police 
forces in the prevention, repression and solving of crimes, as well as their low 
degree of legitimacy in the eyes of the public. 
 Among the problems listed by these various groups, the question of the 
organizational model of the Brazilian police stands out. In general, the dichot-
omy of a police force intended to patrol the streets (the Military Police) and 
another focused on criminal investigations (Civil Police) does not make for 
coordinated and effective action. Problems such as conflicts of jurisdiction 
and overlapping actions occur constantly in their work. Critics also point out 
that the Military Police have adopted an organizational structure that mimics 

44 
Vicente Riccio et al.
the Armed Forces, while the Civil Police acts like a legal bureaucracy, which 
reduces their ability to solve crimes. These problems reflect the norms estab-
lished by the Brazilian Constitution of 1988 (Article 144), which regulates 
public safety in the country. Despite these criticisms, counterpressures from 
the police have prevented the approval of major changes to the current model 
(Azevedo and Vasconcellos 2011). 
 Among the criticisms of the organizational model of the Brazilian police 
are the hierarchies and career paths within them. In Brazil, there are parallel 
careers within the two branches of policing. The Military Police reproduce the 
military distinction between officers and the enlisted ranks, commonly called 
“soldiers.” The former are responsible for management, with the highest rank 
being that of colonel. Ordinary soldiers rank between private and sergeant, 
and they work on the street. There is no mobility between these two groups, 
and conflicts between them can be intense. For example, a 1997 strike of the 
Military Police in Minas Gerais was led by a corporal, and it questioned the 
existing career structure. The strike arose when salary increases were awarded 
to officers while the salaries of soldiers remained frozen. 
 In the case of the Civil Police, the division is between inspectors, who hold 
bachelor’s degrees in law and are responsible for conducting criminal inves-
tigations, and investigators and clerks, who carry out the tasks of checking 
facts and recording the details of cases under the supervision of the inspec-
tors (Lino 2004). In general, entry to this latter career depends on finishing 
high school, but some Civil Police agencies have started to demand higher 
education for entry into the career. This depends on the criteria established 
by each state. 
 The existence of dual career tracks in policing has been widely ques-
tioned in Brazil. Scholarly studies of this issue are recent and seek to explore 
the contradictions and flaws in the model. The problems that have been 
identified are not just a matter of administration or human resources. 
Rather, they are issues of an institutional nature related to the distribution 
of power within the police, which are also directed at the other organs of the 
criminal justice system (the judiciary, the public prosecution and the prison 
system). The model adopted in Brazil defines competences and spheres of 
power between the two types of forces that are marked by internal disputes 
between different hierarchical levels of the police, overlapping of responsi-
bilities between them, and conflicts regarding police investigations that are 
manifested in disagreements between the prosecutors’ office and the Civil 
Police (Sapori 2007). 
 This chapter examines the Civil Police, which is responsible for investi-
gating crimes in Brazil. The organization adopted by the police in Brazil is 
based on a very particular model of criminal investigation. Unlike most West-
ern countries, whether of Roman-Germanic or Anglo-Saxon legal tradition, 
in Brazil there is no clear separation between the phases of investigation and 

Chapter 3: Hierarchy, Career and Advancement 
45
adjudication. In the Brazilian system, the Civil Police both conduct inves-
tigations of criminal activity and generate final reports concerning guilt. 
In this model, there is not only investigation, but also decisions regard-
ing “guilt” with regard to the facts (Misse 2011; Azevedo and Vasconcellos 
2011). This dual competence defines the power of the police inspector, 
with regard to its internal aspect in relation to his subordinates and in rela-
tion to the other institutions of the criminal justice system, particularly the 
public prosecutor. 
 The aim of this study is to analyze how hierarchy, career aspirations and job 
satisfaction affect the operations of the Brazilian Civil Police. The research was 
conducted among the Civil Police of the Amazon region, as part of a project 
supporting their effort to realign themselves strategically. The chapter examines 
how these issues are perceived by the members of the force, bearing in mind the 
different roles performed by the organization. It describes how hierarchical divi-
sions within the Civil Police affect perceptions of the police belonging to the two 
levels. This analysis allows us to observe the extent to which hierarchy shapes 
perceptions concerning members’ chosen careers and their commitment to the 
profession. Therefore, it is possible to see the role of this institutional arrange-
ment in the adherence of the police to their professional career. At the end, we 
discuss issues for further research on the subject in Brazil. 
 Who Are the Civil Police? 
 Th e architecture of the Brazilian security system is defi ned in Article 144 of 
the constitution. It establishes the powers of federal entities in the fi eld of 
public safety (the nation, states and municipalities) and the functions of the 
Brazilian police forces, by defi ning their spheres of activity. 1  As regards the 
Civil Police, they have jurisdiction to investigate criminal infractions, except 
for military and federal ones, in the various states. Moreover, the constitu-
tion itself identifi es police inspectors as being responsible for managing the 
institution. 2 
 The main responsibility of the Civil Police is conducting criminal inves-
tigations. Its characteristics do not reflect just a way to organize police work; 
they also reflect the distribution of power within the Civil Police institution 
and in relation to other organs of the criminal justice system. The outcomes 
of their investigations provide “instructions” for the other actors, which 
elsewhere would be typical of the work of prosecutors and judges. The final 
judgments of the Civil Police on cases have come to dominate their interest, 
instead of valuing criminal investigations themselves. Their decisions become 
the first judgment by the state regarding a crime, since the analysis contained 
in their reports will be reproduced at the judicial stage (Azevedo and Vascon-
cellos 2011). 

46 
Vicente Riccio et al.
 The role of the police inspector reflects this arrangement, since the course 
of his or her work is not only administrative but also “judicial.” The work 
carried out is considered to be part of the judicial process. The criminal 
investigation model in Brazil contributes directly to this portrayal. The police 
inspector has a higher position in the hierarchy in relation to others involved 
in the criminal investigation process. 3 
 The division of labor within the Civil Police is also a way to distribute 
power vertically. All other employees involved in the investigation of crimes, 
including investigators, clerks responsible for recording what is found and sci-
entific experts 4  are subordinate to the police inspector. The police inspector 
is responsible for presiding over the investigation and determining final judg-
ments against suspects. Upon completion of their work, they decide whether 
to send the case on to the public prosecutor. After analysis, prosecutors decide 
whether to initiate a criminal case against a suspect. 5 
 Mostly, this is the model of how investigations work in Brazil. Police 
inspectors value their total control over cases and insist on retaining superior 
bureaucratic status in their organization. In the Civil Police, this superiority 
of inspectors is reinforced by a constitutional requirement regarding educa-
tional qualifications for entry into the career: they must have a law degree. 
This differentiates theirs from any other career path in the institution. In turn, 
this requirement has favored the “legalization” of decision-making within the 
Civil Police and contributed to a low-level effectiveness of the core business 
of the Civil Police: criminal investigations. 
 Organizational conflicts arising from this model emphasize even more 
its inefficiencies. But how is this division expressed within the police force? 
What is the resulting contrast between the perceptions of employees in the 
“superior” and “inferior” levels of the organization? How are they expressed 
within the police institution? Does this hierarchical distinction affect percep-
tions of career paths and commitment to the profession? Our research sought 
to answer these questions, based on interviews among the Civil Police in the 
State of Amazonas. 
 Public Security in Amazonas 
 Th e Amazon region covers a great part of Brazil (40%) and is marked by great 
complexity. While home to the largest forest and the greatest biodiversity on 
the planet, the region lacks adequate development policies refl ecting its size 
and diversity. Th e Amazonas has an area of 1,559,161.68 square kilometers 
and 3,905,483 inhabitants. 6 
 The Civil Police of Amazonas, responsible for investigating most crimes 
affecting the region, has approximately 2,465 employees carrying out their 
work in 62 municipalities. They are divided among inspectors (332), criminal 

Chapter 3: Hierarchy, Career and Advancement 
47
experts (194), clerks (388), investigators (1,295) and administrative assistants 
(256). The latter includes career civil servants hired through public competi-
tions and employees hired temporarily by the state government. 
 Despite great world interest in the Amazon region, criminological stud-
ies on the region are few and recent. This is also true of research on policing 
there. Existing studies on the questions of violence and crime generally cover 
issues such as the environment, land disputes and issues involving the rights of 
indigenous people (Loureiro and Guimarães 2007; Sant’Anna and Young 2010; 
Rabello 2013). These issues are important, but the complexity of the state, whose 
capital is an industrial hub and has a mining economy in most of its territory, 
faces many other issues. Moreover, Amazonas borders on Colombia and Peru. 
They are cocaine producers on a global scale, and many of their export routes 
pass through Amazonas. As a result, challenges to security institutions are 
immense. Amazonas, like the whole region, has suffered a significant increase 
in violence in recent years. The homicide rate has nearly doubled in the region 
in the last decade due to increased drug trafficking. For example, in 2004 the 
level of homicides was 16 per 100,000 inhabitants. This number grew to 32 in 
2014. Considering the entire country during this period, the homicide rate grew 
only 10%, from 26 to 29 homicides per 100,000 inhabitants. 7  So, in Amazonas 
difficulties observed in the country’s more populous regions are present, plus 
there are additional challenges imposed by its vast and varied character and 
geographical location. But while the workings of the Civil Police take place in 
a distinctive context, the institutional model of policing in the state is the same 
as that adopted across the country. Thus, analysis of career-related issues is still 
likely to reveal issues common to the Brazilian police forces. 
 The Civil Police of Amazonas 
 Th e Civil Police of Amazonas is the arm of the Amazonas State government 
responsible for the investigation of criminal off ences. At their historical origin 
in the monarchical period, Brazilian police were highly centralized around 
the royal court based in Rio de Janeiro. Th e position of police inspector was 
created in 1841, as part of a move to impose administrative centralization 
based on court dictates and to control local populations. Th e police power was 
essential to this strategy (Bonelli 2009). With the advent of the Republic in 
1889, there came a need to organize the police institutions along more repub-
lican lines. Th e Civil Police of Amazonas was offi  cially established only in 
1922 (Law 3052/22) in order to adapt to national requirements of the criminal 
code and criminal procedure of the republican period. In this period, it was 
not obligatory to have a law degree to hold the position of inspector, since the 
lack of qualifi ed professionals made it diffi  cult to appoint graduates in remote 
and isolated regions of the country. 

48 
Vicente Riccio et al.
 The shift toward current arrangements took place with a constitutional 
amendment in 1971, which reserved the position of inspector for graduates 
in law. However, at this time there were still exceptions to the rule, with the 
so-called  provisionado , or commissioner, who could carry out the functions 
in a specific location in the absence of a qualified professional. In the Amazon 
region, marked by vast areas with difficult access, provisionados were widely 
employed. The 1988 constitution abolished the provisionados. To hold this 
position it is required to have a law degree and to pass a competitive public 
examination (Dantas 2009). The requirement for higher education in order 
to enter into upper-level career tracks in the Civil Police was now only for 
inspectors and scientific experts. 
 However, the organization of the Civil Police of Amazonas underwent 
a major change in 2009. In that year, further requirements for higher edu-
cation were adopted for entry into the posts of detective and clerk. 8 Thus, 
the demand for university education—but not necessarily a law degree—has 
become common for investigators and clerks. From then on, many profes-
sionals with university degrees entered the Civil Police lower down in the 
formal hierarchy. There are now two career tracks in the institution that 
require university education, but they have different duties, status and levels 
of power. 
 Although the expansion of higher education requirements drew positive 
responses among the public and security professionals, there is no definitive 
conclusion about its effectiveness. Other research has concluded that skill 
among police is based primarily on experience, which is why higher edu-
cation does not have a significant impact on actual practice (Bittner 1990). 
Moreover, practice is much more important in the construction of the identity 
of the police than is academic training (Bayley and Bittner 1984; Oberweis 
and Musheno 2001). Additionally, it should be noted that the evidence on 
educational requirements in policing is still insufficient for making more 
definitive recommendations as to its adoption (Skogan and Frydl 2004). 
 The point relevant to the current study is that new demands for edu-
cated employees have blurred somewhat old distinctions between the two 
major levels of hierarchy within the Civil Police. Before 2009, there was no 
requirement of higher education for the careers of detective and clerk in the 
Civil Police of Amazonas. The change to the established criteria makes it pos-
sible for more qualified professionals to conduct investigative work and the 
administrative routines of police inquiries. However, these more qualified 
professionals cannot aspire to the organization’s management posts, which 
are in the hands of the police inspectors. Thus, we see in the Civil Police a 
process of renewal that started with the competition for entry into the ranks 
of clerks and investigators being reserved for those with higher education. 
This group of newcomers with greater cultural capital may have more criti-
cal views, in comparison to those who came before them. This raises the 

Chapter 3: Hierarchy, Career and Advancement 
49
question of how the two groups perceive their satisfaction with and apprecia-
tion of careers in the Civil Police. 
 The Amazonas Survey 
 Our research with the Civil Police of Amazonas was conducted between 
November and December 2013, in the context of an eff ort by the organization 
to realign itself strategically. Th e research focused on employees of all levels. 
Th e survey was conducted with the authorization of the institution and by 
means of a web survey, which could be completed using the Internet. Web 
administration of the survey was chosen due to the vast size of the state and 
budget constraints on carrying out a traditional survey. It enabled us to (a) 
increase the number and geographical diversity of staff  members who would 
be able to participate, (b) expedite the work of collecting and tabulating the 
data, and (c) reduce costs. Web administration is oft en recommended when 
the study population is well known, all potential respondents have access to 
the network and they have email addresses. Of course, web administration 
also has limitations that merit attention, in order to avoid jeopardizing the 
survey (Joncew et al. 2014). 
 The questionnaire distributed to members of the Civil Police was based 
on a survey developed by Skogan (2015) for research in the Chicago Police 
Department. It focused on relationships between police and the community, 
especially minorities, as well as problems of procedural justice involving police 
officers and their superiors. The questionnaire was translated into Portuguese 
and adapted to the Brazilian scene. The questionnaire included questions con-
cerning (a) officers’ demographic profiles, (b) their views of violence, justice 
and crime, (c) perceptions of their relationship with the community, (d) their 
views on the use of force, (e) assessments of the structure of the Civil Police, 
(f) reports of relationships with other components of the criminal justice sys-
tem and (g) measures of career satisfaction. 
 This chapter examines aspects of professional development in the Civil 
Police. The independent variable considered here is our respondent’s posi-
tion in the institutional hierarchy, while the dependent variables measure 
issues related to job satisfaction, job commitment and satisfaction with work-
ing conditions. Respondents are divided into two groups: those in the upper 
hierarchical level (level 1), composed of inspectors and experts, and those in 
the lower hierarchical level (level 2), who are investigators and clerks. 
 Data collection took place in November and December 2013. Responses 
were obtained from 287 participants from a universe of 2,465 employees, 
for a 12% response rate. 9  Based on administrative data on characteristics of 
Amazonas Civil Police, respondents to the survey were broadly representa-
tive with respect to gender, function/position and length of career. However, 

50 
Vicente Riccio et al.
while this survey provides a useful portrait of Civil Police employees in Ama-
zonas, further research will be required to speak more generally about Brazil 
as a whole. 
 Profile of Participants 
 Members of the Civil Police in Amazonas are young. Th is was the result of 
reforms culminating in the hiring of many new employees beginning in 2009. 
Overall, 65% of respondents were under 40 years of age. As this implies, many 
respondents were in the early or middle stages of their careers. Among the 
respondents, more than 90% had been in the Civil Police for no more than 
15 years. (Th ese fi gures match administrative data.) Th ere was a signifi cant 
female contingent as well; 34% of respondents were women. Th e eff ects of 
reform can also be seen with regards to education: 96% of those respond-
ing held higher education degrees and 80% reported post-graduate training. 
In Brazil, a bachelor’s degree involves four years of study. Th ere is a further, 
intermediate level between a bachelor’s degree and the equivalent of a master’s 
degree, which is a course of study providing specifi c occupational training 
aft er completion of a bachelor’s degree, but is not a master’s degree. 10  In the 
Civil Police of Amazonas, many employees have attained this further level of 
education because it can be a requirement for further promotions; this was 
also established in 2009. 
 As regards to race, a majority (55%) declared themselves mulatto, and 
39% as white. Others identified themselves as Afro-Brazilian (3%), Oriental 
(2%) and indigenous (11%). In short, in Amazonas the Civil Police is a young 
force, with a high level of education, it is majority male, and it is majority 
mulatto. 
 Hierarchy and Career Satisfaction 
 For this analysis, ranks in the Civil Police were divided into hierarchical 
level 1 (inspectors and experts) and level 2 (clerks and investigators). Th e 
former group included 51 inspectors (18%) and 12 experts (4%), and they 
constituted 22% of the total sample. Th e second-level group of respondents 
was composed of investigators (46% of the total) and clerks (31%). 
 The survey included several questions gauging the career commitments 
of staff members. They were asked to rate their overall job satisfaction with 
the question “How do you rate your level of satisfaction with your career in 
the Civil Police?” They could do so on a five-point scale, with responses rang-
ing from very satisfied to totally dissatisfied. Many respondents clustered near 
the middle of this range. Overall, 25% were very or fairly satisfied, and 31% 

Chapter 3: Hierarchy, Career and Advancement 
51
reported being largely or totally dissatisfied. Not surprisingly, top managers—
the inspectors and experts who run the organization—were more satisfied 
than those below them in the hierarchy. However, across all employees, those 
with  more  education were  more dissatisfied  with their careers, by a notable 
margin. This stems from the organizational dilemma described above, that 
created by changes in the recruitment of investigators and clerks, the line staff 
who actually conduct and document investigations. The results of this can be 
seen in  Figure 3.1 . 
 As  Figure 3.1  documents, new and more educated line staff members 
dominate the pool of disgruntled employees. Many are now university edu-
cated, but they are excluded from opportunities for advancement by the 
two-tier hierarchy that dominates the Civil Police. Among investigators and 
clerks, the more educated they are, the more unhappy they are about their 
career prospects. Among the most educated, those with some post-university 
qualification, more than 60% of the second-tier staff indicated that they were 
largely or totally dissatisfied with their careers. They have nowhere to go. 
 The organizational dilemma created by the post-2009 reforms in hiring 
for the Civil Police is illustrated even more starkly in the right-hand panels 
of  Figure 3.1 . It charts responses to the question “How do you evaluate your 
desire to continue in the career of the Civil Police of Amazonas?” Respondents 
could choose among a number of categories designed to elicit the strength of 
their commitment to remaining on the job. Possible answers to the question 
(there were five possible responses) ranged from “I wish to continue in my 
 Figure 3.1 Education, place in the hierarchy and job commitment 

52 
Vicente Riccio et al.
job” to “I sometimes think of leaving my job” and others indicated their inten-
tion to eventually leave. 
 In this instance, there were very large differences in career commitment 
between first- and second-tier employees  and  among educational groups. The 
two factors worked quite differently, as can be seen in  Figure 3.1 . Among the 
leadership, more than 85% planned to stay on the job or on occasion “con-
sidered” leaving; the comparable figure for detectives and clerks was about 
65%. Also among senior managers, the more educated they were, the more 
committed they were to their career. In the most highly educated category, 
75% of tier-one managers intended to stay on the job. However, among the 
second-tier staff, the more educated they were the more they wanted to leave. 
At the maximum, among line staff with a post-university university qualifica-
tion, only 9% wished to stay in the Civil Police. 
 Some of this dissatisfaction was about their salaries. This can be seen in 
responses to a third question regarding their satisfaction with their paycheck. 
Respondents were asked to rank their satisfaction with their pay on a five-point 
scale ranging from very satisfied to totally dissatisfied. Many were fairly dissatis-
fied with their economic situation. Overall, about 55% of those surveyed were 
“slightly” satisfied or worse on the five-point scale. Top-tier managers were some-
what happier than lower-level staff, by about 10 percentage points. Again, the 
striking finding with regard to pay was the high level of dissatisfaction with their 
pay among detectives and clerks (this is not shown in  Figure 3.1 ). Second-tier 
employees with less than a university degree were the most likely to say they were 
very satisfied with their salary, but among the others hardly anyone did. Among 
university graduates slotted into the second level in the hierarchy of the Civil 
Police, more than 60% were largely or totally dissatisfied with their pay. They find 
themselves perpetually confined to the lower ranks of the organization, with no 
real opportunities for advancement, while holding university degrees (and many 
had more training than that) yet not making a satisfactory salary. 
 Conclusion 
 Our survey uncovered marked discrepancies among the career prospects of 
members of the Civil Police. Senior managers were largely satisfi ed with their 
careers, a situation that was created by ensuring that they will always dominate 
the top-level positions in policing. Th ey were less happy about their salaries, 
which are considerably higher than those of second-tier staff  members, but 
perhaps they were comparing their civil service pay with that of the managers 
of comparably large organizations in other sectors of society. A big majority of 
senior managers were committed to remaining in their careers. 
 At the bottom of the hierarchy, Civil Police employees were more dis-
satisfied on every measure, and their level of dissatisfaction was tied to their 

Chapter 3: Hierarchy, Career and Advancement 
53
training. The more educated they were, the more dissatisfied they were with 
their jobs. The more education they had, the more unhappy they were about 
their salaries. And the more educated they were, the more they hoped to leave. 
 This organizational dilemma seems  constitutionally  constructed. In the 
Civil Police, the superiority of inspectors is reinforced by the constitutional 
requirement that top managers have special qualifications that reserve top 
management slots for themselves. Others must remain on a career path that 
does not promise a bright future. When after 2009 the Amazonas Civil Police 
began hiring large numbers of seemingly “more qualified” second-tier staff, 
they filled those positions with employees who can see no path forward in the 
organization. This was further encouraged by national policies, which paid 
for the courses that advanced the educational level of the staff, but supported 
them to take this training in fields that did not qualify them for advancement 
up the management ranks. The hierarchical model that characterizes the Civil 
Police in Amazonas, and perhaps elsewhere in Brazil, has “built in” a level of 
organizational dysfunction that may limit its effectiveness in its core tasks. 
 Notes 
  1. Article 144 of the Federal Constitution establishes the existence of fi ve types of police force in 
Brazil—(1) the Federal Police, (2) the Federal Highway Police, (3) the Federal Railway Police, 
(4) the Civil Police, and (5) the Military Police—and the Fire Brigade. Th e Federal Police are 
responsible for crimes related to the nation and its public institutions, as well as interstate 
and international infractions. It acts in cases involving international drug traffi  cking and car-
ries out policing of borders. Th e Highway and Railway Police are the federal government’s 
responsibility and they patrol the roads and railways. Th e Civil Police investigate crimes and 
the Military Police conduct public patrolling; both are the responsibility of state governments. 
  2. Pursuant to Art. 144, paragraph 4: “§ 4 Th e civil police, under the direction of career police 
inspectors, are responsible for, subject to the competence of the Union, judicial police func-
tions and the investigation of criminal off enses, except for military ones.” 
  3. Th is characteristic of the Brazilian model inspires police inspectors to seek the same bureau-
cratic status as prosecutors and the judiciary. Belonging in a legal career rather than a police 
career leads them to claim parity in salary with the public prosecution and the judiciary: the 
best-paid sectors of the Brazilian public service. However, this is unlikely to happen because 
of budget constraints in the states. 
  4. Experts are responsible for producing scientifi c evidence in police inquiries and attend to 
inspectors’ requests. Although they are at a higher level of the Civil Police career, experts 
do not have the same power as the inspectors, who are responsible for the management of 
the organization. 
  5. Th e power of the police inspector can be seen also in the fact that the position of Police 
Chief or Chief Inspector, responsible for the management of the institution, is only acces-
sible to career inspectors. 
  6. Available at www.ibge.gov.br on 02/05/2016. 
  7. Available at www.ipea.gov.br/portal/images/stories/PDFs/nota_tecnica/160322_nt_17_
atlas_da_violencia_2016_fi nalizado.pdf on 03/22/2016. 
  8. In Brazil, a higher education degree is the equivalent of a bachelor’s degree in the United 
States. 
  9. Of the 287 respondents, fi ve were administrative assistants and one contributed no res-
ponses; they are not considered in the analysis presented here, reducing  N  to 281. Skips in 

54 
Vicente Riccio et al.
the questionnaire were allowed for some questions, so the number of valid responses varies 
according to the question. Also, some police offi  cers found selected questions to be very 
sensitive and chose not to respond. 
 10. In the survey, 6% of employees reported holding a master’s degree, 1% (three employees) 
reported having a doctorate. 
 References 
 Azevedo, R. G., and Vasconcellos, F. B. 2011. O Inquérito Policial em Questão—situação atual 
e a percepção dos Delegados de Polícia sobre as fragilidades do modelo brasileiro de inves-
tigação criminal [The police inquiry under Question: The current situation and the percep-
tion of police inspectors about the fragilities of the Brazilian model of crime investigation]. 
 Revista Sociedade e Estado 26: 59–75. 
 Bayley, D., and Bittner, E. 1984. Learning the skills of policing.  Law and Contemporary Problems 
47: 35–59. 
 Bittner, E. 1990.  Aspects of police work . Boston: Northeastern University Press. 
 Bonelli, M. G. 2009. Perfil Social e Carreira dos Delegados de Polícia [Police inspectors’ social 
profile and career]. In  Delegados de Polícia  [Police inspectors], ed. M. T. Sadek, 22–50. Rio 
de Janeiro: Centro Edelstein de Pesquisas Sociais. 
 Dantas, H. 2009. A Formação Acadêmica dos Delegados de Polícia [The academic formation 
of police inspectors]. In  Delegados de Polícia [Police inspectors], ed. M. T. Sadek, 51–71. Rio 
de Janeiro: Centro Edelstein de Pesquisas Sociais. 
 Joncew, C., Cendon, B. V., and Ameno, N. 2014. Websurveys como método de pesquisa [Web-
surveys as research methods].  Informação & Informação  19: 192–218. www.uel.br/revistas/
informação. 
 Lino, P. R. 2004. Police education and training in a global society: A Brazilian overview.  Police 
Practice and Research 5: 125–136. 
 Loureiro, V., and Guimarães, E. C. 2007. Reflexões sobre a Pistolagem e a Violência na Amazô-
nia [Reflections about hired killers and violence in the Amazon].  Revista Direito GV3 1: 
221–246. 
 Misse, M. 2011. O Papel do Inquérito Policial no Processo de Incriminação no Brasil: algumas 
reflexões a partir de uma pesquisa [The role of the police inquiry in the Brazilian incrimi-
nation process: Some reflections based on research].  Revista Sociedade e Estado 26: 15–27. 
 Oberweis, T., and Musheno, M. 2001.  Knowing rights: State actors’ stories of power, identity and 
morality . Aldershot: Ashgate. 
 Rabello, A. C. 2013. Amazônia: uma fronteira volátil [Amazon: A volatile frontier].  Estudos 
Avançados 27: 213–235. 
 Sant’Anna, A. A., and Young, C. E. F. 2010. Direitos de Propriedade, Desmatamento e Conflitos 
Rurais na Amazônia [Property rights, deforesting and rural conflicts in the Amazon].  Eco-
nomia Aplicada 14: 381–393. 
 Sapori, L. F. 2007.  Segurança pública no Brasil: Desafios e perspectivas  [Public security in Brazil: 
Challenges and perspectives]. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Fundação Getulio Vargas. 
 Skogan, W. 2015. Surveying police officers. In  Envisioning criminology: Researchers on research 
as a process of discovery , ed. M. Maltz and S. Rice, 109–118. New York: Springer. 
 Skogan, W., and Frydl, K. 2004.  Fairness and effectiveness in policing: The evidence . Washington: 
National Research Council. 

55
 Contents 
 Dilemmas of the Incorporation of the Professional-Bureaucratic 
Model 
56 
 Community Policing and the Military Police 
58 
 Criminal Investigations in the Civil Police 
60 
 Conclusion 
64 
 References 
67 
 Police Culture and 
Organizational 
Reform in Brazilian 
Policing 1 
 Eduardo Cerqueira 
Batitucci, Marcus 
Vinícius Gonçalves 
da Cruz, Amanda 
Matar de Figueiredo 
and Letícia Godinho 
de Souza 
 4 
 Th is chapter examines policy and strategic decision-making in the Brazilian 
police. It focuses on the operational and institutional characteristics of the 
Civil and Military Police of the state of Minas Gerais, and how those char-
acteristics aff ected the planning and implementation of reforms in the areas 
of community policing and criminal investigations. In the Brazilian system, 
police are organized at the state level, which means that they are usually very 
large organizations with employees numbering in the thousands. Th e Military 
Police are responsible for street patrol, while the Civil Police investigate crimes 
and report their fi ndings to state prosecutors. But while they are distinct orga-
nizations, both share the cultural and organizational characteristics that are 
conventionally labeled as the “professional-bureaucratic model of policing.” 
Th is is especially true in terms of their shared crime-fi ghting ideology and use 
of technological approaches to crime control (Batitucci 2011). 

56 
Eduardo Cerqueira Batitucci et al.
 In this chapter, we examine these characteristics of police occupational 
culture as they impact the implementation of community policing and 
criminal investigation initiatives. These responsibilities represent two of the 
strongest challenges facing Brazilian police today—their legitimacy deficit, 
from the community perspective, and their inefficacy with regard to fulfilling 
the obligations of the criminal justice system. 
 Dilemmas of the Incorporation of the 
Professional-Bureaucratic Model 
 Walker (1977) details the principal elements of the professional- bureaucratic 
model of policing, as it is known in the United States. Th ese include the 
development of a professional self-awareness, through the production of 
professional literature and the foundation of police associations and unions; 
militarization as a control strategy, with an emphasis on discipline; admin-
istrative reform, with the introduction of Taylorist and Fordist principles 
common in the private sector; the bureaucratization of police organizations; 
professional improvement through police academies and the use of institu-
tional criteria for the recruitment and promotion of offi  cers; and the intensive 
use of technology, especially that which enhances police mobility and com-
munication (e.g., automobiles, telephones and radios). 
 It is without a doubt that police activity in contemporary Brazil, espe-
cially where the Military Police are concerned, was strongly influenced 
by this model and its organizational and technological elements. Some of 
the greatest innovations the Brazilian police have experienced in the last 
50 years were based on those strategies. For instance, throughout the 1980s, 
the Military Police in Brazil heavily invested in the creation of command and 
control systems, usually based in computerized dispatch communication 
centers, that increased their mobility and accessibility while maintaining the 
logic and values of the military structure they inherited from the Brazilian 
colonial past. 
 In this period, discretion by frontline officers was not considered a prob-
lem, since the police elite believed in the force of the military values and the 
symbolic control exercises by their military-style hierarchy. Police officers 
were encouraged not to fraternize with civilians, and the job was perceived 
as simply a matter of following orders. Routes and patrol locations were pre-
defined and crime-oriented, and most of the everyday work of officers was 
confined to responding to incidents called in through a centralized dispatch 
service. “Radio-patrol,” as police slang calls it, contributed to the construc-
tion, by the frontline police culture, of the distorted view of the community 
that comes of dealing continually only with crises throughout their whole 
working day. 

Chapter 4: Police Culture and Organizational Reform 
57
 In the American context, Wilson and Kelling (2000, p.  10) suggested 
that this model of professionalization completely changed the relationship 
between officers and the communities they serve. Professionalism contrib-
uted to minimizing the importance of everyday contacts between officers and 
the community, and maximizing a rational, “scientific” approach to manage-
ment that stressed officers’ accountability to objective indicators and not to 
the experiences relayed upwards by officers themselves. In the Brazilian case, 
the institutionalization of this model strengthened a pre-existing characteris-
tic of policing. This was a culture marked by the prevalence of the discipline 
of law in the training of the officer corps, and militarism in their ideology 
and operational structure. As cultural components born from the historical 
traditions of the Brazilian police, these two frameworks intersect to create an 
abstract conception of the police role, which symbolically devalues the opera-
tional activity of frontline officers. Their knowledge and experience is often 
considered irrelevant. Instead, police leaders hold a quasi-aristocratic view of 
policing, one in which “management cops” (Reuss-Ianni 1993) are considered 
superior vis-à-vis frontline police, when it comes to professional competence 
and dealing with complexity (Batitucci 2015). 
 According to Walker (1977, p. 64), the long-term result of the spread of 
this model of policing in America was a fundamental shift in the nature of the 
police mandate. It became one of the ideological and operational dominance 
of the notion that the role of the police is to fight crime. Greater reliance 
on seemingly objective, tangible measures of their effectiveness, including 
statistics such as reported crimes and the number of arrests, reinforce this 
definition of effectiveness. Activities dedicated to “community service” lost 
importance to the police, who saw themselves engaged in an endless war 
against an invisible enemy. 
 In Brazil, the police mandate as defined in legislation and in public opin-
ion (Muniz and Proença Jr. 2007; Muniz and Silva 2010) is vague. This has 
widened and made contestable the boundary between what is and what is 
not appropriate policing. This has in turn allowed police to meet a very wide 
range of demands in Brazil, including those centered on the idea of fighting 
crime and those that are relevant to the mediation of everyday conflicts, civil 
defense, traffic control and even social assistance, among many others. Their 
movement into all of these social spaces has given police an overwhelming 
presence in the Brazilian society. On the other hand, openness in the defini-
tion of what policing should be has sidestepped clarifying debate over what 
professional policing should look like in 21st-century Brazil, both conceptu-
ally and in operational practice. 
 This problem becomes evident in discussions of how police can police in 
a way that enables them to regain their legitimacy, and how they can enhance 
their technical proficiency in addressing conventional crime problems. To 
illustrate this, we examine issues surrounding the adoption of community 

58 
Eduardo Cerqueira Batitucci et al.
policing by the Military Police and new investigative procedures by the Civil 
Police. 
 Community Policing and the Military Police 
 Th e idea of community policing in the Military Police dates back to the 
early 1990s. Th e thinking at that time focused on the need for “a police that 
contemplates the attitudes of partnership, cooperation and interaction with 
community leaders,” and to seek to off er a new focus on policing which, instead 
of solving “random problems,” would work within priorities established in 
partnership with the community (PMMG 1993). Th e main justifi cation for 
adopting community policing practices was to meet the needs of the police 
in dealing with social changes, in particular the end of the dictatorship and 
the implementation of a new Brazilian federal constitution. Another objec-
tive was to secure through these partnerships new and alternative sources of 
funding to sustain the police. From a policing standpoint, the Military Police 
during that period did not make any substantive changes that would insti-
tutionalize these initiatives. Th ere was at fi rst no movement toward creating 
community councils nor any special training for offi  cers responsible for com-
munity policing. Any changes in policing in this early period were confi ned 
to thinking about the police role in a newly re-created democracy and not in 
any concrete institutional changes. Th e Military Police lacked, at that time, 
the cultural and professional elements necessary for adopting these kinds of 
innovations, especially any changes involving frontline police offi  cers. Th is 
was due in part to the prevalence of a military culture in the organization 
(FJP 2014). 
 By the end of the 1990s, the Military Police did formalize the creation of 
community councils within their regional commands. However, the councils 
that were created functioned as organizational “add-ons,” created by regional 
commands in order to satisfy guidelines established by their organization. 
This did not bode well for the councils, for the regions were not driven by 
a conception of why and how there should be community involvement in 
public safety (PMMG 1999). In practice, the Military Police did not recog-
nize any autonomy exercised by the community in their participation, and 
instead accepted them solely as a legitimizing device that could not challenge 
the institutional assumptions of the police. Souza (1998) observed that, in a 
broader perspective, there was no institutionalization of community policing 
as a philosophy and a community safety strategy. The Military Police were 
not able to internalize the concept, the values it represented and the opera-
tional activities required to promote any real change in their policing style. 
In her opinion, community policing remained isolated within the organiza-
tion, any successes it showed were dependent upon the initiative of specific 

Chapter 4: Police Culture and Organizational Reform 
59
commanders, no attention was paid to challenging cultural views and opera-
tional practices that ran counter to a community-oriented philosophy, and it 
faced a low acceptance among both frontline officers and managers. 
 But by 2002 there emerged a new perspective on community policing. 
It emphasized the creation of cooperative partnerships through active com-
munity participation in all aspects of policing processes, from planning to 
action. The public would have an autonomous role and would not be tied 
to the police or their programs or be dependent on police funding. This 
was seen as speaking to the legitimacy problems of the police. A Military 
Police memo explained, “community participation in planning and decisions 
improves the technological and professional profile of the police, because of 
the improvement in the levels of satisfaction, sense of security, quality of life 
and reduction of crime and disorder” (PMMG 2002). The new guidelines 
advised special attention to the great challenges that these new perspectives 
implied, especially concerning the police themselves: their culture, methods 
and management processes. The guidelines were presented with a clear nor-
mative focus and did not prescribe specific structures, organizational change 
strategies, training content or allocation of police officers and other resources. 
For example, in addition to the community councils, the new perspective 
on policing included reference to stations designed from the experience of 
Japanese  Kobans . Adopting these would call for the long-term assignment 
of officers, involving them in continuous and ongoing community policing 
activities in order to reinforce the relationship between police and community. 
However, as FJP (2014) observes, the Military Police ended by suggesting that 
the community would be responsible for the construction of the stations, cre-
ating a virtually insurmountable obstacle to their implementation, especially 
where they would be needed in the poorest and most vulnerable communi-
ties. To date, not a single police station has been built following this model. 
 From 2004 onwards, new operational tactics were developed, based on 
specialized patrols or squadrons. “Active Prevention Patrols” (PPA) were the 
first, conceived of to 
 work under the primary objective of reinforcing the population’s ties of reci-
procity, solidarity and participation, through continuous visits by the police 
to the population most in need of the police services (vulnerable citizens and 
victims of crimes), surpassing the traditional concept of an “abstract consumer 
for the police Service.” 
 (PMMG 2004, p. 12) 
 However, the guidelines suggested, paradoxically, that PPAs should be “pref-
erably equipped with heavy weapons” to be able to meet its “secondary 
missions,” which were described as “repressive actions and support to tactical 
squadrons.” 

60 
Eduardo Cerqueira Batitucci et al.
 GEPAR, jargon for “Specialized Patrol Squadrons for Vulnerable Commu-
nities,” was created in the early 2000s. This unit was developed to accomplish 
two missions: community policing and the prevention of homicide in violent 
slums. They were described as complementing preventive action through social 
policies. In 2005, the Military Police broadened the field for GEPAR, describ-
ing it as a “new form” of policing within the favelas, using a problem-oriented 
approach. Note that, despite endorsing the concept of a “problem-oriented polic-
ing,” some “problems” were predefined in guidelines for the program. They 
prioritized violent crimes, drug trafficking, the seizure of illegal firearms 
and control of wars between juvenile gangs. Moreira and Godinho (2010) 
examined the connection between GEPAR and social policies in favela areas 
in the city of Belo Horizonte. They conducted a survey of all of the officers 
involved in GEPAR until that time, some 230 of them. They concluded that 
a major problem with the program was that only the commanders of GEPAR 
had regular contact with social service agencies. They reported that there was 
great difficulty in arranging interactions with the community and mobilizing 
community leaders to get them involved in partnership projects, as well as a 
number of deficiencies related to specific training and logistical issues. 
 By the end of the 2000s, problem-oriented policing had become the over-
all conceptual framework for the institutionalization of community-based 
policies within the Military Police. However, it was defined in a particular 
way. “Problem-oriented policing recognizes that criminal behavior is a result 
of an interaction between the individual and the environment. This highlights 
that opportunity can be considered the main cause of crime” (PMMG 2011). 
Thus, by identifying the problem as opportunity and the solution its manage-
ment, the program’s guidelines skewed problem solving toward a specific set 
of social dynamics and to a specific conception of policing based in situational 
crime prevention (Felson 1996) and the routine activities approach (Cohen 
and Felson 1979). Lost from view was community involvement in the devel-
opment of priorities and solutions for those problems. 
 In conclusion, the Military Police invested a large institutional effort in 
the design, development and implementation of community policing in order 
to deal with the legitimacy questions facing the police in Brazil. This effort, 
however, was hampered by their institutional legacy, rooted as they were in a 
legalistic and militaristic framework for actually conducting operations. 
 Criminal Investigations in the Civil Police 
 For Roberto Kant de Lima (Kant de Lima 1995, 1989) the Brazilian legal tradi-
tion has two main features. On the one hand, it is an accusatorial system that 
publicly investigates while preserving a role for defense of the accused. Th e 
accused is presumed to be innocent, and the function of the legal process is to 

Chapter 4: Police Culture and Organizational Reform 
61
draw together information enabling the court to be convinced of his or her guilt 
or innocence while protecting the accused. On the other hand, the Brazilian 
tradition also has the features of an inquisitorial system. Th is in one in which, 
before the prosecutor’s complaint is fi led with a court, the Civil Police performs 
an investigation. Th e legal system does not state the fact, but assumes its prob-
ability, that the accused is guilty, and the  inquisitorial  phase constitutes a search 
for evidence by the police to ensure that this presumption is true. From this 
vantage point, the system’s concern is with injury to the public interest and not 
with the rights of the accused. So, the Brazilian Code of Criminal Procedure, 
despite claiming that the process is accusatorial and conforming therefore to 
the constitutional provisions of equality and balance between the parties and 
the due process of law, states that the judicial process may be preceded by an 
extrajudicial procedure, conducted by the Civil Police, of an inquisitorial nature 
supposedly under the supervision of the prosecutor and the judge. 
 The pioneering research on the modern Civil Police in Brazil is that by 
Paixão (1982), Paixão, Martins and Sapori (1992), Kant de Lima (1989, 1995), 
Oliveira (2004) and Mingaardi (1992). All of them rely on ethnographic proj-
ects conducted in units of Brazilian Civil Police during the 1980s. Their work 
identified two strands of work within the Civil Police, responsibilities which 
have historically been described as a dichotomy that is contradictory: on one 
hand, there is the conducting of criminal investigations, and on the other, 
dealing with the formal and legal requirements of the police report that is 
made to the prosecutor, the  inquérito policial  (IP). With slight variations, the 
workflow in a Civil Police precinct is described as follows: the victim or the 
Military Police registers a complaint. Next, the  delegado 2  (the person in charge 
of the case) becomes aware of the incident and dispatches a group of police 
investigators. Once they have verified the appropriateness of proceeding for-
mally, an IP is initiated. This is usually under the coordination of an  escrivão , 
always formally presided over by the  delegado . The  escrivão  sends work orders 
to the investigators, and coordinates interviews with victims, witnesses and 
suspects. Usually, he is also in charge of gathering together the pieces of evi-
dence and organizing the information that is collected. Once the investigation 
is over, the  delegado  prepares a final report, which is forwarded to the court. 
He may request more time for investigation, suggest that the suspect is guilty 
of specific offenses, or suggest that the IP be terminated in the absence of suf-
ficient evidence to pursue the case further. 
 However, in his research in the field, Paixão (1982, p. 74) found that these 
formal procedures did not describe accurately the actual practice of police 
investigations. Instead, they were oriented “on the one hand, by organizational 
assessments of the actual legal aspects of the case, and on the other, by the police 
theories knowledge about the nature of crime and its perpetrators.” The result 
was that, as one police investigator affirmed, “when the investigation is initi-
ated, it is almost ready. We already know who the criminal is” (1982, p. 74). 

62 
Eduardo Cerqueira Batitucci et al.
This highlights the important role played by stereotyping and the symbolic 
construction of the prototypical criminal, and his contrast to the “good” citizen 
(Paixão 1982, pp. 74–76). In the everyday practice of the police, there is a great 
deal of “correctional detention,” in which people are arrested for a reason that 
is tangential to an actual offense. For example, officers do this “to give a lesson” 
to someone who is improperly behaving or to extract information from them 
about other ongoing criminal activities. This serves a second feature of actual 
police investigations, which is their reliance on networks of informants who 
feed them with insider information about the world of crime (see Bittner 1967). 
This often uncorroborated intelligence also leads to arrests and detention. 
 Therefore, there can be a constant tension between what is “legal” and 
must be required and what is “possible” to require in a case. In some instances, 
the police select where the law can be applied and where it should not be 
applied. By doing so, the police protect the image of the judicial and legal sys-
tems, which remains seemingly “within the law,” while the police are seen to 
constantly violate or distort it (Kant de Lima 1995, p. 52). The apparent crimi-
nal’s confession becomes a key element justifying the stereotypes that drive 
investigations, leading it, in the author’s view, to legitimize the use of physi-
cal violence as a method of investigation. A consequence is that the police 
turn into an agency that unofficially arbitrates or tries and punishes sectors 
of Brazilian society for whom the formal judicial process is often unavailable 
(Kant de Lima 1995, pp. 84–85). As a result, some of the most important issues 
concerning the Civil Police in Brazil arise from the daily activities that make 
up criminal investigations. They reveal important elements for understanding 
the place investigations occupy in the criminal justice system. 
 Civil Police define in their everyday practices who are the suspects, and 
they often do so based on stereotypes mainly when dealing with poor people. 
Then the important aspect of their job is to find them guilty. In a culture 
based on an inquisitorial model, this is an open road to arbitrary practices. 
Rodrigues (2011, p. 90) illustrates this, in the words of a PCMG police inves-
tigator she interviewed: “here the goal is to find a criminal and that he makes 
a confession. That is what is important. The soul of the investigation is this.” 
Thus, establishing guilt of those caught up in this process is the endpoint of 
the police investigation. Miranda, Oliveira and Paes (2010, p. 134) made the 
same point in research with police in Rio de Janeiro. For those interviewed, 
“Suspects are guilty  a priori , because they will not confess, or will lie to protect 
themselves.” The presumption of guilt orients expectations by the police of a 
truth that they only need to “confirm.” 
 All of this points to a large degree of ritualism in the investigations of 
the Civil Police. Rodrigues (2011, p. 91) draws attention to the irrelevance 
associated with actual investigations, since any substantive aspects related to 
it as a means to solving a crime is replaced by a systematic production of 
reports (field communications, interviews, confessions, service orders). Zilli 

Chapter 4: Police Culture and Organizational Reform 
63
and Vargas (2013, p. 630) highlight the same point, pointing the “notarial 
character of the IP, which overlaps the dynamism and technicality of investi-
gations—relegating to testimonial evidence much greater importance than to 
the so-called technical evidence.” 
 This problem tends to become more severe where demands for produc-
tivity and efficiency result in performance appraisal management systems 
that push for finalistic results—such as reported IPs and other indicators of 
crime management. In this situation, it is common to press for “productivity 
over quality of investigation and the substitution of the discretionary power 
of the police by the detailed specification of its performance.” Thus, as pointed 
out by Rodrigues (2011, p. 126), it is common to find investigators spending 
more time writing field reports than conducting field investigations. There 
are  escrivães  who carry out four, five hearings per day; and  delegados only 
dealing with writing IPs’ conclusions and losing any real connection to the 
actual crime investigation. So, as noted by Misse et al. (2010, p. 84) and Aze-
vedo and Vasconcellos (2011, p. 73), the actual police investigation becomes a 
ceremonial and bureaucratic act, to the detriment of investigative and analyti-
cal evidence gathering, through prioritizing the search for a suspect and only 
secondarily actually conducting investigations. 
 Our research on the Civil Police was conducted during 2013–2014 and 
involved systematic observation of the day-to-day activities in police units and 
focus groups with  delegados ,  escrivães  and field investigators. This revealed 
that the course of action in police investigations is an intuitive one. There is 
no procedural guidance for officers enforced by the organization that leads 
them to apply any standardized institutional expertise to work in complex 
cases. The “vision” and “experience” of the individual police officer, driven by 
community pressure and dynamics of crime in the area, guide institutional 
priorities and work process. There is no institutional knowledge manage-
ment, and oral tradition and on-the-job learning are the dominant forms of 
socialization of new police officers. Criminal stereotypes and work guidelines 
are informally generated by the local culture of police districts, and are infor-
mally passed along to new police officers through socialization. The central 
Civil Police Academy exerts just a secondary level of socialization, and largely 
a ceremonial one with little substantive grip on actual practice. 
 Observations of field investigations and interviews with police investiga-
tors instead reveal practice that fails to recognize and treat the crime scene 
as its central focus. In homicide cases, for example, it was unusual that one 
police team concentrated on solving a particular crime. Instead, there was 
institutionalized detachment between the teams responsible for preliminary 
investigations (those related to the crime scene) and the teams responsible for 
the follow-up investigations based on later developments.  Delegados usually 
were not present at crime scene investigations and knew about them only 
through police field reports. But another theme that emerged from interviews 

64 
Eduardo Cerqueira Batitucci et al.
and focus groups was the limited effectiveness of the reports that were pro-
duced. They tended to meet formal requirements but had marginal utility in 
actually clarifying the dynamics of the crime they described. At the crime 
scene, as well as in other areas of the investigative process and the routines 
of operational units, there was a great deal of improvisation and a lack of 
dialogue between investigators. Actually, secrecy among them was the more 
dominant mode, since information and knowledge was hoarded by individual 
investigators, not shared professionally. 
 Aware of this criticism, in the second half of 2014 the chief of the Civil 
Police established an experimental police unit that was to test new approaches to 
investigations. It focused on homicide cases arising in a specific area of the city 
of Belo Horizonte, a city of three million that is the capital of the state of Minas 
Gerais. The innovations to be tested included systematic crime analysis in their 
area of responsibility, focusing on the construction of network maps of drug and 
gang-related activity, and a team approach to the investigative process. For the 
first time,  delegados , investigators,  escrivães  and crime-scene investigators were 
to work together on particular homicide cases. Each team was solely responsible 
for their case, from beginning to end. They were to share all of the information 
they collected and the responsibility for all the reports they produced. 
 The experimental unit worked on 18 homicide cases in a four-month 
period, during which we were able to follow their work. We concluded that 
teamwork among the police officers had positive effects on the routines and 
work processes of the experimental unit. They also focused more on the spe-
cific facts and circumstances of their cases. The knowledge they exchanged 
proved crucial to the performance of the individuals involved and on their 
understanding of the collective benefits of investigative work. Their formal 
duties were conducted with greater quality, and the investigators perceived an 
increase in their understanding of the complexities involved in the cases they 
investigated. This shift in the focus of their work encouraged quality investiga-
tions and less focus on the bureaucratic formalities of the IP process. There was 
consensus among all officers involved that they were doing better police work. 
 Although the majority of opinion inside and outside the organization was 
positive, the initiative lasted only four months and was then discontinued. 
This was largely due to the opposition of the prevailing traditional culture of 
the Civil Police. To date, no substantive changes have been made in the way 
in which investigative units work in Minas Gerais. 
 Conclusion 
 Th e dual goals of building legitimacy and increasing effi  cacy remain a prob-
lem for police in Brazil. From a cultural standpoint, it is clear that the Military 
Police is not convinced of the necessity or operational utility of community 

Chapter 4: Police Culture and Organizational Reform 
65
policing, despite great discussion and broad support for it. Th ere remains a 
clear disconnection between policy discussion and daily policing. Th e actual 
implementation of programs and policies is oft en discontinuous, faced with 
competition for resources with traditional police activities. Th e Civil Police 
have not been able to allocate needed personnel and other resources. Even in 
the case of police offi  cers who are directly involved, there is great suspicion 
about community policing, and even ignorance of its conceptual underpin-
nings. On a day-to-day basis, many of the activities that are described as 
community policing are actually traditional police practices, especially those 
directly related to the professional model. Implementation of most commu-
nity policing policies is in the discretionary hands of local commanders, who 
by virtue of a more or less personal attachment to the proposals, either boost it 
or not. To the extent they are driven by performance management indicators 
and evaluated based on them, it is very diffi  cult for managers to cope with the 
resource demands of community policing programs at the operational level. 
Few offi  cers are motivated to participate in community policing activities. 
 Thus, our conclusion is that, despite apparently large efforts to implement 
a robust community police program over the past 15 years, to the Military 
Police these activities still face ritual, cultural and institutional difficulties. 
As is evident in our analysis, efforts in Minas Gerais toward organizational 
decentralization of command have not reached frontline officers and have not 
affected the core activity of police. It is a movement restricted to the manage-
ment level of the organization, a movement with the objective of increasing its 
capacity for command in an increasingly complex environment. The discre-
tion of the frontline police officers to carry out community-oriented activities 
has never been emphasized. 
 These findings support the thesis of dissociation between control and 
discretion advanced by Kelling and Moore (1988); or, to put it in another 
way, between planning and operational activity. By discussing elaborately the 
academic and technical aspects of community policing without developing 
organizational mechanisms to connect theory with practice, the leadership of 
the Military Police deepened the void between concept and action, and limited 
the breadth and depth that central office policies could have. In this context, 
community policing could be understood through the concept of institu-
tional isomorphism. DiMaggio and Powell (2005) suggest that innovations 
are more often put forward to construct political and normative legitimacy 
for the organization and leaders rather than to actually impact operational 
efficacy or effectiveness. 
 On the problem of efficacy, the experimental homicide investigation ini-
tiative that we evaluated illustrated that, although it was a relative success on 
the field, it was not able to confront the traditional culture of the organiza-
tion regarding how investigative police work should proceed. Detective work 
continues to feature a disconnection between the actual investigation and the 

66 
Eduardo Cerqueira Batitucci et al.
formal demands of the IP, and the latter remains central on the radar screen 
of Civil Police officers and in their professional identity.  Delegados ,  escrivães 
and investigators see their respective work as if they were in opposition to one 
another. Rather than seeing investigations being built from the contributions 
of the team, from the perspective of their own careers each member remains 
compartmentalized and self-centered, reflecting the internal conflicts and the 
demands of their relationships with the other actors in the criminal justice 
system. 
 All of this is widely recognized by those within the police, and not just by 
researchers. An important question, then, is the possibility that this realiza-
tion will promote institutional change in the Civil Police. Were claims that 
there would be reform just ceremonial speeches in response to critical ques-
tions regarding the investigative inefficacy of the Brazilian Civil Police? 
 Meyer and Rowan (1977, pp. 342–344) argue that it is usually assumed 
that a rationally constructed, formal organizational structure is the most 
effective form of coordination and control of complex technical activities in 
the modern world. This view is based on the assumption that organizations 
work according to their organizational design—“coordination is a problem of 
routine, rules and procedures are followed and operational activities conform 
to what the formal structure prescribes.” Meyer and Rowan argue, however, 
that empirical research often contradicts this model, pointing to the impor-
tance of parallel informal organizations that are as or more important than the 
formal ones. Also, the structural elements of formal and informal organiza-
tions can be disconnected from each other, and from the practical activities 
they are intended to promote: “rules are violated, decisions frequently go 
unimplemented and, if implemented, bring out uncertain consequences, the 
technologies used have an efficacy problem and the evaluation and inspection 
systems are subverted, offering little coordination” (1977, pp. 342–344). 
 Thus, to keep in ceremonial conformity with external pressures, organi-
zations tend to disconnect their formal structures from the uncertainties of 
their technical tasks (and, therefore, the demands of efficiency and efficacy), 
becoming instead loosely articulated. That is, there is a disconnect between 
the formal structure visible from the outside and actual operational activi-
ties. Many of their visible structural characteristics become the product of 
organizational conformity to myths that are institutionalized in the social 
environment, and work as “rational and impersonal mandates that identify 
several social goals as technical in nature and specify, imperatively, appropri-
ate and rational means to reach those goals” (Meyer and Rowan 1977, p. 344). 
 It is possible a robust community policing program could correspond 
to the “correct” or “appropriate” manner of conducting police work, given 
the values it reflects (Crank 2003)—values that, to achieve legitimacy, offi-
cers must share. In investigations, information and knowledge emerged as 
key elements of effective police work. Using them effectively would require 

Chapter 4: Police Culture and Organizational Reform 
67
dissemination of knowledge and experience within police organizations, 
which could only be accomplished by governance mechanisms making this 
happen on a day-to-day basis. But as yet neither of these reforms, one aimed at 
securing legitimacy and the other at enhancing the effectiveness of traditional 
policing, has taken root in the Brazilian police. 
 Notes 
 1. Th is research was partly fi nanced by  Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científi co e 
Tecnológico  [National Counsel of Technological and Scientifi c Development] CNPq and 
 Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de Minas Gerais  [Research Support Foundation 
of Minas Gerais’ State] FAPEMIG. 
 2. Th e  delegados  team is usually made up of investigators who have a law degree and are 
empowered to carry out the fi eld work. Th e reports produced by the fi eld agents are orga-
nized by an  escrivão , which has the function to collect and organize the fi eld reports, and 
usually cross-examine victims, witnesses and defendants. Th e  delegado  has the fi nal word on 
all investigations, as well as draft ing the conclusions, which are forwarded to prosecutors and 
the judges. 
 References 
 Azevedo, R. G., and Vasconcellos, F. B. 2011. O Inquérito Policial em Questão—situação atual e 
a percepção dos Delegados de Polícia sobre as fragilidades do modelo brasileiro de investiga-
ção criminal [The police inquiry under question: The current situation and the perception of 
police inspectors about the fragilities of the Brazilian model of crime investigation].  Revista 
Sociedade e Estado 26: 59–75. 
 Batitucci, E. C. 2011. A Polícia em transição: O modelo profissional-burocrático de policia-
mento e hipóteses sobre os limites da profissionalização das polícias brasileiras [The police 
in transition: The bureaucratic-professional policing model and hyphotesys of Brazilian 
police profissionalization].  Dilemas: revista de estudos de conflito e controle socia 4: 65–96. 
 Batitucci, E. C. 2015. Polícia de Ciclo Completo e as Reformas no Aparato Policial e na Segu-
rança Pública Brasileira [Complete cycle police and the reforms of police apparatuses 
and public security in Brazil]. In  Caderno Temático Seminário Internacional de Segurança 
Pública , ed.  Câmara Dos Deputados  [The Brazilian House of Representatives], 41–43. Brasí-
lia: Câmara dos Deputados. 
 Bittner, E. 1967. The police on skid-row: A study of peace keeping.  American Sociological 
Review 32: 699–715. 
 Cohen, L. E., and Felson, M. 1979. Social change and crime rate trends: A routine activity 
approach.  American Sociological Review 44: 588–608. 
 Crank, J. P. 2003. Institutional theory of police: A review of the state of the art.  Policing: An 
International Journal of Police Strategies and Management 26: 186–207. 
 DiMaggio, P. J., and Powell, W. W. 2005. A Gaiola de Ferro Revisitada: isomorfismo institucio-
nal e racionalidade coletiva nos campos organizacionais [Iron cage revisited: Institutional 
isomorfism and colective rationality in organizational fields].  Revista de Administração de 
Empresas 45: 74–89. 
 Felson, M. 1996. Preventing retail theft: An application of environmental criminology.  Security 
Journal 7: 71–75. 

68 
Eduardo Cerqueira Batitucci et al.
 FJP. 2014. Análise dos Programas e das Ações de Policiamento Comunitário na Polícia Militar 
De Minas Gerais (1980–2010) [Community policing programs and actions analzis at mili-
tary police of minas gerais].  Relatório apresentado à FAPEMIG, projeto APQ-01212–11 [Final 
Report Fapemig Project APQ-01212–11]. Mimeo. 
 Kant de Lima, R. 1989. Cultura jurídica e práticas policiais—a tradição inquisitorial [Legal cul-
ture and police practices—the inquisitorial tradition].  Revista Brasileira de Ciências Sociais 
4: 65–84. 
 Kant de Lima, R. 1995.  A polícia da cidade do Rio de Janeiro—seus dilemas e paradoxos [The 
police of the city of Rio de Janeiro its dilemas and paradoxes]. Rio de Janeiro: Editora 
Forense. 
 Kelling, G. L., and Moore, M. H. 1988.  The evolving strategy of policing . Washington, DC: Per-
spectives on Policing, National Institute of Justice, United States Department of Justice, Nº4. 
 Meyer, J. W., and Rowan, B. 1977. Institutionalized organizations: Formal structure as myth and 
ceremony.  American Journal of Sociology 83: 340–363. 
 Mingardi, G. 1992.  Tiras, gansos e trutas: segurança pública e polícia civil em São Paulo (1983–
1990)  [Cops, Snitchers and Punks: Public security and civil police in São Paulo]. São Paulo: 
Página Aberta. 
 Miranda, A. P. M., Oliveira, M. B., and Paes, V. F. 2010. A reinvenção da “cartorialização”: 
análise do trabalho policial em registros de ocorrência e inquéritos policiais em “Delegacias 
Legais” referentes a homicídios dolosos na cidade do Rio de Janeiro. [The reinvention of 
“notarization”: An analysis of crime reports and police inquiries in “Legal Police Precincts” 
concerning voluntary homicides in Rio de Janeiro].  Pesquisas Aplicadas em Segurança 
Pública , Ministério da Justiça, Brasília 2(4): 119–152. 
 Misse, M., Costa, A.T., Vargas, J.D., Ratton, J.L., and Azevedo, R.G. (eds.). 2010. O  inquérito 
policial no Brasil: uma pesquisa empírica  [Police inquiry in Brazil: An empirical research]. 
Rio de Janeiro: Ed. BookLink. 
 Moreira, H. W., and Godinho, L. 2010. Estudo de caso: uma comparação da influência do pro-
grama Fica Vivo e do GEPAR na redução dos crimes de homicídio na 1ª. RPM [Case study: 
Comparing the influence of the Fica Vivo program and GEPAR in homicides reduction at 
1º RPM]. MBA Dissertation. Fundação João Pinheiro, Belo Horizonte. 
 Muniz, J. O., and Proença, D., Jr. 2007. Muita politicagem, pouca política os problemas da polí-
cia [Too much politcking and few policies and the problems for police].  Estudos Avançados 
21: 159–170. 
 Muniz, J. O., and Silva, W. F. 2010. Mandato Policial na Prática: tomando decisões nas ruas de 
João Pessoa [Police Mandate in use: Making decisions in the streets of João Pessoa].  Cader-
nos CRH 23: 449–473. 
 Oliveira, L. 2004.  Sua Excelência o Comissário e outros ensaios de Sociologia Jurídica [Your 
highness the comissar and other essays of legal sociology]. Rio de Janeiro: Ed. Letra Legal. 
 Paixão, A. L. 1982. A Organização Policial numa Área Metropolitana [Police organization in a 
metropolitan area].  Dados—revista de Ciências Sociais 25: 63–85. 
 Paixão, A. L., Martins, H. T., and Sapori, L. F. 1992. Métodos e acidentes de trabalho: violência, 
legalidade e polícia [Methods and work incidents: Violence, legality and police].  Análise e 
Conjuntura 7: 76–91. 
 PMMG. 1993.  Diretriz de Policiamento Ostensivo 3008/93  [Guidelines for ostensible policing]. 
Belo Horizonte: Imprensa Oficial de Minas Gerais. 
 PMMG. 1999.  8ª Região da Polícia Militar. Instrução 01/99–8ºCRPM  [8th military police 
region—instruction 01/99–8th CRPM]. Belo Horizonte: Imprensa Oficial de Minas Gerais. 
 PMMG. 2002.  Diretriz para a Produção de Serviços de Segurança Pública nº 04/2002 —CG 
[Guidelines for the delivery of public security services]. Belo Horizonte: Imprensa Oficial 
de Minas Gerais. 

Chapter 4: Police Culture and Organizational Reform 
69
 PMMG. 2004.  Região da Polícia Militar. Instrução 01/2004–8ªRPM. Cria e regula as Patrul-
has de Prevenção Ativa, para emprego na capital do Estado  [8th military police region— 
instruction 01/2004–8th RPM—creation and regulation of active prevention patrol to be 
deployd at State’s capitol]. Belo Horizonte: Imprensa Oficial de Minas Gerais. 
 PMMG. 2011.  Diretriz para a Produção de Serviços em Segurança Pública nº 3.01.06/2011—CG 
[Guidelines for the delivery of public security services]. Belo Horizonte: Imprensa Oficial 
de Minas Gerais. 
 Reuss-Ianni, E. 1993.  Two cultures of policing: Street cops and management cops . New York: 
Transaction Publishers. 
 Rodrigues, J. N. L. 2011. O inquérito policial para o crime de homicídio: inquisitorialidade, 
discricionariedade e conflito em busca de verdade e de culpados [The police inquiry in 
homicide cases: Inquisitorial shape, discretion and conflict in the search of truth and guilts]. 
Master’s Degree Dissertation on Sociology, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Hori-
zonte, Brazil. 
 Souza, E. 1998. Polícia Comunitária em Belo Horizonte: avaliação e perspectivas de um pro-
grama de segurança pública. [Community policing in Belo Horizonte: Evaluation and per-
spectives of a public security program]. Master’s Degree Dissertation on Sociology, Federal 
University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil. 
 Walker, S. 1977.  A critical history of police reform . Lexington, MA: Lexington Books. 
 Wilson, J. Q., and Kelling, G. L. 2000. Broken windows: The police and neighborhood safety. 
In  Community policing, classical readings , ed. W. M. Oliver. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: 
Prentice Hall Ed. 
 Zilli, L. F., and Vargas, J. D. 2013. O trabalho da Polícia Investigativa face aos homicídios de 
jovens em Belo Horizonte [Investigative police work in relation to youth homicides in Belo 
Horizonte].  Ciência & Saúde Coletiva 18: 621–632. 


71
 Contents 
 The Survey 
72 
 Female Participation in Policing 
73 
 Gender Relations in Brazilian Policing: Towards Sex Equality? 
77 
 The Importance of a Gender Policy 
87 
 References 
89 
 Managing Gender 
Relations in the 
Brazilian Police 
 Ludmila Mendonça 
Lopes Ribeiro 
 5 
 Studies discussing the gender dimensions of the daily operation of police 
forces have been growing steadily in number over the past decades (Mourão 
2015). One way to classify the approaches of these studies is to note that they 
diff erentiate between biological dimensions (sex) and their social signifi ca-
tions (gender), dimensions that show variation from one society to another. 
From the advent of theories of modernity, the main category taken for analysis 
has been how biological sex plays a prominent role in social life and privi-
leges males as agents of transformation. In contrast, women were assigned a 
secondary role, confi ned to the domestic environment and to caring for the 
home and the children—who in turn would be educated by her in accordance 
with their gender. From sex, two clearly distinct genders (here “role-assigning 
cultural categories”) would be defi ned: masculine and feminine. Any discon-
nection between sex and gender was treated as dysfunctionality, either social 
or medical (Giddens 2001). 
 The concept of gender arises from the need to address the differences 
between the sexes and how their construction defines social relations 
(Küchemann et al. 2015). While sex relates to the biological aspect, gender is 
a cultural construct directly related to a given society, specifically defined in 
both time and space. This perspective stresses the fact that the same biological 
sex originates various genders, depending on how the individual recognizes 
and inserts him/herself into the social order (Hirata et al. 2009). Thus, femi-
ninity and masculinity are cultural constructs learned during the socialization 
process; they are not unchangeable but in constant transformation. 

72 
Ludmila Mendonça Lopes Ribeiro
 We will use the construct  gender  to understand differences between indi-
viduals in Brazilian police organizations. While the 1988 Federal Constitution 
of the Brazilian Republic (CR/1988) barred any discrimination based on dif-
ferences between the sexes, 1 the inner workings of the institutions in charge of 
public security reinforce a myriad of social roles according to an individual’s 
biology, which contributes to reproducing unequal gender relations. 
 The Survey 
 Th e data analyzed in this chapter derives from a research project on women 
in police institutions, carried out by the Brazilian Forum on Public Security 
( Fórum Brasileiro de Segurança Pública —FBSP) and by the Center for Studies 
on Organizations and People ( Núcleo de Estudos de Organizações e Pessoas —
NEOP) of the Getulio Vargas Foundation (FGV), with support from Brazil’s 
Ministry of Justice and CRISP ( Centro de Estudos de Criminalidade e Segurança 
Pública  or Center for Studies on Crime and Public Security) of UFMG (Federal 
University of Minas Gerais). Th is study seeks to understand how gender rela-
tions are constructed inside various Brazilian law enforcement agencies. 
 The institutional arrangement of public security in Brazil is governed by 
Article 144 of CR/1988. According to the provisions therein, the task of keeping 
order and combating crime shall be carried out by the following organiza-
tions: 3 Federal Police agencies, 27 Military Police organizations (performing 
ostensive policing duties) and 27 Civil Police forces (the latter with judicial 
police powers). In addition, there are 1,081 Municipal Guard bodies (FBSP 
2015)—formerly assigned to public asset protection and currently engaged 
in crime prevention, as their statutes have been approved. These total 1,138 
policing agencies staffed by 648,000 professionals (FBSP 2015). Each type of 
agency follows very distinct  modus operandi , so any research focused on indi-
vidual officers and their gender relations must consider the specificities of 
these institutional arrangements. 
 In order to reach this huge group of officers in their entirety, online 
questionnaires with password-controlled access were made available to all 
registered public security professionals listed in the Ministry of Justice’s data-
base. The Internet option for conducting the survey is justified by the huge 
size of Brazil and our intention to reach the largest possible number of police 
officers, ranging from those working in state capitals to those based in the 
country’s most remote locations. The resulting sample broadly reflects the 
wide diversity of policing in Brazil today. Of the total number of question-
naires distributed in this way, there were 11,982 valid returns, or about 2% 
of all those performing police duties throughout Brazil. The distribution 
of respondents was broadly in proportion to the distribution of organiza-
tions and the numbers of police officers—male and female—currently active 

Chapter 5: Managing Gender Relations 
73
in Brazilian territory. The data from this online survey is representative of 
each police institution, with resulting estimates boasting a 99% confidence 
level and sampling margin of error of 1.17% in each stratum. This analysis 
excluded respondents belonging to fire departments, who for organizational 
reasons were also included in the survey. 
 The survey included questions differentiating between the concepts of sex 
and gender. However, few transgender respondents identified themselves, and 
otherwise there was a high correspondence between complete responses to 
the sex and gender items. So despite our more comprehensive understanding 
of gender, responses to the sex-category question are utilized in this analysis 
of power relations between men and women. 
 Female Participation in Policing 
 In many places around the world, policing is understood stereotypically as 
being a male’s job, since it involves protecting the population against crime 
and criminals while also maintaining order. Th us, the actions carried out by 
police forces are seen as men’s roles in traditional societies (Soares and Musu-
meci 2005). In Brazil, this scenario is not diff erent, which would explain that 
the overwhelming majority of police offi  cers in our sample (81%) are male. 
Th e gender distribution of Brazilian police forces is described in  Figure 5.1 , 
which depicts this by type of agency. 
 Figure 5.1  Distribution of respondents by sex and type of police force 
 Source: Women in police institutions (2015) 

74 
Ludmila Mendonça Lopes Ribeiro
 This virtually 80–20 split raises the question of what 19% female par-
ticipation in policing means in the context of police organizations and in 
Brazilian society. According to the Brazilian census of 2010, economically 
active women represent 43% of the working population, which means that 
they are underrepresented in police institutions. This number is low in com-
parison to some other societies, even though surveys conducted by UNODC 
show that policewomen hardly ever reach 30% of the policing labor force any-
where in the world. 2  Even seeing it from this perspective, Brazil falls short of 
the world’s average. 
 Nonetheless, if we compare 19% female participation in policing to the 
results of an earlier survey, one conducted in 2000, we have much to celebrate. 
At that time, females did not exceed one digit as a percentage of the Military 
Police force. This was also true of the Civil Police, where there were positions 
that were somewhat guaranteed for women. This was the result of the cre-
ation of Special Police Stations for Assistance to Women (DEAMs, with the 
Portuguese initials) in the 1990s. The DEAMs were intended to provide spe-
cialized assistance for women, and they ended up being populated largely by 
female police, who would in principle be more capable of listening to female 
victims (Musumeci and Soares 2004). However, in that period the percentage 
of female officers overall still fell short of our 20% figure for 2015. Over the 
past 15 years, the proportion of females engaged in Brazilian police forces 
has grown at an accelerated pace, causing even the Military Police—the most 
resistant to gender equality—to include more than 10% of women in its ranks. 
 Women started joining the Brazilian police corps in 1955, as São Paulo 
State’s Decree no. 24.548 created the Special Female Policing Corps (Donadio 
2009, p. 91). However, it was during the 1980s that their presence was inten-
sified as the country slowly moved from authoritarianism to democracy, a 
transition completed in 1985 when Brazil’s new constitution (CR/1988) came 
into effect. This provided the constitutional basis upon which police struc-
tures were modified so as to include both sexes (Mourão 2015, p. 215). Until 
the Federal Constitution was enacted in 1988, Brazilian police forces only 
included men in their ranks, with few exceptions, given the prevailing under-
standing that the duties performed in those institutions were associated to 
male physical strength and therefore were men’s exclusive right (Soares and 
Musumeci 2005). 
  Table 5.1  presents a demographic profile of male and female officers, 
based on our survey. Since the women were included in the police forces only 
following the democratic transition, they are noticeably younger than their 
male peers. While women police are an average 36 years old and mostly are 
between 26 and 35 years of age (43.2% of the total), men are an average 38 and 
highly concentrated within the age group from 36 to 45 (42.9%). 
 Another difference between men and women in the police has to do 
with skin color, something that is always a flashpoint in Brazilian society. 

 Table 5.1  Percentage distribution according to age, skin color, marital status, 
children and schooling, per sex 
Males (%)
Females (%)
Age
18 to 25 
2.9
3.9
26 to 35 
32.9
43.2
36 to 45 
42.9
36.2
46 to 55 
18.8
14.5
Above 56 
2.4
2.3
Total
100.0
100.0
Skin color
White
44.4
50.7
Black
9.3
8.9
Brown
44.3
37.9
Yellow
0.8
1.5
Indigenous
0.4
0.2
Other (please specify)
0.8
0.8
Total
100.0
100.0
Marital status
Single
15.8
31.6
Married/in Steady Union
79.5
57.6
Divorced
4.6
9.9
Widow(er)
0.2
0.9
Total
100.0
100.0
Children
Yes
72.9
52.8
No
27.1
47.2
Total
100.0
100.0
Schooling
First grade—completed
1.0
0.1
Second grade—incomplete
1.5
0.3
Second grade—completed
20.1
8.3
Higher Education—incomplete
20.9
14.4
Higher Education—completed
32.6
35.1
Post-graduation—lato sensu (specialization) complete or 
incomplete 
20.8
36.3
Post-graduation—stricto sensu (M.A./Ph.D.) complete or 
incomplete
3.0
5.5
Total
100
100
 Source: Women in police institutions (2015) 

76 
Ludmila Mendonça Lopes Ribeiro
As  noted  by Muniz (2012), depending on the classification methodology 
adopted, the results of surveys can vary widely, as the way each individual 
perceives himself or herself as to color is very much related to their socio-
economic status. Far from indicating the respondent’s race, skin color 
classification rather reveals how he or she sees him/herself in terms of social 
standing, as whites have traditionally been this country’s elite. In our survey, 
we adopted the same methodology as the IBGE census, which involved asking 
respondents to classify themselves in terms of skin color. It should be noted 
that, among Brazilian police, females are the majority among whites (50.7%) 
and males among dark skin color (53.6% are browns or blacks), despite this 
not being reflected in the country’s wider population. 
 Does this mean that our policewomen are part of Brazilian elite, whereas 
male police officers originate from the lower social strata? In order to answer 
this question, one must unveil the relations between sex, schooling and skin 
color. Outside the walls of police institutions, numerous studies highlight the 
fact that school failure is more prevalent among black men (Carvalho 2004). 
At the other extreme, women represent the majority of higher education 
students. Male police tend to report fewer years of schooling than do their 
female peers—on average, women tend to be one grade above men. While 
males are the majority among those who have at most completed high school, 
women are the majority of those with a postgraduate degree, either complete 
or incomplete,  lato  or  stricto sensu . Thus, the presence of more women among 
police whites means that those with a more solid education background are 
the ones electing to pursue a career in the police, as previous surveys had 
already indicated (SENASP 2013). 
 With regard to marital status, the highest percentage of both sexes was 
concentrated in the “married or in steady union” category: 79% of men and 
58% of women were in that category. This distinct pattern in marital status 
seems to have impacted childbearing rates, as the percentage of women with 
children is smaller than that of men: 73% against 53%, respectively. These dif-
ferences may be interpreted as a consequence from the prevailing age range in 
each of the two groups, as the women are somewhat younger than men in the 
force. But they can also be understood as associated with women’s choice for 
the career at the expense of having a family—which should be postponed to a 
later age, or even altogether discarded in favor of a more satisfactory profes-
sional and personal life (Lima 2012). 
 Nevertheless, being a policewoman does not seem to mean being free 
from duties considered “feminine” in Brazilian culture: 66% of female 
respondents indicated they dedicate their free time to domestic chores (as 
against 50% of the men) and 31% never perform remunerated activities in 
their off time, in contrast with half of their male peers (51% of whom always 
perform paid activities in off hours). Therefore, being a policewoman is to 

Chapter 5: Managing Gender Relations 
77
take on a double shift, as it happens with 88% of working women, according 
to IBGE data. 3  
 Gender Relations in Brazilian Policing: 
Towards Sex Equality? 
 If gender is a cultural construct on a sexually diff erentiated human body 
understood as a fi eld in which power is articulated, and serving as a mech-
anism for organization of equality and inequality, how then are men’s and 
women’s places determined in Brazilian police forces? 
 The incorporation of women into Brazilian police forces coincides with 
the experiences of several other Latin American countries. The notable excep-
tions would be Chile and Uruguay, where females were included in the 1930s 
(SENASP 2013, p.  16). The admission of women happened along with a 
redefinition of the way police forces are expected to act within a democratic 
context, as their presence in the ranks was seen as an opportunity for reform, 
for humanizing the forces with a new emphasis on “preventive—less trucu-
lent—policing strategies”, thought to be typical of the feminine role (Calazans 
2005, p. 2). Starting from the principle that “the condition of police, in the 
case of men, would only accentuate the worst attributes of masculinity”, the 
arrival of women would mean a humanization of the institutions, a way of 
“completely removing the remnants of the police’s dictatorial past” (Soares 
and Musumeci 2005, p. 118). 
 This assumption may be questioned at its origin, given that this opening 
to women was not wide, unconditional and unrestricted. Rather than a refor-
mulation of assumptions on how police should act, what actually happened 
was the establishment of mechanisms confining women to some defined 
spaces within the institution, including assigning them welfare work focused 
on domestic violence—especially when involving children and the elderly, 
given the presumed feminine character of such activity (Mourão 2015). In 
the Military Police, for instance, the place of women was marked by a differ-
entiated career path, with distinct promotion criteria from their male peers 
(Musumeci and Soares 2004). 
 This selective incorporation of women into the policing profession con-
tinues to the present day and guides distinct admission criteria according to 
sex, such as with the system of quotas—which sets a predefined percentage 
of positions for females. Support for this quota system among officers them-
selves is documented in  Figure 5.2 . Support for quotas was strongest among 
the powerful Military Police. While the quotas were initially a demand of 
the feminist movement—for they would secure at least a required minimum 
access to the profession (Araújo and AlvesAlves 2007)—as women went on 

78 
Ludmila Mendonça Lopes Ribeiro
gaining an ever larger field in the marketplace this system turned into a hurdle 
on their way towards reaching higher percentages than those imposed by the 
quotas (Calazans 2005). Indeed, the quotas are a limiting factor to women 
wishing to join the institution. 
 As noted, support for selection by means of quotas was most widely sup-
ported among the Military Police (69%) and Municipal Guard (63%). These 
two forces look to the armed forces for their structural and operating models 
(Souza 2011). In these institutions, restricted access is justified by the physical 
differences between men and women. If “one must run after bandits”, 4 women 
would lack the required competence for such (Soares and Musumeci 2005, 
p. 12), and so it is imperative to establish the number of positions each sex is 
legally entitled to at the first stage of the selection process. 
 The quota system for police hiring is a controversial measure, as it implies 
a situation in which “women and men are in conflict, as they vie for scarce 
resources” (Abreu 2011, p. 9). On the other hand, setting a threshold percent-
age for women “interferes with that dispute seeking to prevent the scale from 
tilting too much to the men’s side” (Abreu 2011, p. 9). In the case of police, this 
quota cap for women is widely accepted internally—which may be seen as an 
obstacle to change: in total, 48% of the interviewees are in favor of keeping or 
setting quotas for admission of women; 52% of the men believe that the incor-
poration of females should not exceed certain parameters. Women, in turn, 
support that policy in lower percentages (31%), given their understanding 
 Figure 5.2 Support for hiring quotas for females, by type of police force 
 Source: Women in police institutions (2015) 

Chapter 5: Managing Gender Relations 
79
that they would have better chances to join the ranks if not for those caps 
(Soares and Musumeci 2005), as the first stage of selection is a general knowl-
edge test—at which they could take advantage of their longer school years. 
 Despite the fact that their arrival occurred by means of a quota system, 
“bit by bit, the policewomen moved from exclusive units to join the wider 
force, through a process that unified male and female staff” (Mourão 2015, 
p. 20). In our survey, only 5.3% of respondents reported the existence of dif-
ferentiated careers according to sex, all of whom belonged to Military Police 
and Municipal Guard ranks. 
 We see that nowadays the functional gap between sexes is narrower than 
it was 30 years ago—when women were exclusively assigned support/office 
duties, thus reinforcing the stereotype according to which only men rather 
than women should be out there in the streets (Musumeci and Soares 2004; 
Calazans 2005).  Figure 5.3  depicts the distribution of job assignments by sex. 
As it reports, even today, a larger percentage of women (33% versus 22% of the 
men) are deployed in the administrative sector, and fewer serve in operational 
units. However, based on other research, the latter is in fact an improvement 
over past practice (SENASP 2013). 
 As  Figure 5.3  further illustrates, at higher positions in the hierarchy, 
such as strategy and direction, the differences between men and women are 
smaller, as schooling and specialization are somewhat more valued than the 
individual’s sex in those functions. Moreover, 39% of all interviewees agree 
 Figure 5.3 Distribution of duties performed by police, by sex 
 Source: Women in police institutions (2015) 

80 
Ludmila Mendonça Lopes Ribeiro
that, in order for a woman to fill a hierarchical position above men, she should 
have a wider academic background. However, another 14% (16% of the men 
and 4% of the women) still believe that policemen and policewomen should 
perform different activities as suited to their sex, a view perhaps reinforced by 
stereotypical differences that are in fact socially constructed over the biologi-
cal element. 
 Another way of verifying the stereotypical basis of continuing gen-
der inequalities is to examine whether mounting numbers of women are 
accompanied by changes in the physical structure designed for them, such as 
bathrooms, lodgings, locker rooms and even nurseries (Mourão 2015). Such 
equipment is intended to offer women more privacy, away from male eyes, 
in addition to ensuring their return to work after childbirth, as caring for 
small children is seen as a typically female task (Freitas 2001). It turns out 
that workplace infrastructure adapted to women is very much institutional-
ized in Brazilian police organizations: 86% feature differentiated bathrooms, 
66% specific accommodations and 7% have nurseries. In only 12% of them 
are there no such items. These details are summarized by type of force in 
 Figure 5.4 . The Civil Police are among the institutions where this latter per-
centage is higher, despite the fact that it operates police stations specializing 
in assistance to women. At the other extreme is the Federal Police, with 95% 
of its units fitted with at least a minimally adapted infrastructure to cater for 
both sexes. 
 Figure 5.4 Availability of facilities for exclusive use by women, by type of force 
 Source: Women in police institutions (2015) 

Chapter 5: Managing Gender Relations 
81
 The adoption of new personal protective equipment has been one of 
the adaptations Brazilian police have made to confront the more structured 
and lethal criminality that they now face in urban areas. Police forces set up 
Internal Occupational Accident Prevention Committees to consider these 
and established “the mandatory use of personal protection equipment by any 
police officer on duty” (Sandes 2007, p. 35). Personal protection equipment 
(PPE) ergonomically adapted to women represent the other side of the coin 
in terms of adapting the institutional culture for receiving the feminine, given 
that body anatomy is the main element of sex differentiation. Thus, feminine 
molding of bulletproof vests and belts/holsters is an indication that the police 
organization acknowledges—and is willing to adapt to—feminine morphol-
ogy. According to 42% of the interviewees, PPE are not available to women. 
The Federal Police count on a high percentage of PPE adapted to women, 
whereas the Municipal Guards cope with equipment shortage, with at least 
half of the corps lacking it. 
 As  Figure 5.5  documents, the Civil Police, which in principle should 
pose fewer obstacles to the admission and promotion of female police, are 
instead among the institutions with the lowest percentage of PPE ergonomi-
cally adapted to women (47%). Next follows the Military Police (39%) which, 
although essentially intended to patrol the streets, do not count on enough 
PPE adapted to the woman’s body for all their female police officers—the 
 Figure 5.5  Availability of personal protection equipment ergonomically adapted 
to women, by type of force 
 Source: Women in police institutions (2015) 

82 
Ludmila Mendonça Lopes Ribeiro
apparent rationale being that only men are physically and morally able to 
work out in the streets, and so only they should need the PPE. 
 A less visible aspect of gender relations among police is the so-called glass 
roof (Silveira 2004), or the existence of subtle criteria applied when acknowl-
edging men and women as part of the institutional dynamics. Women find 
these symbolic barriers hard to overcome, for they involve informal, often 
unwritten rules, though recognized by members of the organization in the 
performance of their functions. Examples would include statements like “the 
individual will only make good progress in the career if it is a man” (validated 
by 12% of interviewees) or “the men who joined the force with me are in a bet-
ter position now, even though the institution does not define separate career 
paths” (confirmed by 28% of the women interviewed). 
 Another representation of that “glass roof” is the resort to “jokes” or 
derogatory innuendos seeking to belittle women in the exercise of their profes-
sional activities. This happens occasionally or even frequently, with notorious 
differences between men and women as to that behavior, as documented in 
 Figure 5.6 . The more accentuated it is, the larger the percentage of female 
respondents reporting this dynamic in the workplace. In total, 14% of the 
women report the constant occurrence of such practice versus 5% of the men. 
 Further, almost half of the interviewees have already been a target of 
chauvinist jokes with a sexist character or of inappropriate comments on their 
 Figure 5.6  Victimization by inappropriate comments by peers with regard to sex/
gender or sex orientation, by respondent sex 
 Source: Women in police institutions (2015) 

Chapter 5: Managing Gender Relations 
83
physical appearance or about cognitive differences supposedly determined 
by sex. Women are more often targeted (66% at least once). Nonetheless, the 
percentage of men affected by this misconduct is also rather high (44%) when 
considering that police forces are male-dominated institutions, and therefore 
one would not expect their prevailing gender to be victimized by these infor-
mal practices. There is a culture of disrespect in the police environment of 
which women are the preferred target, but which will also not overlook any 
weakness in men when dealing with the “different”, i.e., those who do not fit 
the masculine standard. 
 Derogatory jokes “constitute a veritable psychic murder, however it may 
present itself as an indirect form of violence; with regard to it, and under 
the pretext of tolerance, many of us become complacent, indifferent and 
neglectful” (Freitas 2001, p. 9). When it comes to police organizations, their 
notorious male chauvinism—deeply rooted in society and present in work-
place interactions—lead to blaming women for an uneven power dynamic 
between the sexes. The aggressor’s strategy is to disqualify the victim and thus 
justify his own inadequate behavior. Testifying to that is the fact that for 57% 
of the women and 63% of men, among respondents, feminine behavior may 
indeed entail chauvinist jokes. The highest degrees of agreement are found in 
institutions with military characteristics—which are precisely the ones pos-
ing greater difficulties to the admission of women. Nonetheless, as  Figure 5.7  
 Figure 5.7  Agreement with the statement: “Women's behavior may entail inappro-
priate comments with regard to sex/gender or sexual orientation”, by type of force 
 Source: Women in police institutions (2015) 

84 
Ludmila Mendonça Lopes Ribeiro
illustrates, other forces also display high percentages in that regard, always 
above 50% of the interviewees, confirming the fact that playful devalua-
tion of women is a fruit of an inadequate attitude rooted in the police 
imagination. 5  
 Jokes of this nature are indeed forms of discrimination and coercion, and 
can cause real harm, if not to the personality, at a minimum to the person’s 
dignity. The associated suffering is often coupled with a lack of understanding 
of what is causing it. Even so, police culture typically does not see this pattern 
of behavior as a violence, which prevents it from being treated appropriately 
(Lima 2002). For 48% of the policemen, jokes or malicious comments about 
physical appearance, affective-sexual orientation or cognitive capacity are not 
forms of gender-related violence. Women see such attitude as violence more 
often (55%), although only 6% of them have formally reported incidents of 
that nature. 
 Discrimination, humiliation, disrespect or coercion all have a name: 
“moral harassment”, an attitude that is as old as work itself. In the 1990s, this 
was identified as a form of violence capable of generating pathologies that can 
manifest themselves in absenteeism and psychological leave (Freitas 2001). 
In the police forces, it is still a sort of taboo theme, with only a few programs 
focusing on discussing the matter more seriously. How does moral harassment 
come to be? Disqualifying the victim is the most common strategy, somehow 
causing the other’s humiliation—either actual or symbolic—to be naturalized 
(i.e., seen as natural) and understood as a phenomenon that is part of life in 
society and therefore also in organizations (Freitas 2001, p. 11). In the case of 
Brazilian police forces, moral harassment is institutionalized by practices and 
comments, which stress the view that those who are discriminated or humili-
ated somehow “earned” it. As jokes make people laugh, they tend to disguise 
their violent dimension. 
 If moral harassment is “associated with a recurrent effort by a person to 
disqualify another” (Freitas 2001, p. 9), the same is true of sexual harassment. 
Sexual harassment is part of uneven relations between men and women: as in 
the case of the  senhores de engenho  (Brazilian sugar mill and plantation own-
ers, who during colonial and slavery times had power of life and death over 
their families and servants) who would take possession of women slaves’ bod-
ies to satisfy their lust without that being considered a crime (Freyre 2000). 
The problem is that practice survived to the end of slavery in Brazil in the 
form of a naturalized sexual initiation of the family’s boys by their house-
maids. “Until not long ago, a woman who worked out of the home was seen 
as a ‘slut’, for a woman who subjects herself to the world of streets must be 
prepared to ‘submit to the casting couch’” (Freitas 2001, p. 13). It would be 
naive to believe that this imagery has just vanished as redemocratization took 
place in Brazil, for it is deeply rooted in the social practices that pervade our 
history as a society. 

Chapter 5: Managing Gender Relations 
85
 Among the officers we interviewed, 23% had been victims of moral or 
sexual harassment, representing 42% of the women and 21% of the men. 
These percentages are presented, by type of force, in  Figure 5.8 . Female vic-
timization was almost twice as high as male victimization, thus confirming 
the hypothesis according to which discriminatory practices tend to reinforce 
sex differences, as the police forces replicate domination patterns prevailing in 
the wider society (Soares and Musumeci 2005, p. 138). In other words, sexual 
harassment will hardly ever happen among equals. It simultaneously reasserts 
sex and power differences, by ascribing to people the connotations that gen-
der presupposes. Among the institutions surveyed, respondents serving in the 
Federal Police reported the highest percentage of victims of moral or sexual 
harassment, 34%. By contrast, the Military Police is the force with the lowest 
percentage of cases, which either indicates that not always does the popular 
imagery find resonance in police practices, or perhaps that the policewomen 
in such institutions find it harder to speak up about the theme even through 
online surveys. 
 The frequency of moral harassment is described in  Figure 5.9 , and it is con-
siderably more frequent than sexual harassment (89% versus 11%). However, 
the distribution of moral harassment varied considerably from that of sexual 
harassment. Fully 96% of victimized men suffered moral harassment, whereas 
26% of women with sexual harassment. The frequency with which victimiza-
tion happens shows differences both in terms of sex and type of harassment. 
 Figure 5.8 Direct victimization by moral or sexual harassment, by type of force 
 Source: Women in police institutions (2015) 

86 
Ludmila Mendonça Lopes Ribeiro
With regard to the moral type, differences between men and women are very 
subtle: 70% recognize that this type of violence is a daily routine in their lives. 
As for differences between the sexes, female victims declared that this sort of 
“indecent proposal” tends to happen at times, whereas the men said it rarely 
happens. 
 While moral and sexual harassment are encountered frequently inside 
police institutions, especially when the victim is a woman, only 12% 
denounced the violence they suffered in headquarters and police stations, 
and only 1/4 of these were satisfied with the developments triggered by their 
reporting. Women are more prone to suffering moral harassment in silence: 
despite being more frequently victimized than men are, they break even when 
it comes to denouncing abuse, at 12% for both sexes. The figures change when 
it comes to sexual harassment, as more women than men file a formal com-
plaint (12% versus 7%), probably because for men sexual harassment is seen 
as a double humiliation: violation of gender role (given that sexual harass-
ment is traditionally seen as an offense by men against women) and violation 
of equal condition terms (as it debases the one being harassed). 
 In this context, there is a pressing need for policies capable of pre-
venting gender violence in Brazil’s police forces, so that policewomen that 
assist members of the public in similar circumstances will not assume the 
normality of the experience and thus revictimize those who— differently 
from what the police normally do—are willing to pursue a suitable 
 Figure 5.9 Direct victimization by moral or sexual harassment, by sex 
 Source: Women in police institutions (2015) 

Chapter 5: Managing Gender Relations 
87
treatment of the issue. Several studies of the performance of DEAMs 
point at the fact that the very policewomen in charge of providing that 
specialized assistance often blame the women for the violence of which 
they are victims, by dismissing it as part of the female condition. About 
this, see Durão (2013). 
 The Importance of a Gender Policy 
 Th e incorporation of women into the police institutions of Latin America is a 
product of the continent’s democratic transition process. It took place as local 
police (in particular) started being seen as service providers rather than politi-
cal armies. In that context, women were included with the aim to democratize 
the institution by contributing their femininity—which was expected to neu-
tralize masculine brutality—and by performing essentially social work, based 
on the belief that policewomen could establish a closer relationship with the 
community while performing a pacifying, protective role (Donadio 2009, 
p. 82). Th e more visible consequence of adopting this new way of engaging 
females in the police was the associated diff erentiation in what it means to be 
a man or a woman police offi  cer (Lima 2002). 
 Being a police officer in Brazil is by no means an easy task. It involves 
undergoing a series of tests for admission, to be exposed to one of the highest 
homicide rates in the world (UNODC 2014) and to put one’s own life at risk, 
given the high percentage of police that die in the exercise of the profession 
(FBSP 2015). Being a policewoman is even harder in a country that fails to 
appropriately discuss the admission of females in the force and to develop 
gender policies capable of shedding light on the symbolic violence pervading 
institutional life and preventing gender violence, such as in the form of moral 
and sexual harassment. 
 In the survey, we can see that women participate in policing at lower 
percentages than those seen among the economically active population gen-
erally. In view of the difficulties faced when trying to join the ranks, and 
subsequently to rise to the same posts as their male peers, women end up 
giving priority to their professional career to the detriment of marriage and 
children, while substantially improving their own education. Although more 
educated than men, a higher percentage of women take up tasks seen as less 
important, such as those of the support staff. While today there are no longer 
separate careers for men and women in the police forces, females keep being 
symbolically confined to defined spaces demarcated by male chauvinist jokes 
seemingly intended to remind women of their “true” role in Brazilian society. 
By doing so, Brazilian policemen reproduce historically unequal gender rela-
tions which place women at subordinate positions or keep them powerless to 
denounce the violence of which they are victims. 

88 
Ludmila Mendonça Lopes Ribeiro
 Women’s survival in this professional environment tends to be made 
harder by the lack of a gender policy to protect them from violence of various 
sorts, ranging from male chauvinist jokes to sexual harassment. This prob-
lem is made worse by the small number of police organizations counting on 
a Code of Conduct to clarify what is gender and what would be appropri-
ate behavior, and to criticize patterns of male chauvinist domination. Further 
lacking are specific mechanisms for reporting cases of gender violence (such 
as specialized complaints offices) and a Code of Ethics that would include a 
discussion on sexual harassment. 
 Some of the women interviewed stated that there are indeed mechanisms 
for reporting moral and sexual harassment inside police institutions; never-
theless, these mechanisms are the same available for the general population. 
Among those most often quoted are bodies such as Internal Affairs—usually 
staffed by men, incidentally—and the DEAMs, specialized in assisting women, 
as seen above. Being mostly staffed by female officers, the DEAMs would in 
principle be endowed with the capacity to better care for women affected by 
moral and sexual harassment in masculine environments (Mourão 2015). 
 As an institution, the DEAMs were created to give visibility to gender 
violence (often hidden inside homes), but their practice indicates that these 
institutions are also uneven in their gender relations, reproducing and thus 
potentializing the women’s physical and psychological suffering. The police-
women that work at the DEAMs also see the women they assist as responsible 
for the violence of which they are victims and think that, unfortunately, it is 
not up to the police to rescue them from a situation they have brought upon 
themselves (Durão 2013). Thus, when referring to the DEAMs as the main 
instrument at the disposal of policewomen victimized by violence in their 
work environment, the interviewees seem to be stressing just how unpre-
pared the police institutions are to deal with gender violence, given that the 
policewomen are also likely to be blamed for the violence of which they are 
victims, just like they blame their female peers for displaying behaviors bound 
to attract chauvinist jokes. 
 This lack of appropriate mechanisms to tackle the phenomenon inside 
police organizations serves to multiply situations involving threat, coercion 
or force and causing physical and sexual suffering to women, at substantially 
higher rates than to men, given that a sense of assured impunity felt by a 
superior who harasses his subordinate is the rule rather than the exception. 
In view of this, there is a pressing need for implementing a program for qual-
ity of life in the work environment, one that proves capable of minimizing or 
extinguishing the occurrence of such violations of rights, which—in addition 
to debasing women—causes the policewomen to fall prey to the very sort 
of violence they are expected to prevent, thus sustaining a vicious cycle that 
could further entail the naturalization of moral and sexual harassment against 
women beyond the walls of police institutions. 

Chapter 5: Managing Gender Relations 
89
 Notes 
 1. Art. 3 Th e following are fundamental objectives of the Federative Republic of Brazil: (. . .) 
IV—promote the welfare of all, irrespective of origin, race, sex, skin color, age or any other 
forms of discrimination. 
 2. Source: www.unodc.org/unodc/en/data-and-analysis/statistics/crime/cts-data-collection.
html, accessed on 16 October 2015. 
 3. Per the last IBGE survey on the matter, available at www.ibge.gov.br/home/presidencia/noti-
cias/imprensa/ppts/00000020091812202014183816455337.pdf, accessed on 22 October 2015. 
 4. Th e Portuguese term  bandido would carry similar connotations to  bad guys for US cops. 
 5. For an analysis of how this phenomenon occurs historically from the moment women fi rst 
joined the Military Police in Brazil, see Lima (2002). 
 References 
 Abreu, M. A. 2011. Cotas para mulheres no Legislativo e seus fundamentos republicanos [Quo-
tas for women in the Legislative and its republican fondaments]. In  Texto para Discussão 
(TD) 1645 , ed. IPEA, 1–33. Brasília: Instituto de Pesquisa Econômica Aplicada (IPEA). 
 Araújo, C., and AlvesAlves, D. 2007. Impactos de Indicadores Sociais e do Sistema Eleitoral 
sobre as Chances das Mulheres nas Eleições e suas Interações com as Cotas [Impacts of social 
indicators and the election system on the women chances in elections and their interactions 
with the quotas].  Dados 50: 535–577. 
 Calazans, M. E. 2005. Polícia e gênero no contexto das reformas policiais [Police and gender in 
the contexto of police reforms].  Educação 10(2): 21–34. 
 Carvalho, M. P. 2004. O fracasso escolar de meninos e meninas: articulações entre gênero e 
cor/raça [The school failure of boys and girls: The link between gender and race].  Cadernos 
Pagu 22: 247–290. 
 Donadio, M. 2009. La mujer en las instituciones armadas y policiales: resolución 1325 y opera-
ciones de paz en América Latina [The woman in armed forces and the police: Resolution 
1325]. In  Proyecto GPSF Nº 07–184: La mujer en las Fuerzas Armadas y Policía en América 
Latina: una aproximación de género a las operaciones de paz  [The woman in armed forces and 
police in Latin America: A gender approach to Peace-keeping operatons], ed. M. Donadio, 
1–256. Buenos Aires: Red de Seguridad y Defensa de América Latina. 
 Durão, S. 2013. Silenciamentos sutis. Atendimento policial, cidadania e justiça em casos de 
vítimas de violência doméstica [Subtle silencing, police response, citizenship and justice for 
victims of domestic violence].  Análise Social 209: 878–899. 
 FBSP. 2015.  9º. Anuário do Fórum Brasileiro de Segurança Pública [9th annual report Brazilian 
security forum]. São Paulo: Fórum Brasileiro de Segurança Pública. 
 Freitas, M. E. 2001. Assédio moral e assédio sexual: faces do poder perverso nas organizações [Moral 
Harassment and sexual harassment: Faces of perverse power in organizations].  RAE 41: 9–13. 
 Freyre, G. 2000.  Casa Grande e Senzala  [Slaves and masters]. 40th edition. Rio de Janeiro: 
Civilização Brasileira. 
 Giddens, A. 2001.  A transformação da intimidade sexualidade, amor e erotismo nas sociedades 
modernas  [The transformation of intimacy: Sexuality, love and eroticism in modern societ-
ies]. São Paulo: Unesp. 
 Hirata, H., Laborie, F., Doré, H., and Senotier, D.2009.  Dicionário crítico do feminismo [Critical 
feminist dictionary]. São Paulo: UNESP. 
 Küchemann, B. A., Bandeira, L. M., and Almeida, T. M. C. 2015. A categoria gênero nas ciências 
sociais e sua interdisciplinaridade [The gender category in social sciences and its interdisci-
plinarity].  Revista do CEAM 3: 63. 

90 
Ludmila Mendonça Lopes Ribeiro
 Lima, M. A. 2002.  A major da PM que tirou a farda  [The police woman that took off the uni-
form]. Belo Horizonte: Qualitymark Editora Ltda. 
 Lima, M. G. R. 2012.  Um estudo sobre o adiamento da maternidade em mulheres contemporâneas 
[An study about the postponement of maternity in contemporary women]. Doctoral disser-
tation. São Paulo: Universidade de São Paulo. 
 Mourão, B. 2015. Diálogos sobre Mulheres Policiais [Dialogues about police women]. In  Polícia 
e democracia: 30 anos de estranhamentos e esperanças  [Police and democracy: 30 years of 
unfamiliarity and hopes], ed. R. S. Lima and S. Bueno, 212–236. São Paulo: Alameda. 
 Muniz, J. 2012. O Preto no branco? Mensuração, relevância e concordância classificatória no 
país da incerteza racial [Black or white? Measurement, relevance, and classificatory concor-
dance in a country of racial uncertainty].  Dados 55: 251–282. 
 Musumeci, L., and Soares, B. M. 2004. Polícia e Gênero: participação e perfil das policiais 
femininas nas PMs brasileiras [Police and gender: Participation and profile of female police 
officers in Brazilian gendarmerie].  Revista Gênero 5: 183–207. 
 Sandes, W. F. 2007. Uso não-letal da força na ação policial: formação, tecnologia e intervenção 
governamental [The use of non-lethal force in police action: Formation, tecnology and gov-
ernmental intervention].  Revista Brasileira de Segurança Pública 1: 24–36. 
 SENASP. 2013.  Mulheres na Segurança Pública  [Women in public security]. Brasília: Secretaria 
Nacional de Segurança Pública (SENASP); Ministério da Justiça: 1–103. 
 Silveira, M. L. 2004. Políticas públicas de gênero: impasses e desafios para fortalecer a agenda 
política na perspectiva da igualdade [Gender public policies: Deadlocks and challenges to 
streghten public agenda in equality perspective]. In  Políticas Públicas e igualdade de gênero 
[Public policies and gender equality], ed. T. Godinho and M. L. Silveira, 1–11. São Paulo: 
Coordenadoria Especial da Mulher. 
 Soares, B. M., and Musumeci, L. 2005.  Mulheres policiais: presença feminina na Polícia Militar 
do Rio de Janeiro  [Policewomen: Female presence in the military police of Rio de Janeiro]. 
Rio de Janeiro: Civilização Brasileira: 1–250. 
 Souza, M. S. 2011.  Novos espaços do feminino: Trabalho, gênero e corporações militares no 
Brasil  [New female spaces: Work, gender and military corporations in Brazil].  Revista Sociais 
e Humanas 24: 133–147. 
 UNDOC. 2014.  Study on Global Homicide 2013 . Vienna: United Nations Office on Drugs and 
Crime (UNODC): 1–166. 

 Section II 
 The Police and Their 
Problems 


93
 Contents 
 Drug Laws in Brazil 
94 
 The Production of Cannabis in Brazil 
94 
 The Repression of Illicit Plantations 
97 
 Discussion 
104 
 References 
104 
 Police Action and 
the Drug Business in 
Brazil 
 Paulo Fraga and 
Joyce Keli do 
Nascimento Silva 
 6 
 Th is chapter examines initiatives carried out by the Brazilian Federal Police in 
recent decades to combat illicit cannabis cultivation. We see these measures 
as largely a reaction to external criticisms of government drug policies and 
practices. Th e actions that were taken in response, in order to diminish illegal 
cultivation, were fundamentally repressive in character. Th ey focused on the 
forced eradication of cannabis plants, the elimination of seedlings, and the 
destruction of processed marijuana. No broader initiatives were envisioned. 
For example, no consideration was given to programs aimed at replacing 
illegal plantations with functioning farms that would also employ and feed 
people, nor to incentives for traditional farming in the area. Such alternative, 
nonrepressive strategies could have worked in concert with a policy of eradi-
cation driven by repressive actions, but they were not considered. 
 While the initiatives that were fielded (in combination with other public 
security measures developed by the government of the state of Pernambuco) 
were judged successful in terms of breaking up drug gangs and reducing 
homicide rates in the region, the eradication policy did not diminish the 
most consistent forms of cultivation. Instead, they innovated and persisted by 
changing their organization and operations and by expanding the number of 
agents active in the production process. 
 This chapter draws upon historical, legal, and sociological research 
on Brazilian drug policy and field research carried out by the authors with 

94 
Paulo Fraga and Joyce Keli do Nascimento Silva
financial support from the  Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de Minas 
Gerais  [Minas Gerais’ State Foundation for Research Support] and  Conselho 
Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico  [National Counsel of 
Scientific and Technological Development]. 
 Drug Laws in Brazil 
 Brazil has a history of laws dealing with questions related to the use, traffi  ck-
ing, and production of psychoactive substances. Th ey have always been in line 
with international norms and regulations. Beginning in 2006, the law in Brazil 
laid out a National System of Public Policy on Drugs (SISNAD) that addresses 
the prevention of undue drug use and attention to and social reintegration of 
users and addicts. It established procedures for repression of the unauthorized 
production of psychoactive substances, including their cultivation and illicit 
traffi  cking. 
 The New Drug Laws, as they came to be known, are a target of both 
criticism and praise. They both set severe penalties for drug trafficking and 
introduced innovations in the judicial treatment of those charged with carry-
ing drugs for personal use, backing away from prison sentences in those cases. 
The latter represented a significant change from previous legal regimes. There 
are also notable gaps in the legislation, such as the absence of objective cri-
teria for differentiating between drug users and traffickers. Earlier legislation 
had outlawed the cultivation of narcotic substances and the preparation and 
production of controlled substances able to create physical or psychological 
dependency (Pierangeli 2001). In 1971, legislation increased the maximum sen-
tence allowable for drug offenses and introduced the concept of gang- specific 
drug trafficking, which could involve as few as two people (Karam 2010). 
 The New Drug Laws were particularly innovative, owing to the mix of 
legal responses that were allowed for prevention and education for those who 
acquire, keep, have at their disposal, transport, or carry on their person illicit 
drugs for personal use. They also recognized a different status for those who 
sow, cultivate, or harvest plants for the production of small quantities of nar-
cotic substances, including for personal use (Greco Filho 2011). All of these 
provisions reflected a significant change in drug policies that had been set in 
the 1940s, when the first systematic modern drug laws were introduced. 
 The Production of Cannabis in Brazil 
 In Brazil, cannabis production is concentrated in one of the poorest regions 
of the country, and the recent expansion of production there is attributed 
largely to an expanding internal Brazilian market (Fraga 2006). Plants are 

Chapter 6: Police Action and the Drug Business 
95
cultivated in the São Francisco Valley region in the Northeast of Brazil to 
supply the urban markets of the main northeastern capitals and midsize 
cities in the region. Pioneering studies of cannabis plantations in Brazil (Bic-
alho 1995; Bicalho and Hoefl e 1999) suggested otherwise, that marijuana 
produced in the Valley was targeted for the Southeast region, including for 
cities such as Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo, and Belo Horizonte. Th ere were also 
suggestions that plantation production was already serving markets outside 
the country. Other studies, however, did not verify this account (e.g., Fraga 
2006, 2015). 
 To the contrary, information from ex-producers, active dealers, and the 
Federal Police indicate that production from São Francisco Valley is destined 
for the consumer markets of the Northeast region, close to the area of produc-
tion. There are other consolidated and well-organized cannabis distribution 
networks in the Southeast. They distribute marijuana coming from Paraguay, 
which is of good commercial value and produced in regions closer to the prin-
cipal consumer markets of Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo. This competition 
also directed cannabis production of the São Francisco Valley region toward 
the main northeastern capitals (Fraga and Iulianelli 2011). 
 Though the presence of cannabis plantations in the São Francisco Valley 
is long standing (Pierson 1972; Burton 1869), recent increases in produc-
tion have been tied to three fundamental drivers: the consolidation of the 
“industrialized” agricultural industry for producing tropical fruit in the São 
Francisco Valley region; the crisis in traditional agriculture in the region due 
to the construction of the Itaparica damn, which dislocated populations; and 
an increase in the country’s consumer market for marijuana, specifically in 
the Northeast (Fraga 2006; Bicalho 1995). 
 Fraga (2003) and Fraga and Iulianelli (2011) noted that in Brazil, the cen-
tralization of the cultivation and sale of cannabis in the hands of groups who 
control the stages of production and the distribution process has tied rural 
workers without land or not connected to family agriculture to the commer-
cial drug business. Those without ties to land see themselves ensnared in an 
economy of a semi-slave character, tied to living where they work. This pro-
cess has intensified over time, beginning with a period of rapid growth in 
production of cannabis in the region in the 1980s and continuing into the 
2000s. There was a parallel trend in production that involved some associa-
tions of workers who labored collaboratively in cannabis fields, usually on 
public lands or in areas where land ownership was contested. The distribu-
tion of their produce, however, always remained in the hands of organized 
gangs (Fraga 2011). Currently, there is a tendency for the decentralization 
of production into smaller farms. This has been in response to federal anti-
drug efforts, which became more intense in the 2000s and led to a breaking 
up of previously large production organizations. Repression has also had the 
effect of extending plantation areas out of the so-called “Marijuana Polygon” 

96 
Paulo Fraga and Joyce Keli do Nascimento Silva
into nearby areas, such as the state of Piauí and south of Bahia, where a great 
number of plantations have sprung up in recent years. 
 As noted earlier, campaigns against these illicit plantations have been 
undertaken without considering the economics of farm work and the often 
desperate situation of rural agricultural workers. These factors were also 
involved in the spread of cannabis plantations in recent decades, in order to 
serve a market avid for the product (Fraga 2012). The increase of production 
in the São Francisco Valley region in recent decades led to the incorporation 
of these new actors into the cannabis productive circuit. It is now possible to 
trace generations of farmers who base themselves in illicit production. The 
traditional cultivation of tropical fruits, a long-standing feature of agricul-
ture in the area, was mechanized and converted into a factory-like industry 
by the 1970s, and this contributed significantly to the movement of labor into 
the cannabis cultivation business (Fraga, Cunha and Carvalho 2015). Driven 
by their precarious economic situation, workers who did not have land 
claims make up a significant proportion of all cannabis laborers. Through 
the 1980s, the expansion of cultivation areas, the fertile soil of the islands of 
the São Francisco River, and the need for greater numbers of people in the 
production and distribution of cannabis made work for the first generation 
of displaced agricultural workers (Fraga 2006). Ironically, the expansion of 
industrialized agriculture in the region facilitated the growth of cannabis 
production, since illicit cultivators could make use of the improvements in 
highways and infrastructure that were established to facilitate the tropical 
fruit business. 
 The 1970s and 80s, therefore, can be characterized as a period of the 
institutionalization of large-scale illicit cultivation in the São Francisco Val-
ley. New economic relations were established and new actors emerged in the 
drug trade, and these changes transformed the economy of the region, which 
is hot and faces long dry spells that have a major impact on agriculture. The 
expansion of criminal networks was made possible by two distinct factors that 
complemented each other. The first was confrontations between families for 
control of politics and local power. They fought to dominate cannabis produc-
tion, which was beginning to generate significant wealth. Their knowledge 
of the region and their history of involvement in other illegal businesses—
including the appropriation of land, political crimes, murder, and corruption 
of public officials—were important factors in their establishment of criminal 
networks to successfully spread production. The second factor was the drug 
control efforts of the state, which struggled to contain the growing commer-
cialization of the drug trade (Fraga 2010). 
 The structural elements that facilitated the spread of cannabis cultiva-
tion in the São Francisco Valley did not differ from factors that led people 
in other parts of the world to involve themselves in illicit cultivation. As the 
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime itself recognizes (2014), around 

Chapter 6: Police Action and the Drug Business 
97
the world, illicit cultivation is driven by vulnerability and opportunity. For 
poorer rural people, survival can depend on money made in cannabis cultiva-
tion. For them, participation in illicit markets is particularly attractive, despite 
the resulting risks. Cannabis is a relatively durable product, it can be stored for 
longer periods, and has a good final price and a good market for sale, when 
compared to other traditional and more perishable agricultural products. It 
was being grown in areas that lacked public investment in agriculture and had 
serious water problems. In poor regions where other agricultural products 
cannot sustain the population, illicit cultivation facilitates the development of 
an underground economy of considerable magnitude (United Nations Office 
on Drugs and Crime 2014). 
 The Repression of Illicit Plantations 
 Th e growth of marijuana production, the formation of criminal networks, 
the violent incursion into the cannabis business of criminals from other 
illicit activities, and a burgeoning homicide rate led the Brazilian govern-
ment to act more forcefully in initiatives that promised to tackle the problem. 
Beyond these domestic concerns, Brazil also felt pressure from multinational 
organizations to intensify its repression of the drug trade (Fraga 2007, Fraga 
2015). Prior to this period, the federal and state governments in the Brazilian 
Northeast had undertaken some countermeasures. Even while production 
was still low, the authorities viewed it as a public health problem demand-
ing repressive measures. In 1946, a consortium was formed by the states of 
Bahia, Sergipe, and Alagoas and named the Interstate Marijuana Agreement. 
Th ey sought to implement collaborative measures to prevent and restrain 
practices tied to the use, sale, and cultivation of marijuana (Cardoso 1958). 
Th e report of the meeting recognized the southern zone of São Francisco, in 
the states of Sergipe and Alagoas, as one of the biggest cannabis production 
regions in Brazil, together with Maranhão and Pará. Representatives from 
the Civil Police, the secretaries of education and health of each state, as well 
as representatives from the federal government, participated in the creation 
of the agreement. 
 At the end of three meetings of the commission, 19 measures were 
proposed for adoption by the states. In relation to the repression of the plan-
tations, two points stand out: (1) the destruction of marijuana plantations, 
except for its production for medical and industrial ends; and (2) small plan-
tations could be placed under watch by the State Commissions of Oversight of 
Narcotics (SCON), with the aim of studying marijuana from pharmacologi-
cal, clinical, psychological, and sociological points of view. 
 This meeting inspired, in the following year, a National Commission of 
Oversight of Narcotics (NCON) to establish standards that would be followed 

98 
Paulo Fraga and Joyce Keli do Nascimento Silva
by all of the states in relation to the eradication of marijuana, or  diamba , plan-
tations, throughout the whole national territory, that is to say: 
 a. The marijuana or  diamba  plantations found in the national territory 
were to be destroyed by police authorities, under the technical super-
vision of the Agriculture Ministry, requiring these authorities to give 
immediate notification to the National Commission of Oversight for 
Narcotics; 
 b. If there were no representatives from the Agriculture Ministry in 
the local area where the plantation was encountered, the destruction 
could be undertaken by police authorities in conjunction with the 
sanitation authorities or by functionaries from the state agricultural 
services, with the technical capacity to proceed with the identification 
of the narcotic plant; 
 c. Samples of the plantations destroyed or to be destroyed were to be 
sent to the closest state or federal establishment, where its botanical 
characteristics could be carried out; 
 d. The authorities who carry out the destruction of the marijuana were 
obliged to immediately send to the National Commission for the Over-
sight of Narcotics a detailed report of their conduct, indicating the place, 
the report regarding the plant’s classification, a sample of the plant 
appropriately authenticated, as well as other details referent to the case. 
 (Pernambuco Filho 1958, pp. 178, 179) 
 Brandão (2014) observes that the creation of the national commission was at 
the initiative of doctors who dedicated themselves to combating  diambism (the 
habit of smoking marijuana) because of the addiction attributed to marijuana 
use. For these doctors and other members of health agencies and the police, 
many forms of drug addiction were viewed as acceptable, with the exception 
of marijuana, which needed to be combated. Marijuana use was understood 
by the establishment as an addiction of the lower classes, one resulting from 
their ignorance and in need of being stamped out in order to preserve public 
health. Th e creation of the National Commission for the Oversight of Narcot-
ics in 1936 was the fi rst eff ort to regulate and even seek to legalize transactions 
involving some with drugs. Th e Commission, at this fi rst stage, was directly 
subordinated to the Ministry for Exterior Relations. Th is connection should 
be understood as an initiative to bring Brazilian governmental norms and 
measures into line with those defi ned in the international sphere. 
 Police repression during this period was the domain of the state Civil 
Police and of the Federal District. Despite all the efforts of the NCON, initia-
tives for eradication of cannabis plantations were sporadic and targeted mostly 
at small producers. In the 1940s, health and agricultural authorities had a 
say in the process, and addiction control was dealt with in the public health 

Chapter 6: Police Action and the Drug Business 
99
sphere. The regional police acted under the coordination of the Agriculture 
Ministry in their eradication initiatives. This does not mean that repression 
was absent, but what drove the eradication efforts of the time was not so much 
crime control as the principles of public health. 
 Only in the 1960s and 70s, when marijuana use spread more widely in soci-
ety and began to affect the middle classes, did eradication projects become more 
frequent and under the supervision of the Federal Police (Misse 1999). This 
increasing criminalization was a feature of the military dictatorship installed in 
the country in 1964. By the 1980s, it was the Military Police, which are organized 
at the state level, that took over efforts to repress illicit cultivation. The Federal 
Police took action when areas of cultivation and marijuana distribution networks 
spanned more than one state. The modern Federal Police was formed in 1944. At 
the time, their new powers centered more specifically on public security services, 
such as policing maritime areas, airports, and the border. With the move of the 
federal capital to the city of Brasilia, the Federal Police incorporated other police 
departments from that area, and in 1967 it took its current form. 
 The Federal Police are under the control of the national Justice Ministry. It 
has many functions, such as investigating crimes against the political and social 
order or protecting the goods, services, and interests of the national govern-
ment or its public enterprises. They also take on crimes whose practice has 
interstate or international repercussions and demand an orchestrated approach 
to enforcement. Among its newer functions is responsibility for the prevention 
and repression of drugs and contraband trafficking that spans state lines. When 
national and regional governments are concerned about the cultivation and 
interstate trafficking of marijuana, the Federal Police is their vehicle for action. 
 The growth beginning in the 1980s of cannabis plantations in the São 
Francisco River region led to a reaction from the Brazilian government, which 
in turn intensified its repressive efforts. Through the 1970s, the Federal Police 
were already involved in drug enforcement, but only in a nonsystematic way. 
It was only in the 1980s that enforcement would become more organized and 
methodical. 
 Henman (1986) describes the serious violations of human rights that char-
acterized the haphazard efforts taken against cannabis plantations during the 
earlier period. At that time, Brazil was under a military dictatorship, and during 
the second half of the decade it began to direct more resources toward combating 
the use and trafficking of drugs in general and illicit cultivation of cannabis in 
particular. These operations were conducted on a small scale, however, and they 
were scattered and did not represent an overarching enforcement plan. Rather, 
they reacted to reports that came in. In one of these initiatives, in the state of 
Maranhão and on the lands of the Guajajara Indians, police agents tortured 
an alleged drug kingpin. This led the national Indigenous Missionary Council 
(IMC) to denounce such acts and to continue to pressure the authorities con-
cerning their activities on native lands during the remainder of the decade. 

100 
Paulo Fraga and Joyce Keli do Nascimento Silva
 In the 1980s, enforcement operations were intensified and undertaken 
with greater frequency. But despite this, plantations continued to expand. The 
quantity of plants eradicated, processed marijuana destroyed, and seedlings 
seized grew. It was not uncommon for 50,000 seedlings or cannabis plants to 
be uncovered in a single plantation (Fraga 2000). Even as the authoritarian 
regime came to an end during the 1980s, there was no significant change in 
the strategies of the Federal Police in relation to its eradication operations, 
and they continued to inflict human rights abuses. In a study of individuals 
accused of participation in cannabis cultivation in the Valley region between 
1974 and 1985, around 20% of cases presented some type of irregularity, 
including the presentation of dubious confessions signed by illiterates, pre-
ventative prison sentences imposed without a legal basis, and allegations of 
confession under torture (Fraga 2015). 
 In the 1990s, eradication efforts became more frequent in the São Francisco 
Valley region, but production again continued to grow. There was a further 
escalation in drug-related violence during the decade, eventually reaching 
alarming levels. In 1997, of the ten cities with the highest homicide rates in 
Brazil, three were in the São Francisco Valley region: Floresta (112.6/100,000), 
Belém do São Francisco (98.0/100,000), and Terra Talhada (86.4/100,000). 
The growth of violence was a direct result of crime organized around the 
plantations and increasing levels of drug trafficking. In this period, the gangs 
that organized themselves around illegal cultivation continued to have strong 
family connections, and struggles between the families aggravated the situ-
ation. Another feature of the 1990s was an increase in homicides involving 
heavy weapons; an arms race had come to the Valley. 
 The police strategy was to hit plantations close to harvest time. This would 
undercut their revenue after many of their production expenses had been 
incurred. The high point of operations that took place in the São Francisco 
Valley region in the 1990s was Operation Mandacaru. This sweep through 
the Valley lasted 53 days and was the biggest eradication effort undertaken 
until that point. Table 6.1 summarizes official reports on the successes of the 
mission. Many vehicles were inspected and some seized; thousands of people 
were questioned and a few hundred arrested; and many plants and kilos of 
processed cannabis were destroyed. 
 However, the operation had its costs as well. Financially, it cost 7.5 million 
 reais  (around US$3.8 million in the era). This was an unprecedentedly high 
expense, but a force of almost 1,500 agents had been assembled from various 
enforcement agencies within the federal government, and it had to be paid 
for. The operation was coordinated not by the Federal Police, but by the new 
National Antidrug Secretariat (NADS). This had been created by the Brazil-
ian government during the term of President Fernando Henrique Cardoso, 
in response from pressure by the Organization of the American States (OAS). 
This external pressure led Brazil to agree to abide by an OAS directive on the 

Chapter 6: Police Action and the Drug Business 
101
reduction of demand for drugs (Garcia, Leal and Abreu 2008). The creation 
of the NADS and its subsequent highly visible crackdown in the Valley was a 
political move by the Brazilian government to show to the international com-
munity that they were taking action and that reducing drug trafficking would 
be a government priority. 
 But shifting control of Operation Mandacaru to the NADS also resulted in 
pushback by the Federal Police. They argued that, with their more efficient use of 
resources, in operations costing 85,000 reais (44 thousand dollars), they had eradi-
cated more plants using fewer agents. The NADS alleged in return that the Federal 
Police had also received funding from the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration 
for purchasing equipment and reimbursing other police agencies (Isto é 1999). In 
Operation Mandacaru, the NADS did not have American support. 
 The plan had been that following Operation Mandacaru, responsibility 
for plantation eradication would pass to the state of Pernambuco. The federal 
government did transfer equipment and money to the state, but the Federal 
Police continued to take the lead in drug eradication campaigns, and they 
continue to do so until this day. They claimed that the NADS did not actually 
have the powers of the police, and that coordination of eradication actions by 
this “civilian” secretariat would be unconstitutional. The ensuing controversy 
led to the fall of several Justice Ministers, and it was finally resolved by a 
decree of the president limiting the powers of NADS. NADS lost its police-
like roles and retreated from coordinating and directing direct eradication 
operations. In 2011, it was folded into the Justice Ministry and given a policy-
advising role in support of actions by other agencies in drug use prevention. 
The Federal Police continues to coordinate significant eradication operations 
 Table 6.1  Numbers of Operation Mandacaru 
eradicated marijuana plants
544,424
plantations located
255
seedbeds destroyed
294
seedlings destroyed
223,598
marijuana seized
612.3 kg
immediate arrests
188
arrest warrant issued
16
inspected vehicles
109,475
seized vehicles
155
repossessed vehicles
9
people taken in
242,054
fi rearms seized
257
Other weapons seized
105
 Source: Institutional Security Offi  ce of the Presidency of Republic 

102 
Paulo Fraga and Joyce Keli do Nascimento Silva
around four times a year, still coinciding with harvest times. Control of opera-
tions in the São Francisco Valley have been decentralized to a local branch of 
the Federal Police in the region, rather than being centralized in Brasilia. 
 Most recently, it appears that continued enforcement efforts have changed 
the character of the drug business there. Important gangs have been broken 
up, and the size of plantations has gone down, with a reduced quantity of 
cannabis now being grown in many but smaller operations. An officer we 
interviewed in the area reported that enforcement operations have become 
more effective when they are guided by satellite photographs, which identify 
in advance the location of farms. Enforcement has pushed production from 
the mainland bordering the São Francisco River out onto islands in the river 
itself, where smaller plantations are to be found. In compensation, producers 
have been employing more fertilizer in order to enhance their harvests. 
 Police offi  cer:  
Today, few plantations are encountered on “the continent” (on 
the riverbank). And another thing which is also interesting is 
that the farms have diminished in size. Th ey prefer to plant a 
small farm here, plant another smaller one there. It is diffi  cult to 
fi nd a plantation of forty thousand plants, which we had already 
considered to be a big farm. Th is year we only managed to fi nd 
one big farm, of more than forty thousand plants. You asked me 
how the calculation is made. What happens generally is that in 
each hole (we call them holes), they plant from 3 to 4 plants of 
marijuana, right? Previously we made the following calculation, 3 
marijuana plants generates about 1 kilo of marijuana at the time. 
Today each plant will give 700 grams. Now, the size of the plant 
then increased a lot. So, why did the size of the plant increase so 
much? Because they are using follicular stimulants, the fertilizers, 
right? So today each hole manages to produce more or less 3 kilos 
of marijuana; 2 and-a-half to 3 kilos of marijuana. 
Interviewer: 
Th at is to say, it increased the productivity, is that it? 
 Police offi  cer: 
Exactly. So in this way, they diminished the quantity of plan-
tations, but the productivity is either the same or perhaps 
greater. So the count is more or less done in this way. 
 (Police officer, 35 years of age, 2015) 
 Forming more, if smaller, plantations has also increased the participation 
of poorer rural workers, also leading new families who planted in smaller 
quantities in the past to be integrated into the productive process. So, there 
was success in breaking up the family groups and gangs, which had sparked 
violence during the 1990s. But a consequence of this success was the decen-
tralization of the production process and the involvement of more people 

Chapter 6: Police Action and the Drug Business 
103
than before, putting at risk vulnerable people who had not previously had 
contact with criminal life. 
 Police offi  cer: 
We observed that, every day more people became involved in 
the cultivation on the marijuana farms. 
 Interviewer: 
Increasingly more? 
 Police offi  cer: 
Always more, right? We don’t have any more big producers in 
the region. 
 Interviewer: 
Sorry. Big cultivators you would call people who are like what? 
 Police offi  cer: 
It would be a clan, a family. 
 Interviewer: 
Which were the fi rst to get into this business, is that right? 
 Police offi  cer: 
Exactly. 
 Interviewer: 
Th e fi rst to work with the plantations in the region. 
 Police Offi  cer: So like this, today you will no longer fi nd clans that are 
directed toward gigantic farms. We have a photo here in the 
station of a marijuana farm, where there was gunfi re on one 
side of the farm. Th ose on the other side of the farm could 
not hear the gunfi re. Th is marijuana plantation was that big, 
understand? Today you don’t encounter this anymore. You 
just don’t see it anymore. 
 (Police officer, 35 years of age, 2015) 
 Federal Police Statistics indicate that between 2005 and 2014 there was a 
general reduction in the quantity of plants eradicated. As Table 6.2 reports, 
 Table 6.2  Cannabis plants destroyed in forced eradication of the Federal Police 
operations (2005–2014) 
Year
Number of forced 
eradication operations
cannabis plants
(millions)
2005
2
1,822
2006
3
2,095
2007
1
131
2008
3
2,131
2009
4
1,652
2010
4
1,026
2011
3
847
2012
3
537
2013
3
719
2014
2
1,080
 Source: Federal Operations 

104 
Paulo Fraga and Joyce Keli do Nascimento Silva
these numbers vary considerably from year to year. However, the success of 
eradication campaigns appears to have declined, especially after 2010, per-
haps in the isolation and decentralization of the new production process. 
 Discussion 
 Globally, Brazil is not considered a drug-producing nation. Cannabis is the 
only drug cultivated on a large scale, and that is to supply the domestic market. 
Brazilian production, in fact, supplies only around 30% of that market. Th e 
repressive measures undertaken to destroy cannabis plantations only became 
large scale beginning in the 1990s, despite the fact that legislation had been on 
the books outlawing them since the 1940s. Th e belated attention given to the 
problem was owing to international pressure to demonstrate Brazil’s involve-
ment in the war against drugs. 
 Only when the Federal Police became the principal organization for com-
bating cannabis production could significant operations to do so be sustained. 
They had federal resources and the assistance of the U.S. Drug Enforcement 
Administration. The result of their two decades of repression was the breaking 
up of local gangs, significantly reducing the number of large plantations, and 
helping diminish the homicide rates in regions where the larger plantations 
were located. However, more recently there are indications of a migration of 
plantations to other states outside the São Francisco Valley region, to areas 
such as Piauí and Pará. There also seems to have been an increase in the pro-
ductivity of new, smaller plantations, including due to the use of chemical 
fertilizers. Decentralization also has led to greater involvement by poor agri-
cultural workers in these many new, smaller farms. 
 The Brazilian government did not choose a strategy of offering transi-
tional income support and farming alternatives for these workers. Farming in 
the São Francisco Valley region is marginal because the area is often beset by 
extensive drought, so their prospects outside of the drug business were dim. 
So instead, more farmers are involved in the drug business than in the past, 
still working at the margins but seeing in the cultivation of cannabis their best 
option for a better life. 
 References 
 Bicalho, A. M. 1995. A Produção de Maconha No Sertão do São Francisco [The production of 
Marijuana in the Hinterlands of São Francisco].  Boletim de Geografia Teorética  25: 289–300. 
 Bicalho, A.M.D.S.M., & Hoefle, S. W. (1999). From Family Feud to Organised Crime: The Cultural 
Economy of Cannabis in Northeast Brazil. Bulletin of Latin American Research, 18(3): 343–360. 
 Brandão, M. D. 2014.  Ciclos de atenção à maconha no Brasil  [Marijuana attention cycles in 
Brazil]. Revista de Biologia, 13(1): 1–10. 

Chapter 6: Police Action and the Drug Business 
105
 Burton, R. F. 1869.  Exploration of the highlands of the Brazil . London: Tinsley Brothers. 
 Cardoso, E. 1958. Convênio Interestadual da Maconha [Interstate Marijuana Agreement]. In 
 Maconha, Coletânea de Trabalhos Brasileiros  [Marijuana, Brazilian Collection of papers], 
165–174. Rio de Janeiro: Serviço Nacional de Educação Sanitária, Ministério da Saúde. 
 Fraga, P.C.P. 2000. Juventude, Narcotráfico e Violência no Brasil [Youth, Drug Trafficking and 
Violence in Brazil]. In  Narcotráfico e Violência no Campo  [Narcotrafficking and Violence in 
the Field], ed. A.M.M. Ribeiro and J.A.S. Iulianelli, 81–108. Rio de Janeiro, DP&A. 
 Fraga. P.C.P. 2003. Da Favela ao Sertão [From the Favela to the Hinterland]. In  Jovens em Tempo 
Real [Youngsters in real time], ed. P. C. P. Fraga and J. A. S. Iulianelli, 117–147. Rio de Janeiro: 
DP&A. 
 Fraga, P.C.P. 2006. Plantios ilícitos no Brasil: notas sobre a violência e o cultivo de cannabis no 
polígono da Maconha [Ilegal crops in Brazil: Notes on the violence and cannabis cultivation 
in the Marijuana Polygon].  Cadernos de Ciências Humanas-Especiaria 9: 95–118. 
 Fraga, P.C.P. 2007. A Geopolítica das Drogas na América Latina [The geopolitics of drugs in 
Latin America].  Em Pauta 10: 83–105. 
 Fraga, P.C.P. 2010. As ações de erradicação de plantios considerados ilícitos na América Latina 
e no Brasil [Eradication actions of considered illegal plantations in Latin America and Bra-
zil]. In  Crimes, drogas e políticas  [Crime, drugs and politics], ed. P. C. P. Fraga, 187–225. 
Ilhéus: Editora da UESC. 
 Fraga, P.C.P. 2011. Plantar o ilícito e colher renda: alternativas, redefinição de conflitos no 
entorno do cultivo ilícito de cannabis no Sertão [Planting the illicit and reaping income: 
Alternatives, redefinition of conflicts surrounding the illicit cultivation of cannabis in the 
Sertão]. In Violência e Dilemas Civilizatórios: as práticas de punição e extermínio [Violence 
and Civilizational Dilemmas: The practices of punishment and extermination], ed. C. Bar-
reira, L; Sá and J. P. Aquino, 89–108. Campinas: Pontes Editora. 
 Fraga, P.C.P. 2012. Plantaciones ilícitas como fuente de ingresos alternativa y expresión de 
desigualdad: el caso del cultivo de cannabis en el nordeste de Brasil [Illicit plantations as 
alternative source of income inequality expression: The case of cannabis cultivation in north-
eastern Brazil].  Estudios Sociológicos 30: 143–169. 
 Fraga, P.C.P. 2015a. A participação feminina no plantio de  cannabis  no Vale do São Francisco 
[Female participation in cannabis plantations in the São Francisco Valley]. In  Mulheres e 
Criminalidade  [Women and criminality], ed. P.C.P. Fraga. 1st edition, 9–36. Rio de Janeiro: 
Letra Capital. 
 Fraga, P.C.P. 2015b.  Vida bandida: histórias de vida, ilegalismos e carreiras criminais. Um estudo 
com presos do sistema carcerário do Rio de Janeiro  [Thug life: Stories of life, ilegality and 
criminal careers: A study with inmates of Rio de Janeiro’s prison’s system]. Lisboa: Ed. Nova. 
 Fraga, P.C.P., Cunha, S. M., and Carvalho, L.C.D. 2015. Políticas de repressão e erradicações de 
plantios de cannabis no nordeste brasileiro [Repression and eradication policies of cannabis 
plantations in northeastern Brazil]. In  Plantios ilícitos na América Latina  [Illegal plantings in 
Latin America], ed. P.C.P. Fraga, 55–80. Rio de Janeiro: Letra Capital. 
 Fraga, P.C.P., and Iulianelli, J. A. S. 2011. Plantios ilícitos de cannabis no Brasil: Desigualdades, 
alternativa de renda e cultivo de compensação [Illicit cannabis plantations in Brazil: Inequal-
ities, alternative income and compensation cultivation].  Revista Dilemas 4: 11–40. 
 Garcia, M.L.T., Leal, F. X., & Abreu, C. C. 2008. A política antidrogas brasileira: velhos dilemas 
[Brazilian anti-drug policy: old dilemmas].  Psicologia & Sociedade , 20(2): 267–276. 
 Greco Filho, V. 2011.  Tóxicos: prevenção—repressão [Drugs: Prevention—repression]. 14th edi-
tion. São Paulo: Saraiva. 
 Henman, A. 1986. A guerra às drogas é uma guerra etnocida [The war on drugs is an ethno-
cide war]. In  Diamba Sarabamba: coletânea de textos brasileiros sobre a maconha [Diamba 
Sarabamba: collection of Brazilian texts on marijuana], ed. A. Henman and O. Pessoa Jr., 
91–116. São Paulo, Ground. 

106 
Paulo Fraga and Joyce Keli do Nascimento Silva
 Isto é. 1999.  A viagem da maconha: operação de R$ 7,5 milhões descobre que Maranhão tomou o 
lugar de Pernambuco como maior produtor  [The marijuana trip: operation of R $ 7.5 million 
finds that Maranhão took the place of Pernambuco as the largest producer]. n. 1575, http://
istoe.com.br/28905_A+VIAGEM+DA+MACONHA+/ (accessed January 10, 2016). 
 Karam, M. L. 2010.  Drogas: legislação brasileira e violações a direitos fundamentais [Drugs: 
Brazilian legislation and fundamental rights violations]. In  Law Enforcement Against 
P rohibition—LEAP . Brasil: Disponível em. www.leapbrasil.com.br/textos (accessed Decem-
ber 15, 2015). 
 Misse, M. 1999.  Malandros, marginais e vagabundos: a acumulação social da violência no Rio de 
Janeiro  [Rogues, Punks and Thugs: The social accumulation of violence in Rio de Janeiro]. 
Ph.D. Dissertation. Instituto Universitário de Pesquisas do Rio de Janeiro, RJ. 
 Pernambuco Filho, P. 1958. Estudo sôbre as conclusões aprovadas pelo Convênio da Maconha, 
realizado na Cidade do Salvador, em dezembro de 1946 [Study on the conclusions approved 
by the Marijuana Convention, held in the City of Salvador in December 1946]. In  Maconha, 
Coletânea de Trabalhos Brasileiros  [Marijuana, Brazilian Collection of papers], 175–180. Rio 
de Janeiro: Serviço Nacional de Educação Sanitária, Ministério da Saúde. 
 Pierangeli, J. H. 2001.  Códigos penais do Brasil: evolução histórica  [Penal codes of Brazil: His-
torical evolution]. 2nd edition. São Paulo: Editora Revista dos Tribunais. 
 Pierson, D. 1972.  O Homem no Vale do São Francisco  [The man in São Francisco valley]. Rio 
de Janeiro: SUVALE. 
 United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. 2014.  World Drug Report 2014 . Vienna: Author. 

107
 Contents 
 Racial Inequalities, Violence and Black Youth 
108 
 The Role of Brazil’s Military Police 
110 
 Police Officers’ Origins and Views 
112 
 A Discontinuous Democracy 
115 
 References 
118 
 Race, Class and 
Law Enforcement in 
Brazil 1 
 Renato Sérgio de 
Lima and Jacqueline 
Sinhoretto 
 7 
 In March 2015 Brazil reached a landmark: it had been 30 years since the end 
of military dictatorship in Brazil and the restoration of democracy. Th is ensu-
ing period is one of the longest democratic cycles the country has enjoyed. 
However, Brazil’s democracy did not advance seamlessly during this period. 
Th ere was progress in several areas of the country’s development agenda, such 
as the fi ght against absolute poverty, and the consolidation—albeit inconsis-
tently applied—of such rights as consumer protection. Since the return of 
democracy a number of protections have been enshrined in the nation’s new 
Civil Code, there has been increased use of alternative criminal penalties, and 
there has been new investment in police training regarding the principles of 
human rights. 
 There have also been steps backward, and new obstacles to the imple-
mentation of democratic principles in state institutions have arisen. Above all, 
there have been roadblocks to the democratization of Brazil’s criminal justice 
system (the police forces, the state prosecutors’ offices, the offices of the public 
defender, the judiciary and the prison system). Examining these, it can be seen 
that in the field of public safety there is a pendulum movement between—on 
one hand—measures intended to modernize police forces and the criminal 
justice system along democratic lines, and—on the other— resistance from 
contrary forces that are not inclined to challenge the institutional violence, 
inefficient operations, and poor protection of human rights that characterize 

108 
Renato Sérgio de Lima and Jacqueline Sinhoretto
the police forces of Brazil. As Costa and Lima (2014) put it, an enormous 
dispute is currently being waged as to the meaning of law, order and public 
safety in Brazil. 
 Countless factors contribute to this state of affairs. The first of these is the 
historical coincidence between the return of democracy and the upswings in 
violence, fear and general feelings of insecurity. Violence is ever present in 
the newspapers, above all taking the form of the fear of violent crimes against 
property, including robbery and personal theft. Among poor people, violent 
death is almost commonplace: there are over 58,000 intentional violent deaths 
each year, and in addition, more than 3,000 deaths are provoked annually by 
the police forces themselves. The victims of all of this are mainly poor, young 
black males. Theirs makes up a whole universe of “invisible victims” that need 
to be dealt with. The enemies of the Brazilian state are not other countries, but 
portions of its own population that are historically and politically invisible. 
 Racial Inequalities, Violence and Black Youth 
 Among issues invisible to the population of Brazil as a whole, racial inequal-
ity ranks as one of the major taboos of the political culture. However, data are 
available that help deconstruct some of the myths that stubbornly maintain 
an image of Brazil as a nation without racial inequalities, or without a rac-
ist ideology, and instead one that needs to tackle economic inequality. Th e 
Brazilian Forum on Public Safety edited its “Index of Youth Vulnerability to 
Violence and Racial Inequality” ( Índice de Vulnerabilidade Juvenil à Violência 
e Desigualdade Racial ) at the request of the federal government. It shows, for 
example, that young black males from 12 to 29 years of age are on average 2.6 
times more likely to be murdered than young white males, and that in some 
states of Brazil’s Northeast, such as Paraíba and Pernambuco, they are 11 times 
more likely (Brasil 2015a). 
 Such facts are increasingly better known, albeit without taking center 
stage or causing great indignation in mainstream public opinion. The scarcity 
of analyses of the color or race of victims, offenders and the police is in itself 
evidence of how invisible the racial issue is when considering how violence 
is produced in Brazil. Data on color and race are available in reports and on 
forms stored away by the criminal justice system. Close analyses of the racial 
component of the crime and justice problems of the country have generally 
not loomed large in interpretations of violence (Sinhoretto 2014b). In the col-
lective imagination of Brazilians, racism has been subsumed and attenuated 
by the idea that the inequality affecting young black males is essentially a 
social class issue. The most commonplace explanations of violence in Brazil 
tend to focus much more on inequalities of experience between classes. How-
ever, the data emphatically prove that race is a core issue. 

Chapter 7: Race, Class and Law Enforcement 
109
 Although, as we noted, lethal violence is a class experience, class is insuf-
ficient to express the extent of inequality in the distribution of violent deaths. 
Race relations intertwine with it—and occasionally go beyond it. Regarding 
violent death, blacks are the most vulnerable. Proportionately, black people 
die unexpectedly 30% more often than do whites in Brazil (FBSP 2015), forc-
ing us to think equally of links between class, race, generation and territory. 
Put differently, it is common sense to state that the police forces treat the rich 
and poor unequally, but very little has been invested in research into how the 
process of construction of unequal treatment comes about in the daily routine 
of law enforcement personnel on the streets. 
 Violent death is marked by color, age and territory in Brazil. The flash 
point in some portion of violent deaths lies in interactions between police and 
youth. On the one hand, young people—and particularly black youth—do not 
enjoy policies seemingly intended to assure their right to life and safety. On 
the other hand, youth—and particularly black youth—are the favored targets 
of police surveillance, as revealed by data on the prison population and on 
deaths resulting from police actions. 
 A survey conducted in Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo and Minas Gerais found 
that more young blacks die in police operations than do young whites. The 
more frequently deadly force is applied by the police, the more it is targeted at 
blacks. Taking 2011 as a benchmark, and calculating death rates at the hands 
of police among the white and black populations of each state, reveals that in 
Minas Gerais twice as many blacks as whites were killed by the police. This 
rate was three times more unfavorable to blacks in São Paulo. While in Rio de 
Janeiro, police killed almost four times more blacks than whites. Among all 
the states surveyed, the victims of deadly violence are mainly young, while the 
average age among black victims is lower than the average age among white 
victims (Sinhoretto et al. 2014). 
 In addition to violent deaths caused by law enforcement actions, rates of 
imprisonment point to young blacks being the main target of policing. Young 
blacks are not only overwhelmingly the main victims of homicides in Bra-
zil, including those committed by law enforcement agents, but on average 
they also go to prison 18% more often than do whites. Additionally, the data 
in the study entitled “Map of Imprisonment: Brazil’s Young People” ( Mapa 
do Encarceramento: os jovens do Brasil —Brasil 2015b) show that most often 
young black people are placed in pretrial detention while awaiting a judicial 
sentence, one that may take years to be handed down. Once sentenced, many 
are found guilty of crimes that could have been punished by alternative sen-
tencing, as in the cases of crimes against property and crimes linked to the 
drug trade. In other words, the fact that there are many young people and 
black people in prison cannot be explained by the supposition that the police 
are, in their daily activities, watching the most violent criminals—those that 
commit heinous crimes. Only 12% of Brazil’s inmates are serving sentences 

110 
Renato Sérgio de Lima and Jacqueline Sinhoretto
for murders. The core of criminal policy is driven by punishment of crimes 
against property or linked to the drug trade, in line with the war on drugs 
begun by the United States in the 1980s. 
 Criminal justice policy in this regard differs very little from judicial policy 
that can be observed in the civil justice system. An overwhelming concern 
about managing conflict linked to the protection of wealth can be seen in who 
has access to civil justice—an analysis of which we have described elsewhere 
(Sinhoretto 2014a; Lima, Sinhoretto and Bueno 2015)—and it is reflected in 
the profile of inmates. Criminal punishment in Brazil falls mainly upon young 
black men committing crimes threatening wealth: robbery, theft and drug 
trafficking. 
 The main concern of the justice system thus is with the protection (either 
necessary or undue) of wealth, to the detriment of the treatment of violent 
conflicts and the protection of life and well-being. Observing this system in 
operation, it seems clear that the handling of violent conflicts is not a core 
concern for the institutions of justice. Furthermore, given that the bulk of the 
work done in the criminal justice system seems to begin with arrests of people 
caught in the act of perpetrating crimes, it can be seen that the most active 
role in managing violent conflict falls to Brazil’s Military Police. Their routine 
operations select their targets for enforcement and prioritize the crimes they 
are actually interested in focusing on. 
 The Role of Brazil’s Military Police 
 Within the Brazilian criminal justice system, the Military Police (a uniformed, 
militarized gendarmerie run at the state level) plays a central role, as they carry 
out daily deterrent policing of the streets and select the types of crimes and of 
criminals on which to concentrate. Brazil’s Military Police are responsible for 
determining the practical implementation of public order policies and draw-
ing the boundaries of what is legal or illegal on the street. But in the “logic 
as practiced” of current policing procedures, this boundary is tenuous and 
hardly ever made explicit, and varies in accordance with the segment of the 
population that is the target of policing and with the type of crime committed. 
 The Civil Police have helped produce this state of affairs as well, due to 
their inability to carry out effective criminal investigations. As a result, the 
actions of the Military Police determine the outputs of policing generally. 
The activity of the Civil Police has been studied by generations of research-
ers, including Paixão (1982), Kant de Lima (1995) and Misse and colleagues 
(2010). There has been an over-reliance on police investigations known as 
“inquiries” ( inquéritos policiais ), a process that was formally created in 1871. 
Inquiries were a bureaucratic feature of the Empire and the Republic, and have 
been maintained throughout democratic and authoritarian periods alike. The 

Chapter 7: Race, Class and Law Enforcement 
111
form of an inquiry rather than its content is privileged. There is no coordi-
nation of the work of inquiries with other police forces, and investigation is 
mistaken for what one would think of as a “police inquiry.” Little attention is 
given to the idea that a decent investigation depends on such actions as pre-
serving the crime scene, collecting technical evidence and building trust with 
the population at large, so that they will provide information or step forward 
as witnesses to events that have taken place. 
 As to the Prosecution Office, its responsibility seems to reside in a fail-
ure to exercise its constitutional role as an external control on police action. 
Instead, prosecutors go through the motions of processing inquiries as they 
receive them from the police precincts, and do not concern themselves with 
how either the Military or Civil Police is working or with guaranteeing the 
rights of the population when they are targeted by their actions. Rather, they 
accept what the police give them, despite alarming figures regarding the inci-
dence of police use of force and deadly force. The actions of the judiciary, in 
its turn, simply reproduce the existing profile of Brazilian inmates, illustrat-
ing how it has given up any oversight of other elements of the criminal justice 
system. 
 As in several other South American countries, the criminal justice system 
finds it acceptable that some 40% of Brazilian inmates are incarcerated in pre-
trial detention. Detainees can remain in this limbo for an extended period: a 
CRISP/UFMG/SRJ/MJ (Centro de Estudos da Criminalidade e Segurança 
Pública–Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais/Secretaria da Reforma do 
Judiciário–Ministério da Justiça) (2014) survey documented that in the five 
Brazilian states that were examined, the average time that elapsed before con-
cluding manslaughter cases in the judicial branch was 7.3 years. Given what is 
known of the working of the criminal justice system and its consequences for the 
demographic profile of inmates, the high rate of pretrial detention further rein-
forces the leading role of the Military Police in creating disparities in the system. 
Arrests of young inhabitants of the violent outlying neighborhoods of Brazil’s 
cities (the “periphery”— periferia ) and of black men are driven by acknowl-
edgment of the bodily stigma that they bear: that of the “ mala ” (petty drug 
dealer—Jesus 2014), the “ peba ” (a young person who lives in the  periphery—
Suassuna 2008) and/or the “ vagabundo ” (slacker, street punk, beggar). 
 Briefly, the leading role of the Military Police is created by the tacit accep-
tance of all involved that what is important is to maintain public order, even 
if this means delegating the definition of what this actually entails to law 
enforcement officers on the street rather than to the judicial branch. Officers 
interacting on a daily basis with the inhabitants of the street corners and bars 
that make up the urban maze ( as quebradas ) and give shape and color to the 
centers and peripheries of Brazilian cities are empowered to make what essen-
tially are the final decisions regarding what is legal and illegal. The autonomy 
delegated to the Military Police in Brazil is not the conscious choice of this 

112 
Renato Sérgio de Lima and Jacqueline Sinhoretto
organization only, however ardently it may promote the cult of its indepen-
dence; it is a political and institutional option taken by all the organizations 
making up the criminal justice system. 
 As violence is accepted as being a legitimate response by the state, and 
because many in the population call out for it to be applied in order to guar-
antee peace for law-abiding citizens ( cidadãos de bem ) through the repression 
of “bad guys” (“ bandidos ”), nothing could be taken more for granted than the 
ideology that “good criminals are dead criminals— bandido bom é o bandido 
morto. ” This is according to a study by Bueno (2014), although recent data 
show that Brazilian society is split down the middle over this issue (FBSP 
2015). Many Military Police forces still operate following the logic of military 
operations: that criminals need—just like an enemy—to be taken down, neu-
tralized, killed. This “war on crime” stance is reinforced by the fact that police 
officers are three times more likely to be killed in confrontations than are aver-
age members of the population at large. Instead of using force to defend the 
democratic rule of law, the militaristic stance that they are fighting the enemy 
persuades people that killing—and its corollary, being killed—is the calling 
of law enforcement officers. However, it is essential to draw attention to the 
fact that this only occurs because it is policy choice regarding how to handle 
social conflict that was made in Brazil, rather than because it is a necessarily 
efficient way of reducing crime. The persistence of homicides (which exceed 
the figures of any other country), studies of police victims (which show how 
fragile is the right to physical integrity), and the growth in the number of rob-
beries and rapes all indicate that the result of this militaristic style of police 
has not brought crime down. 
 Police Officers’ Origins and Views 
 Examining the background of law enforcement offi  cers draws further atten-
tion to the intersection between race and social class in the makeup of the 
police forces. By far the majority of law enforcement offi  cers are poorly paid, 
and yet relatively well educated. Th ey are mostly black, as a result of a race 
relations model that has built a job market off ering slightly enhanced oppor-
tunities to blacks in public careers 2  (Jesus 2014; Sansone 2002; Ramalho Neto 
2012; Pires 2010). However, there are obstacles to full citizenship in the sworn 
ranks, because consonant with the militarized structure of the police forces, 
their members are not entitled to form trade unions or to assemble politically, 
and they are oft en subject to anachronistic disciplinary codes. 
 In a joint survey of more than 21,000 Brazilian law enforcement officers by 
the Brazilian Forum for Public Safety (FBSP) and the Getulio Vargas Founda-
tion (Lima, Bueno and Santos 2014), most officers interviewed said they were 
favorable to demilitarization, which they understood not as the abandonment 

Chapter 7: Race, Class and Law Enforcement 
113
of hierarchy and control mechanisms, but rather as a change from an unequal 
and segregated personnel system and as the end of the arbitrary humiliation 
and punishment that employees often undergo. In accordance with this, 57% 
of law enforcement officers favored the end of the military justice code; 76% 
favored a formal separation of the Military Police from the army; 94% advo-
cated modernization of the disciplinary code in order to bring them into line 
with the Federal Constitution; 87% wanted the right to join trade unions and 
to strike to be regulated; and 87% wanted the work of the Military Police forces 
to be reoriented towards the protection and assurance of citizens’ rights. 
 In this paradoxical situation, what guides the practice of these officers? By 
all accounts, it seems that there has developed a rudimentary but decidedly 
nonmilitary set of new ideas concerning how police should deal with young 
people who express an ethical and aesthetic departure from the norms deemed 
acceptable for their class, color and territory. In addition, there is resistance to 
institutional practices and an organization culture that sees police as defend-
ers of the interests of the state rather than of the rights of the citizen. Current 
strategies to control crime are not seen as based on a legal foundation or pro-
fessional knowledge, far less on any sophisticated criminological theory. This 
is in the context of a world of complex crime in which trade in drugs and 
weapons is multinational, professionalized, hierarchical and well organized. 
The police are deeply estranged from the community, just as they are from 
young people, and do not see themselves as effectively organized to counter 
contemporary crime problems. 
 As a result, according to a national victimization survey ( Pesquisa Nacio-
nal de Vitimização ), the population does not see the Brazilian police as 
trustworthy. Even Brazil’s most positively rated police force, which happens 
to be the Minas Gerais Military Police, does not enjoy the trust of more than 
one-third of the population (CRISP and DATAFOLHA 2013). This number is 
drawn from a 2014 study entitled  Índice de Confiança na Justiça —ICJ (“Index 
of Trust in the Justice System”) by FGV Direito SP (Cunha 2014), which found 
that only 33% of respondents called the police to solve problems in which 
they were victims or participants. Of these, only 37% stated they were “very” 
or “somewhat” satisfied with the services provided by the police. Only 32% of 
those interviewed in the ICJ declared that they trust the police, a figure very 
similar to the 33% who stated they trust the judicial branch and below the 48% 
who trust the prosecutor’s office. However, none of these institutions enjoys 
the trust of more than half of the population of Brazil. 
 Brazil’s unequal and far from smoothly advancing democracy, which 
ought to rest on the cornerstone of protecting life and promoting equality 
above any other value, actually rests upon a subjective quality attributed to the 
law enforcement officers—a hunter’s keen sense of smell. Their approach to 
controlling what is identified as criminal behavior is confrontation and com-
bat. They pursue a militarized form of combat that assumes and authorizes 

114 
Renato Sérgio de Lima and Jacqueline Sinhoretto
the elimination of the enemy. This is why the distinction between the use of 
legal force and police violence is, as we have mentioned, a blurred boundary, 
one that is deliberately ill defined and held to be undefinable. Brazil’s paradox-
ical democracy coexists with the practice of controlling crime which threatens 
the establishment, while allowing white-collar crime to flourish everywhere. 
 Within this setting, the Military Police is the body that has been charged 
with managing criminal violence and has been given implicit freedom to 
use their own, supported by their widespread description as “combating the 
criminal.” On the other hand, judges and prosecutors are paid high salaries 
and have strong guarantees regarding their autonomy, working conditions, 
control of their own budget, political independence, administrative indepen-
dence, special social welfare rights and ability to choose the conflicts they 
wish to manage. It is law enforcement officers who earn the lowest salaries, 
receive the poorest training in all of Brazil’s justice system and must rely on 
their poor training and instincts. The lives of “bad guys” have no explicit 
value, while police officers “do what nobody else has the guts to do” in order 
to impose law and order. They can claim the identity of hero when they “fall in 
battle,” victims to a certain extent of their own confrontational social control 
model. This further contributes to their routine use of violence on the streets. 
 Social movements defending the victims of police violence, human rights 
advocates and black youth have organized politically in order to criticize this 
state of affairs, raising the banner of the demilitarization of the police. But 
very little has been achieved in terms of credibly diagnosing the causal links 
between militarization and the production of carnage among youth and the 
massive imprisonment of young people. Perhaps the difficulty of making such 
a diagnosis in a politically effective way explains why proposals of reform 
have been half-hearted and come all too short of the challenge to build full 
and universal citizenship in the field of safety. No one knows for certain what 
demilitarizing the police forces would mean. As a result, the demands for less 
violent, more rights-oriented police forces are vague in terms of a program of 
action. This lays them open to criticism from opponents and helps discredit 
any alternatives that are put forward. Without a feasible proposal for police 
reform, the denunciation of abuses and fatalities takes center stage as the main 
strategy in the struggle. This is, however, a reactive strategy with very little 
power to produce short- or mid-term change. 
 From another angle, law enforcement officers themselves are organizing 
to claim union status. They are demanding improved working conditions and 
pay, but few among them have condemned the institutional architecture of 
policing itself as being responsible for the current situation in public safety. 
Their solutions seem to repeat formulas that have failed in the past. They 
boil down to more and bigger weapons, more officers and more cars. Above 
all, internal critics of the police demand greater firepower, more modern 
vehicles and officers better trained for combat. And in the midst of this lack 

Chapter 7: Race, Class and Law Enforcement 
115
of consensus over reform, Brazil has a national congress that has failed to 
advance modernization in this area (FBSP 2014). 
 As has been argued elsewhere (Lima and Sinhoretto 2011; Lima, Sinho-
retto and Bueno 2015), the restoration of democracy in Brazil in the 1980s did 
not resolve conflicts over the police. This is not to deny that there have been 
changes, but the restoration of democracy created new ambiguities regarding 
the role of the police and antagonisms between actors in the system. From a 
sociological point of view, this antagonism is the way in which interest groups 
contend over ethical views, which they advance in debates that arise every 
day. The ambiguity is a byproduct of conflicts over the role of the police in 
defending rights versus the legitimate desire of the population to live in peace 
and safety. The police are a core institution in any democracy, and therefore 
ensuring control over them and transparency in their policies and operations 
is central to advancing the citizenship status of millions of Brazilians. 
 Brazil is not alone in this situation. Throughout the world, there have 
been pressures to reduce rights in order to control crime, above all within the 
context of the “war on drugs” and the fight against terrorism. The increasing 
militarization of police forces is a present concern for the United States and 
European activists, who draw attention to (for example) the growing militari-
zation of police weaponry. Racial and ethnic biases and filtering mechanisms 
have increasingly been addressed as issues in democracies. However, in none 
of the countries with which Brazil is commonly compared is the homicide rate 
so high and lethal encounters between law enforcement officers and civilians 
so common. Empirical evidence gathered in Brazil reveals a completely dif-
ferent scale to the problems facing theories of democracy, social control and 
public safety. The scale of Brazil’s dilemmas is what sets the country apart and 
makes efforts to modernize the public safety institutions so urgent. 
 A Discontinuous Democracy 
 Th e empirical observations gathered here now will help us examine the work-
ing of democracy in Brazil and the stop-start nature of its development. Social 
scientists have already addressed the disconnect between democracy and 
the assurance of civil rights in Brazil. It has been a major issue of study for 
40 years, since Wanderley Guilherme dos Santos (1979) identifi ed how Brazil 
constructed a peculiar form of “regulated citizenship” under which the mass 
public is governed somewhat arbitrarily and oft en violently, a feature which is 
quite diff erent from that of other democracies. Twenty years later, José Murilo 
de Carvalho (2000) returned to the discussion, reaffi  rming that the lack of 
guaranteed civil rights (to life, freedom from harm, equality and justice) had 
aff ected the quality and intensity of democracy in Brazilian society. Teresa 
Caldeira (2000) and James Holston (2013) described Brazil as a “disjunctive 

116 
Renato Sérgio de Lima and Jacqueline Sinhoretto
democracy” that does not secure guaranteed civil rights, and a society that 
accepts violent punishment, torture and the deadly use of force by the police. 
 Sérgio Adorno and Camila Dias (2014) have also drawn attention to 
the violence practiced by the state at rates that that would be unthinkable 
in secure democracies—in rates of death caused by the police and prison 
conditions, in the multiple types of selective biases practiced by the crimi-
nal justice system and in tangible hurdles to the effective implementation of 
human rights. Angelina Peralva (2001) contributed to an understanding of 
the violence/democracy paradox in Brazil by showing how, for young people 
who grew up under democracy and a period of economic expansion, racism 
is a barrier to integration in a society where mass individualism advocates 
the consumption of goods and services, but does not ensure equality in their 
distribution. 
 In the tradition of this line of analyses, this chapter seeks to contrib-
ute to an understanding of ways in which authoritarianism operates in the 
daily practices of safety and justice. We have stressed that race, in its com-
plex interactions with issues of class, generation and territory is an important 
component ordering the practices of the criminal justice system. The more 
policing involves imposing military practices that define potential offenders 
as the enemy, the more this tendency is reinforced. This is where authori-
tarianism in institutional practices—which are directly linked to a political 
tradition that excludes people, represses them and treats them virtually as 
slaves—shows most tellingly its effects. It hinders their exercise of civil rights, 
above all—albeit not exclusively—for black youth, by refusing to guarantee 
their right to life, liberty, physical safety, equality, fair treatment before the law 
and access to justice. 
 The deterioration of civil rights in the face of this repression calls for fur-
ther consideration here. The state’s current responses to crime and criminals 
are echoes of an older culture infused by “violent sociability,” a concept well 
described in the classics documenting Brazilian social thought, particularly in 
the work of Sérgio Buarque de Holanda (1958), Gilberto Freyre (1933), Victor 
Nunes Leal (2012), Maria Sylvia de Carvalho Franco (1997) and Raymundo 
Faoro (1975). Machado da Silva argued that violence must be understood not 
as a series of isolated behaviors, but rather as a complex of hierarchically artic-
ulated practices; in other words, as the social order itself. In this way, urban 
violence does not destroy conventional patterns of sociability, but coexists 
with them; in other words it expresses patterns of sociability that are rooted 
in the use of force as the organizing principle of social relations (Machado da 
Silva 2008). 
 The role of the state as the holder of a legitimate monopoly on the use 
of violence is questioned by this process. One of the major challenges to the 
real implementation of democracy in Brazil resides in its failure to actually 
maintain this monopoly and ensure that it is exercised legitimately through 

Chapter 7: Race, Class and Law Enforcement 
117
law. Instead, violence is also widely used in the actual control of urban popu-
lations through the repressive role of the police. That there are two holders 
of control over violence dictates that there will be a fine line determining the 
course of police actions, between how force is employed to maintaining law 
 and  order, and demarcating the boundary between what is legal and what is 
illegal (Bueno 2014). 
 Notwithstanding new explanations of the stop and start nature of Bra-
zil’s recent democratic development, if we take a long-term perspective we 
will be dealing with the effects of the economic and social development 
model adopted in Brazil. It is based on an ideology of society’s subordi-
nation to the state, which is still very strong, and which has always had 
a strong racial component. In other words, a very robust model of politi-
cal and economic development in Brazil has been produced by conflating 
safety, order and development. The attractiveness of this package to this 
day imposes considerable democratic, bureaucratic and structural con-
straints upon the nation. This model did not leap fully formed into the 
world, nor is it only the heir to the authoritarian regime of 1964. Rather, it 
has been the fruit of institutional developments and relationships between 
the military and civilians, as well as of economic and political trends and 
a legal culture that attributes an ambiguous role to police institutions, as 
Kant de Lima (2009) points out. 
 The backdrop to this, as Lima and Brito (2011) have stated, is the idea 
that the people are to believe that economic development demands society’s 
subordination and absolute control of the state over it. Costa and Lima (2014) 
identify the option—as a tactic—of the maintenance of legal and law enforce-
ment thinking based on the concept of the primacy of “internal security.” 
Within this movement, public safety is not an end in itself, but interacts with 
and depends upon the economy, and the state’s capacity to intervene. There 
are constraints upon social participation, and it is the state that defines who 
will deserve to interact with the policies in this arena and who is to be fought 
and neutralized. Safety and development thus have become linked, and the 
operational standards applying today will therefore flow from a strategy that 
legitimizes institutions tasked with maintaining public order, particularly 
police forces, by resorting to violence. It still remains to understand better 
how racialization constructs the internal “enemy” to be addressed by the 
police in order to accurately dismantle the subtlety with which racialization 
camouflages itself so as to become invisible. 
 The fact remains, however, that in a political culture that has acknowl-
edged violence as the legitimate language of the state’s action for centuries, 
there are—paradoxically—several moral prohibitions, and justifications 
springing from economics and from development models, that prevent 
Brazil from recognizing itself as an unequal, racist, violent country. Behind 
the rhetoric of being a peace-loving democratic nation, Brazil has amassed 

118 
Renato Sérgio de Lima and Jacqueline Sinhoretto
a tainted record in the area of human rights. The country ranks first on 
national lists of violent crime, institutional violence, inequality, and a lack 
of respect for civil and social rights. And as a result, the drive toward the 
democratic modernization of Brazil’s society advances only slowly at best. 
To be feared is the possibility of a return to the institutionalized practices 
from Brazil’s past, of cronyism and the excessive influence of the propertied 
classes. 
 Notes 
 1. A version of this text has been published in  Contemporânea—Revista de Sociologia da UFS-
Car , v. 5, pp. 119–141, 2015. 
 2. Data on the racial makeup of police forces vary greatly between states. See Sinhoretto, Silves-
tre and Schlittler (2014) for more details. 
 References 
 Adorno, S., and Dias, C. 2014. Monopólio Estatal da Violência. In  Crime, Polícia e Justiça no 
Brasil , ed. R. Lima, J. Ratton, R. Azevdeo and R. Ghiringhelli, 187–197. São Paulo: Editora 
Contexto. 
 Brasil, Presidência da República. 2015a.  Índice de vulnerabilidade juvenil à violência e desigual-
dade racial 2014: Secretaria-Geral da Presidência da República, Secretaria Nacional de Juven-
tude, Ministério da Justiça e Fórum Brasileiro de Segurança Pública  [Youth vulnerability 
to violence and racial inequality: General Secretariat of Republic's Presidency, National 
Secretariat of Youth, Ministry of Justice and Brazilian Forum of Public Security]. Brasília: 
Presidência da República. 
 Brasil, Presidência da República. 2015b.  Mapa do Encarceramento: os jovens do Brasil: Sec-
retaria-Geral da Presidência da República, Secretaria Nacional de Juventude, Ministério da 
Justiça . Brasília: Presidência da República. 
 Bueno, S. 2014.  Bandido bom é bandido morto: a opção ideológico-institucional da política de 
segurança pública na manutenção de padrões de atuação violentos da polícia militar paulista . 
Dissertação de Mestrado. Administração Pública e Governo, Fundação Getulio Vargas. 
 Caldeira, T. 2000.  Cidade de Muros: Crime, Segregação e Cidadania em São Paulo . 1st edition. 
São Paulo: Editora 34 e Edusp. 
 Carvalho, J. M. 2000.  Cidadania no Brasil: o longo caminho . Rio de Janeiro: Civilização Brasileira. 
 Costa, A., and Lima, R. 2014. Segurança Pública. In  Crime, Polícia e Justiça no Brasil , ed. 
R. Lima, J. Ratton, R. Azevedo and R. Ghiringhelli, 482–490. São Paulo: Editora Contexto. 
 CRISP, Centro de Estudos de Criminalidade e Segurança Pública. 2013.  DATAFOLHA. Insti-
tuto de pesquisas. Pesquisa Nacional de Vitimização . Brasília: SENASP. 
 CRISP/UFMG/SRJ/MJ (Centro de Estudos da Criminalidade e Segurança Pública– Universidade 
Federal de Minas Gerais/Secretaria da Reforma do Judiciário–Ministério da Justiça). 2014. 
 Mensurando o tempo do processo de homicídio doloso em cinco capitais . Brasília: Ministério 
da Justiça. 
 Cunha, L. 2014.  Relatório ICJBrasil . São Paulo: FGV Direito. 
 Faoro, R. 1975.  Donos do Poder: Formação do Patronato Político Brasileiro . Porto Alegre/São 
Paulo: Editora Globo/Editora da Universidade de São Paulo. 

Chapter 7: Race, Class and Law Enforcement 
119
 FBSP (Fórum Brasileiro de Segurança Pública). 2014. 8º  Anuário Brasileiro de Segurança 
Pública . São Paulo: FBSP. Available at http://www.forumseguranca.org.br/storage/8_ anuario_
2014_20150309.pdf (accessed June 16, 2017). 
 FBSP (Fórum Brasileiro de Segurança Pública). 2015.  9º Anuário Brasileiro de Segurança Pública. 
São Paulo: FBSP. Available at http://www.forumseguranca.org.br/storage/9_ anuario_2015.
retificado_.pdf (accessed June 16, 2017). 
 Franco, M. 1997.  Homens livres na ordem escravocrata . São Paulo: Unesp. 
 Freyre, G. 1933.  Casa Grande & Senzala . São Paulo: Global Editora. 
 Holanda, S. 1958.  Visão do paraíso: os motivos edênicos no descobrimento e colonização do Brasil . 
São Paulo: Companhia Editora Nacional. 
 Holston, J. 2013.  Cidadania Insurgente. Disjunções da democracia e da modernidade no Brasil . 
1st edition. São Paulo: Cia das Letras. 
 Jesus, C. 2014.  A relação estigma-desvio como elemento norteador no uso da força ou da violência 
na atividade policial . Dissertation (M.A. in Sociology). Universidade Federal de Alagoas, 
Maceió, Brazil. 
 Kant de Lima, R. 1995.  A Polícia da cidade do Rio de Janeiro: seus dilemas e paradoxos . 2nd 
edition. Rio de Janeiro: Forense. 
 Kant de Lima, R. 2009.  Ensaios de Antropologia e de Direito: Acesso à Justiça e Processos Insti-
tucionais de Administração de Conflitos e Produção da Verdade Jurídica em uma Perspectiva 
Comparada . Rio de Janeiro: Lumen Juris Editora. 
 Leal, V. N. 2012.  Coronelismo, enxada e voto: o município e o regime representativo no Brasil . São 
Paulo: Companhia das Letras. 
 Lima, R., and Brito, D. 2011. Desenvolvimento: da defesa do Estado à defesa da Cidadania. In 
 Violência e Dilemas Civilizatórios: as práticas de punição e extermínio , ed. C. Barreira, L. Sa, 
and J. P. Aquino, 203–220. Fortaleza: Pontes. 
 Lima, R., Bueno, S., and Santos, T. 2014.  Opinião dos policiais brasileiros sobre reformas e mod-
ernização da segurança pública, Pesquisa opinião dos policiais . São Paulo: CPJA-FGV/Fórum 
Brasileiro de Segurança Pública/SENASP. 
 Lima, R., and Sinhoretto, J. 2011. Qualidade da democracia e polícias no Brasil. In  Entre pala-
vras e números: violência, democracia e segurança pública no Brasil , ed. R. Lima, 129–152. 
São Paulo: Alameda. 
 Lima, R., Sinhoretto, J., and Bueno, S. A. 2015.  Gestão da vida e da segurança pública no Brasil . 
Brasília: Soc. estado, v. 30, n. 1, p. 123–144, Apr. 2015. www.scielo.br/scielo.php?script=sci_
arttext&pid=S0102-69922015000100123&lng=en&nrm=iso (accessed June 5, 2015). http://
dx.doi.org/10.1590/S0102-69922015000100008. 
 Machado da Silva, L. A. 2008. Violência urbana, sociabilidade violenta e agenda pública. In 
 Vida sob cerco: violência e rotinas nas favelas do Rio de Janeiro , ed. L. Machado da Silva, 
35–45. Rio de Janeiro: FAPERJ/Nova Fronteira. 
 Misse, M., Vargas, J. D., Costa, A. T., Ratton, J. L., and Azevedo, R. G. 2010.  O Inquérito Policial 
no Brasil . Uma pesquisa empírica. 1st edition. Rio de Janeiro: Booklink, 1: 476. 
 Paixão, A. L. 1982. A organização policial numa área metropolitana.  Revista de Ciências Sociais 
25: 63–85. 
 Peralva, A. T. 2001.  Violência e democracia: o paradoxo brasileiro . São Paulo: Paz e Terra. 
 Pires, G. L. 2010.  A cor da farda. As relações raciais na Polícia Militar de Sergipe . Dissertation 
(M.A. in Sociology). Sergipe: Universidade Federal de Sergipe. 
 Ramalho Neto, J. P. 2012. Farda & “cor”: um estudo racial nas patentes da Polícia Militar da 
Bahia.  Afro-Ásia 45: 67–94. 
 Sansone, L. 2002. Fugindo para a Força: Cultura Corporativista e “Cor” na Polícia Militar do 
Estado do Rio de Janeiro.  Estudos Afro-Asiáticos 24: 513–532. 
 Santos, W. G. 1979.  Cidadania e Justiça . Rio de Janeiro: Campus. 

120 
Renato Sérgio de Lima and Jacqueline Sinhoretto
 Sinhoretto, J. 2014a. Reforma da justiça: gerindo conflitos numa sociedade rica e violenta. 
 Diálogos sobre Justiça 2: 49–56. 
 Sinhoretto, J. 2014b.  Violência e relações raciais: problematizando evidências e interpretações 
sociológicas . Projeto de Pesquisa CNPq. São Carlos, Mimeo: Universidade Federal de. 
 Sinhoretto, J., Batitucci, E. C., Mota, F. R., Schlitter, M. C., Silvestre, G., Morais, D. S., Souza, 
L. G., Souza, R. R., Silva, S. S., Ovalle, L. A., Ramos, P. C., Almedia, F. B., and Maciel, W. C. 
2014. A filtragem racial na seleção policial de suspeitos: segurança pública e relações raciais. 
In  Segurança pública e direitos humanos: temas transversais , ed. I. S. de Figueiredo, 121–160. 
Brasília: Ministério da Justiça. 
 Sinhoretto, J., Silvestre, G., and Schlittler, C. 2014.  Desigualdade racial e segurança pública em 
São Paulo: letalidade policial e prisões em flagrante. Sumário executivo . São Paulo: UFSCar-
GEVAC. www.ufscar.br/gevac/#sthash.KiXLiLc4.dpuf (acessed May 8, 2014). 
 Suassuna, R. 2008.  O habitus dos policiais militares do Distrito Federal . Dissertation (M.A. in 
Sociology). Brasília: Universidade de Brasília. 

121
 Contents 
 The Survey 
123 
 Use of Force on the Street 
124 
 Impact of the Risk Environment 
124 
 Impact of Personal Factors 
125 
 Upgrading Police Professionalism 
127 
 Perspectives on Crime and Policing 
129 
 Multivariate Analysis 
130 
 Conclusion 
131 
 References 
133 
 Use of Force and 
Police Reform in 
Brazil 1 
 Wesley G. Skogan 
 8 
 Th e role of crime and justice policies in solidifying modernizing trends in 
newly democratic nations is well understood by students of Latin American 
politics, for therein lies some of the most visible challenges to the success of 
democratizing forces. Especially by the end of the twentieth century, violence 
fueled by urbanization, inequality, small arms traffi  cking, and the drug trade 
threatens to undermine fl edgling democracies that fi nd themselves hard-
pressed to reform authoritarian police organizations in the face of demands 
that something drastic be done about crime and corrupt relationships 
between politicians and organized criminals (Koonings and Kruijt 2007). 
 Brazil is not alone in the group of Latin American nations transition-
ing from authoritarianism to democracy, but its problems in doing so may 
be among the most noted. There is no shortage of descriptions of the vio-
lent and corrupt character of Brazilian police and their allied nonstate actors, 
which include private militias, paramilitary squads, and shadowy private 
security operations (e.g., see Perlman 2009). There are frequent reports of 
torture of police prisoners and extrajudicial killings. None of this has helped 
the state to protect its citizens, who in urban areas face extremely high rates 
of violence, and the frequency with which they are killed by them has left the 
police one of the many problems facing the public, not a solution to them. 
One close observer of the Brazilian scene judged that, in the years since its 

122 
Wesley G. Skogan
democratizing moment in January 1984, the criminal justice sector has made 
the least progress toward supporting that agenda (Leeds 2007). Although 
varying from place to place, police violence and corruption are endemic in too 
many Brazilian states, and at the same time violent crime is among the great-
est impediments to social and economic development in its urban regions. 
 While the difficult nexus between crime, policing, and politics in emerging 
democracies is frequently remarked upon, much less has been written on the 
effectiveness of the reform efforts that have been—perhaps too  sporadically—
mounted. 2   This chapter opens one window into police reform in Brazil, by 
examining the effects of police officers’ experience with the National Program 
of Public Security with Citizenship (PRONASCI). During its time, this was 
the nation’s most ambitious attempt to democratize the police. 
 In Brazil, policing at the street level is conducted by the federal states and 
not the national government. At the state level, policing services are largely 
provided by two distinct bodies. The Civil Police conduct criminal investiga-
tions and make decisions regarding prosecution, and often operate in plain 
clothes. Visible street policing, traffic enforcement, responses to emergency 
calls, and riot control are provided by the uniformed Military Police. They are 
heavily armed and organized in strict hierarchical fashion, with an elaborate 
military-style rank structure. They are trained and operate using traditional 
military tactics, and in poor areas their operations often resemble those more 
appropriate for a war zone. 3   Both branches of the police are characterized by 
cultures that stoutly resist change and outside oversight of their operations 
and management. As described in this volume by Marco Ruediger (Chap-
ter 12), PRONASCI represented an intervention into local policing by the 
national Ministry of Justice. He describes the story of its failure, but during 
its formative period PRONASCI opened a window for research on policing 
in Brazil, and this chapter is based on the data that could be collected during 
that period. 
 For the police, PRONASCI’s reform agenda attempted to address a long 
list of issues, including poor management and inadequate training, bad liv-
ing and working conditions for low-level police officers, and an authoritarian 
legacy that is inattentive to issues of human rights. The program aimed at 
upgrading the condition of officers’ lives and standards for police operations. 
Federal money supported training programs and better equipment. Emphasis 
was placed on improving managerial practices, with the goal of improving 
police planning, program implementation, and local evaluation. One problem 
with policing in Brazil is that no one believes that the police are very effec-
tive when they try to carry out standard police work. Because police are very 
badly paid, a housing subsidy program was instituted. Finally, a nationwide 
campaign began to promote community policing efforts at the municipal 
level. However, it was not just a police reform effort. In addition to police 
reform, PRONASCI aimed at restructuring the Brazilian prison system and 

Chapter 8: Use of Force and Police Reform in Brazil 
123
encouraging neighborhood capacity building and community involvement in 
violence prevention. 
 This chapter uses the results of a monitoring survey to examine the issue 
of police use of force. Why examine the views of ordinary police officers? 
For one, it provides a “bottom-up” view of the use of force, listening to the 
voices of officers on this issue. This approach sheds some light on the apparent 
rationality of use of force, in the view of officers on the street. Building a more 
professional force is a long-term effort, for police agencies are human services 
organizations. The levers for change in policing are recruitment, training, 
supervision, and discipline; these constitute most of the tools available to any 
reform effort aiming to upgrade the effectiveness and professionalism of the 
police. This makes it a slow process—police officers start young and their 
careers unfold vertically within the organization, so agencies will change more 
glacially than reformers would hope under the best of circumstances. But in 
the end, the public will see the consequences of reform only in the quality of 
service delivered by officers on the street, so understanding where they stand 
is an important step in the monitoring process. Surveys of police officers and 
other security personnel constitute monitoring mechanisms thus can yield a 
“from the bottom up” portrait of the reform process. 
 The Survey 
 Th e survey was conducted in 2008, using the Internet. Recipients of Ministry 
of Justice educational grants for security personnel were invited to the survey 
web page when they logged on to perform routine required administrative 
tasks. Th e survey was developed and managed independently by Fundação 
Getulio Vargas (FGV), a university in Rio de Janeiro, and the responses of the 
participants remained confi dential. 
 The survey involved a broad spectrum of security personnel in Brazil, 
including employees in the correctional system, firefighters, and forensic 
examiners, as PRONASCI involved distinctive programs for each group. How-
ever, this analysis examines only the responses of members of the Civil and 
Military Police, the two state-based groups that patrol the streets and conduct 
criminal investigations. Only low-level personnel were included in the survey; 
members of the better-educated and better-paid senior officers’ corps enter 
the higher ranks of these organizations laterally, and they were not involved 
in the educational or housing grants programs. In total, 17,341 respondents 
are examined here. The data are national in scope, including respondents 
from 26 of the country’s 27 federal states and 1,938 different municipalities. 
The absence of systematic national records at the time made it impossible to 
estimate a response rate for the survey, and there are no data with which to 
benchmark the personal demographics of respondents. This reflects the fact 

124 
Wesley G. Skogan
that policing is a state rather than a federal responsibility in Brazil. National 
data on many other topics are frequently nonexistent as well. For example, 
there are no national (and frequently local) sources of crime data to match to 
the over 1,900 jurisdictions with participating survey respondents, and Brazil-
ian census data were in practice unmatchable with these boundaries. 
 Use of Force on the Street 
 Th e dependent variable, self-reported use of force, was measured by responses 
to the question “How oft en is the use of force necessary in your work?” 
Respondents were divided on this with 9% reporting force was necessary very 
oft en and 34% oft en. On the other hand, 48% reported use of force was neces-
sary only occasionally and 9% rarely. Th is question was included to gauge the 
general “style” with which offi  cers perform their duties. Note that almost half 
of offi  cers reported fairly frequent use of force. 
 Impact of the Risk Environment 
 Studies in the Northern Hemisphere of the correlates of police use of force 
stress the signifi cant role played by the risks that police offi  cers believe they 
face on the job. Real or not, typing neighborhoods as troublesome leads police 
offi  cers to stereotype residents as uncooperative, hostile, or crime-prone—
resulting in a tendency to approach residents with suspicion, to behave more 
aggressively, and to act more punitively than they do in other kinds of neigh-
borhoods (Terrill and Reisig 2003). Studies based on police records and fi eld 
observations indicate that police verbal and physical abuse, unjustifi ed street 
stops, and corruption are more prevalent in disadvantaged and high-crime 
areas (Fagan and Davies 2000; Kane 2002; Mastrofski, Reisig and McCluskey 
2002; Terrill and Reisig 2003). 
 In this study, officers’ perceptions of the risk environment were measured 
by responses to two questions: “What is the level of risk in your work?” and 
“How do you evaluate the public security situation where you work?” They 
rated their personal risks on a scale ranging from average to very high, and 
the general security situation in their community from “critical—difficult to 
keep order” to “within the normal limits and tranquil.” 
 Both measures prove to be independently related to reports of the use of 
force by Brazilian police.  Figure 8.1  presents the percentages of respondents 
reporting that use of force was necessary often and very often when classified 
by the extent of perceived risk in the areas where they worked. Reported use 
of force rose with risk, ranging from an average of 7% in the lowest-rated areas 
to 54% in more threatening places. As an additional analytic tool,  Figure 8.1  

Chapter 8: Use of Force and Police Reform in Brazil 
125
also presents the percentage of officers who fell into each risk category. As it 
indicates, 63% of officers believed the level of risk in their work to be very 
high, and among that large group 54% reported that force was necessary in 
their work. The effect of the sharp risk-force gradient was thus multiplied by 
the large proportion of officers who saw themselves at high risk. 
 These officers were somewhat more positive about the general security 
situation—only 12% rated it as critical, the highest category. But this percep-
tion too was strongly linked to the perceived necessity of using force on the 
job, with more than 60% of officers in the critical category reporting resorting 
to use of force. In multivariate analyses, both factors were among the most 
important determinants of assessments of the role of use of force in policing. 
 Impact of Personal Factors 
 Because our respondents share a common background—all are working 
police offi  cers—they are divided by fewer social cleavages than is the general 
population. However, several social background factors still played a role in 
shaping reports of the necessity to use force on the street. Th ese included 
gender, age, education, and seniority, with the last two being more important 
aft er other factors are accounted for. 
60
40
20
0
9%
percent of police
average
high
very high
normal
tense
critical
percent use of force necessary
28%
level of risk in work
public security situation
63%
34%
54%
12%
Often
Very Often
 Figure 8.1 Perceived risk and use of force 
 Source: PRONASCI offi  cer survey 

126 
Wesley G. Skogan
 The strongest of these personal factors is gender. Studies of police behav-
ior in the Northern Hemisphere typically find few gender differences in the 
extent to which police are involved in the use of force. For example, Paoline 
and Terrill (2004) found rates of both verbal and physical use of force did not 
differ by gender, and that other individual-level correlates of use of force did 
not vary by gender. Gender differences were very strong in Brazil, on the other 
hand, as is illustrated in  Figure 8.2 . Gender was the strongest risk measure 
in the model. However, because only 11% of police officers are female (this 
is also reported in  Figure 8.2 ), gender can play only a limited role in shaping 
police conduct in the aggregate. 
 Similarly, studies of police behavior in the Northern Hemisphere find that 
younger officers are more likely to employ use of force as an on-street tactic 
for controlling risk, perhaps because they lack experience with more indirect 
but still effective personal risk-management strategies. Harris’s (2011) sum-
mary of this research in the United States notes that officers get in trouble 
early in their careers, but involvement in on-street violence declines with 
experience. In Brazil, many police officers are relatively young—as illustrated 
in  Figure 8.2 , and 40% are age 30 or younger—and many of them are thus in 
40
30
20
10
0
11% 89%
percent of police
male
thru 2nd level
some 3rd level
3rd level plus
under 2X min
2-5x minm
5+ minm wag
19-25
26-30
31-35
36-40
41-45
46 plus
female
percent use of force necessary
52%28%21%
11% 29% 28%20% 9% 3%
14%83% 3%
gender
age
status
education
Personal Factors and Use of Force
Often
Very Often
 Figure 8.2 Personal factors and use of force 
 Source: PRONASCI offi  cer survey 

Chapter 8: Use of Force and Police Reform in Brazil 
127
their high-risk years. The perceived necessity of force declined with age, but 
relatively few police officers are found in older categories. In this national 
study, only 12% of officers were over age 40, and a large majority were under 
the age of 30. 
 The other groups that report less necessity in relying on force are the most 
educated and highly paid police officers in the sample. Both of these factors 
reflect their standing in the organization. There does not seem to be any North 
American research on income differentials, but research has consistently dem-
onstrated that more educated officers generally perform better and are less 
likely to be subjects of citizen complaints. This is, in fact, about the only con-
sistent correlate in research on officer behavior and education (Rydberg and 
Terrill 2010). In Brazil, the officer corps enters policing via lateral entry, and 
they were not included in this study. Income, therefore, reflects the rank and 
seniority of the rank-and-file police officers who were surveyed, and the varia-
tion in education is likewise not linked to the higher educational attainment of 
persons recruited directly into the higher reaches of the organization. 
 On the other hand, race did not enter into this picture at all. As a result, it 
is not presented in  Figure 8.2 . In this survey, about 42% of police officers were 
white, 46% of multiracial heritage, and 10% self-identified as black. None of 
these distinctions, however, was related to views of the use of force. Likewise, 
whether officers lived in the communities in which they worked made no dif-
ference in their views. In total, 68% of those interviewed did live and work in 
the same area, but this was unrelated to reports of the necessity of using force. 
 Upgrading Police Professionalism 
 One of the key reasons for conducting this survey was to monitor police reac-
tions to the professionalizing eff orts of PRONASCI. As discussed above, the 
Justice Ministry’s police reform agenda involved upgrading the condition of 
police offi  cers and standards for operations. 
 Officers’ assessments of several of these professionalizing efforts were 
measured by a single index combining positive responses to a series of ques-
tions about training, equipment, and planning. Those who scored highly 
rated the police academy training that they received as of good or reasonable 
quality and as reasonably or very useful. Officers also scored more highly if 
they had attended several in-service training courses in the past year. High 
scorers also rated the equipment that they were issued as being of good or very 
good quality. Other components of the professionalism index included if they 
gave their own computer skills a high rating, and if they thought the planning 
and evaluation efforts of their agency were good or very good. 
  Figure 8.3  illustrates that police officers were divided on these points, 
with almost as many concentrated at the lower end of the scale (the three 

128 
Wesley G. Skogan
left-hand bars) as at the right-hand side, where officers who were more favor-
ably disposed to the program were concentrated. As the figure also indicates, 
the view that the use of force was necessary in their work declined with reports 
of improvements in training, equipment, and management. More than 50% of 
officers in the low-professionalism category ranked high on use of force, while 
the comparable figure was 36% among those at the upper end of the scale. 
 A key component of this effort to reform the police was its emphasis on 
community policing. What this concept meant on the ground was not always 
clear, and many states were uncertain about how to implement such a project, 
but few of the police officers interviewed (just 6%) were unfamiliar with the 
concept. They were asked, “How would you evaluate Community Policing in 
Brazil?” The response categories were varied, but overall 53% of those inter-
viewed were positive, responding that “it is a very good alternative strategy 
for police in Brazil since it involves community interaction.” About 40% were 
dubious, responding that “it cannot be implemented everywhere, since some 
areas, such as favelas, are communities dominated by drug gangs.” Another 
6% thought that community policing “reduces the authority of the police, but 
50
40
30
20
10
0
6% 40% 53%
percent of police
can’t implement
good alternative
dissatisfied
reasonably
high
very high
satisfied
very low
moderate
reduces authority
percent use of force necessary
51%
22%
25%
11% 14% 20% 24% 22% 10%
community policing
training, equipment
planning & technology
job satisfaction
Professionalization and Use of Force
Often
Very Often
 Figure 8.3 Professionalism and use of force 
 Source: PRONASCI offi  cer survey 

Chapter 8: Use of Force and Police Reform in Brazil 
129
it may have a palliative effect.” As  Figure 8.3  illustrates, there was about a 10 
percentage point difference between the most supportive police officers and 
those who thought community policing would undermine their authority, 
when it came to reports of the necessity of using force on the street. 
 Finally, a measure of the influence of the professionalizing thrust of PRO-
NASCI would be increased job satisfaction. These have been shown to be related 
to features of police work that officers care about, including wages and benefits, 
quality of equipment, training, and supervision. To measure this, respondents 
were asked, “How do you evaluate your satisfaction with your professional 
career?” They rated themselves from satisfied to dissatisfied, with a middle cat-
egory, reasonably satisfied. As  Figure 8.3  documents, the better they felt about 
their careers as police officers, the less likely they were to feel that use of force 
was necessary in their work, from top to bottom by about 18 percentage points. 
 Police views of some components of the program proved to be unrelated 
to their views of the use of force. In particular, participation in the national 
housing subsidy program for police officers did not seem to influence their 
thinking about their work. The program is intended to improve the living 
condition of poorly paid officers, but based on the survey only 9% of them 
were participating. They gave the program a high ranking—on a 0–10 rating 
scale 81% rated it an 8 or above—but too few reported participating for it to 
have much effect on opinion. 
 There was also no direct effect of police officers’ views of the extent of 
corruption. Many see police corruption and violence reinforcing one another, 
for corruption causes them to draw closed “the blue curtain” that shields 
police operations from public scrutiny. When asked about the extent of police 
corruption, only 0.4% of those surveyed maintained that it was no problem. 
Otherwise, the issue was one of how widespread they thought it was. Most 
police officers maintained that corruption is a problem of individual officers 
(69%) rather than widespread (24%) or occurring in specific units (7%). Their 
analyses of the corruption problem, however, were unrelated to their views of 
the necessity of using force. 
 Perspectives on Crime and Policing 
 In addition, several measures of attitudes—the perspectives of these police 
offi  cers on crime and their role in society—were related to their views of 
the use of force, albeit more weakly. Offi  cers were more likely to report fre-
quent use of force when they thought that public security issues were the most 
important agenda item, more important than “other national questions, such 
as employment, education and health.” On the other hand, police who were 
supportive of PRONASCI’s push for sentencing reform were less likely to 
think that force was necessary in their work; they responded positively to the 

130 
Wesley G. Skogan
question, “Are you in favor of swapping of sentences for non-serious crimes 
for study or community work?” 
 Other social attitudes proved to be largely unrelated to police officers’ 
views of the use of force. One opinion in particular was whether they thought 
society trusted the police. Building trust between police and the community 
was one of the major goals of PRONASCI. On the public side of the equa-
tion, FVG is monitoring opinion through surveys they are conducting in poor 
housing areas (favelas) throughout the country (see Riccio, Ruediger, Ross, 
& Skogan, Chapter 10, this volume). Those results are at best mixed, and the 
skepticism of poor Brazilians regarding the police is mirrored on the police 
side. In this survey, only 8% of officers believed the public thought them trust-
worthy and effective, a very low number. 
 Multivariate Analysis 
  Table 8.1  presents the results of an analysis of the joint infl uence of all of these 
variables on offi  cers’ assessments of the necessity of using force on the street. 
Th e standardized regression coeffi  cients indicate the relative importance of 
 Table 8.1  Multivariate analysis of perceived necessity of using force 
Use of force necessary
B
t
Sig.
risky at work
0.31
42.45
0.00
security situation critical
0.16
21.54
0.00
Female
−0.07
−9.25
0.00
Age
−0.04
−5.25
0.00
Education
−0.05
−6.41
0.00
monthly income category
−0.03
−4.07
0.00
support community policing
−0.04
−4.89
0.00
career satisfaction
−0.03
−3.33
0.00
professionalism index
−0.03
−3.67
0.00
support community service
−0.04
−6.06
0.00
public security most important
0.04
4.99
0.00
Constant
24.25
0.00
R = .432; R2 = .186
No. of observations: 16,616
 Notes: B = standardized regression coeffi  cients, t = t-statistic, sig = signifi cance level 
 Source: PRONASCI offi  cer survey 

Chapter 8: Use of Force and Police Reform in Brazil 
131
each of the measures. Th ey are ordered in line with the discussion of variables 
in this chapter. 
 First, it is clear that officers’ assessments of the risks in their environment 
predominate. Both their own perceived risk on the job and their assessments 
of security in general in the communities in which they work were strongly 
and significantly linked to reports of the frequency of use of force. Of the 
two, the risks they personally face predominate. Any assessment of police 
behavior must begin with their perceptions of danger, a specter that pervades 
their lives. 
 Following risk in importance are three personal factors: gender, age, and 
education. Controlling for other factors, female officers reported using force 
less frequently. So too did officers with more experience and those with higher 
levels of education. Rank-and-file officers from somewhat higher income 
households (but low-ranking police officers in Brazil most often live in mod-
est circumstances) also were less likely to report using force. 
 The survey also assessed respondents’ involvement in and assessments 
of the elements of the PRONASCI reform that were likely to affect them. A 
multi-item professionalism index reflecting their participation in training pro-
grams, skill at using technology, and other program-related efforts was among 
the factors that were significantly related to lower levels of self-reported use 
of force. Officers who were more satisfied with their careers were similarly 
inclined. Measures of police views of PRONASCI’s reform agenda follow, and 
remain independently statistically significant. These were support for com-
munity policing and support for sentencing reform. In addition, controlling 
statistically for other factors, officers were more likely to report frequent use 
of force when they thought that public security issues were the most impor-
tant national agenda item. 
 Conclusion 
 Th is nationwide study was conducted in the midst of a large-scale police 
reform eff ort. It highlights the importance of many components of that eff ort, 
which in the survey were linked to reports of less frequent use of force. Con-
sistent with decades of police research, the frequency of self-reported use of 
force was driven most strongly by perceptions of a risky work environment. 
Both measures included here proved important, one a self-assessment of 
respondents’ personal risk and the other a general rating of riskiness of the 
area in which they worked. 
 Controlling for other factors, personal factors were also linked to self-
reports of use of force. In the survey, women, older officers, and those 
with more education reported using force less frequently. So did those whose 
households were making a little more money. However, most Brazilian 

132 
Wesley G. Skogan
officers were young, male, ill-educated, and poorly paid—when taken 
together, a recipe for trouble. 
 Most importantly for the purpose of the survey, which was to help evalu-
ate the reform effort, use of force was reported being used less frequently by 
officers who had contact with or supported key components of the program. 
An index of their personal professionalism based on their participation and 
assessments of training, skill in using equipment, and their views of the plan-
ning and evaluation efforts of their agency was independently linked to less 
frequent self-reported use of force. So was their general career satisfaction. 
Attitudes were also important. Officers who supported the reform program 
and community policing, which was also being promoted, were also less often 
involved in the use of force. On the other hand, officers who thought that 
crime fighting was the most important issue on the national agenda were 
more likely to report use of force. Overall, few of those we surveyed were san-
guine about their status in society. In the survey, only 8% believed the public 
thought of them as trustworthy and effective. 
 The reform of policing in Brazil is, of course, a monumental task. The 
impediments to reform are legion, but they would be familiar to any police 
researcher. They include an insular police culture confident of its ability to 
avoid external scrutiny; organized resistance to change by police unions and 
associations representing the officer corps; the reform-quashing effect of law-
and-order political rhetoric in the face of high levels of violent crime; the close 
relationship between police and rural oligarchs; frequent turnover among 
police executives and their overseers; politicians’ aversion to seeming to take 
responsibility for crime rates; tight links between politicians and police; and 
the corrosive effect of police and political corruption, which creates “dirty 
secrets” that both must conspire to keep hidden (Leeds 2007). Police in Bra-
zil remain widely mistrusted, in part because they carry the legacy of the 
country’s authoritarian past, both reputationally and in terms of their politi-
cal conduct. Rank-and-file officers have little education, and their rough and 
unsophisticated training emphasizes military conduct, discipline, and values. 
Street-level policing is conducted by the Military Police, which operates best 
with heavy weaponry. They support a society characterized by one of the most 
unequal distributions of wealth in the modern world, and they have tradition-
ally done so with disrespect for the rights of the poorer classes. 
 One vision at its launch was that PRONASCI would strengthen the 
capacity of criminal justice institutions as part of a larger agenda, that of 
building trust and confidence between society and the state more generally. 
But, as the chapters in this volume by Ruediger (Chapter 12) and Riccio, 
Miranda, and Müeller (Chapter 11) indicate, reform at the national level 
faltered after several years. Its legacy can still be seen here and there, at the 
state and local level, but policing in Brazil seemingly proved too daunting a 
reform project. 

Chapter 8: Use of Force and Police Reform in Brazil 
133
 Notes 
 1. A version of this text has been published in  Contemporânea—Revista de Sociologia da UFS-
Car , v. 5, pp. 119–141, 2015. 
 2. For an exception, see da Silva and Cano (2007). 
 3. In urban areas, traffi  c control and other similar functions are also performed by an expanding 
 Guardas Municipais , whose offi  cers are sometimes armed but largely conduct “preventive” 
patrolling operations. 
 References 
 da Silva, G. M., and Cano, I. 2007. Between damage reduction and community policing: The 
case of Pavao-Pavaozinho-Cantagalo in Rio de Janeiro’s favelas. In  Legitimacy and criminal 
justice: A comparative perspective , ed. T. R. Tyler, 186–214. New York: Russell Sage Founda-
tion. 
 Fagan, J., and Davies, G. 2000. Street stops and broken windows: Terry, race, and disorder in 
New York City.  Fordham Urban Law Journal 28: 457–457. 
 Harris, C. 2011. Problem behaviors in later portions of officers’ careers.  Policing: An Interna-
tional Journal of Police Strategies & Management 34: 135–152. 
 Kane, R. 2002. The social ecology of police misconduct.  Criminology 40: 867–896. 
 Koonings, K., and Kruijt, D. 2007. Fractured cities, second-class citizenship and urban violence, 
Urban violence and contested spaces in Latin America. In  Fractured Cities: Social Exclusion , 
ed. K. Koonings and D. Kruijt, 7–22. London: Zed Books. 
 Leeds, E. 2007. Serving states and serving citizens: Halting steps toward police reform in Brazil 
and implications for donor intervention.  Policing & Society 17: 21–37. 
 Mastrofski, S., Reisig, M., and McCluskey, J. 2002. Police disrespect toward the public: An 
encounter-based analysis.  Criminology 40: 101–133. 
 Paoline, E. A., and Terrill, W. 2004. Women police officers and the use of Coercion.  Women and 
Criminal Justice 15: 97–119. 
 Perlman, J. E. 2009. Megacity violence and its consequences in Rio de Janeiro. In  Mega-cities: 
The politics of urban exclusion and violence in the global south , ed. K. Koonings and D. Kruijt, 
52–68. London: Zed Books. 
 Riccio, V., Meirelles de Miranda, M. R., and Müller, A. Professionalizing the military police 
through training. This volume. 
 Riccio, V., Ruediger, M. A., Ross, S. D., and Skogan, W. Community policing in the favelas of 
Rio de Janeiro. This volume. 
 Ruediger, M. A. Police reform in Brazil: The rise and demise of PRONASCI. This volume. 
 Rydberg, J., and Terrill, W. 2010. The effect of higher education on police behavior.  Police Quar-
terly 13: 92–120. 
 Terrill, W., and Reisig, M. D. 2003. Neighborhood context and police use of force.  Journal of 
Research in Crime and Delinquency 40: 291–321. 


135
 Contents 
 Police and Community in Developing Democracies 
137 
 The Birth of UPPs in Rio 
140 
 Consolidation of the UPPs 
142 
 The Future of UPPs 
147 
 Further Reading 
149 
 References 
149 
 Gangs, Drugs and 
Urban Pacification 
Squads in Rio 
 Vicente Riccio and 
Wesley G. Skogan 
 9 
 Th e crime problem in Brazil is known worldwide, and its most visible face is 
Rio de Janeiro. Th e country’s former capital and most visited city is marked 
by violence, a violence depicted in mass media, academic studies and even 
fi lms, such as  Elite Squad  and  City of God . In recent decades, crime in Rio de 
Janeiro has been linked to drug traffi  cking, gunfi ghts between criminal gangs, 
police corruption and violence. Th ose problems occur mainly in poor neigh-
borhoods, or favelas, where people live in a risky environment. 
 Crime continues to be a harsh reality in Rio, but it aroused the public 
especially in the 1980s and 1990s. As a result, rising levels of fear of crime, an 
economic decline in entire regions of the city and investments losses were a 
major concern during this period. Criminal events reflected a deeper crime 
dynamic in Rio, one driven by the territorial dominion exercised by drug gangs 
in the favelas. In those regions of the city, drug gangs had taken control, impos-
ing their will by violence. They were de facto power holders in those spaces. The 
extent of the violence problem waxes and wanes. In the last decade, homicide 
has decreased in Rio de Janeiro. In 2004 the homicide rate was 48 per 100,000 
inhabitants, and in 2014 this figure fell to 32 per 100,000 inhabitants. On the 
other hand, the homicide rate in the state of Alagoas has jumped from 34 per 
100,000 inhabitants to 63 per 100,000 inhabitants (Cerqueira et al. 2016). Cur-
rently, the poor northeastern states are the most violent in the country. 
 Despite fluctuating crime and state efforts to attack their hegemony, gang 
control is still the order of the day in many favelas. Further, there are some 

136 
Vicente Riccio and Wesley G. Skogan
regions in Rio in which this kind of oppressive control is performed instead by 
militias, squads of corrupt police officers with ties to political and economic 
elites (Zaluar and Conceição 2007; Cano et al. 2012). 
 The territorial control exerted by those gangs is based on their need 
to protect the illegal drug trade. This provides the resources gangs need to 
acquire smuggled heavy weapons, which they deploy to maintain their con-
trol. In this context, it is common to observe confrontations between gangs 
struggling for control of contested territories. Furthermore, gangs also defy 
the police, and armed conflicts among them are also common in many com-
munities. The intensity of those confrontations can be observed in the kind 
of weaponry used by gangs and police forces: assault rifles, grenades, machine 
guns and armored vehicles. 
 Community residents who are caught in the crossfire between all of these 
armed bands are the main victims in this process. They face alternating cycles 
of brutal dominion by gangs, punctuated by the incursion of heavily armed 
Military Police units undertaking essentially military operations. Their “shock 
and awe” campaigns then quickly subside, for after such tactical operations the 
police do not remain in the communities. The main criticisms of this mode 
of response to crime action are well known: excessive use of violence, many 
collateral victims and a police force enjoying very little legitimacy among the 
population. For a long while, the problem of drug-related gang violence in the 
favelas seemed to be unsolvable. 
 However, in the 2000s, a series of innovative responses to crime were 
fielded under the leadership of the state governor at the time, Sérgio Cabral. 
They were known as the Pacifying Police Units, or “UPPs”. 1  The UPPs were 
created during this administration to bring the state back into communi-
ties controlled by drug gangs on a longer-term basis. A key objective was to 
regain and then hold control of those areas, shifting from the episodic violent 
incursion staged by the Military Police toward strengthening ties between the 
public and state institutions. The main objectives of this new strategy were 
the reduction of crimes, especially homicides, improving police-community 
relations and further reestablishing state control in these regions by bringing 
social and economic programs to bear upon them. 
 The UPPs thus were part of a complex, multi-agency policy that has 
been implemented for almost eight years. Since its start, there has been an 
expansion of the UPPs throughout Rio. However, there are at this writing 
only 38 UPPs functioning among the more than 800 favelas in Rio de Janeiro. 
There were some overall successes in Rio. Between 2005 and 2013, there were 
17,392 homicides registered in Rio de Janeiro, along with 4,707 police killings. 
The homicide rate for this period was “only” 22 per 100,000, down from the 
48 per 100,000 of 2004 (Magaloni, Franco and Melo 2015). 
 However, most recently the UPPs have faced intense criticism. Armed 
conflicts have broken out again in areas previously pacified; there has been 

Chapter 9: Gangs, Drugs and UPPs in Rio 
137
denunciation of the abuses committed by police officers; and the social pro-
grams that were promised have not materialized. This chapter describes the 
development of UPPs in Rio de Janeiro since their inception. It does so within 
a larger framework of research on democratic policing in developing coun-
tries. Special focus is placed on the relationship of police and community, and 
the issues facing policies aimed at improving communities marked by high 
levels of violence and social exclusion. The chapter is organized into three 
main sections: on police and community relationships in developing democ-
racies, the birth of the UPPs in Rio, and the consolidation of the UPPs. 
 Police and Community in Developing Democracies 
 One of the key features of any political transition from an authoritarian 
regime or a state wracked by civil war to a democratic future is the role of 
their police in society (Bayley 2005). Th e police as the state institution respon-
sible for maintaining order and promoting internal peace are central in any 
constitutional agreement about the kind of political regime that is desired. In 
a democracy, the police uphold the law, but its power is limited by it. Th us, the 
police in a democratic society are also bound by legitimacy claims (Tyler et al. 
2007). Th e people need not only the police, but they need a legitimate one. 
 Since the development of modern policing, the question of the role of 
state and the legitimacy of its actions is interconnected. In brief, the modern 
police is based on bureaucratization. The maintenance of order and crime 
fighting were no longer a task of local militias, powerful landowners or even 
the armed forces. The police was created to serve as a public institution (Igna-
tieff 2005). This model, established in London in 1829, spread throughout the 
world. Recognizably modern policing systems have been established in many 
different countries and legal cultures. However, the last almost two centuries 
have been marked by huge changes in the social landscape: urbanization, the 
rise of industrial capitalism, democratic expansion, decolonization, scientific 
revolutions, and globalization are some features of this process. Policing was 
also impacted by those changes in society. 
 The expansion of democracy during the last century was marked by many 
contradictions and distinct political cultures. The idea of democracy was 
accompanied by a huge demand for rights, especially for developing countries. 
Freedom of speech, to engage in an association, or to run for office were not 
enough to fulfill the democratic ideal. In many countries there is seen to be a 
conjunction of political rights with social rights and human rights (Caldeira 
and Holston 2009). What is the role of the police in this equation? As Bayley 
(2005) says, one of the central aspects in state building after a conflict or dur-
ing a period of redemocratization is the role of the police. The rule of the law 
is central for a democracy, and the police must be the first-line enforcers of 

138 
Vicente Riccio and Wesley G. Skogan
democratic norms. The state has the monopoly of violence and the force must 
be used in a legitimate way (Tyler 2011), meaning with respect to the law, in 
a transparent and accountable way (Chappuis and Hänggi 2013). This is a 
matter of rights. So, the police as the first-line enforcers of democratic norms 
should act in accordance with those guidelines. In short, “good governance of 
the security sector is achieved within this model by a framework of civilian, 
democratic control that provides for accountability and transparency in who 
uses force, when, where, why and how” (Chappuis and Hänggi 2013, p. 169). 
 However, in actual operation, the police do not act as they should. Their 
 modus operandi  varies across countries and levels of social economic develop-
ment. One question arises: are the police working in accordance with society 
demands? This question has been made since the development of modern polic-
ing. The bulk of studies about the police has also tried to grasp this problem. 
Studies conducted in the United States have settled on a paradigm regarding the 
evolution of the police in modern societies. The development of police forces 
in the US was based in the local level of administration. It has allowed a rela-
tionship between local political elites and the police, frequently one based on 
patronage and corruption. This feature was most apparent during Prohibition. 
In that period, corruption, violence and mistrust in the police skyrocketed. 
 The answer for this was professionalization and bureaucratization. How-
ever, isolating the police forces from many aspects of civil society created 
problems of its own. One key to modern models of policing is responsiveness. 
The police must be ready to respond quickly to calls and also to adapt quickly 
to changes in the character of crime and the needs of particular communities. 
Insulating the police deepened the gap between them and society. This can be 
observed in the legitimacy claims being made by residents of poor communi-
ties in the US—and Brazil—today. For them, police forces are frequently seen 
as violent, corrupt and biased. In the 1970s and 1980s, the criticisms of this 
model gave birth to two alternative models of action: problem-oriented polic-
ing and community policing. The first is based on the premises of prevention 
and action to solve problems that are not so visible or are only about to occur 
(Goldstein 1979). On the other hand, community policing advocates the decen-
tralization of police and their interaction with the community. Cooperative 
efforts between communities and the police can provide more security, crime 
prevention, reduction of fear of crime and the community’s strengthening. As a 
consequence, community policing increases police legitimacy (Skogan 2006). 
 Those policies that emerged in the United States have proved to be quite 
influential throughout the world. The spread of community policing pro-
grams in the US and the growing academic literature discussing its tenets and 
results have reached different cultures and realities. Community policing is 
not only a technique of social control, but it embeds an ideological meaning 
for developing countries, because it affects a core issue on the state-society 
relationship: the use of force (Wiesler and Onwudine 2007). This concept has 

Chapter 9: Gangs, Drugs and UPPs in Rio 
139
emerged as a hot topic in the public security agenda in places such as Argen-
tina (Glanc 2014), Brazil (Hinton 2005), Mexico (Müller 2010), South Africa 
(Wiesler and Onwudine 2007) and Nigeria (Hills 2012). However, the adop-
tion of community policing in different cultures and levels of social, economic 
and political development can raise some questions: what are the conditions 
to sustain a community policing program in a developing country? How does 
the extent of development of state institutions provide room for legitimate 
and sustainable policing in a conflicted area? Are police forces in newly born 
democracies suitable for those changes? Those questions are important to 
understand the context in which the UPPs were implemented and the main 
challenges they face. 
 In Latin America, for instance, the concept of community policing has 
been advanced as an important idea underlying police reforms. It resonates by 
its contrast to the (recent) authoritarian past of many countries there, places in 
which the mission of the police was to protect the state and not the citizenry. 
However, any spread of a community policing discourse in the region faces a 
“wall” of institutional and cultural barriers posed by police forces themselves. 
As a result, any adoption of the forms of community policing programs does 
not bring with it broader institutional changes, such as decentralization or 
more responsive and crime-oriented policies. However, community policing 
is still seen as a promising instrument to improve police-community relation-
ships (Frühling 2012). Müller (2010) examined the adoption of community 
policing in Mexico City and found that the influences of clientelism, political 
interference and police corruption were obstacles for the program. The influ-
ence of political context was also stressed by Arias and Ungar (2009) when 
they summarized research about Latin American policing. They concluded 
that most studies focused on specific programs, but did not consider contex-
tual and political relationships that also determine a policy’s outcomes. There 
is a tendency to simplify state-society relations when thinking about reform. 
 Thus, discussion about the inauguration of UPPs in Rio should not nar-
row its focus to the program itself, but needs instead to consider broader issues 
raised by the desire to adopt responsive public security policies in developing 
countries. For the UPPs, these broader issues include the capacity of the state 
to fulfill its duties in an area controlled by armed gangs; the different demands 
for security coming from distinct social groups; and the bedrock necessity that 
the project address the legitimacy component of police-community relations 
in high-conflict areas. Further concerns have been advanced by Hinton and 
Newburn (2009) in their discussion of the central issues facing police reform 
in developing countries: the accountability problem (police forces must be 
accountable to the law instead of being a government branch); police must 
protect human rights and not violate them; and police must be accountable to 
the people and hold that as their top priority. The origins and fate of the UPPs 
in Rio de Janeiro can be viewed through the lens of these concerns, and thus 

140 
Vicente Riccio and Wesley G. Skogan
can be seen not as an isolated program, but rather as a proxy for relating police 
reform in Brazil to the developing world generally. 
 The Birth of UPPs in Rio 
 Th ere has long been criticism of the Rio police, both in the daily conversa-
tions of people and in mass media. Th e depiction of Rio as a city teetering on 
the edge of violence, with gunfi ghts and territorial gangs everywhere, is well 
known. Eff orts to deal with recurring public security crises oft en accomplished 
little. Close to the end of the period of military rule in Brazil, the 1982 election 
of Leonel Brizola as governor of Rio promised to have a large impact on local 
crime policy. Brizola was a labor politician. During the military era, he lived in 
exile in Uruguay, Portugal, Chile and the US. Aft er an amnesty law allowed him 
to return to Brazil, he settled in Rio. In 1982, he created the Democratic Labor 
Party and won an unexpected victory in the race for governor of Rio de Janeiro 
State. He was reelected, ran for president and vice president several times, and 
was again elected governor of Rio de Janeiro. Th e question was how a for-
mer political exile and progressive social reformer would deal with the state’s 
Military Police. As a critic of the military regime, Brizola issued controversial 
orders, such as forbidding the police to enter in the favelas in armed units 
and naming progressive offi  cers to manage the institution. However, despite 
his eff orts to reform the police, he had few practical eff ects. Crime and police 
violence continued to grow during the 1980s and 1990s. Th e inability of even 
well-meaning and highly placed public offi  cials to accomplish much added to 
the prevailing perception of Rio as a city out of control, a place where the state 
could not handle its basic function of maintaining order (Ribeiro 2014). 
 Violence rose on both sides of the crime-and-policing divide. On the one 
hand, the gang violence rose and the public demanded tough measures for deal-
ing with crime. On the other hand, police violence was also a big concern of 
many. Mass killings in Favela Vigário Geral became a widely known example 
of police violence. To avenge the killing of four corrupt police officers by drug 
traffickers, a band of Civil Police officers invaded that favela and killed many 
innocent people, including entire families with no criminal records. This event 
has shocked the nation, and like similar episodes it deepened an already-exist-
ing legitimacy crisis. The continuing inability of the state to provide solutions 
to complex security issues in Rio could be observed next, during the adminis-
tration of Rio governor Marcelo Alencar. After another crisis, he appointed a 
former army general (Nilton Cerqueira) as state secretary of security. He in turn 
created a “bravery bonus” for Rio officers, something that was criticized at the 
time by human rights activists, academics and politicians. Officers who engaged 
in a firefight with a criminal were rewarded for bravery. The not-unexpected 
result was an increase in police killings, something that was almost unavoidable 
in a context of extreme violence and little accountability. 

Chapter 9: Gangs, Drugs and UPPs in Rio 
141
 However, desperate experimentation continued in Rio. The evident failure 
of the bravery bonus and high levels of mistrust of the police led to new direc-
tions in reform after Alencar was replaced by Anthony Garotinho. He was a 
former populist radio journalist who supported a new plan for reform that 
was drawn up with input from the academic community. The plan was drafted 
by Luiz Eduardo Soares, who later was the national public security secretary 
during the first Lula administration. He called for more police responsiveness 
to community concerns and killed the bravery bonus. Community policing 
was to be the new philosophy behind policing in Rio. But again, the continu-
ing political ambitions of Rio’s governors intervened, and Garotinho too left 
to run unsuccessfully for president. During the term of his replacement, the 
vice governor, a journalist (Tim Lopes), was murdered while investigating the 
Complexo do Alemão, a notorious collection of favelas located in the northern 
region of Rio de Janeiro. This sparked yet another political crisis, as it high-
lighted the territorial control still being exerted by criminal gangs. 
 As a consequence, another new program emerged: GPAE ( Grupamento 
Tático de Policiamento em Áreas Especiais , or Special Areas Tactical Police 
Group). Implemented in 2000, this program’s main objective was the adoption 
of a community policing philosophy in the state’s toughest favelas. It was inau-
gurated in two communities, Cantagalo and Pavão-Pavãozinho. GPAE’s main 
objective was to manage tensions between police and poor communities. It 
was apparent that top-down, occupation tactics were not going to address the 
legitimacy concerns of members, and that conditions for sustainable tradi-
tional policing were no longer present (Silva and Cano 2007). 
 The incumbent governor’s term (again it was Garotinho) then ended, but 
his wife ran and won her own term as governor of Rio. During her period in 
office (2003–2007), GPAE was expanded and new initiatives were launched 
in the communities of Providência, Casa Blanca, Chácara do Céu, Morro do 
Cavalão (Niterói), Morro do Estado, Vila Cruzeiro and Rio das Pedras. The 
initial success of the GPAE model was described as a reduction in crime and 
fear of crime. However, GPAE was not the end point in this reform story; 
instead, it became the direct precursor of UPP. 
 The concept of UPPs emerged after the first election of Sérgio Cabral as 
governor of Rio de Janeiro (2007–2011). He was also reelected for a second 
term (2011–2015). The strategic plan of the Military Police of Rio noted a 
need to promote GPAE’s expansion to more communities with high levels of 
crime and fear. The core idea was a “take and hold” one, to use a Battalion of 
Special Operations (BOPE) to recover territory from the gangs. Then, after 
the territory was secured, community policing would be implemented there 
through a GPAE team (Ribeiro 2014).  Despite the initial success of the UPP’s, 
Sérgio Cabral has been arrested for corruption charges and condemmed to 
14 years in jail. He also faces more 12 lawsuits for the same accusations.
 The UPP was launched following an armed takeover of a day care center 
in the Dona Marta favela, reputedly to use it as a center for drug dealing. The 

142 
Vicente Riccio and Wesley G. Skogan
Military Police decided to expel the gang and forced their way in. But unlike 
in the past, police did not disappear shortly after this incursion. Rather, they 
remained, and crime declined. In January 2009, the governor signed an execu-
tive order creating the UPPs, and promptly established a bonus of R$500.00 
(five hundred reals) for officers working in the unit. The further expansion of 
the UPPs occurred in March 2009 when the Military Police occupied the com-
munities of Batan, Cidade de Deus and Chapéu Mangueira (Ribeiro 2014). 
As it evolved, the UPP’s intervention plan became a four-step one: interven-
tion, stabilization, community policing and consolidation of state authority 
(Ganem Misse 2014). They were guided by two goals. The first was to regain 
control of territories controlled by the gangs and improve security there using 
more legitimate tactics. The second was to implement a system of incentives 
for police officers based on sticking to their goals and obtaining good results. 
Thus, the extra money was for members of battalions that fulfilled the plan 
(Magaloni, Franco and Melo 2015). Officers who are assigned to these units 
are trained in community policing, and an evaluation unit monitors their per-
formance. At this writing, there are 38 UPPs in place in Rio. 
 Decisions regarding where to target the program are thus important. 
UPPs do not follow a traditional “hottest spots” targeting approach, one of 
deploying officers in small areas with very high levels of crime. Favelas in gen-
eral are areas with a great deal of crime, but the first UPPs were implemented 
in areas with lower levels of violence compared to the worst-off places (Cano 
et al. 2012; Magaloni, Franco and Melo 2015). In fact, the great majority of 
UPPs are located in the South Zone of Rio de Janeiro, where businesses are 
located and more affluent people live. There certainly were criticisms of this 
model. Cano and colleagues (2012) concluded that UPPs were being sited in 
more affluent regions because Rio was about to host events such as the World 
Cup (2014) and the Olympics (2016). There are also strategic considerations. 
Officers interviewed by Magaloni’s team affirmed that the decision to estab-
lish a UPP is based on the character and organization of the criminal gang 
that controls a territory (2015). Thus, a gang known as the  Comando Ver-
melho  (Red Command) was challenged, because they were tactically violent 
and willing to challenge police authority. Finally, it has been noted that favelas 
controlled by the militias (off-duty police officers) tend to be tolerated by the 
police and politicians (Magaloni, Franco and Melo 2015). 
 Consolidation of the UPPs 
 Th e initial results of the UPPs seemed very successful, with their establish-
ment having reduced levels of crime and encouraging small businesses to 
emerge in pacifi ed favelas. Another benchmark has been the growth of for-
mal public services in the impacted communities. Where they are in charge, 

Chapter 9: Gangs, Drugs and UPPs in Rio 
143
gangs and militias exploit their control of services such as electricity, gas and 
cable television. Residents pay for these services directly to an illegal pro-
vider sponsored by the occupying group (Zaluar and Conceição 2007). Aft er 
Dona Marta’s UPP implementation, there was a large increase in the num-
ber of formal contracts with public service companies, and less illegal use of 
them (Cano et al. 2012). Another interesting aspect has been the emergence 
of favela tourism. Small restaurants, hostels and bars have opened that attract 
both tourists and middle-class customers, a sign of economic confi dence and 
the perceived safety of the area. Th is has drawn attention nationally and inter-
nationally to the UPP project. 
 The concept of an initial takeover by Military Police Special Battalions, 
followed later by community stabilization efforts by UPP teams, has been 
maintained. This process can last for months, and when risk declines the UPP 
officers become responsible for policing the community in a more participa-
tory way. However, the adoption of community policing in Latin America 
generally has been criticized because the core elements of this strategy are 
rarely actually present (Frühling 2012). In many places, community policing 
is a discourse proposed by politicians rather than a real strategy followed by 
police officers and managers. The UPPs are today one of the largest actual 
police reform projects in the developing world (Magaloni, Franco and Melo 
2015). Considering the structural problems facing nations in these regions, 
our expectations regarding change should be moderate at most. But how is it 
possible to make changes in this context? What are the factors that promote 
the institutionalization of a program like UPP? What are the incentives neces-
sary to foster the adherence of police officers to the program? What are the 
limits of such programs? Is this sustainable? How can often weak states deal 
with violent and heavily armed groups? 
 The questions may be partly answered by the UPP experience in Rio de 
Janeiro. However, they reflect universal problems in the policing in demo-
cratic societies. These include the problems of legitimacy, trust, crime fighting 
effectiveness and fear of crime. The UPPs may provide a starting point for 
discussion on how ideas in policing originating in the developed democra-
cies of the Northern Hemisphere can be adopted in different settings and 
how they can be made to work. The problem of security and crime is relevant 
for developing democracies, because it is a key element of the quality of their 
democracy itself (Caldeira and Holston 2009). 
 Leadership was important. The role of Rio de Janeiro’s secretary of secu-
rity is a relevant part of the story. José Mariano Beltrame was the secretary 
during the development of the UPPs. He was responsible for coordinating 
the efforts of distinct police organizations, one to reclaim communities and 
another for fostering a continuing and effective police presence thereafter. 
The role Beltrame had as the “top cop” responsible for all of this was appar-
ent, and it is notable that, at this writing, he is still in office. He is the face of 

144 
Vicente Riccio and Wesley G. Skogan
the program and has been responsible for the security policy for a decade. 
After their initially positive results, the UPPs quickly gained broad support 
among the people of Rio. Beltrame’s next step was to jump-start the imple-
mentation of UPPs in other communities facing similar problems. The state’s 
“honeymoon” with UPPs could last forever, and reality continues to intervene. 
Clashes between officers assigned to the UPP and gangsters in the Com-
plexo do Alemão, a group of favelas in the northern area of Rio controlled by 
Comando Vermelho, did not go well. In 2013, a member of the Rocinha favela 
was beaten and tortured to death at the police station. The event was caught by 
a surveillance camera, and the senior BOPE officer and 15 of his subordinate 
officers were arrested for torture and murder. As is frequently the case when 
police face failure, José Mariano Beltrame himself declared that police could 
not be a long-term solution for these communities. He argued for social poli-
cies to improve the quality of life in the favelas, to build a sustainable base for 
resisting crime. 
 As noted earlier, the UPP strategy includes an evaluation component, and 
studies of the effectiveness of the program have begun. The bulk of these stud-
ies cannot be conclusive about the UPP’s results. However, they shed light 
on the program’s development and apparent successes. The studies that have 
been conducted employed a variety of approaches, but they all focus on how 
the program is working and what their main positive and negative impacts 
are. Some track the perceptions of the communities’ members regarding 
the program, police officers working their area, and the main stakeholders 
responsible for the program (Cano et al. 2012). 
 A survey conducted at Dona Marta and Cidade de Deus communities 
in 2009 by Fundação Getulio Vargas (FGV) aimed to assess the perceptions 
of the people living there regarding fear of crime, trust in police and views 
of UPPs. The data was gathered in May 2009—almost six months after the 
initial reoccupation phase—and the perceptions recorded in the survey were 
quite positive. One of the most interesting results of that survey addressed 
the question of improvements in the quality of life after the introduction 
of the UPPs. Fully 81% of interviewees indicated that their life quality had 
improved a lot, due to the program. Other improvements in the communi-
ties were noted: 78% of residents gave a positive evaluation of community 
policing in their neighborhoods and 73% had observed a reduction in drug 
trafficking in the area. 
 In 2010, a phone survey was conducted for  O Globo , the largest Rio news-
paper. It was carried out in seven communities with UPP units. Despite the 
methodology’s limitations, some interesting results were found: 93% of the 
residents said that their communities were safe or very safe, 79% of the inter-
viewees observed that armed drug traffickers had disappeared from the streets 
and, for 85% of the interviewees, gunfights had ended in their neighborhoods. 
Such results would have been unthinkable in the past, and this evidence of 

Chapter 9: Gangs, Drugs and UPPs in Rio 
145
apparent success sparked the decision to begin implementing UPPs in other 
communities (Cano et al. 2012). 
 A survey with police officers was held in 2010 by  Centro de Estudos de 
 Segurança e Cidadania  (CeSec). Officers working in ten areas were inter-
viewed, including some of those discussed in this chapter. A total of 359 
police officers were interviewed in the first survey, and another was carried 
out in 2012, including in additional favelas. Those surveys generated informa-
tion about police officers’ perceptions of their role in the communities they 
patrolled. They were asked about the main problems that they observed on 
a daily basis. The major issues that they noted were related to nuisances and 
domestic violence. For example, in 2010, 75% of police officers indicated that 
nuisance disorders were a big issue, and this figure remained stable in the 2012 
survey (79%). In relation to domestic violence, 62% of police officers consid-
ered it to be an important community problem in 2010, and 65% in 2012. Drug 
trafficking was ranked as the fifth most important problem for them, at 24% in 
2010 and 43% in 2012. The great majority of the issues identified as priorities 
in the survey were not related directly to drug trafficking at all. 
 However, when asked about the risks of being assigned to a UPP unit, a 
great fear among officers in 2012 was that they would be ambushed (32%) or 
killed or wounded (24%). This is interesting because they recognize the main 
problems in the community to be nuisance disorders or domestic violence. 
Those are problems that could be treated in a responsive fashion through the 
tools of community policing. Nevertheless, the lack of trust by police officers 
in a different approach is recognized when they affirm that the most suitable 
weapon to be used in the UPP’s patrolling is their assault rifle (94% of respon-
dents in 2010 and 92% in 2012). Rio de Janeiro is the only state in Brazil where 
the assault rifle is an ordinary weapon used by the Military Police. 
 In 2012, the Brazilian Forum of Public Security and the Violence Analy-
sis Laboratory from Rio de Janeiro’s State University reported on their UPP 
evaluation. The project aimed at understanding the UPPs’ impacts in three 
areas: crime rates, police/community relations and perceptions about the 
UPPs. Considering the first dimension, the objective of the evaluation was 
to understand how the UPPs could reduce homicides and other gun-related 
crimes. The second impact question was whether the UPPs actually repre-
sented a new kind of policing. To examine the last issue, the study evaluated 
the UPPs’ impact on perceived security, levels of association among commu-
nity members, improvement in the formal economy and integration of the 
community with the city. 2 
 The evaluation found a reduction of homicides in the UPPs’ areas, espe-
cially in killings related to police actions. After the implementation of the 
UPPs, the death toll related to confrontations with the police dropped to 
almost zero in some regions. The fall in the homicide rate across the study 
areas was about 60 homicides per 100,000 in a year (Cano et al. 2012). 

146 
Vicente Riccio and Wesley G. Skogan
 The numbers of police officers deployed at UPP sites is a controversial 
topic, one of debate between supporters and critics of the program. The evalu-
ation reported that the average number of police officers per inhabitant in the 
state of Rio de Janeiro is 2.3 per 100,000. In UPP areas, the ratio was 18 police 
officers per 100,000 inhabitants (Cano et al. 2012). At this rate, it obviously 
would not be possible to sustain policing for the state of Rio de Janeiro at 
the UPP level, so that will always be a special feature of this program. When 
Cano’s study was conducted, there were 13 UPPs in Rio. Now the figure is 38, 
a number that has not grown for some time. Currently, there is a widespread 
perception that the program has reached its limits. The staffing cost of the 
program implies that the program has limits on its expansion even to places 
of need, due to its costs. This limit may have already been reached following 
the deepening economic crisis that hit Brazil in 2014. 
 The UPPs’ centralization is another critical issue. Despite its rhetoric 
regarding community policing, in practice community demands are not often 
considered when the police make action plans. In practice, it appears that 
the project reproduces a traditional, top-down policing model in which com-
munities do not influence the program (Cano et al. 2012). There is no real 
decentralization or integration of police and residents that would characterize 
a real community policing program. If one of the program objectives was the 
development of a police-community partnership, the actual shape of the proj-
ect indicates that it is much more a discourse than a reality. This context has 
not changed until now and reinforces the criticisms held by Frühling (2012) 
about the structural problems of Latin American police, which do not allow 
the full implementation of more responsive patterns of action. 
 On the other hand, Willis and Mota Prado (2014) have argued that that 
UPPs are a case of “reflexive” planning, in which managers in practice bypass 
institutional barriers to providing services. This preserves traditional struc-
tures, but creates alternative pathways to attaining their objectives in an efficient 
manner. For those reasons, the UPPs may be more effective than the former 
GPAE, because there are police managers who take action on their own. UPPs 
were not located in an independent unit, but were formed inside traditional 
battalions. By contrast, officers assigned to the UPPs receive orders solely from 
their UPP commander. This organizational model has allowed for an indepen-
dent role for UPPs inside the traditional structure of the Military Police of Rio 
de Janeiro. This may be an important reason why the program has survived. 
 A study conducted by Beatriz Magaloni, Franco and Malo (2015) at the 
Center for Democracy, Development and the Rule of Law from Stanford Uni-
versity broadened the focus of UPP evaluations. They conducted an analysis 
of geocoded violent deaths in Rio from 2005 to 2013. The main objective was 
to understand the impact of UPPs on homicide. Additionally, the research 
tried to compare the levels of death on pacified and nonpacified communi-
ties within Rio de Janeiro. This research aimed at bypassing a methodological 

Chapter 9: Gangs, Drugs and UPPs in Rio 
147
barrier affecting previous studies, the levels at which the data could be aggre-
gated. According to Magaloni, Franco and Melo (2015), the data used for 
previous UPP evaluations were organized at the police precinct level. Those 
regions are very heterogeneous and are not policed only by UPPs. Instead, the 
Stanford group aggregated incidents of lethal violence precisely to the favela 
level. Then, they compared favelas with UPPs to those being policed in tradi-
tional fashion. They manually retrieved and coded the data from more than 
22,000 homicides registered in Rio de Janeiro over the period studied. As the 
UPPs were implemented in different moments, differences in the timing of 
interventions across Rio helped increase the causal implications of the sta-
tistical analysis. They were also able to look at crime displacement along the 
fringes of targeted favelas. Finally, they also identified “control areas” match-
ing specific UPP targets and “paradigmatic cases” that represent the story of 
the program, “based on an analysis of Rio’s spatial and socioeconomic urban 
dynamics” (Magaloni, Franco and Melo 2015, p.  6). Those “paradigmatic 
cases” were the favelas from South Zone in Rio, Cidade de Deus in the West 
Zone and Rocinha, the largest favela in Brazil. 
 The study has concluded that the UPPs had no impact on the observed 
decline of homicides in the favelas of Rio de Janeiro. This trend had been 
underway since 2000. A similar fall in homicide can also be seen in São Paulo, 
where the homicide rate dropped to 13 per 100,000 inhabitants in 2015, the 
lowest registered in years. Homicide rates generally have been rising only in 
the north and northeast regions of the country (Cerqueira et al. 2016). 
 The greatest impact of the UPPs in Magaloni’s study was on killings by 
police officers. They concluded that police killings would be 60% higher with-
out the UPPs. The peak was registered in 2007 with 1,330 people killed by the 
police. After the implementation of the UPPs, the number of deaths occur-
ring from confrontation with police fell to 416 in 2013 (Ramos 2014). So, 
although it appears that UPPs had little impact on general homicide, it has 
a good record with regard to reducing police violence. Death rates for black 
males in Rio dropped “from 25 to less than 7 per 100,000 from 2007 to 2013” 
(Magaloni, Franco and Melo 2015, p. 42). 
 The Future of UPPs 
 Despite positive evaluation fi ndings on a number of dimensions, it appears 
that there will continue to be a lack of resources to expand the program to 
other neighborhoods in Rio. Drug gangs have also been reorganizing their 
operations in response to the program, and there still is widespread lack of 
trust in the police. It is still a special program, not the regular basis for policing 
in Rio de Janeiro. In general, it remains more feasible to have an occupation 
army than a democratic police. 

148 
Vicente Riccio and Wesley G. Skogan
 After eight years of implementation, the UPPs have managed to regain 
some territories from armed gangs and to reestablish the state’s presence in 
those areas. This task was considered unthinkable for many people before the 
program began. In that sense, the UPPs have sent the message that it is pos-
sible for the state to maintain its sovereign power over conflict areas in Rio de 
Janeiro. However, issues such as sustainability, political interference, institu-
tionalization and legitimacy are critical for the UPPs’ future. 
 As we have seen, political context is an important variable in the shape and 
sustainability of community-oriented policing in Brazil, as in Latin America 
generally. The UPPs were an initiative of Sérgio Cabral’s administration, and 
since then his political group has been able to win successive elections. So 
as yet, the political sustainability of the program has not been tested, and 
we know little about how a different political coalition would view the pro-
gram. Another question is how long the UPPs will stick to their vision without 
José Mariano Beltrame’s daily leadership. Since the beginning he has been the 
face of UPPs, both internally and facing outwardly to the community. It takes 
exceptional leadership to foster successful new programs, but they must be 
able to survive leadership transition. 
 The UPPs’ possible expansion is also another problem to be consid-
ered. It seems that the program has reached its limits. UPP demands more 
resources than has traditionally been allocated to policing. The concentra-
tion of officers in UPP areas was far larger than for Rio as a whole, and it 
has many remaining areas in need. There are only 38 UPPs implemented 
across the 800 recognized favelas of Rio de Janeiro. The resource problem 
is now aggravated by an economic crisis that has driven Brazil into a major 
recession. Moreover, the state of Rio de Janeiro is dependent on oil revenues 
from offshore fields, and the fall of oil prices in international markets has 
increased the effects of the economic crisis on its finances. The inability of 
the state to expand and sustain the program in the long run, and to focus 
more resources on the highest crime areas and in the north of the city, may 
reinforce the perception that UPPs were designed for the better-off and eco-
nomically important South Zone favelas. 
 Legitimacy claims are also relevant to the UPPs’ development. One of the 
remarkable aspects of the UPPs in the beginning was the reduction of fear of 
crime and their apparent effect on homicide. Their efficacy in reducing kill-
ings by the police is also very important. However, the return of gangs and 
new confrontations between them and the police in areas such as Complexo 
do Alemão can reduce any legitimacy that has been built up in recent years. 
Further outbreaks of police torture and abuse could badly hurt their cred-
ibility. Moreover, many UPP advocates stress the need to implement social 
policies in their target favelas, to broaden the scope and effectiveness of the 
intervention and foster crime prevention. So, the future of the UPPs looks 
challenging. But—importantly—they provide evidence that the state  can 

Chapter 9: Gangs, Drugs and UPPs in Rio 
149
regain control of areas controlled by armed gangs and foster innovative poli-
cies in developing democracies, if they have the will. 
 Further Reading 
 For more information, visit: www.upprj.com/index.php/o_que_e_upp 
 Notes 
 1.  Unidades de Polícia Pacifi cadora in Portuguese. 
 2. In addition, Oosterbam and Wijk (2015) found in a qualitative analysis that there was a 
reduction in fear among residents of UPP areas. Th ey also stressed the perception of more 
integration among favela residents and middle-class citizens aft er the entry of UPP teams. 
 References 
 Arias, E. D., and Ungar, M. 2009. Community policing and Latin America’s citizen security 
crisis.  Comparative Politics , 41(4): 409–429. 
 Bayley, D. 2005.  Changing the guard: Developing democratic police abroad . Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press. 
 Caldeira, T., and Holston, J. 2009. Democracy and violence in Brazil.  Society for Comparative 
Studies in Society and History 41: 691–729. 
 Cano, I., Trindade, C., Borges, D., Ribeiro, E., and Rocha, L. 2012.  Os Novos donos do morro: 
uma avaliação exploratória do impacto das Unidades de Polícia Pacificadora (UPPs) no Rio de 
Janeiro  [The new  Morro  owners: An evaluation of pacifyng police units in Rio de Janeiro]. 
Fórum Brasileiro de Segurança Pública: Laboratório de Estudos da Violência. www.lav.uerj.
br/docs/rel/2012/RelatUPP.pdf (accessed February 12, 2016). 
 Cerqueira, D., Ferreira, H., Lima, R. S., Bueno, S., Hanashiro, O., Batista, F., and Nicolato, P. 
2016.  Atlas da Violência  [Violence atlas 2016]. Working Paper. Instituto de Pesquisa Pura e 
Aplicada, Brasília. 
 Chappuis, F., and Hänggi, H. 2013. Statebuilding through security sector reform. In  Routledge 
handbook of international statebuilding , ed. D. Chandler and T. D. Sisk, 168–184. London 
and New York: Routledge. 
 Frühling, H. 2012. A realistic look at Latin American community policing programmes.  Polic-
ing and Society: An International Journal of Research and Policy 22: 76–88. 
 Ganem Misse, D. 2014. Cinco anos de UPP: um breve balanço [Five years of the UPP: A brief 
review].  Dilemas: Revista de Estudos de Conflito e Controle Social 7(3): 675–700. 
 Glanc, L. 2014. Caught between soldiers and police officers: Police violence in contemporary 
Argentina.  Policing and Society: An International Journal of Research and Policy  24(4): 479–496. 
 Goldstein, H. 1979. Improving policing: A problem-oriented approach.  Crime and Delinquency 
25: 236–258. 
 Hills, A. 2012. Lost in translation: Why Nigeria's police don’t implement democratic reforms. 
 International Affairs 88(4): 739–755. 
 Hinton, M. S. 2005. A distant reality: Democratic policing in Argentina and Brazil.  Criminal 
Justice 51: 75–100. 

150 
Vicente Riccio and Wesley G. Skogan
 Hinton, M. S., and Newburn, T. 2009.  Policing developing democracies . Abingdon: Routledge. 
 Ignatieff, M. 2005. Police and people: The birth of Mr. Peel’s blue locusts. In  Policing: Key read-
ings , ed. T. Newburn, 25–30. Devon: Willan Publishing. 
 Magaloni, B., Franco, E., and Melo, V. 2015.  Killing in the slums: An impact evaluation of police 
reform in Rio de Janeiro . Working paper, Center on Democracy, Development and the Rule 
of Law. http://cddrl.fsi.stanford.edu/publication/killing-slums-impact-evaluation-police-
reform-rio-de-janeiro (accessed January 10, 2016). 
 Müller, M. M. 2010. Community-policing in Latin America: Lessons from Mexico city.  Euro-
pean Review of Latin American and Caribbean Studies 88, April: 21–37. 
 Oosterbam, S., and Wijk, J. V. 2015. Pacifying and integrating the favelas of Rio de Janeiro: an 
evaluation of the impact of the UPP program on favela residents.  International Journal of 
Comparative and Applied Criminal Justice 39: 179–198. 
 Ramos, S. 2014.  Segurança Pública, violência e polícia: o que aconteceu com o Rio de Janeiro? 
[Public security, violence and police: what has happened with Rio de Janeiro?]. Work-
ing Paper, Centro de Estudos de Segurança e Cidadania: Universidade Cândido Mendes 
(CESEC). 
 Ribeiro, L. 2014. O Nascimento da polícia moderna: uma análise dos programas de policia-
mento comunitário implementados na cidade do Rio de Janeiro [The birth of modern police: 
Community policing programs in Rio de Janeiro (1983–2012)].  Análise Social 211(49): 
2182–2999. 
 Silva, G. M., and Cano, I. 2007. Between damage reduction and community policing: The case 
of Pavão-Pavãozinho-Cantagalo in Rio de Janeiro’s Favelas. In  Legitimacy and criminal jus-
tice: International perspectives , ed. T. Tyler, 186–214. New York, NY: Russel Sage Foundation. 
 Skogan, W. G. 2006.  Community policing in Chicago: A tale of three cities . Oxford and New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
 Tyler, T. 2011. Trust and legitimacy: Policing in the USA and Europe.  European Journal of 
Criminology 8: 254–266. 
 Tyler, T., Braga, A., Fagan, J., Meares, T., Sampson, R., and Winship, D. 2007. Legitimacy and 
criminal justice: International perspectives. In  Legitimacy and criminal justice: International 
perspectives , ed. T. Tyler, 9–29. New York, NY: Russel Sage Foundation. 
 Wiesler, D., and Onwudine, I. D. 2007.  Community-policing: A comparative view . Working 
paper no. 6, International Police Executive Forum: Geneva Centre for the Democratic Con-
trol of Armed Forces. 
 Willis, G. D., and Mota Prado, M. 2014. Process and pattern in institutional reforms: A case 
study of the Police Pacifyng Units (UPPs) in Brazil.  World Development 64: 232–234. 
 Zaluar, A., and Conceição, I. S. 2007. Favelas sob o controle das milícias no Rio de Janeiro, que 
paz? [Favelas under militias’ control in Rio de Janeiro, what Peace?].  São Paulo em Perspec-
tiva 21: 89–101. 

151
 Contents 
 Community Policing in Rio de Janeiro 
152 
 Developing the Concept in Rio 
155 
 Community Policing in Dona Marta and Cidade de Deus 
157 
 Conclusions and Implications for Policy in Brazil 
161 
 References 
162 
 Community Policing 
in the  Favelas of Rio 
de Janeiro 
 Vicente Riccio, Marco 
Aurélio Ruediger, 
Steven Dutt Ross and 
Wesley G. Skogan 1 
 10 
 In the United States, adoption of community policing became widespread dur-
ing the 1980s. Although the details varied widely from agency to agency, these 
programs generally involved decentralizing administration to increase orga-
nizational responsiveness, engaging with the community in safety projects, 
and adopting a problem-solving orientation that extends the police mandate 
to include quality-of-life issues. Many of its tenets proved popular beyond the 
boundaries of the US, and community policing has subsequently stimulated 
new thinking about policing in countries around the world. 
 This chapter examines the adoption of a version of community policing in 
two extremely poor communities—favelas—in Rio de Janeiro, the capital city of 
Rio de Janeiro State and the second largest city in Brazil. They provided a chal-
lenging environment. In both areas, large and well-armed criminal groupings 
challenged the idea that the government held a monopoly over the application of 
violence to maintain order. Instead, they threatened to install themselves as the 
de facto state, one that would protect their criminal enterprises, including drug 
trafficking. Residents of the areas had little voice in this matter. Historically, their 
relationship with the police was a poor one, marked by widespread experience 
with police violence and corruption. This had largely extinguished any sense that 
the state had more legitimacy to exercise violence than did local criminals. 

152 
Vicente Riccio et al.
 After a review of some of the basic concepts of community policing and 
how they might apply to the Brazilian context, this chapter discusses Rio de 
Janeiro’s attempt to mount a community policing effort in these two areas. 
Our initial research question—was Rio’s favela initiative “community polic-
ing”?—necessarily came first, for skeptics doubted that Rio de Janeiro’s State 
Military Police could do anything of the sort. Then we address the second 
question: is there evidence that the program they mounted helped reduce 
crime and rebuild police legitimacy? Using a survey of residents, we examine 
the impact of the program on those issues. 
 Community Policing in Rio de Janeiro 
 In the United States, by the 1980s, initiatives were underway to reshape the 
relationship between police and the communities they served. Th ere were 
diverse reasons for doing so but at its heart, community policing was driven 
by the legitimacy defi cit that had grown over the decades in black and brown 
neighborhoods, and moving in this direction was a political decision (Skogan 
and Hartnett 1997). Earlier, a “professional” model of policing had spread 
through the US, and this was also a political matter: it was intended to confer 
autonomy on the police in relation to politicians, big businesses, and other 
local power brokers. Police bureaucracies quickly isolated themselves and 
adopted a performance model based on quick response to calls from the pub-
lic for police service. Motorized patrolling was the standard police action. 
One unintended consequence was that police lost contact with many mem-
bers of the community and mostly dealt with the public as either aggrieved 
victims or their alleged perpetrators (Moore 1992 [Vol. 15]). Both this gulf 
between the police and the community and the large legitimacy defi cit in poor 
and minority communities would be familiar to policymakers and politicians 
in Rio de Janeiro, for they faced the same problems. 
 Another widely familiar feature of policing is the hierarchical structure of 
police agencies. In the United States, this probably became more pronounced 
with the emergence of the professional model for tightening up administrative 
oversight to deal with the internal corruption and sheer laziness that charac-
terized the even earlier “political” model of policing. The role of hierarchy in 
organizations is to reduce the autonomy of intermediate-level managers and 
front-line employees (Jesilow and Parsons 2000). Some have observed that 
hierarchy impeded the development of a more nimble, locally oriented polic-
ing, and thus undermined its preventive effectiveness by getting in the way 
of the adoption of highly varied community initiatives and responsiveness 
to different priorities in different neighborhoods (Skogan 2004). In Rio de 
Janeiro, too, critics of the police could point to hierarchy as one of their prob-
lems. In fact, police in Brazil are much more modeled along strict military 

Chapter 10: Community Policing in the Favelas of Rio 
153
lines than any North American police department. They are heavily armed 
and frequently conduct what are essentially military operations. Internally, 
there is lateral entry into the top officer ranks, cementing large social and edu-
cational distinctions between rank-and-file police and their military-ranked 
top officer corps. 
 Problem solving, at root, is the idea that police move from exclusively 
taking care of incidents to developing long-term preventive solutions for 
community problems (Skolnick and Bayley 1986). The steps involved include 
problem identification, prioritization, and resolution. The involvement of 
the community may be part of the solution, but maybe not. The police can 
take on problems with their considerable resources, perhaps in conjunction 
with other municipal agencies. Tilley (2004) emphasizes this point when he 
notes that problem-oriented policing does not redefine the distance between 
the state and the community. But, adopting a community orientation pushes 
police to prioritize issues which may not be conventional—or convention-
ally “serious”—crimes. Community policing presses police to address a wider 
range of issues (Skogan 2006). Rio’s favelas had plenty of those, and it was an 
open question at the start of this research whether police would recognize 
them as their problem too. 
 Visitors from abroad looking into the suitability of community policing 
might come away confused. Authors like Seagrave (1996) worry that it is dif-
ficult to define community policing because of the fluidity of the concept. 
The difficulty of defining it is seen by some as a major hurdle to deciding, for 
example, whether “it”—whatever it is—“works.” Others like Ratcliffe (2008) 
celebrate this fluidity, since it can emerge in concrete practice from collabo-
ration between police and particular communities. In this view, community 
policing adapts itself to context, in response to diverse motives for moving in 
this direction. 
 This provides us with an approach to addressing our first research ques-
tion: was Rio’s favela initiative community policing? We first looked for 
strategic components of community-oriented policing: administrative decen-
tralization, problem solving, and—because of priorities in Brazil—legitimacy 
building by protecting the public while respecting human rights. 
 For decentralization, one would look at whether officers have autonomy 
with regard to acting in response to demands as they arise. This entails risks; 
for unlike assembly line workers, police officers in practice exercise a great 
deal of discretion. As state agents who act directly with the public, they have 
a considerable decision-making autonomy in concrete cases (Lipsky 1983). 
Their judgments in these situations may be based more on their personal 
views than on legal rules (Oberweis and Musheno 2001). For this reason, 
the true acceptance of community policing principles by line officers is very 
important; alternately, they can ignore, subvert, or sabotage well-meaning 
policies (Novak, Alarid and Lucas 2003). Research has verified this problem 

154 
Vicente Riccio et al.
in developed societies with a long tradition of democracy, so there is reason 
for concern about how police discretion will be exercised in more recently 
consolidated democracies. 
 Problem solving promises the preventive aspect of community polic-
ing. Because public needs are to play an important role in driving this, we 
would expect community-oriented policing in Rio to track local priorities and 
involvement in other public service agencies in tackling a broad spectrum of 
problems, ranging from health and street cleaning to getting better lighting 
installed. 
 While rebuilding legitimacy by effectively policing while respecting 
citizens’ rights was a prime Brazilian priority, the turn toward the commu-
nity in the United States was also importantly driven by the state’s need to 
recapture enough of it to maintain a politically tolerable level of social peace. 
Concern for legitimacy is important in societies marked by great social divi-
sions, whether they are economic, cultural, or racial in character. A very large 
body of important research has documented that the belief in the legitimacy 
of authorities is crucial to the acceptance of laws and deference to the deci-
sions of the state and its delegates. Democratic nations cannot be built only 
on coercion involving most of the people almost all of the time (Sunshine and 
Tyler 2003; Tyler 2008). 
 Of course, stable states have legitimacy in the eyes of most of the popula-
tion. It is a deficit that is usually concentrated in selected areas, varying in 
detail from nation to nation. In reality, community policing is really about 
legitimating the police in poor, marginalized, sometimes culturally distinct 
communities. In Northern Ireland, for example, Weitzer (1995) documents 
how religion dominated the relationship between the police and the commu-
nity. There, somewhat akin to our Rio de Janeiro communities, autonomous 
armed bands challenged the legitimacy of the state. In regions under influ-
ence of the Irish Republican Army, the population was forbidden to contact 
the police. From the point of view of many poor Catholics, the police were 
unresponsive and brutal, and they were called enemies. In societies marked 
by extreme inequality, recent democratization, and fragile commitment to 
human rights, legitimacy can be hard to find. This can be observed elsewhere 
in Latin America (Frühling 2009), as well as in Eastern Europe (Mesko and 
Klemencic 2007), places with traditions of authoritarian rule which was only 
recently democratized. In such societies, there is a great distance between the 
police and the people. In Brazil, favelas are places where police presence has 
habitually been reactive and violent and police have few links with the com-
munity. In these spaces, armed criminal groups predominate and exercise 
arbitrary and self-serving control over what happens there. 2 
 Thus, a central question we address is the extent to which community 
policing should be established in these locations and successfully build a more 
legitimate relationship with the public. 

Chapter 10: Community Policing in the Favelas of Rio 
155
 But, favelas can be (they vary a great deal) dangerous places. David 
Thacher (2001, p. 771) therefore raises a relevant question: “how does a police 
department institutionalize the commitment to justice and respect without 
weakening crime control?” Can police effectively enforce the law and control 
crime in this context while avoiding abuse? In the circumstance of the fave-
las, police face the difficult task of integrating these sometimes competing 
demands. In the past, they largely had not done a good job at this. The favelas 
in question had a history of police violence absent of actual long-term strat-
egy for crime prevention. In Rio de Janeiro, their interventions often involved 
the use of heavy weaponry, armored cars, and helicopters, and they ended up 
causing a great deal of damage to the people from these communities. How-
ever, the state still could not maintain their temporary monopoly of force, and 
criminal groups in these communities returned to their old ways once they 
were gone (Costa 2004; Moraes and Cano 2007; Sapori 2007). The criminal 
groups operating there are mainly connected to the drug trade, which gener-
ates a great deal of cash that is used in part to corrupt state authorities. This 
leads to a dynamic in which the state efforts to impose order are episodic, 
violently repressive, and widely disrespectful of the rights of residents. On 
the other side, the control practices of armed criminal groups repress any 
independent civic articulation of the views of residents. The adoption of com-
munity-oriented, legitimacy-building initiatives in these highly conflicted 
urban spaces certainly was challenging. 
 Developing the Concept in Rio 
 As we observed in the previous section, relations between police and the 
poor communities we studied were marked by mutual distrust and abusive 
police practices. Like other regions that suff er from these problems, favelas 
are marked by poverty, receive poor public services, and face high levels of 
unemployment. Th e question was, could community-oriented policing be 
implemented in these areas? 
 The effort in our study communities, Santa Marta and Cidade de Deus, 
was not without precedent. In Rio de Janeiro, there had already been an attempt 
to intervene in other favelas using a similar policing model, by the Police 
Group for Special Areas (GPAE). Their interventions focused on the Pavão 
and Pavãozinho favelas, which are located in the Copacabana and Ipanema 
areas of Rio de Janeiro. That project stemmed from the crisis created by the 
killing of five young people by the police, who claimed that they were drug 
dealers. The community reaction to these killings created a local rebellion that 
spread throughout Copacabana (Moraes and Cano 2007). 
 The GPAE project involved the participation of other state agencies, 
civil society, and the area’s inhabitants. It was a top-down project and at the 

156 
Vicente Riccio et al.
beginning, the residents were suspicious of the police. The integration of the 
police and the community in a context of a high level of conflict, with the pres-
ence of several armed groups connected to drug dealing, was one of the 
objectives of the GPAE. GPAE focused initially on three goals: reduce access 
to guns and open gun carrying, steer youths away from a life of crime, and 
halt the violent practices of the Civil and Military Police (Albernaz, Caruso 
and Patricío 2007). The project did not originally focus particularly on drug 
dealing. As they began to operate, members of the GPAE unit found them-
selves receiving many demands from the public that were not immediately 
connected to crime, such as medical assistance, support for access to public 
bodies, and educational and work qualification programs. This, of course, 
has been a standard occurrence when police adopt an open, problem-focused 
orientation to the community. Being effective troubleshooters will capture the 
attention of many elements in the area (Skogan 2006). In its first two years, the 
program was apparently successful, with a significant reduction of homicides 
in the communities involved. 
 The GPAE experience was extended to other communities, such as For-
miga, Chácara do Céu, Morro do Cavalão in Niterói, and Vila Cruzeiro. In 
the latter region, GPAE was instituted in response to media pressure, which 
followed the murder of a journalist. In spite of the initial success of the Pavão 
and Pavãozinho interventions, problems were identified in the execution of 
the program. It was too top down, too unorganized to respond effectively to 
the many social demands that came its way, and did not promise to become 
institutionalized in a fashion that would sustain the intervention for a long 
period. The program was vulnerable to political interference. 
 The GPAE experience in Morro do Cavalão in Niterói (a city in Rio de 
Janeiro’s metropolitan area located at Guanabara Bay and connected to the 
main city by ferry boats and a bridge) was also considered successful, because 
it resulted in the reduction in the visible presence of armed groups in the com-
munity and reduced the spaces where drug dealers could act. Bonds of trust 
between the community and police leaders on the scene were established, but 
this did not solve the issue of the initiative’s institutional fragility. 
 Following the election of Rio de Janeiro State Governor Sérgio Cabral, a sec-
retary of security was appointed who came from the Federal Police (Delegado 
José Mariano Beltrame). There followed a shift in the state’s security policies. 
New initiatives were mounted against drug dealers and the visible occupation of 
favelas by armed groups. These efforts could lead to intense armed confronta-
tions, as in the case of favela Complexo do Alemão, where an operation resulted 
in 19 deaths and involved more than 1,000 police officers. In spite of criticisms 
regarding possible abuses, the action in Complexo do Alemão was considered 
successful and had the support of several social sectors. 
 Importantly, the occupation of Complexo do Alemão clearly defined the 
state government position of not negotiating with armed groups. An initial 

Chapter 10: Community Policing in the Favelas of Rio 
157
emphasis on their containment process was followed by the adoption of a 
policy that combined territorial reoccupation to repress drug dealing and the 
adoption of a form of community policing. The units assigned to the job were 
dubbed Pacifying Police Units (UPPs), and they remain active to this day. 
 The UPP model mounts interventions in poor communities in order to 
reduce the space for organized crime. It takes into consideration the particu-
lar features of the communities in which the units will operate, including the 
character of the armed groups exerting territorial control there. The initial 
occupation has the objective of driving out the most significant criminals 
and establishing an enduring police presence in public spaces. Police regain 
control of former drug dealing points and the escape routes used by the crimi-
nals. The initial interventions are conducted by special groups of the Military 
Police, such as the Special Operations Battalion (BOPE). 
 In a shift, instead of withdrawing after making arrests, police units remain 
in place. This is to create a security situation in which community policing 
can be implemented by the UPPs. These officers are especially trained for 
doing this, and they receive special financial compensation to acknowledge 
the importance of their pacifying role. The continued occupation of an area 
and the inauguration of local UPP teams make it possible to work on the 
provision of other public services demanded by these communities. It was 
described in a speech by the secretary of security: 
 It is necessary to respond to the population’s demand. We used to have the old 
speech: there is no school, there is no doctor because there is no security. Now 
there is security. Let the services come. Rio de Janeiro’s population needs to be 
more active, demand more from its governors, its politicians. To know from 
whom they can demand. The police will create the peaceful environment for 
other people to solve. The more we value citizenship, the less security will be 
needed. 
 Available at http://g1.globo.com/notícias/Rio/0,MUL1252476-5606,00.html 
(accessed on December 8, 2009) 
 Community Policing in Dona Marta 
and Cidade de Deus 
 In this section, we address the implementation of the next iteration of com-
munity policing in Rio de Janeiro, in the communities of Dona Marta and 
Cidade de Deus. Th e operations in Dona Marta began in November 2008 with 
an intervention by BOPE to drive out the criminal groups that visibly occu-
pied the community. UPP teams were installed one month later, in December 
2008. Th is operation functioned as a “test run” in order to be assessed and 
reproduced in other areas. All the action was preceded by careful planning 
and analysis. 

158 
Vicente Riccio et al.
 New police efforts in Cidade de Deus began in 2009, and UPP took over 
in February 2009. This project was adapted to local issues in Cidade de Deus, 
which is a large and populous community. In addition, there are geographic 
differences, for Santa Marta is located on a hill whereas Cidade de Deus is flat 
and spread out. For this reason, the Cidade de Deus intervention focused on a 
specific part of the area, Caratê. By measuring the perceptions of residents of 
these two communities, we were able to provide some evidence on the impact 
of community policing in Rio de Janeiro. 
 Surveys were conducted in both communities during May 2009. A struc-
tured questionnaire was administered to 600 residents, 300 from each favela. 
The field research was carried out in Santa Marta from 22 May to 24 May 
2009, while in Cidade de Deus it took place from 25 May to 27 May 2009. 
Quota sampling was used to select respondents. Rio’s sprawling favelas are 
not laid out on a grid or with official addresses, and dwelling units are piled 
on top of each other and frequently subdivided to house diverse family units. 
This made it impractical to sample by listing residential addresses for random 
selection. Most favelas do not officially exist, so there were also no official 
population lists from which to draw or evaluate standard survey samples. 
Instead, interviewers were positioned at points of high population movement. 
They approached adults asking if they were the head of their household or the 
spouse of the head of their household. Interviews were conducted to achieve 
an approximately 55–45% female–male distribution of respondents. For pur-
poses of this evaluation, the dependent variables were measures of various 
aspects of the perceived security of residents in the areas. We examine these in 
relation to their views of the implementation of the UPP model in their area, 
which is the independent variable. 
 Measures of crime, fear, and police violence were included in the brief 
questionnaire. They reflected the main security problems that residents of 
these two areas faced and the issues that were targeted by the UPP teams. 
Respondents were asked fear of crime questions concerning (in translation) 
perceived improvements over the last year in “your personal and family 
security” and “your ease of coming and going safely.” They rated these issues 
as improving “very much,” “a little,” or “not at all.” They were also asked to 
rate improvements in the presence of “armed drug dealers in the street” and 
“murders.” Finally, the survey monitored the potential for police abuse by 
responses to questions about perceived improvements (or not) in “violence 
by the police” and “police respect for human rights.” 
 The analysis reported here examined the relationship between these per-
ceived changes in the community environment and respondents’ views of the 
UPP teams. They were asked, “how do you evaluate the community policing 
in your area?” They were asked to rate the new police teams using one of four 
categories, ranging from “poor” to “normal,” “good,” and “very good.” The 
results are presented in  Figures 10.1 and 10. 2 . 

Chapter 10: Community Policing in the Favelas of Rio 
159
  Figure 10.1  presents the distribution of responses to the fear of crime 
items. They first asked about possible improvements in personal and fam-
ily security. The left-most chart in  Figure 10.1  illustrates the percentage of 
respondents who reported that their security situation had improved a lit-
tle or very much. These two percentages combine to determine the overall 
height of each bar. The bars thus represent positive views of varying strength 
and a bar is presented for each assessment of community policing. As can be 
noted there, the more positive respondents were regarding community polic-
ing, the more they reported that they and their families felt more secure. The 
difference was most dramatic in the percentage of respondents indicating 
that their situation had improved “very much.” More than 80% of those most 
favorable toward community policing in their area choose this response, and 
together with the “improved a little” group, the total percent positive was 
94%. Among those who thought the program was implemented poorly, on 
the other hand, only 4% saw their security was improving a lot and 15% 
thought it went up “a little.” Statistically, the Spearman correlation between 
the two measures was +.50. 
 Figure 10.1  Community policing and resident perceptions of personal security, 
human rights, and freedom of access 
 Source: Fundação Getulio Vargas survey 

160 
Vicente Riccio et al.
 The right-most panel of  Figure 10.1 examines the second fear of crime 
question: resident perceptions of their freedom to come and go as they please. 
This was an important issue in areas previously marked by extreme violence 
and policing by armed criminal groups. Evaluations of community policing 
were directly related to their ability to come and go; the Spearman correlation 
between the two measures was +.49. The percentage of respondents who saw 
their access rights “much improved” was particularly notable. 
 The center panel in  Figure 10.1  examines residents’ perceptions of police 
respect for human rights in their area. Their evaluations of community polic-
ing were also linked to this factor. At 11% positive, those giving the program 
a poor rating stood far below the 81% in the most positive category seeing 
improvement in police respect for human rights. The Spearman correlation 
between the two measures was +.46. 
 Other factors were linked to our respondents’ views of community safety. 
The strongest correlates of the two fear measures described in  Figure 10.1  were 
education and income. Higher income and more educated residents (relative 
to the others living in these poor areas) were most critical of the police. For 
example, among those in the bottom income quartile, 44% thought that the 
 Figure 10.2  Community policing and resident perceptions of drug dealing, homi-
cide, and police violence 
 Source: Fundação Getulio Vargas survey 

Chapter 10: Community Policing in the Favelas of Rio 
161
police had improved very much, while the comparable figure for those in the 
highest income quartile was only 21%. The most educated respondents were 
the most critical regarding the protection of human rights; 61% of those in the 
highest education group gave them a rating so low that it was not included on 
the bars in  Figure 10.1 , and only 12% thought they had improved very much. 
  Figure 10.2  presents the distribution of two crime-specific ratings of 
community change in these favelas. The left-most panel focuses on reports 
of changes in the extent of visible drug dealing. While the link between this 
and assessments of the quality of the community policing effort in their area 
was somewhat weaker than the findings illustrated in  Figure 10.1  (the Spear-
man correlation was +.32), we note that this question was asking for reports 
of observable conditions in their area. Reducing the extent of visible crimi-
nal activity was one of the primary goals of the UPP teams, and we see here 
that the view that there were improvements in this respect were relatively 
widespread. Perceived improvements in visible drug dealing were commonly 
reported even by respondents who were less positive about the program. 
 The center panel of  Figure 10.2  examines perceptions of trends in homi-
cide. Murder is a tremendous problem in Brazil’s poorest areas, and our study 
sites were no exception. However, the higher the satisfaction with commu-
nity policing, the more residents saw improvements—and especially large 
improvements—in the homicide count. Again, this was also somewhat more 
common even among those who were not positive about this new policing 
effort, so the Spearman correlation was lower, +37. 
 The right-most panel in  Figure 10.2  examines the reports of trends in 
police violence. As we discussed above, this is an issue of tremendous salience 
for even common residents of Rio’s favelas, for historically the police response 
to their problem was one deploying “shock and awe” tactics in their com-
munity. The Spearman correlation between the two measures was +.49, and 
it is clear in  Figure 10.2  that there was a very strong link between satisfac-
tion with community policing and the view that police violence was much 
reduced in their community. As in  Figure 10.1 , these three measures were 
negatively related to income and education, with more educated and higher 
income respondents seeing fewer community improvements and more prob-
lems with police violence. 
 Conclusions and Implications for Policy in Brazil 
 Th e impact of UPP teams in these two Rio favelas seems to have been positive. 
Th e introduction of this new policing model practice was well received. All 
of the perceived security measures we gathered were positively linked to views 
of community policing. Th ose who thought police were doing a good job 
reported feeling safer and could more easily come and go in their community, 

162 
Vicente Riccio et al.
they saw improvements in the extent of police violence and disrespect for 
their rights, they thought there was less homicide, and they saw less drug 
dealing. All of these features of their lives were targets of the UPP teams. Th e 
UPPs have become an important element in the architecture of a new security 
policy for the city of Rio de Janeiro. Th is study was carried out shortly aft er the 
creation of the two fi rst units in Rio. Th eir initial success led to the insertion 
of more new units in various parts of the city, and there was great demand to 
expand the program, especially in view of the 2014 World Cup competition 
in Rio and the 2016 Olympics. Two challenges to the UPPs and to the broader 
community pacifi cation policy that we have described here are their sustain-
ability once Rio leaves the world stage and their possible expansion to other 
areas of Brazil. Future studies of the UPP program could follow its evolution 
and the level of support for reform in communities that need their assistance. 
 Notes 
 1. Th is is a revised version of an article by the same title that appeared in  Police Practice and 
Research: An International Journal 14: 308–318. 
 2. Two recent fi lms address the problem of urban violence and the relation between the police 
and the community—the movies  Cidade de Deus  and  Tropa de Elite . Th e fi rst is based on a 
novel and describes the involvement of youngsters in a peripheral Rio community in drug 
dealing, whereas the second addresses in a factual manner the routine activities of a special 
battalion of the Rio de Janeiro Military Police and their use of violent methods to contain the 
actions of criminal groups in the area. 
 References 
 Albernaz, E., Caruso, H., and Patricío, L. 2007. Tensões e Desafios de um policiamento comu-
nitário em favelas do Rio de Janeiro: o caso do grupamento de policiamento em áreas especi-
ais [Tensions and challenges of community policing in favelas in Rio de Janeiro: The special 
areas policing group case].  São Paulo em Perspectiva 21: 39–52. 
 Costa, A. T. M. 2004.  Entre a lei e a ordem: violência e reforma nas polícias do Rio de Janeiro e 
Nova Iorque [Between law and order: Violence and reform in Rio de Janeiro and New York 
Polices]. Rio de Janeiro: Editora FGV. 
 Frühling, H. 2009. Research on Latin America police: Where do we go from here?  Police Prac-
tice and Research 10: 465–481. 
 Jesilow, P., and Parsons, D. 2000. Community policing as peacemaking.  Policing and Society 
10: 163–182. 
 Lipsky, M. 1983.  Street-level bureaucracy: Dilemmas of the individual in public services . New 
York: Russell Sage. 
 Mesko, G., and Klemencic, G. 2007. Rebuilding legitimacy and police professionalism in an 
emerging democracy: The Slovenian experience. In  Legitimacy and criminal justice: Interna-
tional perspectives , ed. T. Tyler, 84–114. New York: Russell Sage Foundation. 
 Moore, M. H. 1992. Problem-solving and community policing. In  Crime and justice , ed. 
M. Tonry and N. Morris, 99–158. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Chapter 10: Community Policing in the Favelas of Rio 
163
 Moraes, G., and Cano, I. 2007. Between damage reduction and community policing: The case 
of Pavão-Pavãozinho-Cantagalo in Rio de Janeiro’s Favelas. In  Legitimacy and criminal jus-
tice: International perspectives , ed. T. Tyler, 186–214. New York: Russell Sage Foundation. 
 Novak, K. L., Alarid, L. F., and Lucas, W. 2003. Exploring officers’ acceptance of community 
policing: Implications for policing implementation.  Journal of Criminal Justice 31: 57–71. 
 Oberweis, T., and Musheno, M. 2001.  Knowing rights: State actors’ stories of power, identity and 
morality . Aldershot: Ashgate. 
 Ratcliffe, J. 2008.  Intelligence-led policing . Cullampton: Willan. 
 Sapori, L. F. 2007.  Segurança pública no Brasil: desafios e perspectivas  [Public security in Brazil: 
Challenges and perspectives]. Rio de Janeiro: FGV Editora. 
 Seagrave, J. 1996. Defining community policing.  American Journal of Police 15: 1–22. 
 Skogan, W. 2004. Representing the community in community policing. In  Community policing; 
Can it work? , ed. W. Skogan, 57–75. Belmont, MA: Thomson Wadsworth. 
 Skogan, W. 2006.  Police and community in Chicago: A tale of three cities . New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
 Skogan, W. G., and Hartnett, S. M. 1997.  Community policing, Chicago style . New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
 Skolnick, J. H., and Bayley, D. H. 1986.  The new blue line: Police innovation in six American 
cities . New York: The Free Press. 
 Sunshine, J., and Tyler, T. R. 2003. The role of procedural justice and legitimacy in shaping 
public support for policing.  Law and Society Review 37: 513–548. 
 Thacher, D. 2001. Conflicting values in community policing.  Law & Society Review  35: 765–
798. 
 Tilley, N. 2004. Thinking realistically about crime prevention. In  Handbook of crime prevention 
and community safety , ed. N. Tilley, 3–13. Cullampton: Willan. 
 Tyler, T. 2008.  Legitimacy and criminal justice: International perspectives . New York: Russell 
Sage Foundation. 
 Weitzer, R. 1995.  Policing under fire: Ethnic conflict and police community relations in Northern 
Ireland . Albany, NY: State University of New York Press. 


 Section III 
 The Police and Public Policy 


167
 Contents 
 The Origins of Police Educational Reform 
168 
 Brazil’s National Curricular Plan 
17 1
 Training Military Police Officers in Amazonas 
172 
 Views of Participants 
173 
 Conclusion 
179 
 References 
180 
 Professionalizing 
the Military Police 
Through Training 1 
 Vicente Riccio, 
Marcio Rys Meirelles de 
Miranda and 
Angélica Müller 
11 
 Th is chapter examines the role of high-level offi  cer training in the police 
reform agenda of Brazil, and how in one setting federal guidelines designed to 
improve training were implemented in actual practice. Th e fi rst new training 
class for the Amazonas State Military Police in Brazil was the setting chosen 
for this study. Th ey were trained under new guidelines developed by the Min-
istry of Justice, which is attempting to standardize police education across the 
nation. Th is training initiative is part of a larger police reform eff ort in Bra-
zil, one aimed at increasing the professionalism, effi  ciency, and civility of the 
police. Th e ministry’s guidelines provide a direction for change, but there is 
large variation among the Brazilian states in terms of how far they must come. 
 Police reform is a major issue on the Brazilian political agenda due to the 
historical positioning of the police forces in the country. They suffer from 
low legitimacy in the view of society, they are inefficient in the execution of 
their duties, and they have a reputation for corruption and systematic abuses 
of power. Professional education for high-level leaders is seen as an important 
instrument for the improvement of the police in Brazil, one route to making 
them more efficient and capable of integrating with civil society. These issues 
are addressed by the new training program, and they are its objective. 

168 
Vicente Riccio et al.
 In this chapter, we first describe the Brazilian context and the issues it 
raises for police education, and police reform more broadly. Then we pres-
ent a few details regarding the new national training plan. A third section 
describes the actual implementation of the program in Amazonas State. This 
is followed by the findings of our observations and interviews with partici-
pants in the course. In-depth personal interviews were conducted with several 
members of the first graduating class after they had been serving in the field 
for three years, in order to understand their experiences and gauge the impact 
of the program on practice. The chapter concludes with some conclusions 
regarding the progress of police reform on the ground. The conclusions are 
critical of the program, due to the flawed execution of this innovative educa-
tion program for the Amazonas State Military Police. 
 The Origins of Police Educational Reform 
 Police and policing policies have been the subject of much discussion 
around the world, for they are linked to other emergent problems in 
contemporary society. These include increasing social, economic, and 
political risks, plus high or fluctuating crime rates, which reduce the legiti-
macy of the police and impose the need for reform (Ericson and Haggerty 
1997; Kelling and Moore 2005). The resulting model that has emerged 
in many places envisions a results-oriented performance culture in orga-
nizations that make use of new information technologies, and at least in 
poorer areas, operate in closer collaboration with the community, with 
greater transparency and with more measured use of force (Bayley 2005; 
Roth, Roehl and Johnson 2004; Skogan 2004, 2006). However, in prac-
tice, too often what has actually emerged has been instead more tough 
traditional policies aimed at deterring crime that has continued to under-
value integrating the police and the community (Hough 2007). Further, 
even managing traditional policing resources “smartly,” through modern 
practices such as hot spot policing and making better use of information 
technology, also calls for improving the academic qualifications of police 
leaders (Jaschke and Neidhardt 2007). 
 Another general trend is cited by Bayley and Shearing (2005), who noted 
the “pluralization” of policing. The monopoly enjoyed by the public police has 
eroded, and we have witnessed the appearance of parallel organizations aimed 
at crime prevention that are rooted in the community and in business. In 
parallel, there has been increased acknowledgment of the limits of traditional, 
reactive “professional” policing and its focus on motorized patrol. These chal-
lenges to traditional police practices and culture also call for changes in police 
education that would inform more nimble and innovative reactions to these 
shifts in the policing environment. 

Chapter 11: Professionalizing the Military Police 
169
 Finally, democratization processes are at work around the world that also 
call for more sophisticated policing. In societies marked by recent democ-
ratization, one of the changes called for has been the implementation of 
democratic forms of policing (Bayley 2005; Beato 2005; Frühling 2009; Mesko 
and Klemencic 2007; Scott, Evans and Verma 2009). The focus of many new 
democracies has been to reconstruct the legitimacy, efficiency, transparency, 
and civility of the police, usually in parallel with reform efforts more gener-
ally. The police reflect the central characteristics of the state that sponsors 
them, and how they act is crucial to the maintenance of the basic conditions 
of democratic life, such as the right to come and go, freedom of speech, the 
right of association, and the right to vote without intimidation (Bayley 2005). 
An important point to be highlighted is the fact that police education must 
reflect this emerging social complexity. 
 All those themes are connected. The complexity of society and the 
growing complexity of some forms of crime, the obvious benefits of using 
information technologies, a growing emphasis on crime prevention, and the 
expectation that police will reform in parallel with the growth of other aspects 
of democratization all call for changes in police perspectives. One lever for 
changing these perspectives is leadership education. The issue of police edu-
cation has been discussed from several perspectives in the literature. These 
studies revolve around themes such as the distinction between the training 
received in the academy and the daily practice of the profession (Bayley and 
Bittner 1984); the impact of curricular changes (Chapel 2008; Jaschke and 
Neidhardt 2007; Jaschke 2010); the importance of higher education in the 
policing practice (Domincy 2010; Farrow et al. 2010; Jones, Jones and Pren-
zler 2005; Paoline and Terrill 2007; Roberg and Bonn 2004; Vickers 2000); and 
the process through which training reinforces the obedience of new recruits 
(Paes-Machado and Albuquerque 2006; Conti 2009). 
 The question here is, how can police education in a recently democratized 
country such as Brazil be structured in order to deal with high levels of urban 
violence, without losing sight of other trends calling for a more innovative 
policing paradigm? The attempt to redemocratize Brazil’s police forces near 
the end of the twentieth century took place in parallel with an increase in urban 
violence, as well as mounting criticism of the way in which they operated. The 
difficulty in reducing violence persists in Brazil, even though progress in alle-
viating social disparities has been recorded over the last decade. There has 
been significant improvement in the lives of many Brazilians, especially the 
poorest. One example is the evolution of the per capita income of the poorest 
10%, which increased by 57% between 2001 and 2006 (Neri 2009). But in spite 
of this, violence remains high, especially in poorer areas. 
 In the Brazilian case, one of the legacies of the earlier authoritarian regime 
was the subordination of police forces to the army. The resulting approach to 
internal security and public order problems was characterized by harsh crime 

170 
Vicente Riccio et al.
fighting (Costa 2004). The division of police work in Brazil puts most of the 
responsibility for law enforcement into the hands of the federal states. Two 
police forces predominate: the Military Police and the Civil Police. The former 
is responsible for street patrolling, and the second for criminal investigations. 
In both cases, there are two entry points into the profession. In the Military 
Police, officers (superiors) and soldiers (privates, corporals, and sergeants) are 
separately recruited and trained. The same is true in the Civil Police, where 
the relevant distinctions are between  delegados  (superiors) and detectives. The 
Military Police have adopted an organizational hierarchy that mimics that of the 
armed forces, with the highest rank being colonel (Lino 2004). 
 In this chapter, the term “officers” refers to recruits to the upper level ranks 
of the Military Police, or the officer class. The different training regimes for 
various ranks are most striking in the Military Police. In that institution, officer 
training lasts an average of four years, while soldiers are trained in between six 
months and two years, depending on the state in question. But the education 
that they have been receiving is considered inadequate for the complexity of 
operating in a democratic society (Basílio 2004; Poncioni 2005). Public security 
in Brazil until recently has been guided more by judicial regulatory criteria than 
by the adoption of policies aimed at promoting police problem solving, com-
munity policing, and other innovative practices (Sapori 2007). 
 Among the questions raised by crime and criticisms of Brazilian police 
practices has been about police training. It is widely believed that each new 
generation receiving inadequate police training essentially reproduces the 
existing model of policing, one that emphasizes crime fighting, reactive 
strategies, strict adhesion to the organizational guidelines, and rote decision-
making (Poncioni 2005). An Albuquerque and Paes-Machado study (2004) 
of training in the Bahia Military Police points to the maintenance of tradi-
tions of military training and war fighting. There, recruits routinely endured 
punishment and humiliation, which were deliberately inflicted to set the 
stage for their socialization as officers. Such practices were an expression of 
an informal culture that was not adapted to the requirements of a new train-
ing curriculum, one based on modern thinking and emphasizing respect for 
human rights and community-oriented policing practices. 
 The impact of the global human rights movement on police roles in societ-
ies that have democratized can be observed in the inclusion of human rights 
themes in the training of the Northern Ireland Police Service. Engel and Bur-
rus’s study (2004) discussed this change towards a democratic training model. 
The inclusion of the human rights themes was one of the key aspects of this 
initiative. The difficulties in doing so had to do with the historic context of that 
society and the fact that big divisions had been structured due to the conflicts 
that had occurred there. The inclusion of the human rights theme came with its 
acceptance, which indicates a focus on a more democratic model of policing. 
Curricular changes, in turn, require proper institutional support; otherwise, the 

Chapter 11: Professionalizing the Military Police 
171
effects expected from its adoption shall have little or no result. This aspect is rel-
evant in relation to other aspects, such as the adoption of community policing, 
the use of information technologies, and assessment mechanisms. Education is 
relevant since its objective is creating a new culture of policing practice. 
 Brazil’s National Curricular Plan 
 In 2000, the Brazilian Ministry of Justice, through the National Public Security 
Secretariat (SENASP) released a new police training plan, with the purpose of 
standardizing police education among the diff erent federal states. Th e absence 
of specifi c police training policies and assessment criteria led the federal gov-
ernment to defi ne the fi rst set of national requirements for police education. 
Th ese were redefi ned in 2003 with the incorporation of new elements, as part 
of an initiative taken in the fi rst term of offi  ce of President Luiz Inácio Lula da 
Silva. In 2005, there was another revision in the training plan, which was once 
again amended in 2009. Th is latter change was for the purpose of coordinat-
ing training with perspectives created by PRONASCI (the National Program 
of Public Security with Citizenship). PRONASCI was launched in 2007 by 
the Ministry of Justice to support actions to reduce violence in accordance 
with the principles of safety and citizenship. Enhancing the quite low status of 
public security professionals was one of the goals of PRONASCI, and in the 
training realm this included education grants ( bolsa-formação ). Th ese were 
fi nanced by the Ministry of Justice and provided a salary supplement to those 
who attend training courses. Th is included Military Police offi  cers (offi  cers 
and soldiers), Civil Police offi  cers ( delegados and detectives), fi refi ghters, and 
other professionals connected with public security, such as prison staff  (Riccio 
and Basílio 2007). Th e amount of the allowance was R$400.00, and in the fi rst 
year more than 250,000 security professionals were receiving grants. 
 As a program, PRONASCI gathered multiple initiatives under one reform 
umbrella. Some of those actions had begun before the program’s launch and 
other ones were established later. The guidelines for police training in the 
Brazilian Curricular Plan were among those established before PRONASCI’s 
launch, but all of its policies were continued and state training programs for 
Brazilian officers and other security professionals were obliged to follow 
them. Thus, one of PRONASCI’s main goals was to enforce the new curricula. 
For example, an important PRONASCI policy was the creation of national 
educational grants for police employees ( Bolsa-Formação ) and to qualify their 
officers for these grants, the states had to follow the guidelines. These kinds of 
strategies for strengthening training guidelines continue today. 
 The program envisioned ensuring basic cognitive, operational, and attitu-
dinal competency in the following areas: fast learning, flexibility of thought, 
objectivity, method of organization, being observant, oral and written expression 

172 
Vicente Riccio et al.
skills, interpretation ability, responsibility, ability to be cautious and adapt to 
new situations, coordination spirit, physical fitness, and ability to work in teams, 
among others. Attention was also given to enhancing professional skills in plan-
ning, implementing, and assessing programmatic activities. 
 The new curriculum also involved an ethical dimension that emphasized 
respect for human rights as an element underlying all decision-making and 
action. The idea was to ensure compatibility between human rights and police 
efficiency. A great deal of stress was placed on valuing different social groups, 
especially the most vulnerable ones, and stressing how they provide a context 
in which the police action will be carried out. For example, Amazonas, which 
is considered here, includes diverse indigenous groups who lead a traditional 
life and are in turn linked to the region’s vast biodiversity. Other important 
contexts involved racial minorities, disfavored populations, and gender issues. 
 The model training plan that was instituted allowed for some flexibil-
ity in its implementation, so that additional content could be combined in 
accordance with regional need. Training was understood to be an open pro-
cess and aimed at the formation of networks among the teachers and security 
institutions, so as to spread a new pattern of practice among Brazilian security 
institutions. The knowledge and experience of public security professionals 
was accordingly respected, and the pedagogic principles for training made 
space for taking these into account. 
 The guidelines set forth by this new national training plan were ambi-
tious, aimed at changing fundamental aspects of Brazilian police forces. The 
research question was, were the police and other security institutions involved 
able to incorporate its content? 
 Training Military Police Officers in Amazonas 
 Th e region of Amazonas was selected for study because Military Police train-
ing there was brand new in all respects and could be responsive to our research 
fi ndings. Until 2002, all offi  cers of the Amazonas State Military Police were 
trained in other states, such as São Paulo, Ceará, and Rio Grande do Sul. Due 
to its geographic isolation and limited economic development, there was no 
independent training academy there. It could be observed that Military Police 
offi  cers responsible for street patrolling and managing their department were 
trained in ways that were distinct from the reality they faced on the ground. 
Th ere was no special focus on what was going on in their state or on funda-
mental characteristics of their region and its diverse cultures. Most obviously, 
this state includes almost 20% of Brazil’s land area, but has a population of only 
3,590,985 million inhabitants. Th e population is concentrated in Manaus, the 
capital, which has 1,861,838 inhabitants. Logistics in the state are complex, 
and several cities and regions can only be reached by air or by river. 

Chapter 11: Professionalizing the Military Police 
173
 The first locally conducted officer training class in Amazonas was the 
result of a partnership between the Military Police and the State University of 
Amazonas (UEA). This bachelor’s course in Public and Citizen Security was 
held between 2002 and 2005, lasting a total of four years. Fifteen students were 
selected by public entrance examination to be part of the class. They were all 
unmarried; 40% had attended private rather than public secondary schools; 
nine were studying at another university when they joined this new career; 
and four students already had a higher degree. The course of study they pur-
sued was prepared based on federal guidelines, and, taking into account local 
adaptations to take into account the reality of working in this vast region, the 
central concepts of the national plan were incorporated into the program. 
 The course ran for four years. The faculty members were employees of the 
UEA and the Military Police of Amazonas. Each institution was responsible 
for the selection of teachers and instructors, all of whom had the equivalent of 
at least a university degree. The “basic” training subjects were anthropologi-
cal, sociological, philosophic, psychological, ethical-professional, political, 
behavioral, and economic in nature. There were also courses on information 
technology and legal topics. The “professional” training subjects included 
theories and practices of police techniques, but there were also courses on 
operations research, statistics, and technology applications in public security. 
The participants also fulfilled a required number of internship hours with 
different police units, taking on both operational and administrative duties. 
Finally, each student was required to submit a thesis paper at the end of the 
course (Universidade do Estado do Amazonas 2002). Students were awarded 
a university bachelor’s degree upon course completion. 
 Views of Participants 
 Th is research adopted a qualitative methodology for examining students’ per-
ceptions of the training process in Amazonas. Th is approach was chosen in 
order to understand in an exploratory way the details of implementing fed-
eral training guidelines in a particular locale, and how local issues (which in 
Amazonas are particularly unique) were incorporated into the training regime. 
Because the training program was new and still small, it off ered the possibility of 
responding to the fi ndings of our study. Th ose interviewed were among the fi rst 
class of offi  cer candidates trained in Amazonas. Th e objective of the research 
was to understand how the fi rst police offi  cers to be trained under this program 
formed perceptions about their profession, the meaning of policing in a demo-
cratic society, and their role in the specifi c Amazonian context. 
 In-depth interviews were conducted rather than employing familiar 
closed-ended survey questions. Many of the cultural and political issues 
involved in transitioning from an authoritarian tradition to democratic policing 

174 
Vicente Riccio et al.
are not reflected in research on policing in the Northern Hemisphere, nor are 
the dynamics of an officer class that is as socially and economically distant 
from street-level workers as they are in the Brazilian Military Police. Instead, 
we opted for an approach that would let us discover and clarify the subtleties 
involved in these issues, letting the respondents speak in their own words. 
This chapter thus provides a first step toward developing a research agenda for 
policing in Brazil. The conclusions presented here are based on a collaborative 
analysis by the authors, who also conducted the interviews. 
 The program had 13 original graduates, of which four could be inter-
viewed. Semi-structured interviews were conducted with them in March and 
April of 2008. All were serving officers in the Amazonas State Military Police. 
It was difficult to reach other graduates in their class, because they were 
serving in cities throughout the state of Amazonas in locations that could 
be reached only by boat or airplane. As a result, only graduates who were 
serving in Manaus were interviewed during the research. Other class mem-
bers contacted were agreeable to being interviewed, but could not be reached 
and could not be in Manaus between March and April 2008. So only gradu-
ates serving in Manaus were able to schedule an interview. Despite the small 
sample, the officers who were interviewed and those not responding to the 
research shared a common profile. 
 The interviews were conducted by one of the coauthors and carried out 
in the battalions in which each of the officers was designed to serve. Com-
plete privacy was provided during the interviews, and they were conducted 
in a room in which only the interviewer and the interviewee were present. 
The interviews lasted between one hour and a half and two hours on average. 
The interview sessions were recorded and then transcribed for analysis. We 
gave particular credence to the accounts of different respondents who had 
similar experiences, for these suggested common themes. We paid particular 
attention to aspects of the major competing views in Brazilian policing, those 
reflecting tradition and reform. The training guidelines are part of a more 
general federal project aiming to promote a democratic and plural society. 
Those values impact directly the visions police officers have of their occu-
pational identity, their relationship with society, and the meaning of their 
careers in this context. 
 The first point to be emphasized is that the officers we interviewed chose 
a Military Police career. The interviewees introduced themselves not only as 
policemen (they were all male), but also as military officers; they had taken 
on two identities, in a combination that—as we have seen—is not always 
compatible. Second, it was striking how much the interviewees were aware 
that they would be responsible for providing protection to the citizenry. State 
public security agents have the duty of ensuring the preservation of public 
order, as well as safety of people and property. A third theme in the inter-
views centered on the stability of public employment and its opportunities for 

Chapter 11: Professionalizing the Military Police 
175
career development. Lieutenant “A” was certainly interested in job security 
and career advancement: 
 The main reason is linked to the fact that it is a profession in which you deal 
directly with the society, where the values of discipline and hierarchy are 
respected; besides the fact that I have always wanted to be a police officer and 
have always respected this profession, in addition to the security of having a 
public job which could give me the conditions needed to evolve in this career. 
 (Lieutenant A) 
 Lieutenant A also stressed discipline and hierarchy. His construction of his new 
identity is interesting, since the reproduction of the army military model and its 
rank hierarchy in the Military Police is required by the Brazilian Constitution. 
 Another point that arose in the interviews referred to guiding and moni-
toring the behavior of their subordinates, with the objective of maintaining 
order, discipline, and efficiency in the ranks. They worried about their sub-
ordinates’ performance, since their own reputations would depend on that. 
Again, Lieutenant A: 
 The officer has a great responsibility in the deployment of troops, guiding the 
actions which shall be taken during the service, in addition to inspecting its 
progress, to lead in those events in which the presence of an officer is requested, 
to keep constant contact with their immediate superiors who are coordinating 
the service all over the city, to check if the vehicles are where they are supposed 
to be, to keep order and discipline, and from there, the contact with the citizen 
who needs this crucial service for his/her protection. 
 (Lieutenant A) 
 Th e interviewees focused on the quality of the service rendered and on the neg-
ative consequences for their image that might result from managerial mistakes 
they might make. In their view, public order and social peace depend on their 
competent performance. Th ey very much voiced a conservative, bureaucratic 
view of police work, rather than the more innovative—and risky—perspective 
advocated in their training curriculum. Reform meant acknowledging the role 
of police as members of a bureaucracy and applying its rules. 
 In addition, they referred to contradictions between democratic values, 
policing, and the realities of Brazilian society. Differentiating themselves from 
the past was an important consideration. Among these officers, condemnation 
of the anti-democratic acts of the old military regime was strong. In today’s 
values, the police stand as the “guardian of democracy.” The corporate spirit 
does not change, but the ways of thinking and acting are altered. One officer 
noted that police needed to change because in the recent past it had supported 
authoritarian laws and military dictatorship. However, this justification for 
change did not translate into a vision of a more contemporary policing model, 

176 
Vicente Riccio et al.
less structured by bureaucratic hierarchies, and more aimed at prevention and 
integration with other institutions of the criminal justice system. 
 We saw evidence of a vision of democracy that is connected with a very 
important aspect of the country’s recent history, which is the precedence of 
social rights in relation to the political ones. This is an enduring feature of the 
Brazilian political culture. In the twentieth century, during Vargas’s authori-
tarian period, social rights were granted to the working masses before they 
achieved any political rights. The idea was that the state had custody of the 
people, since the people were unable to responsibly exercise their civic free-
doms (Werneck 2001). Officer E articulated this view, that more humane 
policing is required, because society acknowledges the police as their main 
guardian, and is largely unable to manage its own path: 
 For some, democracy is still a word distant from reality, maybe due to a recent 
past in which the police practiced some acts on behalf of national security, and 
in order to end this distortion, we have the duty to progress as soon as possible 
to undo this absurd misunderstanding. Democracy is the exercise of the rights 
that each one of us has and owns, through the evolution of conquests and con-
stitutional guarantees throughout our republican history. It is a historic legacy 
in which each one of us has a share, since it is meant to offer equal opportu-
nities to all within a country, even one as big as ours; it means to respect the 
principles adopted by it and apply them to the benefit of the greatest possible 
number of citizens, to distribute the revenue and create jobs; it means to pro-
vide enough jobs for as many people as possible; it means ensuring the right to 
ask protection from the state, it means much more than being able to elect their 
representatives, it means much more than voting and being voted on; all of this 
represents the base of a democracy that gets more consolidated every day and 
that progresses in the improvement of quality of life to everyone, everything 
ensured by a more human police, which begins to appear now, designed to 
protect a society that considers the police its greatest guardian. 
 (Officer E) 
 Th is view is similar to that revealed in Heyman’s (2002) study of the rela-
tionship between American police offi  cers of Hispanic origin and Mexican 
and Central American immigrants. Offi  cers’ perceptions of newcomers were 
marked by moral judgments based on the idea of mercy, superiority due to 
their position, and paternalism. 
 Our interviewees also saw an association between the practice of democ-
racy and security. One perspective on the Military Police was that it was the 
main instrument guaranteeing the order and safety on which democracy 
depends. Lieutenant A reaffirmed this view: 
 Democracy is the power of the people, by the people and for the people. It is a 
society turned to the achievement of the common well-being and it is through 

Chapter 11: Professionalizing the Military Police 
177
the police forces that this same society is ensured the feeling of safety it desires, 
the Military Police being in charge of keeping the public order focused on the 
citizen. Democracy is extensive; it is for all, based on respect, on the protection 
and in the fundamental rights provided for in the Federal Constitution. 
 (Lieutenant A) 
 Concerning their training, the interviewees stated that the course lived up to 
their expectations and was of satisfactory quality. Th e courses objectives, as 
they understood them, both in terms of the facilities off ered and the quality 
of the instructors: 
 Yes, definitely, all of them, officers and teachers were always ready to settle any 
doubts. Our officers are constantly taking courses outside the state to improve 
techniques and tactics that are needed in the performance of the Military Police 
Officer in his/her daily service, where all the instructors were chosen through 
a rigorous selection within the PM, such as the presentation of résumés and 
qualification internships; as for the teachers, they were recruited among the 
best ones available, which gave us the chance to be able to count on the best 
possible qualification in the basic subjects, where all the knowledge acquired 
made it possible to have a better performance in the service. 
 (Lieutenant O) 
 Nevertheless, they highlighted points that could be improved, such as the 
preparation of the faculty members: 
 I believe that concerning the Academy instructors, there should be a staff of 
officers destined exclusively to teaching and instruction, this way there could be 
a greater dedication and consequently, a higher level of learning, more qualifi-
cation courses should be open to deal with the teaching, that if it were possible 
to allow the teachers of UEA to experiment the routine inside the headquarters, 
make them familiar with the situations that are part of the police officer routine, 
and even with the language used, then we would have, the way I see it, a better 
integration among all the people involved in the teaching process. 
 (Lieutenant E) 
 According to Marion (1998), instructors should be chosen based on their 
knowledge, their skills to instruct, and having good personal qualities such 
as camaraderie, maturity, enthusiasm, confi dence, and high self-esteem. In 
spite of the fl exibility in the classroom practice, it has been observed that the 
instructor’s concern is to transmit the syllabus established in the course plan. 
One of their responsibilities was to adapt the national plan to local conditions 
and resources. In this, despite their attempts, there was room for improve-
ment. Interviewees were satisfi ed by the opportunities for participating in 
community events that were provided. Th ese allowed them to interact with 
the kinds of communities that they soon would be working in: 

178 
Vicente Riccio et al.
 Yes, we participated and with positive results, in several activities that were car-
ried out by the Course Coordination throughout the semesters, such as semi-
nars, lectures, visits to institutions such as Gustavo Capanema, which takes care 
of children, and also escorting several international authorities which came to 
our state. It is worth mentioning that we took part in great events in which 
there were lots of people, thousands of people, as was the case of football games, 
Parintins Folkloric Celebration, among others. 
 (Lieutenant O) 
 Class visits, internships, and classroom instruction helped them learn about 
areas that had previously been unknown, especially places where there were 
large numbers of destitute people and land invasions by squatters. Th ey 
allowed students to get in touch, in a fragmented way, with a bit of the social, 
political, economic, and cultural features of the cities in which they were to 
perform their new duties: 
 Once we graduated in our own state, all the subjects were focused on the reality 
we experience here, and it was not necessary for us to get familiar with these 
aspects, as it happened in the past when the officers graduated outside Amazo-
nas and a considerable time was required to adapt themselves to the conformi-
ties herein existing. 
 (Lieutenant A) 
 On the other hand, none of those interviewed reported learning anything 
about the connection between this new knowledge and innovative policing 
models. Th e students also formed the view that society did not know much 
about them, and were unaware of the “non-coercive” aspects of their work: 
 We were always invited to integrate work teams and destitute communities and 
that was very good, since we had a direct contact with the citizens near to us, 
asking why were those students wearing the Military Police uniform, so we 
would say: “We are student officers of the Military Police, we are graduating, 
and soon we will be the newest class of officers” and this was a surprise for 
almost everyone who heard us, which the way I see it, is due to the fact that the 
serious projects, the projects which are born with the public spirit, unfortu-
nately are not duly clarified or informed to the community where we are going 
to work, and that is too bad because we are getting to know the community in 
which we will work, but the community does not know whom they are work-
ing with. 
 (Lieutenant E) 
 Th is discourse indicated a lack of integration between the police and the com-
munity. While they acknowledged the distance between the two, they off ered 
no thoughts on ways to establish any relationship with the community. Th is 
signaled that they had not internalized important aspects of their training 

Chapter 11: Professionalizing the Military Police 
179
course. Another concern of these offi  cers was the possibility that the course 
might be discontinued. 
 What I’m afraid is that this great project that was the first class will get lost in 
time, I mean, there should be continuity, or even better, regularity in the provi-
sion of this course. I assess that the compliance with these expectations is not 
from one side only, but from all of us: Authorities, societies and police forces, 
not only the military, the civil, the federal and all the others comprising our 
public security system. I believe that we are performing our role and that this 
activity is the motive power to keep believing that it is possible to provide public 
security that is citizen-oriented. 
 (Lieutenant E) 
 This doubt over the survival of the course reveals the fragile environment 
in which reform-oriented police training operated in Brazil. 
 Conclusion 
 Th is research aimed at understanding how training of the Brazilian offi  cer 
class under new guidelines established by the Ministry of Justice was imple-
mented in a local context. Federal policy provided clear guidance to local 
training academies and was in accord with a new model of policing for the 
nation. Th e guidelines emphasized prevention, proactivity in engaging the 
community, the adoption of modern crime-fi ghting strategies, and the role of 
the police in protecting human rights. It provided the regions with fl exibility 
for accommodating local situations and resources, while promulgating clear 
new national expectations for policing. 
 In the case of Amazonas State, Military Police officers prior to 2002 had 
not been locally trained, and clear locally relevant guidelines for their per-
formance had not been created. This was a problem in a Brazilian state with 
many indigenous inhabitants living in isolation, the widest expanse of rainfor-
est in the world, and distinctive problems with eco-crime and land seizures. 
A qualitative study was carried on with the graduates. Only a few of them 
could be interviewed, because others were not reachable. Those who were 
interviewed agreed to do so voluntarily and did so in a very cooperative way. 
They participated in semi-structured interviews. They were questioned about 
their decision to become a police officer, the meaning of this career in con-
temporary Brazil, the role of police in a democratic society, and their training 
experience. Those were the core issues of the project. 
 Among the findings were, first, that despite the training orientation 
toward a more responsive and less bureaucratic policing model, the officers 
shared a common identity as military personnel rather than as civilians in 

180 
Vicente Riccio et al.
uniform. This a feature of Brazilian policing rooted in the military era. This 
characteristic was accompanied by the view that civil society is weak. In their 
perspective, the police are the protectors of this “weak” society, from itself. 
Third, the training was seen as satisfactory, but they did not see it as integrat-
ing with society in a sophisticated way. For them, joining in some meetings 
means community integration. In the end, we can conclude that despite their 
formal adherence to a modern pattern of policing, they still operate within the 
framework of the traditional perspective that dominates Brazilian policing. 
The training had little or no impact in changing this view. 
 Despite the innovative prescriptions of the Ministry of Justice concerning 
officer class training, there are many obstacles to its implementation. There is 
a gap between the local reality and the guidelines from Brasilia. The discrep-
ancies between policy and practice observed in Amazonas were not a question 
of training efficacy per se, but reflected persisting problems for implementing 
policies by the federal government to improve Brazilian policing. The local 
reality must be considered an object of specific policies. The impact of police 
training on Brazilian police, as we could see from a particular experience, 
must be considered with other aspects such as organizational and cultural 
ones. The adoption of new policies is not simple, and a better knowledge of its 
context is required. Further research is necessary to understand the distinc-
tive dimensions of policing in Brazil. 
 Note 
 1. A revised version of Vicente Riccio, Marcio Rys Meirelles de Miranda and Angélica Müller. 
2013. Professionalizing the Amazonas Military Police through Training. Police Practice and 
Research: An International Journal 14: 295–307. 
 References 
 Albuquerque, C., and Paes-Machado, E. 2004. The hazing machine: The shaping of Brazilian 
military recruits.  Policing & Society 14: 175–192. 
 Basílio, M. P. 2004.  A Formação do policial militar no estado do Rio de Janeiro: utopia ou real-
idade possível?  [The military police formation in Rio de Janeiro State: Utopia or feasible 
reality?]. Master’s thesis. Brazilian School of Business and Public Administration: Fundação 
Getulio Vargas, Rio de Janeiro. 
 Bayley, D. 2005.  Changing the guard: Developing democratic police abroad . Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press. 
 Bayley, D., and Bittner, E. 1984. Learning the skills of policing.  Law and Contemporary Problems 
474: 35–59. 
 Bayley, D., and Shearing, C. 2005. The future of policing. In  Policing: Key readings , ed. T. New-
burn, 715–732. Devon: Willan. 

Chapter 11: Professionalizing the Military Police 
181
 Beato, C. C. 2005. Reinventar la Policía: La experiencia de Belo Horizonte [Reinventing the 
police: The experience of Belo Horizonte]. In  Calles más Seguras: Estudios de policía comuni-
taria en America Latina  [Safer streets: Studies of community policing in Latin America], ed. 
H. E. Fruhling, 139–175. Washington, DC: Banco Interamericano de Desarollo. 
 Chapel, A. T. 2008. Police academy training: Comparing across curricula.  Policing: An Interna-
tional Journal of Police Strategies and Management 31: 36–56. 
 Conti, N. 2009. A visigoth system: Shame, honor and police socialization.  Journal of Contem-
porary Ethnography 38: 409–432. 
 Costa, A. T. M. 2004.  Entre a lei e a ordem: violência e reforma nas polícias do Rio de Janeiro e 
Nova Iorque  [Between law and order: Violence and reform in Rio de Janeiro polices]. Rio de 
Janeiro: Editora Fundação Getulio Vargas. 
 Domincy, J. 2010. The higher education contribution to police and probation training: Essen-
tial, desirable or an indulgence.  British Journal of Community Justice 8: 5–16. 
 Engel, S. T., and Burrus, G. W. 2004. Human rights in the new training curriculum of the police 
service in Northern Ireland.  Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies & Manage-
ment 27: 498–511. 
 Ericson, R., and Haggerty, K. 1997.  Policing the risk society . Toronto: University of Toronto 
Press. 
 Farrow, K., Hughes, N., Paris, A., and Prior, D. 2010. New occupations in community justice: 
Inventing the professional curriculum for community safety and anti-social behavior offi-
cers.  British Journal of Community Justice 8: 17–30. 
 Frühling, H. 2009. Research on Latin America police: Where do we go from here?  Police Prac-
tice and Research 10: 465–481. 
 Heyman, J. 2002. U.S. immigration officers of Mexican ancestry as Mexican American citizens 
and immigration police.  Current Anthropology 43: 474–507. 
 Hough, M. 2007. Policing, new public management, and legitimacy in Britain. In  Legitimacy 
and criminal justice: A comparative perspective , ed. T. R. Tyler, 63–83. New York: Russell Sage 
Foundation. 
 Jaschke, H. 2010. Knowledge-led policing and security.  Policing: A Journal of Policy and Practice 
4: 302–309. 
 Jaschke, H. G., and Neidhardt, K. 2007. A modern police science as an integrated academic 
discipline: A contribution to the debate on its fundamentals.  Policing & Society  17: 303–320. 
 Jones, D., Jones, L., and Prenzler, T. 2005. Tertiary education, commitments and turnover in 
police work.  Police Practice and Research 6: 49–63. 
 Kelling, G., and Moore, M. 2005. The evolving strategy of policing. In  Policing: Key readings , ed. 
T. Newburn, 88–108. Devon: Willan. 
 Lino, P. R. 2004. Police education and training in a global society: A Brazilian overview.  Police 
Practice and Research 5: 125–136. 
 Marion, N. 1998. Police academy training: Are we teaching recruits what they need to know? 
 Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies & Management 21: 54–79. 
 Mesko, G., and Klemencic, G. 2007. Rebuilding legitimacy and police professionalism in an 
emerging democracy: The Slovenian experience. In  Legitimacy and criminal justice: A com-
parative perspective , ed. T. R. Tyler, 84–114. New York: Russell Sage Foundation. 
 Neri, M. 2009. Income policies, income distribution, and distribution of opportunities. In  Bra-
zil as an economic superpower? Understanding Brazil’s changing role in the global economy , ed. 
L. Brainard and L. Martinez-Diaz, 221–270. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press. 
 Paes-Machado, E., and Albuquerque, C. L. 2006. The family curriculum, socialization process, 
family networks and the negotiation of police identities.  The Australian and New Zealand 
Journal of Criminology 31: 248–267. 

182 
Vicente Riccio et al.
 Paoline, E., and Terrill, W. 2007. Police, education, experience and the use of force.  Criminal 
Justice and Behavior 34: 179–196. 
 Poncioni, P. 2005. O Modelo policial profissional e a formação do policial do futuro nas aca-
demias de polícia do Estado do Rio de Janeiro [The professional police model and the future 
officer in Rio de Janeiro police academies].  Sociedade e Estado 20: 585–610. 
 Riccio, V., and Basílio, M. P. 2007. As diretrizes curriculares da Secretaria Nacional de Segu-
rança Pública SENASP para a formação policial: a Polícia Militar do Rio de Janeiro e sua 
adequação às ações federais [The National Secretary of Public Security SENASP guidelines 
for police formation: Rio de Janeiro’s adhesion to federal guidelines]. In  A Trajetória das 
políticas públicas no Brasil: uma reflexão multisetorial  [The trajectory of public polices in 
Brazil: A multi-sector reflexion], ed. R. S. Xavier, M. H. C. Pimenta and L. H. R. Da Silva, 
212–241. Porto Alegre: Sagra Luzzatto. 
 Roberg, R., and Bonn, S. 2004. Higher education and policing: Where are we now?  Policing: An 
International Journal of Police Strategies and Management 27: 469–486. 
 Roth, J. A., Roehl, J., and Johnson, C. C. 2004. Trends in community policing. In  Community 
policing can it work? , ed. W. Skogan, 3–29. Belmont, CA: Thomson-Wadsworth. 
 Sapori, L. F. 2007.  Segurança pública no Brasil: Desafios e perspectivas  [Public security in Brazil: 
Challenges and perspectives]. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Fundação Getulio Vargas. 
 Scott, J., Evans, D., and Verma, A. 2009. Does higher education affect perceptions among police 
personnel?: A response from India.  Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice 25: 214–236. 
 Skogan, W. 2004. Representing the community in community policing. In  Community policing 
can it work? , ed. W. Skogan, 57–75. Belmont, CA: Thomson—Wadsworth. 
 Skogan, W. 2006.  Community and police in Chicago: A tale of three cities . New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
 Universidade do Estado do Amazonas. 2002.  Projeto Político Pedagógico do Curso de Bachare-
lado em Segurança Pública e do Cidadão Curso de Formação de Oficiais da Polícia Militar do 
Amazonas—1ª Turma  [Political-pedagogical project of the officers’ bachelor course in public 
and citizen decurity amazonas’ military police officers course: 1st class]. Manaus: Universi-
dade do Estado do Amazonas. 
 Vickers, M. H. 2000. Australian police management education and research: A comment from 
outside the cave.  Policing: an International Journal of Police Strategies and Management 23: 
506–524. 
 Werneck, V. L. 2001. O Estado Novo e a ampliação autoritária da república [The new state and 
the authoritarian widening of republic]. In  República do Catete  [Catete’s republic], ed. M. A. 
Carvalho, 136–174. Rio de Janeiro: Museu da República. 

183
 Contents 
 Evaluating Reform 
184
 The Political Genesis of PRONASCI 
187
 The Political Process and PRONASCI 
189
 Dismantling PRONASCI 
195
 Conclusion 
198
 References 
199
 Police Reform in 
Brazil 
 The Rise and Demise 
of PRONASCI 1 
 Marco Aurélio Ruediger  12 
 Brazil’s National Program of Public Security with Citizenship (PRONASCI)—
was launched in August 2007 during President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva’s 
second term, by the then Minister of Justice of Brazil, Tarso Genro. It had a 
planned budget of US$3 billion, and its objective was to develop a range of 
new preventative and deterrent strategies for policing, including the expan-
sion of eff ective citizenship to the lower reaches of society, enhancing the 
professional status of public security employees, and focusing new resources 
on areas with high levels of crime and low social cohesion. 
 Ninety-six specific projects were proposed under the program, which 
together formed a systematic effort to increase the operational capacity of state 
police forces, and—at the local level—to combine an increase in community-
oriented policing with an expansion of activities focused on the historic low 
levels of civic participation and social development in poor areas. In particu-
lar, it was aimed at insulating socially vulnerable young people from the drug 
trade. In short, it was intended to move policing closer to the community, 
build citizenship and participation at that level, and attack and undermine 
crime networks. As a whole, these approaches would reduce levels of crime by 
undermining its foundations and co-opting its potential participants. 
 When it was created, this initiative represented an innovative, even radi-
cal new direction for the criminal justice system, and one that was extremely 
novel for Brazil’s federal government. As in many federal systems, public 

184 
Marco Aurélio Ruediger
security in Brazil had been largely a prerogative of state governments. The 
federal government had previously avoided direct intervention in policing in 
the nation’s large metropolitan centers. By participating more actively in this 
sector, it was seeking to respond to increasing demands of society for action, 
even though this necessarily—and not by chance—would expand federal 
influence and the possibility of intervention at the state and municipal levels 
through controlling the use of new federal funds. This had to be done very 
carefully, however, given Brazil’s federal government structure. 
 Therefore, it was decided that this involvement in traditionally local func-
tions should follow a “federative” approach, based on cooperation between the 
two levels of government that respected the tradition of local control of local 
affairs. This was of fundamental importance in the Brazilian case, because, as 
in the United States, the political structure assumes a high degree of regional 
independence, with layers of executive prerogative within subnational units. 
By developing a program in a policy area that was widely known to be within 
the scope of the states of the Brazilian federation, the control of significant 
federal funds threatened to undermine this autonomy, since it restricted the 
options open to states interested in obtaining funding. It was a mechanism 
for the national Ministry of Justice to exercise “soft power” at the local level. 
 Evaluating Reform 
 In parallel to the program, the Ministry of Justice constructed a web-based 
system aimed at monitoring and assisting the evaluation of PRONASCI. Th is 
was not done only in regard to the use of the funds provided; in addition, 
qualitative and quantitative empirical research was also conducted to measure 
perceptions of the program among the social sectors it aff ected and participa-
tion in them. Th is management and measurement program was developed 
by Fundação Getulio Vargas, in Rio de Janeiro. Th e construction of multi-
ple evaluation strategies, despite being complex to implement, allowed us to 
monitor the development of PRONASCI and its impacts in a comparative and 
longitudinal manner. Th is provided an empirical basis for policy adjustments, 
as well as highlighting their results. Th is helped to hold the program account-
able and facilitated external pressure toward action at the subnational level. 
Th e present chapter is largely based on this research. 
 As it turned out, there were serious flaws in the design of PRONASCI. 
The complexity of this program was not effectively managed by the techno-
bureaucracy in the Ministry of Justice. Nor, at the same time, was PRONASCI 
initially designed to accommodate the traditional policy concepts of Brazilian 
state governments in terms of public security. 
 The program was designed to represent a change in the paradigm for 
public security by a sophisticated and daring faction of President Luiz Inácio 

Chapter 12: Police Reform in Brazil 
185
Lula da Silva’s  Partido dos Trabalhadores (Workers’ Party, or PT). They pro-
posed an experiment in the radical transformation of the Ministry of Justice 
and tightening a bureaucratic machine not accustomed to programs of such 
complexity and deep penetration into the affairs of the Brazilian states. Com-
mon wisdom in the Ministry of Justice’s bureaucracy and in state security 
agencies was that the ministry would only expand the traditional scope of 
federal policy, which was to support the acquisition of equipment by the states 
and repressive actions by the federal police and the federal highway police, 
especially those directed at drug trafficking and border control. 
 However, what was new was the idea of a strategy promoting structural 
changes in the bureaucratic machinery, as well as of the substance of policies 
in this area, especially those aimed at promoting the welfare of segments of 
society such as women, young people, former members of the armed forces, 
and persons recently released from prison. Needless to say, the introduction 
of the concept of community policing, and new police training to support 
community-oriented work, also presented a shock to the system. 
 Although initially successful, PRONASCI faced continuous resistance 
from segments of the bureaucracy, and it was eventually impacted by a change 
in the set of actors who supported it and by changes in the policy implementa-
tion process. These had devastating effects on the continuity of the program. 
This drama came to a head in the 2012 Brazilian budget, when funds for the 
program were reduced practically to zero. 
 The aim of this chapter is this to examine the development, outcomes, con-
tradictions, and eventual demise of PRONASCI. The first stage was positive, 
illustrating that under certain conditions, it was possible to develop and imple-
ment an innovative federal policy dealing with historically local public security 
issues in a strongly federal environment. The second stage turned negative. 
PRONASCI’s progress slowed and the program was eventually dismantled due 
to a confluence of political factors linked to a bureaucratic struggle between 
those supporting the new model and forces favoring the old regime. 
 I also intend to call attention to the conditions under which this kind of 
innovative political design can be threatened, so policymakers and academics 
will be better attuned to how policy can be strategically insulated and avoid 
being dismantled. I will highlight the contradictions and conditions that even-
tually killed PRONASCI, emphasizing the importance of such factors as the 
ability of the bureaucratic machine to throttle and resist programs that were 
contrary to its culture and the survival of structures of power consolidated 
through more formal practices of policy management. 
 But while it is correct that PRONASCI encountered difficulties and did not 
survive more than four years, it is important to highlight that it spawned a num-
ber of enduring and successful (thus far) spin-off projects, such as the UPPs 
in Rio de Janeiro State. 2   Those projects, in turn, were successful in placing the 
concept of community policing on top of the public agenda, and community 

186 
Marco Aurélio Ruediger
policing was one of the centerpiece elements of PRONASCI. This not only cre-
ated important policy results—as in the case of the police in Rio de Janeiro 
State—but also helped this state and its capital—Rio de Janeiro city—to win 
international competitions to host such important events as the 2014 World 
Cup and the 2016 Olympics. These in turn are calling forth significant new fed-
eral and international investment in different economic sectors in the region. 
 In the case of Rio de Janeiro, the concept of community policing, as well 
as the social actions of the state and city governments, became paradigmatic 
of a new approach to public security. Although less daring than what was pro-
posed in the failed federal PRONASCI project, the UPPs have been a relatively 
successful experiment that have gained a high degree of public support. 
 As a methodological synthesis, I adopt here an approach based on the 
analysis of key events and pivotal changes in the political process that deter-
mine the construction of policy during a brief historical period and, which, 
at least potentially, provided an opportunity to construct new policy agendas. 
The analysis of this process involves specifying the context and key actors, 
identifying the activities that unite them and the events that develop along the 
way, as well as modeling the decision-making process in a systematic manner. 
This approach is centered on strategic political actors and pivotal moments 
for changing policy processes (Barzelay and Gallego 2010). 
 We examine them in the course of dynamic processes: dealing with one 
another, with resources that rise and fall, with events, and within the contexts 
in which they operate. These together create a menu of policy possibilities and 
potential windows of opportunity, including perhaps fairly dramatic alterations 
of the status quo. As we will see, PRONASCI was created and then dismantled 
as a result of the political forces emerging to fill two windows of opportunity 
produced by the political process and operated by gifted policy entrepreneurs. 
We thus structure this discussion around those two pivotal moments, within a 
temporal grid of events and the influence of actors in interaction. Secondarily, 
we also considered the Toquevillean perspective expressed by Evans, Ruesche-
meyer and Skocpol (1985), in terms of the intended and unintended effects of 
public policies, in this case of the spin-off effects of PRONASCI. 
 What can be seen from this conceptual and empirical policy effort is that 
a very complex program was necessary to address solutions to problems in 
contexts that are also complex and involve multiple causalities. Nevertheless, 
the success of any program is not only found in its design or in the effective-
ness of its implementation and funds disposed, but also in its acceptance by 
the bureaucracy. At this point, there were political errors in PRONASCI. A 
vision of this program as the solution for public security in Brazil did not 
come up as a key issue on the agenda contested during the 2006 presidential 
campaign, which led to President Lula’s second term, although public secu-
rity as an issue was debated. It was designed and implemented only during 
2007–2010. It also did not gain enough traction among key members of the 

Chapter 12: Police Reform in Brazil 
187
bureaucracy who were responsible for its sustainable implementation. Finally, 
it had no relevance for the next presidential election in 2010. 
 To the contrary, the program threatened innovation, which the Ministry of 
Justice and its bureaucratic agents were incapable of absorbing, and as a result 
they did not want to insert it into the agenda for debate during the presidential 
campaign and in policy discussions after the election of a new president. 
 In this chapter, I first look in more detail to the political genesis of PRO-
NASCI. Then, I will explain the policy that emerged and then describe its 
demise, a circumstance that is not frequently discussed by students of policy-
making. As a conclusion, I will consider PRONASCI as a case for reference, in 
both positive and negative ways, for studies of policy implementation. 
 The Political Genesis of PRONASCI 
 Aft er resolving to a certain degree historical problems related to economic 
development and social justice that had been prevalent for many decades, 
Brazilian society has been undergoing an apparently sustainable process of 
economic growth and low infl ation. It needs to be taken into account that, 
during its history, Brazil built an eff ective state apparatus linked to the promo-
tion of development along many dimensions. A basic social welfare system 
has existed in Brazil since the 1930s, and this had the impact of strengthening 
state structures and a professional bureaucracy. As noted by Amsden (2001) 
in her analysis of later-developing nations, countries that rose toward the top 
achieved this because they were able to articulate development policies in 
which a strong national state was the central actor. Included on her list of ris-
ing nations is Brazil. In addition, Brazil was also (somewhat episodically) a 
democratic country, aligned with Western nations. 
 Nevertheless, despite the existence of a state apparatus that strengthened 
over time and the nation’s general path toward development, Brazil under-
went repeated cycles of development and stagnation until the middle of the 
1990s, with resulting serious social asymmetries, even though some of these 
have recently been somewhat mitigated. 
 Following this, most notably during Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva’s two 
administrations (2003–2010), a strategy of encouraging development with 
greater social inclusion of the poor was pursued. Above all, this was aimed 
at strengthening low-income groups, with a consequent increase in their 
well-being and an expansion of the domestic Brazilian market. These policies 
raised the consumption levels of 30 million Brazilians considered as poor, 
altering Brazil’s political and economic equation and moving a large part of 
the population into the lower middle class (Neri 2011). 
 Together, these social and economic advances were converted into votes 
that elected President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva twice, but they also created 

188 
Marco Aurélio Ruediger
increasing social demands, both in terms of policies of economic progress and 
increasingly effective citizenship rights among the poor, who were his stron-
gest supporters. Public security issues inserted themselves in this process in 
a critical manner, due to increases in crime and negative externalities created 
by crime in the economy during the 1980s and 1990s. 
 In general terms, public security in Brazil has been especially challenging 
in its large urban areas. This has had serious repercussions on the credibility 
of institutional effectiveness in Brazilian states, in addition to their obvious 
impact on local attractiveness and the questions that they raise about the effec-
tiveness and honesty of public officials. It has thus hindered the federal strategy 
of promoting the country as an actor with a rising presence in the international 
political scene, as well as corroding the foundations of the credibility of state 
institutions. As noted by Santos (2005), Brazil is potentially risking a movement 
contrary to that of institution building, with the co-option of young people by 
the drug trade and the weakening of state credibility, since the web linking the 
drug trade extends dangerously close to the highest levels of the state. This 
could not be allowed, and the federal government decided to take a further step. 
 Although this concern was expressed by the country’s political elite on 
various occasions, it was given an unprecedented central role by the Brazilian 
president in 2007. This was the first pivotal moment in the policy process, a 
very public recognition by the popular president of the importance of crime 
and policing issues on the Brazilian political agenda. In his second inaugural 
speech, President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva stated, 
 During the campaign I stated that my second government would be a gov-
ernment of development, with income distribution and high quality educa-
tion. . . . Other vital areas for the population—and something that is constantly 
demanded—are health and public security. . . . I think that in relation to the 
question of public security—a real national scourge—the conditions for effec-
tive cooperation between the Federal Union and the states of the Federation are 
increasing, without which it will be very difficult to resolve this crucial problem. 
 (President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, 
Inauguration Speech, 2007; author’s translation) 
 Th ere followed a confl uence between this public recognition of the problem, 
the beginning of a new second presidential term, and a change in ministerial 
leadership that brought to offi  ce a new Minister for Justice, Tarso Genro. He 
recognized not only the opportunity created by the situation but also the need 
to implement a vigorous and innovative public security agenda. In an inter-
view with another of the strategic actors involved in the process, Ferreira and 
Britto (2010) recorded: 
 Then, when Tarso went to the Ministry of Justice, this problem already existed. 
There was the question of Rio de Janeiro, which was getting worse, there was 

Chapter 12: Police Reform in Brazil 
189
the crisis of Alagoas, there were the alarming levels of violence in Pernambuco 
[these are other Brazilian cities]. This meant that the question of public security 
gained a new centrality in the second mandate of President Lula [Luiz Inácio 
Lula da Silva], due to the notoriety which this question was acquiring. 
 (Interview with Vicente Trevas, Assistant Secretary for 
Federative Affairs of the Office of the 
Presidency of the Republic; author’s translation) 
 Th e opportunity recognized by Tarso Genro when he was named Minister of 
Justice to develop a new federal policy concerning this traditionally local issue 
was taken up quickly. Four aspects of the problem were widely discussed: (a) the 
need for a reduction in levels of violence through eff ective security actions 
linked to social development in poorer areas; (b) the development of a federa-
tive pact recognizing the co-responsibility of states and municipalities in the 
issue; (c) the need to adapt federal state structures so that they could deal with 
local issues and authorities; and (d) the political confl ict related to this question. 
In another interview by Ferreira and Britto (2010), the minister himself stated, 
 Insecurity has become a central category in politics, in the crisis of modernity. In 
other words, what is called post-modernity—a great fragmentation, the destruc-
tion of utopias, the hysterical sublimation of the present, the absence of perspec-
tives, totalizing in the last instance what is social desegregation, the insecurity 
which is transformed into a central question of politics. I argue, thus, that who-
ever cannot answer these questions, cannot answer anything politically. 
 (Interview with Tarso Genro, Minister of Justice; author’s translation) 
 Th is discussion was expanded to encompass local political elites, the media, 
and the population in general, especially the various targets of the program. 
A complex process of negotiation was developed within the Ministry of Plan-
ning to allocate US$3.35 billion for the program. 
 The Political Process and PRONASCI 
 PRONASCI thus became defi ned as a progressive response to crime. It rec-
ognized that crime was strongly linked to economic distress, and traditional 
policing practices in Brazil were at the same time repressive and ineff ective. 
Casting community safety as among the expanded rights that the Lula admin-
istration was promoting could simultaneously respond to the fears of the 
urban middle classes and to residents of poor areas routinely subject to violent 
repression by both criminals and the police. PRONASCI aimed at replacing 
fear with trust between a reformed security apparatus and the population. 
 This is in line with Bendix (1996), who noted that authority depends on 
and is rebuilt through cumulative acts of trust, that a fluidity exists between 

190 
Marco Aurélio Ruediger
administrative effectiveness and public cooperation. In this case, police 
reform and the adoption of a community policing model could facilitate the 
development of trust and cooperation, becoming a central part of a systemic 
and culturally sophisticated approach to public security. 
 Another author, Silver (2004), follows a similar line, observing that the 
penetration of the police in the context of civil society does not only reside 
in the crime-fighting activities of the police, but also in their central pres-
ence in daily life. Nevertheless, presence in itself does not necessarily unleash 
an effective transformation process in the relationship of the police with the 
community. For this, PRONASCI had to reform the practices and culture of 
its various security forces, in order to achieve an effective paradigm for social 
change. As observed by Janet Chan (2004) in relation to constructs developed 
by Bourdieu, a change in the habitus of the police, as proposed by PRONASCI, 
would achieve results if, and only if, it was also dependent on a change in the 
field in which it was inserted. In this case, field is the historical reality of rela-
tions between police and the community, which are structured on relations of 
power. PRONASCI sought to shift this agenda, understanding the community 
as a politically legitimate entity demanding greater citizenship rights. These 
included recognition of the right of the excluded to better living conditions 
and personal security, as well as a range of expanded opportunities in relation 
to Marshall’s citizenship (1964). But this vision of a reciprocal relationship 
between communities and the public security apparatus that would together 
expand citizens’ rights could only be effective if it changed the system. 
 In this way, the perspective of criminality rooted exclusively in socially 
and economically depressed regions is altered. In part this is true, since the 
poorest areas—called favelas—have been a locus for gangs notorious for 
their connection with the drug trade. However, as observed in the case of 
Rio de Janeiro by Perlman (1976), favelas are mainly composed of work-
ers and their families seeking to be close to work. Many have been there for 
decades, creating linkages with their more affluent neighbors and extensive 
networks of solidarity within their communities, despite their developing in 
a distinct manner, isolated from inclusion in the mainstream city. So taking 
these favelas to be homogenous worlds situated alongside the mainstream city 
is an error that extends the stigma of marginality to the entire community. 
Many different economic activities take place in them, and they are actually 
included in an agglomeration of social segments and distinct standards of 
affluence, though with low levels of social development as a whole. These 
areas have a logic similar to the economic dynamics of American ghettos, as 
described by Fusfeld and Bates (1984). Their accumulation processes are not 
sufficiently strong to alter their economic relevance or even their social status, 
even though their linkages and networks are intense. 
 In Rio de Janeiro, continuous efforts have been made to address these 
issues. The general growth of the country has translated into improvements 

Chapter 12: Police Reform in Brazil 
191
in living standards in the favelas. However, effective, responsive, and profes-
sional policing has been critically lacking, contributing to the emergence in 
these communities of alternative structures under the control of crime cartels 
with economic linkages that go beyond their own territoriality. 
 Therefore, reforming the police could only become effective if linked to 
a change in their cultural and organizational orientation toward providing 
police services in the favelas, and their efforts to restore order under law in 
these areas could only be effective if they were combined with a broad range 
of new opportunities for residents there. Under PRONASACI, police reform 
focused on stimulating social mobility and the protection of highly vulnerable 
groups, such as youths lacking social or familial cohesion, individuals leaving 
the armed forces, the unemployed, and those returning from prison. 
 In order to achieve these objectives, PRONASCI fielded a number of pro-
grams, ranging from re-equipping security forces to providing new officer 
training, instituting community policing models, and providing assistance and 
promoting access to justice and social services to the most vulnerable groups. 
Community policing and the introduction of non-lethal weapons were prob-
ably the most visibly successful PRONASCI initiatives. Brazil’s version of 
community policing involved reaching out to the community with the support 
of integrated services management offices and local community security coun-
cils. It attempted to incorporate central elements of the program observed by 
Skogan and Hartnett (1997) and Skogan (2006), such as community involve-
ment, restructuring of patrol units and the stable assignment of officers to their 
patrol areas, problem solving, and the provision of services, among other objec-
tives. Finally, outside of poorer urban areas, PRONASCI supported greater 
professionalism among highway and border control police, following the strat-
egy of maintaining close relations with other federal programs. 
 This complex construction of policies was created by the federal govern-
ment not only with the aim of overcoming the pressure arising out of the 
increasing demands of civil society for more effective action on the part of the 
state, but also to invert it, so that the states could—or had to—work within a 
new agenda. This political engineering of state-national relationships mobi-
lized significant actors at the national level around public security issues, and 
modified the rules of resource allocation through a complex process of politi-
cal negotiation. 
  Figure 12.1  summarizes the processes being described here, focusing on 
the pivotal points in policy formulation. It is a process-based perspective on 
the interaction of key actors embedded within macroeconomic and political 
trends, such as decisions that were impending on the location of World Cup 
and Olympic events (Barzelay, Gaetani, Cortázar and Cejudo 2003; McAdam, 
Tarrow and Tilly 2001). In this case, however, the development of policy over 
time did not follow the predicted path, and explaining the demise of PRO-
NASCI becomes the central issue requiring explanation. 

192 
Marco Aurélio Ruediger
 The foundational moment depicted in  Figure 12.1 arose out of the presi-
dential initiative (E1) described above, announced in his second inaugural 
address. This was followed by ministerial changes common to a new govern-
ment, changes made to accommodate political forces and to support changes 
in the upper echelons of state bureaucracy in order to support the strategic 
direction chosen by the president. Added to this process are pressures arising 
out of civil society and the political class related to concern about rising crime. 
All of this resulted in the nomination of a new Minister of Justice (EC1) who 
reviewed the strategic direction of the ministry (EC2) and announced plans 
to move in the direction that eventually led to PRONASCI. 
 To turn this strategic policy direction into a program required two com-
plementary processes. Initially, it was necessary to overcome obstacles arising 
from the nation’s federal structure (E2, in  Figure 12.1 ). The route to doing so 
was found in the new minister’s experience in CDES ( Conselho de Desenvolvi-
mento Econômico e Social , or Economic and Social Development Council), 
another agency that negotiated federal agreements relating to policy and 
interministerial collaboration. Second, a great deal of consensus building had 
to be done around this new plan. After being conceptually structured, the 
program was sent to the president for official approval. Following this came 
the implementation stage (E3). 
 Notwithstanding approval for PRONASCI at the highest levels within 
the administration, it was also necessary to negotiate for support within 
 Figure 12.1  The PRONASCI policy process 2007–2009 

Chapter 12: Police Reform in Brazil 
193
“technocratic” levels of various bureaucracies, with a special focus on those 
involved in movement and accountability for funds. This also involved repeated 
negotiations with multiple bureaucratic actors, both horizontally and vertically. 
One problem was that, when it was created, PRONASCI had not been considered 
in the preparation of the budget. Furthermore, the volume and decentralized 
nature of the fund flows, which were of an extraordinary nature, added to the 
necessity of creating procedures for monitoring and evaluating the various 
activities that they were intended to support. This required the development 
of procedures for controlling the project and analytic tools for monitoring and 
evaluating its implementation, both from an administrative perspective and in 
the eyes of the target populations of the programs (E4 and ER1 in  Figure 12.1 ). 
 The key objective of implementation monitoring was, as noted by Wholey 
(1991), to gather systematic and continuous information about effectiveness 
of the various elements of PRONASCI, in order to improve its performance. 
In addition, surveys were conducted among two targets of the program: resi-
dents of the “territories of peace” (as targeted favelas were dubbed) and police, 
fire service, and other public security employees. These enabled adjustments 
to be made in the program “on the fly.” Shadish, Cook and Leviton’s (1991) 
observation about evaluation was especially useful in understanding that 
public programs can change from incremental changes to large alterations in 
their scope and sets of rules. We sought an evaluation monitoring that allowed 
complex changes to be monitored. This proved particularly important early 
in the life of the program, when the relevant ministries were unexpectedly 
slow to implement the program. The Justice Minister was able to challenge 
the ministry, and he used the media to create pressure on the national govern-
ment to press the program forward. 
  Figure 12.2  illustrates the progress of the program, once funds started to 
flow. It charts the progress of federal transfers to the Brazilian states of training 
grants to prepare police officers for community policing. Training funds were 
supplemented with salary money for officers while they were being trained, to 
encourage states to adopt PRONASCI and promptly spend the money. It can 
be seen that through 2009, there was great success in budgeting and moving 
the money that was required; problems were to come later. 
  Figure 12.3  illustrates the results of monitoring public satisfaction with 
PRONASCI projects among various targeted populations. These included cit-
izen reservists ( reservista cidadão ), former soldiers looking for employment in 
the formal economy; PROTEJO ( Proteção a Jovens em Vulnerabilidade Social , 
or Protection of Socially Vulnerable Youths), which aimed at assisting young 
people at risk of entering the drug trade to instead stay in school; and pre-
paratory courses for ENEM (the university entrance exam), which provided 
preparatory assistance for low-income youth to ready them for their university 
exams (this project was carried out in partnership with the Ministry of Edu-
cation). All of these are programs were concerned with stimulating upward 

 Figure 12.2 Training grants awarded and expended 2008–2009 
 Source: PRONASCI evaluation 
 Figure 12.3  Participant evaluation of PRONASCI programs 
 Source: PRONASCI evaluation 

Chapter 12: Police Reform in Brazil 
195
social mobility among residents of poor communities.  Figure 12.3  briefly 
summarizes the findings of a host of target-population surveys conducted 
as part of monitoring the implementation of PRONASCI, and illustrates the 
high levels of approval registered by those targeted by the program. Typically, 
about 30% of program participants gave the highest rating, and almost all the 
remainder gave ratings that were in the very positive range. 
 Together,  Figures 12.2  and  12.3  highlight the success of PRONASCI as a 
program and its implementation in the adopting states. PRONASCI linked 
support for a new policing paradigm to the development of opportunities 
of social inclusion, combined with implementation monitoring and control 
of policy feedback (Pierson 1993). A great deal of money was successfully 
delivered to support key programs, and there was a high degree of satisfaction 
among program participants. And then it died. 
 Dismantling PRONASCI 
 Aft er a great deal of progress following its creation by an October 2007 statute, 
beginning in 2011 the actual budget for PRONASCI was reduced practically 
to zero. Th is concluding section considers the political and policy processes 
that shift ed, leading to this unforeseen and pivotal change. 
  Figure 12.4  charts the progress of PRONASCI’s budgeted and actual 
expenditures. We first can see a very close match between authorized funds 
and those actually allocated in 2008 and 2009; the federal ministries trans-
ferred over 90% of allocated funds to the states during this period. But in 
2010, that figure slipped to 77%, and in 2011 to 38%. Further, this shortfall 
was largely confined to PRONASCI; it did not reflect some larger bureaucratic 
failure.  Figure 12.5  contrasts comparable figures for the implementation of 
PRONASCI and for other programs supported by the Ministry of Justice. For 
each year, it presents the percentage of planned program funds that were actu-
ally dispersed. This chart extends only through 2011, the last year for which 
full-year data is available. As the chart illustrates, the ministry’s success at 
funding its other programs matched the PRONASCI rate during 2008–2010, 
but then police reform fell off the implementation agenda. 
 What led to the collapse in fiscal support for such an energetic program? 
PRONASCI had been created to transform not only operational policies, but 
also to promote social development and, indirectly, the institutional cultural 
of the Ministry of Justice and federal-state relationships in this policy domain. 
In the analytic approach presented by Skocpol (1985), states matter not just 
in terms of their policies, but because their policies affect governmental pro-
cesses and standards, alter the political culture, strengthen different political 
groups, and create opportunities and changes (or externalities) that are some-
times unforeseen. The discussion of the contextual and political origins of the 

 Figure 12.4  Funds authorized and earmarked or expended 2008–2009 (US dol-
lars) 
 Source: PRONASCI evaluation. 
 Figure 12.5  Implementation of PRONASCI and other justice ministry programs 
 Source: PRONASCI evaluation 

Chapter 12: Police Reform in Brazil 
197
program, which were summarized in  Figure 12.1 , predicted a much more suc-
cessful life course for the policy. This leads us to consider the multiple possible 
causes of the program’s demise, all of which took place contemporaneously 
and converged to seal the fate of PRONASCI. 
 First, resistance by bureaucratic structures to the paradigmatic change 
called for by PRONASCI contributed to weakening support for the program 
in the budgeting process. Further, the program received a mixed reaction 
at the state level. The states were anxious to secure federal funds, but they 
resisted the new state-federal relationship imposed by the program, with its 
rules for local spending and persistent monitoring of program implementa-
tion. However, it was the juxtaposition of this resistance and the next pivotal 
moment in Brazilian politics, the 2010 presidential election, that explains the 
program’s disappearance. 
 In 2010, the minister responsible for the original design of PRONASCI 
left office to run for office in one of the Brazilian states. He was elected gov-
ernor of Rio do Sul state and left the national stage. At the same time, the 
party of outgoing president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva chose as its presidential 
candidate his chief of staff, Dilma Roussef, who was also victorious. During 
the presidential campaign, the question of security in large cities was a sub-
ject of debate. Roussef’s campaign reiterated the importance of PRONASCI’s 
conceptual framework. She spoke of the importance of raising the status of 
police officers, who needed proper training and higher salaries. The candidate 
also spoke in favor of new policies and expenditures for modernizing pris-
ons and dealing with highly dangerous prisoners. And in her view, the new 
UPPs inaugurated in Rio de Janeiro had the potential to be an important ele-
ment in defeating crime. 3   However, she barely referred to PRONASCI directly. 
This was in response to mixed views of the program among her campaign 
managers, who reflected some of the bureaucratic resistance and state-federal 
tension that the program generated. As a result, there was little public empha-
sis on PRONASCI as such, which would have committed her politically to the 
program. 
 Instead, what happened was in line with Weir and Skocpol’s (1985) con-
cept of “policy results.” In the case of Brazil, state structures, which are home 
to bureaucratic careers and have some autonomy of action, do not necessar-
ily bend to the influence of elected administrators, who are more permeable 
to political forces or ideological agendas. Elite bureaucrats also are not 
insulated from pressure groups or from the chain of command that begins 
with elected representatives, but in practice they can postpone, distort, or 
provide counter advice about the direction of a policy and its administra-
tion. Habitus and their own survival instinct lead them toward their zones 
of comfort and arrangements more optimal for their career and their net-
work of alliances, even though this can be suboptimal for political decision 
makers faced with contrary interests or legacies of polices in which they 

198 
Marco Aurélio Ruediger
participated. PRONASCI’s budget disappeared into this maze of state and 
federal bureaucracies, not having won an explicit seal of approval from the 
new president during her campaign and no longer protected by its inaugural 
Minister of Justice. 
 Conclusion 
 Policy processes and public administration are continually interconnected. In 
addition, they increasingly are in dialogue with civil and development pos-
sibilities, whether individual or collective, in the public sphere. PRONASCI 
aimed at promoting both security and social development. It originated out 
of the capacity of a few high-placed actors to perceive social and political 
changes that could support this two-pronged defi nition of the problem, and it 
was a policy formula that refl ected the political stance of the president of the 
moment. It spoke to social problems on the citizen side of the program, and 
it promoted police reforms that could rebound to further support progressive 
social developments. Further, it spoke to one of the most notable shortcom-
ings of Brazilian democracy, the traditions and practices of its police. Th e 
program was positive in terms of its results, in spite of its short life. Most 
especially, its spin-off s included the UPP policing teams that remain eff ective 
in Rio de Janeiro. 
 As a lesson in public administration, policymakers must be careful to take 
into account the distinct interests of the bureaucracy, the key role played by 
the media in defining the situation, and the political opportunities that open 
and close as elite actors come and go. Elites across generations—which can be 
short in modern political life—need to buy into policies in order to guaran-
tee their sustainability. Finally, in its short life, PRONASCI did not generate 
enough mass support demanding its continuation. It was from the beginning 
a top-down program. In the face of all of this, the modern monitoring and 
evaluation systems designed to promote program implementation did not 
play a significant role in protecting PRONASCI, despite the many positive 
signals they gathered. 
 Notes 
 1. A revised version of Marco Aurélio Ruediger. 2013. Th e Rise and Fall of Brazil’s Public 
Security Program: PRONASCI.  Police Practice and Research: An International Journal 14: 
280–294. 
 2. UPP means  Unidade de Polícia Pacifi cadora  (Pacifying Police Unit). Th ese units seem to be 
responsible for an increase in trust in police and declining fear of crime in Rio de Janeiro city. 
Th e UPPs operate in a manner that is distinct from traditional, repressive policing, employ-
ing a community policing style instead. 

Chapter 12: Police Reform in Brazil 
199
 3. Source: blog of Dilma (Dilma 13) during the presidential campaign (www.dilma13.com.br/
entry/dilma-discute-propostas-para-segurança-publica/). 
 References 
 Amsden, A. H. 2001.  The rise of “the rest”: Challenges to the west from late-industrializing econo-
mies . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Barzelay, M., Gaetani, F., Cortázar, J. C., and Cejudo, G. 2003. Research on public management 
policy change in the Latin America region: A conceptual framework and methodological 
guide.  International Public Management Review 4: 20–41. 
 Barzelay, M., and Gallego, R. 2010, April. The comparative historical analysis of public man-
agement policy cycles in France, Italy and Spain, symposium introduction.  Governance 23: 
209–223. 
 Bendix, R. 1996.  Construção nacional e cidadania  [National construction and citizenship]. São 
Paulo: EDUSP. 
 Chan, J. 2004. Changing police culture. In  Policing: Key readings , ed. T. Newburn, 338–363. 
Cullompton: Willan. 
 Evans, P., Rueschemeyer, D., and Skocpol, T. 1985. Bringing the state back in. Cambridge, MA: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 Ferreira, M., and Britto, A. 2010.  Segurança e cidadania: Memórias do Pronasci  [Security and 
citizenship: Memories of Pronasci]. 1st edition. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Fundação Getulio 
Vargas. 
 Fusfeld, D. R., and Bates, T. 1984.  The political economy of the urban ghetto . Carbondale, IL: 
Southern Illinois University Press. 
 Marshall, T. H. 1964. Citizenship and social class. In  Class citizenship and social development , 
ed. T. H. Marshall, 65–122. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press. 
 McAdam, D., Tarrow, S., and Tilly, C. 2001.  Dynamics of contention . Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
 Neri, M. 2011.  A nova classe média: o Lado brilhante dos pobres  [The new middle class: The 
brilliant side of the poor]. Rio de Janeiro: FGV/CPS. 
 Perlman, J. 1976.  The myth of marginality: Urban politics and poverty in Rio de Janeiro . Berkeley: 
University of California Press. 
 Pierson, P. 1993. When effect becomes cause: Policy Feedback and political change.  World 
Politics 45: 595–628. 
 Santos, W. G. 2005. O Conservadorismo Obsoleto do status quo [The obsolete conservatism 
of the status quo]. In  Desenvolvimento e Construção Nacional: políticas públicas [Develop-
ment and national construction: Public policies], ed. B. S. Cavalcanti, M. A. Ruediger and R. 
Sobreira, 17–28. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Fundação Getulio Vargas. 
 Shadish, W. R. Jr., Cook, T. D., and Leviton, L. C. 1991. Good theory for social program evalu-
ation. In  Foundations of program evaluation: Theories of practice , ed. W. R. Shadish Jr., T. D. 
Cook and L. C. Leviton, 36–67. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
 Silver, A. 2004. The demand for order in civil society. In  Policing: Key readings , ed. T. Newburn, 
7–24. Cullompton: Willan. 
 Skocpol, T. 1985. Bringing the state back in: Strategies of analysis in current research. In  Bring-
ing the state back in , ed. P. Evans, D. Rueschemeyer and T. Skocpol, 3–37. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press. 
 Skogan, W. 2006.  Police and community in Chicago: A tale of three cities . New York, NY, and 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

200 
Marco Aurélio Ruediger
 Skogan, W., and Hartnett, S. 1997.  Community policing, Chicago style . New York, NY: Oxford 
University Press. 
 Weir, M., and Skocpol, T. 1985. State structures and the possibilities for “keynesian” responses 
to the great depression in Sweden, Britain, and the United States. In  Bringing the state back , 
ed. P. Evans, D. Rueschemeyer and T. Skocpol, 169–191. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
 Wholey, J. S. 1991. Evaluation for program improvement. In  Foundations of program evalu-
ation: Theories of practice , ed. W. R. Shadish Jr., T. D. Cook and L. C. Leviton, 225–269. 
Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
 

201
 Index
Note: Italicized page numbers indicate a fi gure on the corresponding page. Bold page 
numbers indicate a table on the corresponding page.
Active Prevention Patrols (PPA) 59
Amazonas State government 47–9
Amazonas State Military Police 167–8, 
172–4, 179; see also Military Police
Anglo-Saxon legal tradition 44
anti-democratic acts 175
armed militias 11
authoritarianism 74, 116–24, 169–70, 173–4
autonomous role of public 59
bad guys (“bandidos”) 89, 112–14
Bahia Military Police 170
Battalion of Special Operations (BOPE) 11, 
141, 157
Beltrame, José Mariano 143–4, 148
black youth and violence 108–14
BOs, reports 35–6
Brazil, size and population 1–2
Brazilian Code of Criminal Procedure 61
Brazilian Constitution (1988) 44, 45, 175
Brazilian Forum for Public Safety (FBSP) 8, 
22, 72, 89, 112, 119, 145
Brazilian National Institute of Geography 
and Statistics (IBGE) 3
British Crime Survey 5
Brizola, Leonel 140
bureaucratization 56, 137
Cabral, Sérgio 136, 141, 148, 156
cannabis eradication 98–104, 101, 103
cannabis production 94–7
Cardoso, Fernando Henrique 38
career satisfaction of Civil Police 50–2, 51
case processing ineffi  ciencies 14
Center for Democracy, Development and the 
Rule of Law 146
Center for Public Safety of Federal 
University of Minas Gerais 40
Center for Studies on Crime and Public 
Security (CRISP) 72
Center for Studies on Organizations and 
People (NEOP) 72
centralized dispatch service 56
Centro de Estudos de Segurança e Cidadania 
(CeSec) survey 145
Cidade de Deus community policing 151, 
157–61, 159, 160, 159–62
civic engagement 14–15, 17–19
civilian rule 2
Civil Police: of Amazonas 43, 46–53; 
characteristics of 55; criminal 
investigations in 60–4, 122; defi ned 
45–6; females in 80, 81–2; gang 
warfare and 140–1; hierarchy 
and career satisfaction 50–2, 51; 
ineff ectiveness of 110; introduction to 
10, 43–5; organizational restructuring 
of 13–14; profi le of 50; public security 
46–7; role of 170; summary of 52–3; 
survey on 49–50; violent practices of 
156; see also dual civil and military 
police model
Civil Police Academy 63
Civil Police of Amazonas 47–53
civil rights 115–16
cocaine production 47
Code of Conduct 88
Code of Ethics 88
community policing: in Cidade de 
Deus 157–61, 159, 160; concept 
development 155–7; criticism of 143; 
in Dona Marta 157–61, 159, 160; 
evaluation of 128–9; implications of 
161–2; introduction to 17–19, 151–2; 
Military Police and 58–60; potential 
benefi ts 64 66–7, 138–9; PRONASCI 
initiatives and 191; in Rio de Janeiro 
152–5
Complexo do Alemão occupation 156–7
comprehensive crime control policy 37–8

202 
Index
Conselho de Desenvolvimento Econômico e 
Social (CDES) 192
Constituent National Assembly 31
corporatist dispute 34–5
corruption concerns 2, 8, 9, 11, 22, 122, 129
counter-insurgency warfare 11
crime and policing: comprehensive crime 
control policy 37–8; introduction to 
5–10; organized crime 8–9, 11, 157; 
perspectives on 129–30; prototypical 
criminal 62; punishment of crimes 
110–11; see also homicide crime
criminal investigations in Civil Police 
60–4
criminal justice information system 
(INFOCRIM) 38
Criminal Procedure Code 30
Datafolha Institute 40
decentralization 65, 138–9, 146, 153
decision-making autonomy 153
delegado (person in charge of case) 61, 63–4, 
171
demilitarization of police 112, 114
democracy/democratization in Brazil: 
community policing and 58; gang 
activity in Rio de Janeiro 137–40; 
introduction to 2; police role in 
175–7; racial/class inequalities 
108–10, 115–18; sophisticated 
policing and 169
Detail Occurrence Terms (TCO) 34
diambism (marijuana habit) 98
discrimination against female police 84
distributive fairness 20–1
distributive justice 19–21
Dona Marta community policing 157–61, 
159, 160
drug businesses: cannabis production 94–7; 
introduction to 93–4; laws against 94; 
repression of plantations 97–104, 101, 
103; summary of 104
dual civil and military police model: 
corporatist dispute 34–5; institutional 
design of 31–2; introduction to 29; 
origins of 29–31; policing system 
32–4, 33; reform attempts 37–9; 
reform failures 39–41; system 
dysfunction 35–7
education grants (bolsa-formação) 171
eff ectiveness of police 8, 21–2
escrivão (coordinator) 61, 63–4
external oversight of police 14–17
extrajudicial killings 7, 121
Faculdade Latino-Americana de Ciências 
Sociais (Latin-American Faculty of 
Social Sciences) 5
Favela-Bairro program 5
favelas (urban slums) 4–5, 10–13, 190–1; 
see also community policing
fear of crime 158–61, 159, 160
Federal Constitution (1988) 31, 72, 74, 113
Federal Highway Police (PRF) 31
Federal Police (PF) 31, 80, 99–102, 104
Federal Railroad Police 31
federal system of governance 2
Federal University of Minas Gerais (UFMG) 
72
“federative” approach to government 
cooperation 184
feminist movement 77
force see use of force
Fundação Getulio Vargas (FGV) 123, 130, 144
gang activity: developing democracy and 
137–40; drug trafficking 94; in 
favelas 11; introduction to 4–5, 
135–7; Pacifying Police Units 142–9
Garotinho, Anthony 141
gender relations: female participation in 
policing 73, 73–7, 75; introduction to 
71–2; policy importance 87–8; sexual 
equality 77–87, 78–83, 85–6; survey 
overview 72–3
Genro, Tarso 183, 188–9
get-tough policies 22
Getulio Vargas Foundation (FGV) 72, 112
glass roof 82
global human rights movement 170–1
Goulart, João 30
Grupamento Tático de Policiamento em 
Áreas Especiais (GPAE) 141
Guajajara Indians 99
Guilherme dos Santos, Wanderley 115
harassment of female police 84–6, 85
hierarchical structure of police agencies 152
hierarchy of Civil Police 50–2, 51
homicide crime: investigator cooperation 
64; perceptions of trends in 161; rates 
of 6–8, 135, 145, 147; UPPs against 
11–12
Human Development Index (HDI) 3
human rights 118, 170–1

Index 
203
illicit drug plantations 97–104, 101, 103
Index of Youth Vulnerability to Violence 
and Racial Inequality (Índice de 
Vulnerabilidade Juvenil à Violência e 
Desigualdade Racial) 108
Indigenous Missionary Council (IMC) 99
inequality 3–4
inquérito policial (IP) 61
inquisitorial phase 61
in-service training courses 127
Integrated Areas of Public Safety (AISP) 38
Integrated Center of Operations (CiOp) 37
Integrated Management in Public Safety 
(IGESP) 38
Integrated System of Social Defense (SIDS) 
38
internal accountability of police 14–17
Internal Occupational Accident Prevention 
Committees 81
Interstate Marijuana Agreement 97
Japanese Kobans 59
Judicial Police see Civil Police
Justice Ministry see Ministry of Justice
Kant de Lima, Roberto 60–1
Latinobarometro survey 9
law-abiding citizens (cidadãos de bem) 112
law enforcement offi  cers 112–15
Law on Special Criminal Courts 34
legitimacy building 19–23, 153
Lemgruber, Julita 13
lethal violence 109, 147
Lula de Silva, Luiz Inácio 171, 183, 184–8, 
197
Mapa da Violência (Violence Map) 5
masculine brutality by police 87
mass individualism 116
Military Criminal Procedure Code 32
Military Penal Code 32
Military Police: Amazonas State Military 
Police 172–4, 179; characteristics 
of 55; community policing 58–60; 
females in 78–9, 85; gang warfare 
and 136; introduction to 2, 7, 10; 
management of criminal violence 
114; organizational restructuring of 
13; role of 110–12, 122, 170; violent 
practices of 156; see also dual civil and 
military police model
Military Police of Amazonas 172–4, 179
Military Police professionalization: 
introduction to 167–8; national 
training plan 171–2; origins of reform 
168–71; participant views 173–9; 
summary of 179–80; training in 
Amazonas 172–3
Military Police Special Battalions 143
Minas Gerais, Brazil 38, 39
Minas Gerais Military Police 113
Ministry for Exterior Relations 98
Ministry of Justice 99–101, 180, 184–5, 193, 
195–7
Model District in Fortaleza 37
motorized patrolling 152
multiparty political system 2
Municipal Guard 32, 72, 78–9, 81
Murilo de Carvalho, José 115
National Antidrug Secretariat (NADS) 100
National Association of Police Delegates of 
Brazil 34
National Commission of Oversight of 
Narcotics (SCON) 97, 98
National Council of the Public Ministry 40
National Crime Victimization Survey (U.S.) 5
National Federation of State Military Offi  cers 
Entities 34
National Program of Public Security 
with Citizenship (PRONASCI): 
dismantling of 195–8, 196; evaluation 
of 184–7; introduction to 23, 39, 122, 
183–4; overview of 171; political 
genesis of 187–9; political process of 
189–95, 192, 194; summary of 198; 
use of force 121–3, 127–32
National Public Security Secretariat 
(SENASP) 38, 171
National System of Public Policy on Drugs 
(SISNAD) 94
national victimization survey (Pesquisa 
Nacional de Vitimização) 113
nongovernmental organization (NGOs) 
18–19
Northern Ireland Police Service 170
O Globo survey 144–5
Olympic Games (2016) 7, 12
operational disarticulation 37
Operation Mandacaru 100–1, 101
organizational restructuring of police 13–14
Organization of the American States (OAS) 
100–1
organized crime 8–9, 11, 157

204 
Index
Pacifying Police Units (UPPs): birth of 
140–2; consolidation of 142–7; future 
of 147–9; introduction to 11–12; 
overview of 136–7, 139
Pacto pela Vida (Pact for Life) 6
Partido dos Trabalhadores (Workers’ Party) 
184–5
partnership with the community 
(PMMG) 58
Peralva, Angelina 116
personal factors in use of force by police 
125–7, 126
personal protection equipment (PPE) 
81, 81
“pluralization” of policing 168
police and society in Brazil: building 
legitimacy 19–23; community 
focus on reform 17–19; crime and 
5–10; favelas, policing of 10–13; 
internal accountability/external 
oversight 14–17; introduction to 1–5; 
organizational restructuring 13–14; 
professionalism by police 127–9, 128; 
responsiveness of police 138; sexual 
equality in policing 77–87, 78–83, 
85–6; summary of 23–4; system 
of 32–4, 33; wage parity between 
police 39–40; see also Civil Police; 
community policing; crime and 
policing; Military Police; professional-
bureaucratic model of policing
police–community partnership 146
Police Group for Special Areas (GPAE) 
155–6
police ombudsman 16–17
police professionalism 127–9, 128
police reform: attempts at 37–9; community 
focus on 17–19; failures 39–41; origins 
of 168–71; see also National Program 
of Public Security with Citizenship
policy-oriented coalitions 2
population demographics in Brazil 3–4
presidential initiatives 192
problem-solving by police 60, 153–4
procedural justice 19
procedurally fair treatment 20
professional-bureaucratic model of policing: 
community policing and Military 
Police 58–60; criminal investigations 
in Civil Police 60–4; dilemmas of 
56–8; introduction to 55–6; summary 
of 64–7
professionalism by police 127–9, 128
PRONASCI see National Program of Public 
Security with Citizenship
Prosecution Offi  ce 111
Proteção a Jovens em Vulnerabilidade Social 
(PROTEJO) 193
Protestant-Catholic tension 16
prototypical criminal 62
provisionado (commissioner) 48
Public Ministry 33
public security 46–7
punishment of crimes 110–11
quality-of-life issues 151
racial/class inequalities: democracy in Brazil 
2, 58, 113, 115–18; introduction to 
3–4, 107–8; law enforcement officers 
and 112–15; role of Military Police 
110–12; violence and black youth 
108–10
radio patrol 56
repression of illicit plantations 97–104, 101, 
103
responsiveness of police 138
results-oriented performance culture 168
rights-oriented police forces 114
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 2, 8, 152–5; crime 
135–6; see also favelas; gang activity
risk environment in use of force by police 
124–5, 125
Roman-Germanic legal tradition 44
Roussef, Dilma 197
Safety Training Institute of Pará (IESP) 37
São Francisco Valley, Brazil 95–6, 
102, 104
São Paulo, Brazil 1, 37–8
sexual equality in policing 77–87, 78–83, 
85–6
Soares, Luiz Eduardo 141
social movements 114
socioeconomic status of women 76
soft  power 184
Spearman correlation 159–61
Specialized Patrol Squadrons for Vulnerable 
Communities (GEPAR) 60
Special Operations Battalion (BOPE) 
11, 157
Special Police Stations for Assistance to 
Women (DEAMs) 74, 87–8
State Commissions of Oversight of Narcotics 
(SCON) 97
state-federal relationships 195, 197

Index 
205
stereotyping by police 124
strikes by police 33
Taser deployment and training 15
territorial dominion by gangs 135–6
territories of peace 193
Th atcher, David 155
torture, usage by police 8
transplantation eff orts 18
Unified Public Safety System 38
United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP) 3
United Nations Offi  ce on Drugs and Crime 
6, 96–7
university entrance exam (ENEM) 193
UPPs see Pacifying Police Units
urbanization 121, 137
urban maze (as quebradas) 111
use of force, by police: impact of personal 
factors 125–7, 126; impact of risk 
environment 124–5, 125; introduction 
to 121–3; multivariate analysis of 130, 
130–1; perspectives on crime and 
policing 129–30; police professionalism 
127–9, 128; on the street 124; summary 
of 131–2; survey on 123–4
Vargas, Fundação Getulio 184
Vargas, Getulio 30
victimization of female police 82, 82–6, 83, 86
violence: black youth 108–10; of Civil/
Military Police 156; lethal violence 109, 
147; monopoly on use of 
116–17; during Prohibition period 138
Violence Analysis Laboratory 145
wage parity between police 39–40

