
POLICING IN AMERICA

Selected Titles in ABC CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Adoption, Barbara A. Moe
Chemical and Biological Warfare, Al Mauroni
Childhood Sexual Abuse, Karen L. Kinnear
Conflicts over Natural Resources, Jacqueline Vaughn
Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue
Energy Use Worldwide, Jaine L. Moan and Zachary A. Smith
Food Safety, Nina E. Redman
Genetic Engineering, Harry LeVine, III
Gun Control in the United States, Gregg Lee Carter
Human Rights Worldwide, Zehra F. Kabasakal Arat
Illegal Immigration, Michael C. LeMay
Intellectual Property, Aaron Schwabach
The Internet and Society, Bernadette H. Schell
Mainline Christians and U.S. Public Policy, Glenn H. Utter
Mental Health in America, Donna R. Kemp
Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and James
Clay Moltz
Sentencing, Dean John Champion
U.S. Military Service, Cynthia A. Watson
World Population, Geoffrey Gilbert
For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit 
www.abc-clio.com.

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
find the information they need in order to have a better
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and
economic issues facing the world today.


POLICING IN
AMERICA
A Reference Handbook
Leonard A. Steverson
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California 
Denver, Colorado 
Oxford, England

Copyright 2008 by ABC-CLIO, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Steverson, Leonard A. 
Policing in America : a reference handbook / Leonard A. Steverson. 
p. cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 978-1-59884-043-8 (hard copy : alk. paper) 
 ISBN 978-1-59884-
044-5 (ebook)
1. Police
United States.
2. Law enforcement
United
States.
3. Police
United States
History.
4. Police
United States
Biography.
5. Police
Cross-cultural studies.
I. Title. 
HV8133.S84 2008 
363.20973
dc22 
2007013807 
12
11
10
09
08
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116 1911
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an ebook. Visit
www.abc-clio.com for details.
This book is printed on acid-free paper 
Manufactured in the United States of America.
∞

I dedicate this book to my lovely wife Betty, 
our daughters Nikki and Misty and their families,
including our grandsons Ashton, Trent, Colin, and Alden.
I also dedicate this work to the memory of my parents,
Amos and Jane Steverson.


Contents
Preface, xiii
List of Tables, xvii
List of Figures, xxi
1
Background and History, 1
The Early Stages of Social Control, 2
Policing in Early Societies, 3
The British Roots of American Policing, 4
Policing in the Early American Colonies, 10
Early Policing in the Northeast, 10
Early Policing in the South, 12
Early Policing in the West, 13
The Evolution of American Policing: 
The Nineteenth Century, 14
Municipal and County Police, 14
State Police, 19
Federal Police, 20
Private Police, 20
The Evolution of American Policing: 
The Twentieth Century, 21
Municipal and County Police, 21
State Police, 25
Federal Police, 26
Private Police, 28
Policing Changes in Context, 29
References, 30
2
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 33
The Police Mission, 34
ix

The Order Maintenance Function, 35
Community Service Function, 41
The World of the Police, 42
The Police Mystique, 42
The Police Personality, 43
The Police Subculture, 43
The Hazards of the Job, 47
Police–community Relations, 48
Citizen Review Boards, 50
Ethics in Policing: Police Misconduct, 50
Issues of Diversity in Policing, 51
Race Relations and the Police, 51
African American Police, 53
Women Police, 54
Other Minorities, 55
The Changing Police Milieu, 56
The Evolving Nature of Policing, 56
Current Police Philosophies, 57
New Approaches, 61
Intelligence-led Policing: The New Paradigm 
in Policing? 62
The Future of American Policing, 66
References, 68
3
Worldwide Perspective, 73
International and Comparative Criminal Justice, 73
Transnational Crime, 74
International Policing, 75
The Study of International and Comparative 
Policing, 75
Interpol, 76
Europol, 77
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, 78
Schengen Agreement, 79
Policing Systems in Other Countries, 80
Australia, 80
Canada, 82
China, 83
England, 85
France, 87
India, 89
Ireland, 90
x
Contents

Israel, 91
Japan, 93
Mexico, 94
Russia, 96
Sweden, 97
An Overview of World Policing Systems, 98
References, 100
4
Chronology, 103
5
Biographical Sketches, 121
Harry Anslinger, 121
Lola Greene Baldwin, 122
Samuel Battle, 122
Alphonse Bertillon, 123
William Burns, 124
Patrick Colquhoun, 125
Wyatt Earp, 125
Henry Faulds, 126
Henry Fielding, 126
John Fielding, 127
Francis Galton, 128
Pat Garrett, 128
Daryl Gates, 129
Herman Goldstein, 130
Hans Gross, 130
Beverly J. Harvard, 131
Edward Richard Henry, 132
William James Hershel, 132
J. Edgar Hoover, 133
George L. Kelling, 134
Greg MacAleese, 134
Eliot Ness, 135
William H. Parker, 136
Robert Peel, 136
Allan Pinkerton, 137
Theodore Roosevelt, 138
Frank Serpico, 138
Bruce Smith, 139
Eugene François Vidocq, 140
August Vollmer, 141
Juan Vucetich, 141
Contents
xi

Joseph Wambaugh, 142
Alice Stebbins Wells, 143
James Q. Wilson, 143
O. W. Wilson, 144
6
Facts and Data, 147
Police Personnel, 147
Federal Police Agencies, 147
State and Local Police Agencies, 148
7
Directory of Organizations, 209
Federal Government Agencies Related to Policing, 245
State Departments of Public Safety, 248
8
Resources, 253
Print Resources, 253
Books, 253
Journal Articles, 267
Scholarly Journals, 278
Magazines, 280
Nonprint Resources, 283
Videos and DVDs, 283
Websites, 289
Court Cases, 291
Glossary, 299
Index, 305
About the Author, 327
xii
Contents

Preface
T
he profession of policing has captured the hearts and minds
of many Americans, even those who are violators of the law.
As citizens, we notice uniformed officers when they enter a
building we are in. We certainly notice them, often nervously,
when they appear in our cars’ rearview mirrors. We observe
them racing to emergencies and wonder what happened. We be-
come fearful of criminal activity in our neighborhoods and hope
the police can come quickly if needed. We also watch news re-
ports of the abuse of police authority, and sometimes we forget
that the police are people, too, and capable of indiscretions—
indiscretions that are often publicly displayed.
Policing is a profession that conjures up visions of old-
fashioned, hard-bitten police work and officers walking the beat,
G-men chasing gangsters, and, more recently, forensic investiga-
tors and criminal profilers tracking down criminals using scien-
tific innovations. Our ideas about police officers can be found in
popular culture archetypes as polarized as Sheriff Andy Taylor
(the calm, rural sheriff without a gun of the Andy Griffith Show)
and the deadly Inspector Harry Callahan (the aggressive, urban
cop of the Dirty Harry movies). Many children in various stages
of development imitate the police in games of cops and robbers,
and gifts of toy police badges and service revolvers are often the
treasured keepsakes of childhood.
The police in America have not always appeared as they do
today. In fact, the police as we know them are a relatively recent de-
velopment. The earliest police systems were actually family polic-
ing structures in which community members were accountable for
controlling the behavior of their own group as well as for their own
protection. When the watch system became ineffective and some
people became paid police officers, their duties primarily involved
xiii

service functions. Later they accepted more law enforcement du-
ties but became corrupted by a system that dictated their actions
and allowed for little moral or professional decision making. When
the police became professionalized, they incorporated modern ad-
vancements in the field and were removed from many of the cor-
rupting influences of government; however, they tended to lose
touch with the communities they served. As a result, a chasm
formed between the communities and the police; citizens in many
areas began to see the police as an invading army rather than as an
institution whose very purpose is to serve and to protect the pub-
lic. This division became painfully obvious in the riots of the 1960s
when police and citizens clashed in often violent outbreaks. The
chasm also became painfully visible later in the Rodney King beat-
ing and its aftermath.
Clearly a new philosophy was needed to return the police to
their original purpose of serving the public. The change came in
the form of community-oriented models such as community
policing, problem-oriented policing, and broken windows polic-
ing, as developed in the 1970s and 1980s. In these models, the po-
lice became more integrated with citizens and used them as allies
in their attempts to control and prevent crime. Working in a col-
laborative fashion with the citizens and being a force in helping
solve the unique community problems they faced was not a new
idea but rather one that needed to be revisited in the wake of the
social upheaval of the 1960s.
The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 changed American
society in many ways, including how policing was administrated.
At the highest levels of government, a new focus on intelligence
developed to keep the country free of future terrorist activity. This
idea spilled over into the institution of policing because it was
posited that, by using carefully analyzed information (intelligence)
in a proactive way, street-level crime, as well as terrorism, could be
prevented. An evolving system of intelligence-led policing, which
can easily be seen as an adjunct to community policing models,
has developed and could possibly turn out to be the newest trend
in policing.
The police are considered the thin blue line that separates
order from chaos. It is often assumed that the police mostly func-
tion to maintain control in society through the vigorous enforce-
ment of laws; however, much of the work police officers perform
is service oriented. This is why the community models tend to
work better in most circumstances than the old professional
xiv
Preface

model. Note that the term “policing” is used rather than “law en-
forcement,” as is standard in many books and texts on police
work. This is because law enforcement is part of the order main-
tenance function and simply one aspect of what the police do;
therefore the term “policing,” which incorporates aspects of both
order maintenance and service functions, is preferred.
This book is an easily accessible source of information about
the field of policing and should provide readers with a glimpse
into the sociohistorical factors involved in social control mea-
sures taken not only in the United States but in other countries as
well. The book is intended for not only those who have or are
pursuing occupational goals in policing or the criminal justice
system in general but to those who want to better understand
ways in which societies deal with deviant behavior.
It is hoped that readers will learn more about the field of 
police work in this volume. The combination of years in academic
study and practical application in the criminal justice field have
made the author an observer of the field of policing; perhaps read-
ers with an interest in the field will find what they seek or will be
able to delve into more depth with the resources provided.
The author would like to thank all of the people involved in
the production of this work including the editors at ABC-CLIO:
Mim Vasan, Dayle Dermatis, and Kristine Swift, whose patient
understanding helped keep me focused on the task at hand. I
also would like to thank my family for their continued support
through the project—to Betty and the girls and to Millie for of-
fering comfort in the difficult times that occurred during the
preparation of the book. My colleagues at South Georgia College
were also helpful and their encouragement was sorely needed. I
also want to pay tribute to the thin blue line that protects our na-
tion and especially to those who paid the ultimate price when
duty called.
Preface
xv


List of Tables
Table 6.1
As of September 2004, Federal Agencies Employed
about 106,000 Full-Time Personnel Authorized to
Make Arrests and Carry Firearms, 152
Table 6.2
State and Local Law Enforcement Agencies and
Employees Based on June 2000 Figures, 152
Table 6.3
The Types of Agencies That Employ Police
Personnel (Sworn and Nonsworn Employees), 155
Table 6.4
Local Police Departments and Full-Time Personnel,
by Number of Sworn Personnel, 2003, 157
Table 6.5
Sheriffs’ Offices and Full-Time Personnel, by
Number of Sworn Personnel, 2003, 158
Table 6.6
The 50 Largest Local Police Departments by Total
Number of Full-Time Sworn Personnel, Number of
Full-Time Sworn Personnel per 100,000 Residents,
and Percentage of Full-Time Sworn Personnel
Regularly Assigned to Respond to Calls for Service,
2003, 158
Table 6.7
Twenty-five Largest Sheriffs’ Offices, by Number
and Function of Full-Time Sworn Personnel, 
2003, 161
Table 6.8
Use of Sworn Reserve or Auxiliary Officers in Local
Police Departments, by Size of Population Served,
2003, 163
Table 6.9
Use of Sworn Reserve or Auxiliary Officers in
Sheriffs’ Offices, by Size of Population Served, 
2003, 164
Table 6.10
Use of Nonsworn Reserve or Auxiliary Officers in
Local Police Departments, by Size of Population
Served, 2003, 165
xvii

Table 6.11
Use of Nonsworn Reserve or Auxiliary Officers in
Sheriffs’ Offices, by Size of Population Served, 
2003, 166
Table 6.12
Gender and Race of Full-Time Sworn Personnel in
Local Police Departments, by Size of Population
Served, 2003, 167
Table 6.13
Gender and Race of Full-Time Sworn Personnel 
in Sheriffs’ Offices, by Size of Population Served, 
2003, 168
Table 6.14
Minimum Educational Requirements for New
Officers in Local Police Departments, by Size of
Population Service, 2003, 171
Table 6.15
Minimum Educational Requirements for New
Officers in Sheriffs’ Offices, by Size of Population
Service, 2003, 172
Table 6.16
Academies Providing Basic Instruction on Various
Topics and Number of Hours of Instruction
Required, 2002, 176
Table 6.17
Law Enforcement Training Academy Facilities,
2002, 178
Table 6.18
Average Base Annual Salary for Selected Positions
in Local Police Departments, by Size of Population
Served, 2003, 180
Table 6.19
Average Base Annual Salary for Selected Positions
in Sheriffs’ Offices, by Size of Population Served,
2003, 181
Table 6.20
Types of Routine Patrol Other Than Automobile
Used by Local Police Departments, by Size of
Population Served, 182
Table 6.21
Types of Routine Patrol Other Than Automobile
Used by Sheriffs’ Offices, by Size of Population
Served, 182
Table 6.22
Court-Related Functions of Local Police
Departments, by Size of Population Served, 
2003, 183
Table 6.23
Court-Related Functions of Sheriffs’ Offices, by 
Size of Population Served, 2003, 184
Table 6.24
Detention Functions of Local Police Departments,
by Size of Population Served, 2003, 185
Table 6.25
Detention Functions of Sheriffs’ Offices, by Size of
Population Served, 2003, 185
xviii
List of Tables

Table 6.26
Temporary Holding (Lockup) Facilities Operated by
Local Police Departments, by Size of Population
Served, 2003, 186
Table 6.27
Temporary Holding (Lockup) Facilities Operated 
by Sheriffs’ Offices, by Size of Population Served,
2003, 187
Table 6.28
Special Public Safety Functions of Local Police
Departments, by Size of Population Service, 
2003, 188
Table 6.29
Special Public Safety Functions of Sheriffs’ Offices,
by Size of Population Service, 2003, 189
Table 6.30
Traffic and Vehicle-Related Functions of Local
Police Departments, by Size and Population 
Served, 2003, 190
Table 6.31
Traffic and Vehicle-Related Functions of Sheriffs’
Offices, by Size and Population Served, 2003, 191
Table 6.32
Special Operations Functions of Local Police
Departments, by Size of Population Served, 
2003, 192
Table 6.33
Special Operations Functions of Sheriffs’ Offices, 
by Size of Population Served, 2003, 193
Table 6.34
Local Police Departments with a Mission Statement
That Includes Community Policing, by Size of
Population Served, 2003, 193
Table 6.35
Sheriffs’ Offices with a Mission Statement that
Includes Community Policing, by Size of
Population Served, 2003, 194
Table 6.36
Community Policing Activities of Local Police
Departments, by Percentage of Population 
Served, 2003, 195
Table 6.37
Community Policing Activities of Sheriffs’ 
Offices, by Percentage of Population Served, 
2003, 196
Table 6.38
Types of Nonlethal Weapons Authorized for
Personal Use by Sworn Personnel in Local Police
Departments, by Percentage of Population Served,
2003, 198
Table 6.39
Types of Nonlethal Weapons Authorized for
Personal Use by Sworn Personnel in Sheriffs’
Offices, by Percentage of Population Served, 
2003, 199
List of Tables
xix

Table 6.40
Special Technologies Used by Local Police
Departments, by Size of Population Served, 
2003, 201
Table 6.41
Special Technologies Used by Sheriffs’ Offices, by
Size of Population Served, 2003, 202
Table 6.42
Complaint Dispositions in Large Law Enforcement
Agencies, by Type of Agency, 2002, 203
Table 6.43
Complaint Dispositions in Large Law Enforcement
Agencies, by Percentage of Full-Time Sworn
Officers, 2002, 204
Table 6.44
Citizen Complaints about Police Use of Force in
Large Municipal Departments, by Selected Agency
Administrative Characteristics, 2002, 205
Table 6.45
Complaint Dispositions in Large Municipal Police
Departments, by Selected Agency Administrative
Characteristics, 2002, 206
xx
List of Tables

List of Figures
Figure 6.1
Full-Time Employment by Local Police
Departments, 1987–2003, 156
Figure 6.2
Full-Time Employment by Sheriffs’ Offices,
1987–2003, 156
Figure 6.3
Female and Minority Local Police Officers,
1987–2003, 169
Figure 6.4
Female and Minority Personnel in Sheriffs’ 
Offices, 1987–2003, 169
Figure 6.5
Local Police Officers Employed by Departments
Using Various Recruit Screening Methods, 
2003, 170
Figure 6.6
Sworn Personnel Employed by Sheriffs’ Offices
Using Various Recruit Screening Methods, 
2003, 170
Figure 6.7
Training Requirements for New Officer Recruits in
Local Police Departments, 2000 and 2003, 173
Figure 6.8
Training Requirements for New Deputy Recruits 
in Sheriffs’ Offices, 2000 and 2003, 173
Figure 6.9
Positions for which Academies Provided Training
and/or Certification, 2002, 174
Figure 6.10
Types of Training Provided by Academies, in
Addition to Basic Recruit Training, 2002, 174
Figure 6.11
Academies Providing In-Service Training on
Community Policing Topics, 2002, 175
Figure 6.12
Training Related to Racially-Biased Policing, by
Methods of Instruction, 2002, 177
Figure 6.13
Basic Instruction Related to Terrorism and
Responding to Terrorist Incidents, 2002, 177
Figure 6.14
Sources of Training Funds or Equipment, 2002, 179
xxi

Figure 6.15
Recruits Completing Training, by Race and 
Gender, 2002, 179
Figure 6.16
Percentage of Local Police Departments Using 
Full-Time Community-Policing Officers, 1997,
2000, 2003, 197
Figure 6.17
Percentage of Sheriffs’ Offices Using Full-Time
Community-Policing Officers, 1997, 2000, 
2003, 197
Figure 6.18
Local Police Departments Using Video Cameras 
in Patrol Cars, 2000 and 2003, 200
Figure 6.19
Sheriffs’ Offices Using Video Cameras in Patrol
Cars, 2000 and 2003, 200
Figure 6.20
Citizen Complaints about Police Use of Force per
100 Full-Time Sworn Officers, by Type of Agency,
2002, 203
Figure 6.21
Law Enforcement Officers Killed in the Line of
Duty, 1973–2004, 207
Figure 6.22
Law Enforcement Officers Killed in the Line of
Duty by Weapon Type, 1973–2004, 207
xxii
List of Figures

1
Background and History
P
olicing is and has been an extremely important part of Amer-
ican society. Along with the court and correctional systems, it
is part of the triad that constitutes the criminal justice system
in the United States. Since it is the “front-end” component of the
system, it involves much interaction between the police and the
members of the communities they serve. The police are therefore
said to make up the “thin blue line” that exists in part to hold the
line between chaos and order in society. Police systems exist all
over the world in different forms to accomplish this and other
missions. 
The institution of the police, as it is currently known, is rela-
tively recent. Prior to the establishment of the first modern police
agency in London in 1829 and its urban American counterparts
in the 1840s, policing was an ambiguous and diverse undertak-
ing that morphed after World War I into the entity recognizable
today as the police (Monkkonen 1981, 24).
The study of policing is important for a number of reasons.
Not only does it aid in understanding the measures instituted by
governments to control socially harmful behavior, but it also pro-
vides insight into those measures. For example, the “noble ex-
periment” of prohibition in America in the 1920s and early 1930s
relied on the police to control behavior. When the ban on alco-
holic beverages became clearly unenforceable, the duties of the
police shifted to other, more enforceable, behaviors.
Understanding the history of the police also provides a better
understanding of democracy. The police not only control the be-
havior of citizens; they are citizens themselves. The amount and
degree of enforcement allowed provide a better understanding
1

not only of government on a broad scale, but also of the relation-
ship between police and community on a personal or community
level.
Another benefit is a fuller understanding of bureaucratic
structures. It has long been assumed that, as societies develop
and become more complex and nuanced, a move to bureaucrati-
zation is necessary to maintain efficiency (in other words, to pre-
serve order). Interestingly, in the last few decades, policing in
America has moved away from its traditional emphasis on a
highly bureaucratized system to one that is community based.
Time will tell whether this model, only several decades in place,
will give way to a return to the traditional, professional model or
to some other approach to policing.
Before exploring the distinctly American version of policing,
it is beneficial to look at some of the earliest known forms of so-
cial control.
The Early Stages of Social Control
The earliest societies did not have an organized police force but
depended on their own citizens to police themselves. It is likely
that the heads of families were responsible for maintaining order
and  settling disputes. As people moved away from their original
villages, they encountered others with whom they were unfamil-
iar and whose traditions were alien. As new communities were
formed, defenses were erected to stop invaders from causing po-
tential harm to the residents. These ensconced communities grew
into towns and cities whose citizens devised methods to main-
tain their ways of life (Cramer 1964, 3).
As societies became increasingly complex, the traditional
control agents of family and church were not sufficient to control
the behavior of the growing populations. Therefore, strategies
were promulgated and enforced through the centuries to accom-
plish this task. The earliest enforcement measures were very dif-
ferent from those of today, and they were subject to continual
revision as social conditions changed.
Throughout history, social control can be seen as having
passed through three distinct stages: citizen and family responsi-
bility, a volunteer system of “watchmen” with obligations to a
larger governmental structure, and a paid police force (Rawlings
2002, 231–233). In the first stage, communities policed themselves.
2
Background and History

This system of “kin policing” often controlled deviance through
the use of the blood-feud, where the victim of a certain crime,
along with his or her family or clan, retaliated against the of-
fender, normally of another clan. To keep the retaliatory actions
from turning into full-blown conflicts that threatened to disrupt
or even destroy the community, it became necessary to put into
place a more formalized means of dealing with actions deemed by
the community as deviant.
In the second stage, a governmental force acted as an arbiter
between the accused and accuser. This was a more formalized
system whereby the governing body, usually the crown, agreed
to provide a system of justice, order, and protection from invad-
ing forces, in return for loyalty. However, the community also
had to provide something to the government: a “watchmen” sys-
tem of citizens to monitor community activity and to bring of-
fenders to justice. If the community failed to abide by this
condition, they would be subject to fines by the crown.
Because this type of policing was unstable and basically in-
effective in dealing with a rapidly changing society and with the
crises of the day, a move was made to promote a more solid
framework for enforcing laws and maintaining order. In the eigh-
teenth century, many citizens hired substitutes for watch or con-
stable duty, turning their responsibilities over to others. In time,
a police force emerged, whom the citizens paid to protect them.
This last stage was a move that would usher in the new era of
policing (Rawlings 2002, 232).
Policing in Early Societies
The word “police” can be traced to early Greek and Roman law.
The concept encompassed the ideals of providing safety and wel-
fare to people living in municipalities and promoted city govern-
ment responsibility for many areas of public life, including the
control of crime, the management of unruly crowds, the fighting
of fires, and the maintenance of health and sanitation. Much
power was vested in the people. who comprised the early forms
of police (Becker and Whitehouse 1979, 8).
Many of the early societies created a code of formalized
norms that the citizens were made to follow and that were sanc-
tioned to encourage conformity. Possibly the first uniform code
was handed down by King Hammurabi (1792–1750 BCE) of
Policing in Early Societies
3

Mesopotamia. The Code of Hammurabi is a system of laws that
carried very severe punishments, including death, for a number
of offenses.
Other sets of laws have been uncovered, such as those regu-
lating the affairs of the early Assyrians, Hittites, and Egyptians.
The group with what could be considered the first formalized po-
lice force was formed around 1340 BCE under the reign of the
Egyptian King Hur Moheb, who began a force of river patrols to
watch over the Nile. Later, in the twelfth century BCE, ruler
Rameses III put heavy emphasis on his police force in the main-
tenance of order. Other early civilizations, such as those in India
and China, also created codes for conduct, which people were
charged with enforcing. The Old and New Testaments of the
Bible also describe criminal codes, most notably the Ten Com-
mandments of the Old Testament (Cramer 1964, 4–8).
The Romans had a system of law based on the Law of the
Twelve Tables, partially derived from the Greek system. In this
system, as in other ancient legal systems, the government was
not charged with the punishment of offenders; this was the oblig-
ation of the citizens who were wronged. However, shortly after
the Twelve Tables came into being, a group of governmental offi-
cials were given the responsibility of investigating crimes in-
volving murder, indicating that the state was now responsible for
criminal prosecution (Cramer 1964, 8–9). Later, others groups of
Roman officers under Augustus were used as police: the military
unit called the Praetorian Guard, a group of people called vigils
who worked for the magistrate and who possessed arrest pow-
ers, and a night watch service that fought fires as well as crime
(Langworthy and Travis 2003, 42)
The British Roots of American Policing
A history of policing in England helps us understand policing
practices in America, since the colonists adopted primarily En-
glish law enforcement strategies. The modern police structure
that emerged in London in the early nineteenth century was
copied in American cities; however, only the components that
were believed to accentuate the national conceptualization of de-
mocracy were utilized (Miller 1977, x). However, there is a very
rich history of measures taken throughout the world to maintain
citizens’ conformity to contemporary notions of right and wrong.
4
Background and History

Prior to 1066 in England, there was little need for an elabo-
rate system of law enforcement. The local citizens policed the be-
havior of their communities’ members at this time, and the Saxon
kings exerted little control over the communities. From at least
the time of King Alfred’s reign (871–899), the type of social con-
trol involved an unspoken social obligation of the community’s
citizens to protect themselves. 
In what was known as the frankpledge system, the commu-
nities divided themselves into groups of ten families or so, called
tythings (or tithings), who were responsible for the basic protec-
tion of the community. In each of the tythings, the responsibility
for protection primarily fell to the males in the family over age
twelve; this group of males was headed by the tythingman. Ten
of the tythings formed a larger grouping, referred to as a hun-
dred, or shire, and one person was selected as the head of the
group, called a hundred-man or royal reeve. The shire reeve was
responsible for promoting peace in the shire (similar to a county)
and reported to the king. The title “shire reeve” later morphed to
sheriff. The shire reeve was able to call on all available able citi-
zens to protect the shire in case of emergencies; this was known
as the posse comitatus (Critchey 1967, 2–3).
When the Normans invaded England in 1066 (the Norman
Conquest), they modified the frankpledge system to ensure
greater control of the citizenry. Manorial courts that governed
several communities replaced the tithing system (Critchey 1967,
3). As time passed, the celebrated title of constable, from the
Latin term comes stabuli (master of the horse, master of the sta-
bles, or count of the stables) (Hatley 1999, 1), was conferred upon
a citizen who would perform as a major officer of the court. In
1252, a statute raised the social stature of this position. The duties
of the constable included pursuing, apprehending, and bringing
to court perpetrators of a number of offenses, ranging from seri-
ous to minor (Johnson 1981, 2–3; Langworthy and Travis 2003,
55). The constable kept the peace in his region by a number of
means, including the “hue and cry,” in which citizens were re-
quired to cry out when they witnessed crimes so that the of-
fender could be apprehended and brought to justice. Several
other terms were given to people possessing this title over the
years, including tythingman, borsholder, and headborough
(Critchey 1967, 5).
The Statute of Winchester of 1285 returned law enforcement
duties to the local communities, promulgated an effective system
The British Roots of American Policing
5

of policing, and differentiated urban and rural law enforcement
practices. From this legislation came the “watch and ward” sys-
tem, in which constables were able to select up to sixteen male
citizens, depending on the town’s population, to serve as night
watchmen who guarded gates and who turned over law viola-
tors to the constables the following morning. The statute brought
back an earlier form of control—the hue and cry. The statute also
required the arming of all of the king’s subjects with weapons in
case a hue and cry alarm was raised (Critchey 1967, 7).
The provisions of the statute remained in place for five hun-
dred years but became woefully inadequate. The once elevated
status of constable turned to one of derision and mocking. Fewer
and fewer of the citizens desired the job, and the more affluent
merchants, farmers, and tradespeople were able to hire substi-
tutes to perform this unpaid labor, which came down to main-
taining the night watch, taking prisoners, placing them in custody
or keeping them in their own homes until delivering them to a
magistrate, and initiating the hue and cry. As time passed, the ac-
tivities of another law enforcement official, called the high con-
stable, supervised this agent (Critchey 1967, 10–15). Eventually
the constables were those who were unable to pay someone else
to do the work, and so the position often fell into the hands of the
community’s poor, elderly, disabled, illiterate, and incompetent
males (Johnson 1981, 3).
During this period a group of citizens called “informers”
would seek out criminal behavior to receive rewards. The in-
formers would often obtain specialized knowledge of a certain
crime or of a certain geographic area to receive greater rewards.
The common informers, however, were often corrupt and gener-
ally despised by other community members. While the informers
dealt primarily with minor theft offenses, another group, called
the thief-takers, emerged who actively sought out professional
criminals. The thief-takers were also despised by much of the
population and often were involved in criminal behavior as
much as the ones they pursued. The most infamous of all thief-
takers was Jonathan Wild, a vicious man who bragged about the
number of felons he sent to the gallows and who received much
media coverage about his conquests. He himself went to the gal-
lows in 1725, but the position of thief-taker continued to flourish
(Hibbert 2003, 92–94). Other unscrupulous people, called trading
justices, followed one of Wild’s simple schemes: These justices
hired people to steal from others, then returned the recovered
6
Background and History

items to the rightful owners—for a commission (Critchey 1967,
19–20).
By the mid-eighteenth century, crime in London had increased
significantly and was a major concern for the city’s citizens. The
capital was recognized as one of the most dangerous in Europe. A
professional police force was strongly resisted, and, in its attempts
to control the burgeoning crime problem, the city continued its
practice of using a hodgepodge of nonprofessional officials with
such names as streetkeepers, badgeporters, and headboroughs.
Groups of robbers known as highwaymen rode through London’s
streets terrorizing people on the roadways, while burglars and
footpads (thieves who rob people on foot) were able to carry out
their actions with little interference (Bleiler 1976, v).
Some of the more economically stable areas were able to em-
ploy paid watchmen to patrol the streets; however, certain areas
of town were havens for criminal activity and their citizens were
unable to pay for private systems. A new office, called the magis-
trate, was reconstituted from the justice of the peace and was
charged with administering watch organizations in their commu-
nities (Langworthy and Travis 2003, 60). In 1738, one of these
magistrates, a former novelist, playwright, and attorney named
Henry Fielding (1707–1754), was commissioned to supervise the
Bow Street Court, an area of high crime. Fielding’s predecessors
in office, including his immediate predecessor, Sir Thomas deVeil,
were able to make a fortune by taking bribes from the Bow
Street’s criminal element. In his books and plays Fielding had
protested against the justice system extensively, and as a justice he
refused to get involved in corruption (Critchey 1967, 20). Fielding
sought to change the crooked system by instituting a professional
police force to control crime in his area. Due to resistance from
governmental officials, however, he opted to organize a group of
former constables turned thief-takers to carry out investigations
and bring suspects to trial (Bleiler, 1976, vi).
Fielding’s thief-takers received no salary but did obtain re-
wards for the successful prosecution of cases. They were able to
confiscate the offender’s belongings and often received money
from the victims of the crime. Upon Henry Fielding’s death, his
half brother John supervised this group, who came to be known
as the Bow Street Runners, also known as the Flying Squad or the
Bow Street Flyers. This plainclothes force carried hollow wooden
staffs, called truncheons, that were adorned with a brass crown.
The truncheons were hollow so that they could be used to carry
The British Roots of American Policing
7

warrants and also functioned as symbols of their official author-
ity. The Runners, always less than a dozen strong, were used to
guard the king and to investigate different types of criminal ac-
tivity such as theft, post office and bank robbery, murder, assault,
and fraud. They were generally considered to be effective in their
duties and gained much renown throughout Great Britain. They
are often considered an early model for the country’s famed de-
tective agency, Scotland Yard (Bleiler 1976, vi–viii).
John Fielding, who was later knighted for his efforts, insti-
tuted a number of other changes in the Bow Street system. He or-
ganized a mounted patrol unit assigned to protect major
roadways, a foot patrol to patrol the streets, and mounted horse
patrols to serve the areas outside the city. In effect, he created a
tripartite system of preventative patrol. In addition, other inno-
vations were instituted in London, including the Thames River
patrols in which officials patrolled the water in rowboats and on
foot in the wharfs. Even these changes, however, were not suffi-
cient to meet the needs of an increasingly urbanizing nation
(Langworthy and Travis 2003, 60–63).
The inadequacy of eighteenth-century methods of law en-
forcement in England made it obvious that a new system of
policing was needed. In addition to their inability to control the
growing crime problem, the police forces were still seen as op-
pressive by many citizens. A new philosophy was needed to for-
mulate a more effective system of law enforcement. That
philosophy came in the form of a set of policies promoted by a
Metropolitan magistrate named Patrick Colquhoun. Colquhoun
argued for the separation of powers between the police and the
magistrates and justices. The Scot, who in 1797 wrote the popu-
lar Treatise on the Police of the Metropolis, was an advocate of the
utilitarian philosophy that advocated a preventive rather than a
punitive system of justice (Langworthy and Travis 2003, 63).
The beginning of the Industrial Revolution (early 1700s) was
a period of rapid population growth and movement to urban
centers. It was also a time of increasing crime rates. All of the
policing innovations installed during this period to deal with the
rising crime, however, were soon found to be insufficient. A new
system of policing was needed
Yet the modern era of policing did not begin until the early
nineteenth century. A member of the British Parliament named
Robert Peel desired to create a centralized force in 1785 but the
measure was aborted by the City of London, who did not want
8
Background and History

such a police force. The idea did not go away, however, and it was
resurrected by Peel’s son, also named Robert, in the form of the
Metropolitan Police Act of 1829. The young Robert Peel
(1788–1859) had become an adroit politician and received an ap-
pointment to the position of home secretary. His new police force
functioned independently of the magistrates and covered the areas
directly surrounding downtown London; London proper was not
included in the plan. Peel appointed two justices, later called com-
missioners, to lead the program. These two commissioners, retired
military officer Charles Rowan and attorney Richard Mayne, were
housed in a building that was previously used as a residence for
the royalty from Scotland; the police headquarters thus became
known as Scotland Yard (Trojanowicz and Dixon 1974, 25–28). The
police force did not initially receive full acceptance by the citizens
and were known as “peelers.” However, the new police proved
their worth to the communities in which they worked and re-
ceived the more respected moniker “bobbies” in honor of their
founder (Langworthy and Travis 2003, 68). 
The tenets of the new law enforcement policy are referred to
as the Peelian Principles:
1. The police force must be organized, firm, and orga-
nized in a military fashion.
2. The police will be under governmental jurisdiction.
3. Proof of police effectiveness will be found in lower
crime rates.
4. News of criminal activity should be disseminated to
citizens.
5. Police personnel should be adequately supplied in both
time and area.
6. Police officers should maintain a calm and determined
manner.
7. Officers should maintain a positive appearance.
8. Recruitment of qualified people and adequate training
are necessary.
9. All officers will be provided a number.
10. Police offices will be located in areas centrally located
and easily accessible.
11. Newly hired officers will have a probationary status.
12. Good record keeping is needed to correctly distribute
police personnel (Germann, Day, and Gallati 1968,
60–61).
The British Roots of American Policing
9

The innovations in the United Kingdom that culminated in
the Metropolitan Police would eventually find their way to the
fledgling United States. However, the social conditions of the
young nation would contribute to a very distinct form of policing.
Policing in the Early American Colonies
The earliest known inhabitants of what was to become America
were many different groups of Native Americans. The various in-
digenous tribes utilized an array of methods of social control. For
example, tribes in the southern part of the country, such as the
Cherokees, Choctaws, Seminoles, Creeks, and Chickasaws, had
policing agencies to deal with internal disturbances and viola-
tions of codes of conduct within Indian land boundaries. The no-
madic Cheyennes of the West had six different military societies
that served as police in addition to having a military role. In time,
and often in concert with federal troops, the Native American
agencies adopted methods similar to those of Anglo-American
police forces (Prassel 1972, 179–182).
Early Policing in the Northeast
Counties, adopted from the British shires, were established in the
Northeast. Although counties were important, the local villages
became the principal units of government because citizens had to
band together in cohesive groups for protection. In some parts of
the Northeast, the climate and soil were not very conducive to
farming; so movement outside the villages was not a necessity
(Folley 1980, 65–66).
Policing by the European settlers on American soil had some
of the same practices as those in England. Prior to independence,
charters granted in England governed the means of social control
in the colonies. Although local concerns could be dealt with by the
colonies, British law and custom superseded local attempts to
control citizen behavior. The London Charter of 1606 provided for
governance by a resident council in each colony that established
local ordinances to follow the dictates of the crown, perform court
duties, appoint local judicial officers, and provide other govern-
mental services (Folley 1980, 64). The colonies would eventually
gain independence from England, and, although they continued
many of the British policing methods, America created its unique
10
Background and History

police structure that developed from the distinct traditions and
the social conditions in three geographic areas: the northeastern
and middle colonies, the southern states, and the western frontier
(Langworthy and Travis 2003, 70).
In the northeastern part of the country, the New England
colonies developed a strong industrial base, especially in the
areas of fishing, timber harvesting, shipbuilding, and shipping. A
large number of immigrants entered the area to work in these
and other industries, and the populations of many of the cities
grew rapidly. Prior to this influx, the system in place included a
sheriff governing the county, marshals (who were similar to the
British constables), and in some areas, including New York,
Boston, and Philadelphia, a watch system. The sheriffs and mar-
shals were actually more like entrepreneurs than government of-
ficials because they only worked daytime hours, they obtained
fees from certain duties such as housing jail inmates and serving
subpoenas, and they spent very little time on actual police work.
The watch system was established in Boston in 1638, and soon
similar measures were taken throughout the Northeast. In New
York, citizens adopted the Dutch schout (nightwatchman) and the
ratelwatch (rattle watch, a name that refers to the use of noise-
makers to alert people of criminal activity and of the watchmen’s
approach). In America, the night watch was a patrol effort, and in
some cities the watchmen were required to perform other duties
such as calling out the current time and the weather conditions.
Some cities even required the watchmen to tend to the city street
lamps (Fosdick 1969, 59–60).
The watch system proved very ineffective because the watch-
men were paid low or no wages and were therefore completely
unsuitable for the work (Langworthy and Travis 2003, 71). The
night watch was comprised primarily of men who worked during
the day and supplemented their income with the night job. They
eventually became the source of ridicule and derision because of
their open drunkenness and sleeping on the job. The occupation
became highly undesirable for trustworthy citizens, who often
faced grand jury actions for failure to perform the watchman’s
tasks (Fosdick 1969, 59–61).
As the seventeenth century drew to a close, the changes in
American social structure, which included urbanization and in-
dustrialization, brought together people from different class,
racial, and ethnic backgrounds, often causing competition for jobs,
social standing, and advantage. The competition often resulted in
Policing in the Early American Colonies
11

unrest and crime. Neighborhoods began to spring up that reflected
the different ethnic and socioeconomic statuses of the people liv-
ing and working in them. Prejudice and discrimination led to bit-
ter and violent feuds in the street. Crime also became a major issue
as fear of robberies and property crime became pervasive in the
North during the early and mid-1800s and citizens armed them-
selves extensively to protect themselves (Johnson 1981, 17–25).
Early Policing in the South
The colonies in the South had a plantation economy due to the
area’s vast expanse of fertile land and favorable climate for grow-
ing crops and raising livestock. Unlike the settlers in the North,
colonists in the southern states used the county as the primary
unit of local government; this worked well in such a rural, agrar-
ian society (Folley 1980, 65; Langworthy and Travis 2003, 73). 
The southern institution of slavery contributed greatly to the
early model of policing in the South. Since slavery was so perva-
sive in the region, it became a community effort to ensure that
slaves stayed within the confines of the institution; in fact, laws re-
stricted the slave owners themselves from being too lenient on the
slaves (Friedman 1993, 87). Slave patrols, also called “patrollers” or
the commonly used derivative “paddyrollers,” were established to
ensure that slaves would not escape or become involved in violent
uprisings. The patrols traveled circuits and made sure that any
slaves on roadways had the appropriate passes to be away from
their home plantations. They also periodically visited plantations
to check on the safety of the slave owners and to make sure that
the owners were adequately enforcing discipline on the slaves
(Langworthy and Travis 2003, 73–74). When there were increased
fears of uprisings, the paddyrollers increased their activity (Fried-
man 1993, 87). For example, in Charleston, South Carolina, a group
called the South Carolina Regulators was formed in the late 1760s
for the purpose of controlling slaves (Friedman 1993, 180). The
Regulators consisted of vigilante squads that remained a viable in-
stitution in the South into the nineteenth century. Slave patrols
were not agents of the government, nor did they perform any
crime prevention duties. True policing was primarily the responsi-
bility of county sheriffs or, in some cities, of municipal police offi-
cers (Langworthy and Travis 2003, 73–74).
In the South, dueling became incorporated into the social
structure. Despite laws against it, dueling was practiced to a sig-
12
Background and History

nificant degree in the South, particularly in the mountainous re-
gions. One of the functions of the early police in the region was
to keep a lid on the passion and violence that led to this type of
behavior (Friedman 1993, 178–179).
Early Policing in the West
The roots of Anglo-American policing in the West do not go back
as far as the colonial period, but it has a unique and interesting
history. One factor that influenced policing was the vastness of
the West. As settlers from the North and South moved westward
across the county, many of them with the hope of becoming
wealthy in the gold and silver mines, they began to settle in the
wide-open spaces of the American West and found the area more
suitable for ranching than for farming. The settlers formed them-
selves into villages and towns for protection, but, due to the wide
distribution of population, the county sheriff became the primary
governmental agent of law enforcement. With the municipal po-
lice  responsible for law enforcement in the towns and the sheriff
responsible for enforcement in the rural areas, the West had sim-
ilar characteristics of both the northern and southern states (Fol-
ley 1980, 66). 
Another influence on the type of enforcement was whether
the settlers were from the North or South. Northern settlers pre-
ferred the municipal police, and southerners preferred the
county sheriff, based on their familiarity with their respective
systems (Langworthy and Travis 2003, 74). However, the West
was unique in that some of the areas being settled were already
states, others were under federal control, and still others were
under Indian control. The county sheriffs and municipal police
were responsible for the areas that were under state control; a
federal marshal and deputies were provided to areas that were
still territories; and Indians, with occasional assistance from sol-
diers of the United States Army, policed the areas that were still
Indian Territory (Johnson 1981, 89–90).
Still another influence was the diversity of people in the
West. As in the northern states, the West became a mixture of
people of different races and cultures. The Native Americans, Eu-
ropean Americans, freed African Americans, Mexican Ameri-
cans, and Asian Americans all competed over the newly
emerging resources of the West. Conflicts occurred not only be-
tween these groups but also between cattle ranchers and sheep
Policing in the Early American Colonies
13

herders, between large cattle operations and small ranchers, be-
tween miners and mine owners, among other groups. People in
this part of the country turned to four groups to maintain order
and to handle criminal behavior: private citizens, federal mar-
shals, merchants, and local police. Due to the concerns over law-
lessness and the effectiveness of the police, local citizens and
business owners frequently decided to take the law into their
own hands, and vigilantism became a common way of dealing
with crime (Johnson 1981, 90–103). Due to this image of frontier
justice and to the tales that grew into legends of shootouts be-
tween federal marshals and notorious outlaws, the West took on
a mystique that fascinated people in the East, culminating in nu-
merous books and, later, movies.
The Evolution of American Policing: 
The Nineteenth Century
Municipal and County Police
The night watch of the 1700s was found to be inadequate in the
nineteenth century. Major civil disruptions in most northern cities
between the 1830s and 1870s erupted over issues of race and eth-
nicity, as well as economic problems or political disagreements.
The violence was often so severe that some people of the era began
to doubt if the new country, founded on democratic ideals, would
survive (Walker 1977, 4). Mobs and gangs—with intriguing names
like the Blood Tubs, Rip Raps, and Dead Rabbits in New York,
Philadelphia, and Boston—appeared to be more in control, and
greater in number, than the police. Rival gangs openly fought in
the streets, especially during times of political activity such as elec-
tions. Even the volunteer firefighters struggled violently over the
opportunity to fight the city’s fires; many buildings burned down
completely because the groups did not decide quickly enough
who would fight the fire (Richardson 1974, 35). This chaotic situa-
tion was described in the book and later in the movie, both titled
Gangs of New York.
The system of night patrol varied significantly from one city
to another, but it usually covered the night hours of nine o’clock in
the evening until sunrise, offering no coverage for the daylight
hours. The riots and other disturbances made it apparent that mea-
14
Background and History

sures for daytime coverage were needed. Boston started a daytime
police force that operated separately of the city’s night watch in
1838 and soon several other cities followed suit. In 1844, New York
City integrated its day and night forces; this new system, which
became the basis for the modern American police, served as a
model for other cities such as New Orleans, Cincinnati, Boston,
Philadelphia, Chicago, Baltimore, Newark, and Providence, which
adopted prevention-oriented police forces in the 1850s and 1860s
(Fosdick 1969, 66–67). The cities had differently sized police de-
partments based on their populations, and, of course, New York’s
force was the largest (Friedman 1993, 149).
The early officers who patrolled the streets of the American
cities dressed in plainclothes and carried only thirty-three-inch
nightsticks. In 1855, some cities began requiring officers to wear
regulation hats and caps. In New York, officers wore a medal
around their neck to be used for their identification as police of-
ficers when making arrests or fulfilling other police duties; the
medals were concealed at other times. Finally in 1856, the New
York Police Department adopted a uniform policy, but it was
strongly resisted by officers who felt it represented a militaristic
and undemocratic type of organization. In addition, the uniforms
were hardly “uniform” because police departments throughout
the city opted for different styles. In the same year, Philadelphia
required its officers to wear badges on the outside of their coats;
it would be another four years before the full uniform was worn
in that city (Fosdick 1969, 70–71).
Educational or experience requirements for the new recruits
were negligible, and training in the ways of police work was like-
wise trifling and slapdash. The new uniforms adopted by many
departments possibly brought about a more military style of
training, and they certainly provided a very visible presence on
the street. Much of the work of the early police patrol was to
maintain order in the cities, and it often consisted of arresting va-
grants, intoxicated citizens, and others who disturbed the peace.
The lower socioeconomic classes primarily experienced the in-
creasing power of the police because the deviant behavior of
prosperous citizens was often ignored. Given the view that the
control of the “dangerous classes” required most of the police’s
efforts, conflicts and distrust naturally grew between the police
and citizens (Friedman 1993, 150–152).
In addition to controlling the unseemly actions of the popu-
lace, the police also adopted a service role by searching for lost
The Evolution of American Policing: The Nineteenth Century
15

children and placing the homeless in shelters, often in the police
station houses. The station houses soon became overrun with
those needing shelter, creating a chaotic situation. The construc-
tion of lodging houses for the homeless at century’s end allevi-
ated this problem for the police (Friedman 1993, 152).
Since violence had become a part of American life during
this period, the use of firearms came to be accepted, as a dubious
citizenry began to accept the idea that such a measure was the
only way to maintain order. The use of firearms and their poten-
tial for deadly force against offending citizens was in distinct
contrast to the London Metropolitan police, who had gained re-
spect for their restraint in using firearms (Johnson 1981, 25–31).
Many of the problems of policing in America during the
early years of police professionalism were due to the fact that the
police were under the control of politicians. Two groups figured
prominently in this arrangement: the urban entrepreneurs and
the critics. The first group sought to control the activities of the
police through patronage, and they were able to profit from the
relationship between the police and the ward bosses who con-
trolled them. The second group consisted of people with pro-
gressive ideas who sought reform in the criminal justice system
(Johnson 1981, 55–71). The conflict between the two groups was
one of governmental versus policing perspectives: The particu-
laristic model (favored by the political machines) emphasized
making case-by-case decisions on issues like hiring, promotion,
and enforcement; the universalistic model (as favored by the pro-
gressives) promoted a meritorious system (hiring and promotion
based on qualifications) and uniform policing based on legal
standards (Langworthy and Travis 2003, 87).
Many people in policing became very rich in the 1800s. One
such person was Alexander S. “Clubber” Williams, a captain in the
New York City Police Department who gained fame as a brutal, in-
solent, and corrupt police administrator and later as a wealthy but
vilified individual (Johnson 1981, 55–60). Williams is credited for
giving the “tenderloin districts” their name: When discovering
that he was going to a part of the city where vice and corruption
provided the potential for a great deal of graft for unscrupulous
police officers, Williams reportedly exclaimed that he would no
longer have to settle for chuck steak but now was able to afford
tenderloin (Reppeto 1978, 49–50).
It was not only the politicians and police administrators who
reaped the benefits of a corrupt system; unscrupulous officers
16
Background and History

also took advantage. Patrol officers often ignored the vice going
on around them and could frequently be found in saloons, pool-
rooms, and brothels. Many detectives had an interesting scam.
They received rewards from victims or bribe money from
thieves, according to who made the better offer; in some cases
there was an agreement between detectives and pickpockets to
split the bounty (Johnson 1981, 61). It is understandable that the
reputation of the police suffered to an incredible degree during
this time.
The force opposing the urban entrepreneurs, the critics, came
into prominence during the Progressive Movement of 1896–1917,
a period when three major changes in ideology were taking place:
(1) an emphasis on honesty and efficiency in governmental affairs,
(2) an increase in authority for politicians and government offi-
cials, and (3) the use of people with specialized knowledge to han-
dle specific social problems. The critics came from three different
groups, all having the similar interest in promoting better police
behavior.
One group of critics was commonly known as the “moralist
crusaders” who were highly concerned with the evils of the
day—prostitution, gambling, and alcoholism, as well as police
corruption. People in this group promoted investigations into
police affairs, and the first commission investigating the police,
the Lexow Commission in 1894, examined graft activities among
New York City police. The group was not very effective in con-
trolling the activities of the police, however, because they were
often up against solid political machines.
Another group of police critics was comprised of people
who wished to improve police effectiveness and efficiency. This
group often joined forces with other groups seeking reforms in
the criminal justice system, such as the National Prison Associa-
tion, whose committee on the police promoted a civil service sys-
tem in which people were hired as police officers and promoted
based on their merit rather than patronage.
An important change in policing in the nineteenth century
was the development of the class of police officer known as the
detective. Detective squads started in the largest American cities
at midcentury and were charged with investigating crime, which
often involved “going undercover” by covertly dealing with
those involved in criminal behavior. The detective function de-
rived its heritage from the thief-takers and constables of England.
In time, the public became fascinated with the idea of these
The Evolution of American Policing: The Nineteenth Century
17

stealthy individuals. Detective novels became a popular form of
literature, and fictional characters like Sherlock Holmes became
fixtures of American nineteenth-century life (Friedman 1993,
204–208). But it was a real-life detective, Allan Pinkerton (1819–
1884), who promoted the romanticism of the detectives by pub-
lishing over eighteen books from 1874 to1885 (Walker 1977, 22).
Out of necessity, the new field of forensic science also began
during this century because criminal behavior became more preva-
lent and offenders more difficult to catch (Friedman 1993, 208). The
phrase “forensic science” refers to all of the parts of the criminal
justice system utilized in scientifically supported investigations
that can effectively be used to prosecute offenders in a court of law
(Nickell and Fischer 1999, 1). One of the primary advancements in
the police departments of larger cities involved communications.
As improved means of communication developed, agencies ex-
changed information about crimes and offenders.
A major problem experienced by the early police was the lack
of any useful means to identify offenders. And so the new tech-
nology of photography found a use in law enforcement. Belgian
officials had begun using daguerreotypes (early photographic
pictures) in 1843, and France and the United States began using
them within the decade. When the technology advanced to the
point that prints could be made from negatives, the posting of of-
fender’s pictures in police station houses became possible. These
pictures became known as “mug shots” because the pictures were
images of faces (Nickell and Fischer 1999, 1). Victims and wit-
nesses were asked to view the mug shots to determine the iden-
tity of offenders.
Another innovation to identify offenders was fingerprinting.
No one person can claim to be the sole inventor of this technol-
ogy; five people, working independently but around the same
time in the 1870s and 1880s, posited the benefits of fingerprinting
to the criminal justice system. Dr. Henry Faulds, a Scottish physi-
cian working in Japan, and Sir William James Herschel, a British
magistrate working in India, both claimed to uncover the uses of
the mysterious fingerprint, which appeared to be unique for each
person. In 1880, the claims of these two people became noticed,
and three others, famed British scientist Sir Francis Galton (an-
other British magistrate), Sir Edward Richard Henry, and Argen-
tine police statistician Juan Vucetich, who catapulted the process
to fame. In actuality, this new science, at the time called dactylo-
18
Background and History

scopia, had been discovered perhaps by much earlier peoples
(Cronin 1977, 159–177).
At the same time, a worker in a French police department,
Alphonse Bertillon, devised a method of taking precise measure-
ments and descriptions of offenders’ body parts (a science that
would be labeled anthropometry), making notations of physical
traits such as scars, and taking fingerprints for offender identifi-
cation. The process, known as the Bertillon method, became cus-
tomary procedure in many American cities (Friedman 1993, 208).
This method would eventually prove to be overly tedious, and
fingerprinting would eventually supplant it (Nickell and Fischer
1999, 8).
Major advancements in forensic detection were revealed in a
book called Criminal Investigation by Austrian attorney Hans
Gross. Gross advocated supplementing police work with prac-
tices derived from the disciplines of anthropometry, medicine,
toxicology, serology, ballistics, mineralogy, ecology, and botany.
Through his efforts at amalgamating these fields, he created the
new field of criminalistics and gave it its name (Nickell and 
Fischer 1999, 9).
State Police
In the nineteenth century, states also started creating policing
agencies. The Texas Rangers are often described as the first state
police; however, at the time this group of settlers was formed in
the 1820s, Texas was still a republic. The rangers were effective in
protecting the rural communities in which they lived, and, when
Texas declared its sovereignty in 1836, they took on additional
duties, such as fighting the area’s American Indians and later, in
the 1850s, began to combat highway robberies, control slave es-
capes, and guard the border in an effort to keep out illegal aliens.
The rangers gained much fame for their effectiveness in fighting
crime; however, they were often ruthless in their dealings with
certain groups, especially African slaves and Mexicans. Arizona
and New Mexico started up state agencies based on the Texas
Ranger model, and soon states in the East established state sys-
tems, although very different ones from the western rangers
(Johnson 1981, 156–158).
Massachusetts also experimented with a state police agency
in 1865, in response to citizens’ fears of rampant alcohol abuse,
The Evolution of American Policing: The Nineteenth Century
19

especially by the state’s Irish American population. A state force
was assembled to govern such behavior because many citizens
thought that local police agencies ignored what the majority con-
sidered alcohol drinking excesses. The state police in this form
was short-lived; legislative changes abolished the agency and re-
placed them with rural detectives (Johnson 1981, 157–158).
Federal Police
In the 1800s, the federal government left most law enforcement
responsibility to the states. However, some crimes—robbery of
the U.S. mail, fraud involving the mail, and counterfeiting—were
detrimental to the whole country’s well-being. Since there was
no national police and because states were unable to deal with
federal crimes, federal agencies such as the Treasury and the Post
Office developed their own enforcement arms to deal with them.
The Post Office was one of the first federal agencies, created
shortly after the new government began operating in 1789. The
group of agents assigned to protect the national mail service, the
postal inspectors, was the federal government’s first police force.
During the nineteenth century, the postal inspectors became
well-known for their effectiveness and provided a model for
other policing entities (Johnson 1981, 73–81).
The U.S. Secret Service, another federal agency, was formed
after the American Civil War to combat crimes related to the na-
tional currency, most notably counterfeiting. Created in 1865, the
agency assumed expanded duties two years later to investigate
fraudulent activities against the government. A number of
groups were targets of the new agency, such as distillers of illegal
alcohol, smugglers, mail robbers, the Ku Klux Klan, and others.
In 1894, it began providing protection to President Glover Cleve-
land on an informal basis. The responsibility to protect U.S. pres-
idents  became official in the next century (United States Secret
Service n.d.).
Private Police
As businesses began to flourish in America during the nineteenth
century, merchants often turned to private police or private secu-
rity to protect their interests. The so-called express companies
came about during the 1830s to ensure the safe transport of valu-
ables, money, and, later, other items. Several private security
20
Background and History

agencies were formed during this time, including the investiga-
tive agency started by former Chicago detective Allan Pinkerton.
Other notable companies during this period were Wells Fargo,
Adams Express, and Overland Express (Lipson 1975, 23–32).
The benefits of private policing were direct and seemed
more appealing to many businesses than paying taxes to a gov-
ernmental entity that might be less effective in securing their in-
terests. Most city police departments allowed a group of private
citizens, called specials, to work as security officers for private
firms. The specials were sworn in by police departments and
wore almost identical uniforms to the local police, but they were
employees of the private companies (Walker 1977, 29).
The railroads were a major employer of private security
agents, especially because the railroads covered such a vast ex-
panse of rural area. Allan Pinkerton’s agency was hired by six dif-
ferent railroads in 1855 to protect the trains and also to monitor the
actions of the railroad employees, particularly activities involving
union involvement. Pinkerton’s agency began providing security
services to business in suburban Chicago; his Pinkerton Protective
Police Patrol boasted its effectiveness in not only preventing
crimes but also in discovering unscrupulous employee activity
(Walker 1977, 30). As the nineteenth century neared its end, the
railroad industry continued to grow at an incredible pace and pri-
vate special agents, such as those employed by Baldwin-Felts De-
tective Agency, were responsible for investigating railroad crime,
monitoring railroad stations and freight cars, removing hobos, pre-
venting train fare fraud, and investigating allegations of equip-
ment tampering. The last duty was the most important task of the
railroad agents (Velke 2004, 19).
The Evolution of American Policing: 
The Twentieth Century
Municipal and County Police
The twentieth century brought new demands for local police.
Labor-related conflicts increasingly dictated the use of police to
keep the peace. In addition, the effect of prohibition on law en-
forcement was profound. In 1919, one year after World War I
ended, state legislatures began voting on their support, or lack
The Evolution of American Policing: The Twentieth Century
21

thereof, for the Eighteenth Amendment to the Constitution,
which marked the beginning of the Prohibition Era (Edwards
2000, 73–85), making it illegal to produce, transport, or sell liquor.
Congress passed a stringent enforcement of this prohibition, the
Volstead Act, over presidential veto, and the states followed suit
with similar actions on the state level. 
Although considered by many to be an unenforceable legal
action, Prohibition led to thousands of arrests by the police, al-
though many of these cases were reduced to misdemeanor sta-
tus. The prohibition of alcohol provided fertile ground for the
period’s gangsters, the most notorious being Al Capone. The pe-
riod’s organized crime bosses used the underground activity of
bootlegging (a slang term for the manufacture, transport, and
sale of liquor, also known as hooch), as a supplement to their
other illegal crime operations. Prohibition was not the total im-
petus of twentieth-century organized crime, but it contributed to
its growth (Friedman 1993, 339–341). The Eighteenth Amend-
ment was repealed in 1933, almost fourteen years after America
officially went dry (Edwards 2000, 75–85).
As new problems in fighting, preventing, and solving crime
developed, policing strategies evolved in America. The large
urban police departments initially looked to the London Metro-
politan Police for guidance in developing their own methods, but
soon they began to create their own strategies and then to borrow
ideas from one another (Monkkonen 1981, 40). In the previous
century, patrol work was performed initially on foot and later on
horseback in some departments. When motorized cycles and au-
tomobiles were invented in the early part of the century, many
police agencies used them, and their use became imperative be-
cause many of the people they were chasing were fleeing in au-
tomobiles. Motorcycles came into use in patrol work in
Philadelphia in 1906, and automobiles were first used in Detroit
in 1909 (Folley 1980, 72).
An innovative strategy that many police departments
adopted in the early twentieth century was the establishment of
specialized police squads. These often took the form of vice
squads whose officers were trained in the enforcement of the vice
laws at a time when vices—prostitution, gambling, and alcohol
and narcotics abuse—were becoming worrisome to many citi-
zens. The effect of these squads was to further remove police of-
ficers from specific communities to combat citywide problems
(Langworthy and Travis 2003, 95).
22
Background and History

The 1920s heralded a new era of police professionalism. Led
by Berkeley, California, police chief August Vollmer, a new gener-
ation of innovative administrators appeared on the scene, insisting
that their field is a profession and using the newest technological
innovations to further their mission. Vollmer’s contributions are
legendary: He was the first administrator to hire college-educated
officers as a matter of practice and the first to utilize a system of
traffic signals. He used bicycles, motorcycles, and cars for patrol
and equipped them with radios. He operated one of the first crime
labs, utilized an early polygraph, and started a police academy. In
addition, he was a professor, writer, and president of the powerful
International Association of Police Chiefs, where he argued for a
centralized criminal records agency, which would later be found in
the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Langworthy and Travis 2003,
95–96).
Perhaps as important to the field, Vollmer was a mentor to
the new generation of administrators to advocate professional-
ism, including O. W. Wilson, another highly innovative police
manager and scholar. Wilson was one of Vollmer’s “college cops”
who went on to become chief of police of the Wichita, Kansas, po-
lice department in 1928, where he advocated the use of police
cars for patrol work. He also served as professor at the Univer-
sity of California and Harvard University, and in 1960 he became
the chief of police in Chicago (Friedman 1993, 360). In addition he
was a prolific writer and authored the classic text, Police Admin-
istration (Langworthy and Travis 2003, 97).
Forensic science continued to be shaped by necessity, and
many new advances in policing occurred during the early twenti-
eth century. Due to the innovations of New York handwriting ex-
pert Albert S. Osborn, handwriting analysis gained legitimacy by
being accepted in the courts. The nation’s first fingerprint bureau
was created in St. Louis after the technique was demonstrated at
the 1904 World’s Fair (Friedman 1993, 358–359). The first forensic
laboratory in the country was developed in 1923 in Los Angeles
under the guidance of August Vollmer (Nickell and Fischer 1999,
13). A highly modernized crime lab, complete with ballistics
equipment, lie detector test, and X-ray capabilities, was estab-
lished in Cincinnati in 1934 (Friedman 1993, 359). Scientific crime
scene investigation procedures were advanced by a number of
university faculty throughout the nation during the century. It was
a British scientist, however, who in 1985 discovered the unique-
ness of DNA structure that provides a “genetic fingerprint” for
The Evolution of American Policing: The Twentieth Century
23

criminal investigation (Nickell and Fischer 1999, 11–12). The use of
DNA testing in criminal justice was adopted throughout the
United States and has proven to be one of the great innovations of
recent times.
The 1950s brought new fears of crime, especially involving
juvenile delinquency, as rates climbed during this period (Fried-
man, 1993, 449). The tumultuous 1960s brought new challenges
to the nation’s police departments. Called in to quell demonstra-
tions over racial discrimination, the war in Vietnam, and other
political issues, at the same time fighting a growing crime rate
(and the resulting fear of crime), the police encountered a grow-
ing disconnection from the communities they served. In addi-
tion, increasing court-imposed restrictions on the police limited
their ability to carry out their mission and had a marked effect on
morale (Langworthy and Travis 2003, 97–99). So-called social
wars were declared on drugs and poverty, and once again the po-
lice were seen as street-level enforcers of these policies. Many
conflicts resulted from protesters’ viewing the police as a military
occupation force rather than peacekeepers.
By the end of the 1960s, a new philosophy of policing was ob-
viously  needed; the paramilitary, bureaucratic model was simply
ineffective in dealing with the challenges of the decade and the
perceived challenges ahead. The era of the community policing
model, also called the community-oriented model, began as a re-
sult of the conflict in the 1960s and developed strength over the
ensuing decades. The innovations and strategies of the previous
professional era had succeeded in removing the police from the
corrupting influences of the communities; they centralized power
in the hands of well-trained, experienced administrators and gave
the police a more favorable image than that of the earlier era. But
now the police seemed too removed from their communities and
citizens began to desire a return to the “beat cop” approach—a
person to talk with on the street and a visible presence in the
neighborhoods, rather than a detached official patrolling the
streets in a police car.
The President’s Commission on Law Enforcement and the
Administration of Justice, drafted in 1967, saw this need and rec-
ommended better police–community relations. Crime prevention,
rather than simply crime fighting, became a major focus. A holis-
tic approach was adopted, and the officers on patrol became gen-
eralists rather than specialists. They adopted a problem-solving
perspective in which the police, in conjunction with community
24
Background and History

members, identified specific community problems. In essence, the
officers widened their scope of responsibility in order to deal with
community problems (President’s Commission on Law Enforce-
ment and Administration of Justice 1967).
Some scholars see this community-oriented approach to police
work as a return to an early model of American policing in which
officers were tightly woven into the fabric of society. This approach
causes concern among some due to the corruption that existed in
the nineteenth century (Langworthy and Travis 2003, 100).
State Police
There were many changes in the state police agencies in the twen-
tieth century, as well as in the municipal departments. Increased
urbanization, industrialization, and immigration caused several
states to create their own police forces to deal with a number of
emerging problems. During the previous century, the Pennsylva-
nia legislature had turned over law enforcement during violent
coal mining labor disputes to private firms. The governor adopted
a military-style police force to quell the labor and ethnic violence
after a major strike in 1902. The new force was able to suppress the
disturbances, but it was largely motivated by prejudice against
ethnic and racial minorities. Other states adopted agencies based
on the Pennsylvania model, but as labor disputes began to wane
and as ethnic groups started assimilating in larger numbers after
1917, this model was no longer useful. Other changes were on the
horizon that would force the state agencies to change (Johnson,
1981, 159–160).
Even the famous Texas Rangers took on a new mission at the
turn of the century. Renamed the Texas State Rangers and placed
under the state’s Department of Public Safety, the reorganized
agency began performing the same duties as the city and county
police. Their image as crime fighters suffered initially but was re-
stored due to their successful policing of the border towns that
were experiencing rapid population growth (Hatley 1999).
The automobile had the greatest impact on twentieth-
century state policing efforts. Originally an upper-class toy, the
automobile soon sped along America’s roadways in great num-
bers, thanks to mass production and affordability (Johnson 1981,
161–163). Many police agencies created state highway patrol
forces to deal with the increasing number of motorists on state
highways.
The Evolution of American Policing: The Twentieth Century
25

Federal Police
The federal government, which had a diminutive policing role in
the nineteenth century, experienced remarkable growth in the
next century. The United States Secret Service, which had been
instituted in the previous century to combat counterfeiting and
later to investigate fraud against the government, officially as-
sumed in 1902 a role that it had performed informally: the pro-
tection of the president. As the century progressed, the agency
assumed responsibility for the protection of the president’s fam-
ily, other high-ranking officials of the government, and visiting
heads of foreign governments. In the 1980s, in addition to its
other duties, the agency began investigating high-tech frauds in-
volving credit and debit cards, computers, and identification
documents. The next century would bring new challenges relat-
ing to computer fraud and international crime (United States Se-
cret Service n.d.).
The primary federal policing agency during this time was
the Bureau of Investigation (later renamed the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, or FBI), which was part of the Justice Department.
Created in 1908, the agency grew quickly with the addition of
agents whose purpose was to investigate and prosecute offenders
involved in the sex trafficking trade (white slavery). Another so-
cial problem, the burgeoning drug trade, became another focus. It
was concerns over international affairs, however, rather than do-
mestic issues that created a prominent role for the agency around
World War I. A new unit, the General Intelligence Division, was
created and J. Edgar Hoover was placed in charge. This division
obtained information on suspected radicals and subversives;
Hoover inflated the actual seriousness of the threats by this group
and had his agents raid suspected hangouts (Johnson 1981,
167–168).
As director of the FBI, Hoover made the agency one of the
best-known federal agencies. He created a highly qualified group
of agents by raising law enforcement standards, and he champi-
oned several policing innovations such as founding the first fed-
eral criminal laboratory in 1932 and creating the National Police
Academy three years later. A series of high-profile apprehensions
of “notorious gangsters” in the 1930s, such as Pretty Boy Floyd,
John Dillinger, and Bruno Hauptman, the kidnapper of the Lind-
berg baby, vaulted Hoover and the FBI to fame (Johnson 1981,
172–175). The agency’s fame was also due in part to Hoover’s use
26
Background and History

of propaganda, which played a large part in bringing his agency
into the popular culture. Hoover was involved in the production
of a number of movies and television shows that projected an
image of the FBI as the nation’s highly professional law enforce-
ment agency. America’s fascination with fictional detectives led
to FBI agents being referred to as heroic figures, as G-men (gov-
ernment agents). These agents, who “always got their man,” sat-
isfied some of the nation’s basic psychological needs (Powers
1983, 74). Hoover himself wrote nonfiction accounts of the
agency and in the 1950s promoted himself as the icon of Ameri-
can traditional values. In his most popular book, Masters of Deceit
(1958), the director expressed his view of the ultimate battle be-
tween an America with Christian values versus communist na-
tions with satanic motivations (Powers 1983, 232–237). Soon the
FBI had responsibility for espionage, counterespionage, and sab-
otage; Hoover’s agency performed its mission in these areas ad-
mirably before and during World War II by stopping any major
attempts at sabotage and by breaking up espionage rings (John-
son 1981, 172–175).
After the war, Hoover continued to gather intelligence on
many people, including public officials and actors, and he con-
tributed to the heightened postwar fears of communism. After
the Red Scare, Hoover continued to gain power and attributed
the growing protests from civil rights and antiwar groups of the
1960s to communist provocateurs (Johnson 1981, 175–181). Radi-
cal groups, lumped under the umbrella of the “new left,” became
the target of the agency, much as the communists had been in the
1950s and the Ku Klux Klan in the 1960s. 
Hoover’s long tenure as the FBI director, approaching almost
48 years, ended with his death in 1972, two years prior to President
Richard Nixon’s resignation from office following the Watergate
scandal. The FBI had investigated the break-in, the subsequent
cover-up attempts, and the related events that led to the national
scandal (Federal Bureau of Investigation n.d.). Hoover’s adminis-
tration was controversial because his xenophobic tendencies
found their way into bureau policy; however, he can be credited
for increasing the level of professionalism and innovation in law
enforcement (Friedman 1993, 271). Federal law enforcement suf-
fered during the 1970s from a loss of prestige and prominence.
However, the agency, under new leadership, promoted a more
racially diverse workforce and recruited women as agents. New
priorities were established as agency targets—people involved in
The Evolution of American Policing: The Twentieth Century
27

organized and white-collar crimes—became a national concern. In
addition, foreign counterintelligence became a new focus as inci-
dents of terrorist activity increased at home and abroad.
Throughout the 1980s, the illegal drug trade and frauds in-
volving savings and loan institutions were investigated. As the
Cold War ended, agents were reassigned to domestic concerns,
most notably violent crime. The ability to handle crisis situations
became a prime concern as the agency became involved in con-
troversial situations in the early 1990s, such as an incident at
Ruby Ridge in Idaho in which a fugitive’s wife was accidentally
shot by an agent. Even more prominent in the media was the
Waco, Texas, incident, in which agents responded to a group of
heavily armed members of a sect called the Branch Davidians.
The agents were unable to bring the event to a successful conclu-
sion, and eighty people died as the compound was suddenly set
on fire. Domestic terrorism also became a salient issue in the
1990s as the agency investigated several major acts: the bombing
of the World Trade Center in New York in 1993, the Oklahoma
City bombing in 1995, and the Unabomber attacks (Federal Bu-
reau of Investigation, n.d.).
The use of technology continued to be a strong point of the
FBI at century’s end. The FBI’s crime laboratory adopted the use
of DNA technology, and the agency began investigating com-
puter crimes, especially involving child pornography and other
Internet crimes involving children. In the first year of the new
century, however, the mandate changed again. Foreign terrorism
became a major focus of the agency after the September 11, 2001
attacks in America (Federal Bureau of Investigation n.d.).
Private Police
Even though its founder died in 1884, the Pinkerton National De-
tective Agency was still a viable force in private security for rail-
roads and industry in the twentieth century. Other agencies, such
as the William J. Burns International Detective Agency, founded
in 1906 by former Secret Service operative and later FBI director
William Burns, also competed for a share of the private security
market.
When railroads became nationalized during World War I, all
private security agents became federal employees for the dura-
tion, becoming private investigators again at the war’s end. Cor-
porate leaders began using private security again, but the Great
28
Background and History

Depression stifled the industry, with the unintended conse-
quence that more educated people, needing work, entered the
field. World War II brought new opportunities in the form of
overseeing the transport of war materiel, patrolling beaches, and
diverting ships and submarines to specified areas (obviously,
great secrecy was needed for these operations). After the war, in-
creases in crime over the next few decades promoted the ex-
panded use of uniformed security personnel, whose use rate
increased whenever new fears of a crime wave arose (Lipson
1975, 35–57).
Policing Changes in Context
The profession of policing has had to adapt throughout its his-
tory. The earliest societies relied on informal methods of social
control to maintain order. As society became more complex, a
professional police force was created, based on the British model,
in the mid-nineteenth century. The early police became deeply
embedded in communities but also became heavily indebted to
political machines and acted to protect the interests of the
wealthy and powerful. Due to corruption, an increasingly adroit
criminal element, and technological advancements such as the
automobile, the police adopted a new philosophy of policing: the
professional crime-fighting model. Crime fighting required a
highly bureaucratic structure worthy of being accepted as a pro-
fession, and the military style was embraced. The strategy that
evolved and that was promoted by such noteworthy figures as J.
Edgar Hoover, O. W. Wilson, and William Parker was successful
in its attempts to maintain order but also created a distance be-
tween the police and the communities they served.
The professional model of policing proved unable to main-
tain social order during the social turbulence of the 1960s, as ten-
sions over racial and gender inequality and the Vietnam War
continued to create a chasm between the mostly white, middle-
class male police and a citizenry that was becoming increasingly
diverse. The police were often perceived as agents of an oppres-
sive government, and in many communities a quid pro quo
arrangement occurred. An increase in police force was met by an
increase in citizen resistance. For many, the collective persona of
the once esteemed police force took on the appearance of an oc-
cupying army, complete with battle gear, military strategies, and
Policing Changes in Context
29

plenty of armament. Police–community relations in many parts
of the country became severely strained.
By the 1970s, the situation called for a new game plan. Com-
munity policing represented a return of the police to the streets
by having officers working within communities and helping the
communities deal with their unique problems through a collabo-
rative effort. Problem-solving approaches and technical advance-
ments have been put to use in crime prevention, rather than
crime fighting, in an effort to make the police proactive rather
than reactive. In spite of this change in philosophy and even with
the successes of community policing, the police still primarily
react to crime after the fact.
Working in a current ethos of increasing police visibility, in-
creasing demands for technological innovation (especially in the
area of criminal investigation), and a community orientation, all
occurring in the looming shadow of terrorism, the police have
been called on to address these contemporary concerns. Ironi-
cally, in the last few decades, the police have been heavily im-
mersed in a community orientation, and now, especially since
September 11, 2001, the demand for order and control has taken
on an international focus.
References
Becker, Harold K., and Jack E. Whitehouse. 1979. Police of America: A
Personal View, Introduction, and Commentary. Springfield, IL: Charles C.
Thomas.
Bleiler, E. F. 1976. “Introduction.” In Richmond: Scenes in the Life of a Bow
Street Runner. New York: Dover Publications.
Cramer, James. 1964. The World’s Police. London: Cassell and Co.
Critchey, T. A. 1967. A History of Police in England and Wales 900 1966.
London: Constable and Co.
Cronin, John J. 1977. “The Fingerprinters: Identification as the Basic
Police Science.” In Pioneers in Policing. Edited by Philip J. Snead.
Montclair, NJ: Patterson Smith.
Edwards, Griffith. 2000. Alcohol: The World’s Favorite Drug. New York:
Thomas Dunn.
Federal Bureau of Investigation. No date. ”FBI History.” Available at:
http://www.fbi.gov/fbihistory.htm. Accessed February 28, 2007.
30
Background and History

Folley, Vern L. 1980. American Law Enforcement: Police, Courts, and
Corrections, 3rd ed. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Fosdick, Raymond B. 1969. American Police Systems. New York: Century
Co.
Friedman, Lawrence M. 1993. Crime and Punishment in American
History. New York: Basic Books.
Germann, A. C., Frank D. Day, and Robert J. Gallati. 1968. Introduction
to Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice, 7th ed. Springfield, IL: Charles
C. Thomas.
Hatley, Allen G. 1999. Texas Constables: A Frontier Heritage. Lubbock:
Texas Tech University Press.
Hibbert, Christopher. 2003. The Roots of Evil: A Social History of Crime
and Punishment. Phoenix Mill, UK: Sutton Publishing.
Johnson, David R. 1981. American Law Enforcement: A History. St. Louis,
MO: Forum Press.
Langworthy, Robert H., and Lawrence F. Travis, III. 2003. Policing in
America: A Balance of Forces. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Lipson, Martin. 1975. On Guard: The Business of Private Security. New
York: Quadrangle/New York Times.
Miller, Wilbur R. 1977. Cops and Bobbies: Police Authority in New York and
London, 1830 1870. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Monkkonen, Eric H. 1981. Police in Urban America, 1860 1920.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nickell, Joe, and John F. Fischer. 1999. Crime Scene: Methods of Forensic
Detection. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky.
Powers, Richard Gid. 1983. G-Men: Hoover’s FBI in American Popular
Culture. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.
Prassel, Frank Richard. 1972. The Western Peace Officer: A Legacy of Law
and Order. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
President’s Commission on Law Enforcement and Administration of
Justice. 1967. The Challenge of Crime in a Free Society: A Report.
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Rawlings, Philip. 2002. Policing: A Short History. Cullompton, UK:
Willan Publishing.
Reppeto, Thomas A. 1978. The Blue Parade. New York: Free Press.
Richardson, James F. 1974. Urban Police in the United States. Port
Washington, NY: Kennikat Press.
Trojanowicz, Robert C., and Samuel L. Dixon. 1974. Criminal Justice and
the Community. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
References
31

United States Secret Service. No date. “Secret Service History.”
Available at: http://www.ustreas.gov/usss/history.shtml. Accessed
February 28, 2007.
Velke, John A. 2004. The True Story of the Baldwin-Felts Detective Agency.
United States: John Velke.
Walker, Samuel. 1977. A Critical History of Police Reform: The Emergence
of Police Professionalism. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
32
Background and History

2
Problems, Controversies, 
and Solutions
T
he police are an essential institution in America. Although
people often become irritated or upset when they feel the po-
lice are exhibiting too much control over their lives, they also
feel safer knowing the police are around and depend on them for
protection. They also expect the police to ensure traffic flows
safely and to respond to emergency situations. They also depend
on the police to investigate situations involving criminal behav-
ior because of their expertise in these circumstances.
People are also intrigued by police. The fact that so many
movies and television shows, both fictional and reality-type,
have caught the public’s attention reflects Americans’ high de-
gree of fascination with the police. Among the host of highly
rated shows and series involving police work are the fictional
shows (such as Law and Order-affiliated shows), crime scene in-
vestigation shows (such as CSI, NCIS [Naval Criminal Investiga-
tive Service], and Criminal Minds), and reality shows (such as
American Justice, Cold Case Files, Forensic Files, and City Confiden-
tial). In addition, much of the news is dominated by stories in-
volving the police. Obviously, people enjoy watching the police
in action.
Although the police world is not always as exciting or glam-
orous as depicted in the media, it is unique and complex. The
unique history of American policing and the present cultural de-
mands on it give the “thin blue line” its distinctive flavor.
33

The Police Mission
Adopting a broad view of the police in terms of governmental phi-
losophy, Delattre defines the American police mission as the per-
formance of the police role in the country’s “experiment in ordered
liberty” (2002, 16). This definition refers to the function of the po-
lice in a democratic society of maintaining order while safeguard-
ing individual liberty. If a society’s policing apparatus is either
excessively prohibitive or excessively lenient, instability results.
Reflecting a pragmatic, street-level approach to the police
mission, an expolice administrator states that the mission of the
police involves the performance of five distinct responsibilities:
preserving the peace, protecting people and property, investigat-
ing crimes and arresting offenders, preventing crime from occur-
ring, and enforcing laws (Bouza 1990, 1).
Other police scholars note that there are different functions,
roles, duties, or various other terms to describe what the police
do. Policing can be seen as having two primary functions—order
maintenance and community service, along with a related set of
duties.
Order maintenance has the associated duties of law enforce-
ment, patrol, traffic control, and investigation; community ser-
vice has the associated duties of acting as a community resource
and providing crime prevention programs. Order maintenance
refers to the function that helps promote a safe and lawful envi-
ronment for the community in which the police work. While
some scholars describe a separate police function of law enforce-
ment, it can be argued that the actual enforcement of laws, which
includes the arrest, apprehension, and prosecution of offenders,
is actually a measure taken to ensure that social order is main-
tained; therefore it is part of the order maintenance function. The
police provide order maintenance also through patrol work, traf-
fic control, investigation of crimes, and other means.
The community service function is often seen as secondary
to order maintenance, especially to the notion of crime fighting.
However, it must be considered a major function because it com-
prises much of what the police actually do. Common activities of
the police include serving as a community resource and assisting
victims and potential victims of crime. The police are certainly
part of a larger interdisciplinary network of providers of services
to communities and can often be found working in crime pre-
34
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

vention education programs, child advocacy programs, mentor-
ing underprivileged children, and a host of other activities.
The Order Maintenance Function
Law Enforcement
The enforcement of criminal laws is a very important part of the
law enforcement function. It is probably the responsibility most
often associated with police work; in fact, policing as an occupa-
tion is often referred to as law enforcement. The actual enforce-
ment of laws, however, entails much more than simply ensuring
order through the apprehension and arrest of offenders, and it
often overlaps with other areas of police responsibility. 
Perhaps the law enforcement operations most frequently as-
sociated with the police are searches and seizures, and arrests.
Searches consist of the examination of a a private area by govern-
mental agents; seizures involve taking possession of items ob-
tained in the search that can be used against the owner if criminal
activity is found to be involved. In the United States, the search
and seizure procedures used by the police create much debate. It
is important in America, a country that historically has valued lib-
erty and feared the possibility of an overly intrusive government,
that searches not violate the rights of the citizens. The police are
guided in this area by the Fourth Amendment to the Constitution,
which provides that people cannot be searched without probable
cause that a criminal offense has occurred. The 1961 case of Mapp
v. Ohio established the exclusionary rule, which states that ille-
gally obtained evidence cannot be used in court. There are some
exemptions to the exclusionary rule, but police have to take care
to use legally sound principles in searches and in the resulting
seizure of possible evidence.
Another key area of responsibility of the police is the execu-
tion of arrests. The United States Supreme Court has interpreted
an arrest as any substantial restriction on the ability of a person to
freely come and go. Physical force to effect the arrest is unneces-
sary in this interpretation; a person who uses authority to ver-
bally limit a person’s ability to move about freely is making an
arrest. In most cases, a warrant is required to effect an arrest, but
the police are allowed to arrest a person if: (1) the offense is com-
mitted in the presence of an officer, (2) if the offense is a felony
and probable cause exists, and (3) the act involves violence, even
The Police Mission
35

if the offense under investigation is a misdemeanor (Conser and
Russell 2000, 383).
One of the aspects of the law enforcement function is the
possibility of officers having to use to force for several reasons: to
make offenders comply with instructions; to prevent potential
harm to the officers, the offenders, or others; or to stop the at-
tempts of a dangerous person to escape custody. The police use a
continuum of force to ensure that the proper degree is used to
contain a situation. Graduated sanctions for increasingly danger-
ous circumstances include:
• Verbal commands from officers
• Open-hand tactics or the use of what are termed “less
lethal weapons” 
• More forceful physical restraint measures
• Intermediate striking weapons, such as batons
• Lastly, deadly force, which is to be used by police only
to protect their own lives or the lives of innocent people
(Ortmeier 2006, 218)
The “tools of the trade” used by the police for law enforce-
ment include both lethal and nonlethal weapons. The standard
lethal weapon used by police officers has been a .38 caliber, six-
shot revolver; however, because the police often encounter peo-
ple with greater firepower, many agencies have adopted a host of
other firearms (Dantzker 2003, 168–169).
Less lethal weapons are used when the police determine that
deadly force is not needed. Different weapons are used for dif-
ferent situations, and none should ever be seen as the correct tool
in all cases of offender resistance (Standen 2005). Examples of
less lethal weapons include batons, chemical agents, stunning
devices, distraction devices, and other immobilizing weapons.
Batons are a descendant of the truncheon from the earlier days of
the professional police and are used for striking when offenders
are in close proximity to the officer and require physical inter-
vention to control the situation.
Chemical agents, such as oleoresin capsicum (also called OC
or pepper spray), contain the oil of hot peppers and are more ef-
fective than their early versions in the 1980s. Officers use these
agents to stop offenders through the application of a spray, foam,
or gel that is discharged from a canister, causing a burning sen-
sation that normally stops offenders from aggressive activity
36
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

(Oldham 2005). Pepper spray causes offenders to experience eye
irritation, tearing, and difficulty breathing when the spray is ap-
plied to the face, and it often prevents further activity until an ar-
rest can be made.
Some less than lethal weapons stun offenders with an elec-
tric shock or with specially designed low-impact rounds. The
stun gun is a weapon that looks similar to a flat flashlight with
two electric prongs that produce muscle spasms and disorienta-
tion when contact is made and electric shocks are delivered (Ort-
meier 2006, 214). The Taser (which stands for Thomas A. Swift
Electric Rifle) was named after a character in a 1920s–1930s chil-
dren’s adventure series (Wrobleski and Hess 2006, 381). The
weapon resembles a firearm, and most of the models used by po-
lice are in the form of a handgun. The weapon uses compressed
nitrogen to discharge two electric darts that remain connected to
the handgun; these darts deliver electricity into the body of of-
fenders or on their clothing. When offenders are “tazed,” the
central nervous system becomes overwhelmed and uncontrol-
lable muscle contraction occurs, causing temporary mobility of
the suspect and giving officers time to contain the situation (Old-
ham 2005).
Another device often used by police is the Pepperball. The
Pepperball weapon, often a handgun though other styles are in
existence, uses compressed air to launch a projectile that is filled
with OC powder and that stings offenders when impact is made.
At that point, its effects resemble those of pepper spray. A shot-
gun version fires a projectile that looks like a badminton birdie
and that can be used in any standard shotgun. Other stunning
devices are projectiles (such as beanbags, rubber baton style
rounds, or rubber balls packed into a cartridge) fired from hand-
guns or shotguns that stun through impact. These devices are ob-
viously less lethal than bullets (Oldham 2005).
Some devices cause distractions to allow officers to get con-
trol of situations. The flashbang is a grenade-shaped device that is
hurled into dwellings or other areas, causing disorientation. The
device makes a loud noise, produces a bright light that causes
temporary blindness, and emits smoke. It is often used in hostage
situations and in high-risk entry encounters that often involve the
use of SWAT teams (Hess and Wrobleski 2006, 195).
Some other less lethal weapons used by the police are pro-
jectiles that use netting to stop fleeing offenders, foams that form
around the offenders to stop movement, and bubbles that fill
The Police Mission
37

rooms where offenders are hiding. All of these have different
uses and limited utility in various circumstances. 
Some less than lethal weapons end up causing death for a
variety of reasons, such as the poor physical condition of offend-
ers, improper use by the police, or other unanticipated condi-
tions. In spite of the potential problems, less lethal weapons are
valuable tools and, when used properly, can achieve the desired
objective without having to use deadly force.
Patrol
One of the primary duties of the police is patrol work, and 60 to 70
percent of a police officer’s time is dedicated to this activity (Wrob-
leski and Hess 2006, 131). Patrol is often considered the backbone
of a police department and is the most visible duty of the police. It
is not only the duty that most connects the police and the public, it
is also the one in which most police officers start their careers
(Dantzker 2003, 67–68). Patrol has as its roots the practice of
“standing guard” or “keeping watch,” which was certainly prac-
ticed in the earliest societies and which had much utility in the mil-
itary forces. The need for someone to patrol areas to observe
possible criminal activity has been around as long as the need for
social control measures. The duty for current policing agencies en-
tails the vigilant observation of people and responding to situa-
tions involving crime, emergencies, or the need of other services.
The several different forms of patrol are foot patrol (the old-
est form of patrol), mounted horse patrol, nonmotorized wheel
patrol (bicycles, roller skates, and skateboards), automobile patrol,
all-terrain vehicle (ATV) patrol, motorcycle patrol, water vehicle
patrol, helicopter and airplane patrol, and patrol using canine
units (often referred to as K-9 units) (Conser and Russell 2000,
258–269). A new form of motorized patrol makes use of the small,
two-wheeled scooter-type vehicle called the Segway Human
Transporter, or simply Segway, which was introduced in 2001. The
Segway vehicle is guided by the movement of the rider and is
being used by police departments not only for its transport bene-
fits but also  because it allows citizens greater accessibility to the
police (Wrobleski and Hess 2006, 195–196).
Traffic Control
In traffic control, police officers have a number of assignments.
Sometimes the traffic control duty is connected to patrol work
and sometimes it is a separate activity. Traffic control includes the
38
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

enforcement of traffic laws, the direction of traffic flow, the pro-
vision of assistance to motorists, the investigation and documen-
tation of automobile accidents, and the performance of
emergency services (Wrobleski and Hess 2006, 131). In addition,
the police are often responsible for educating the public about
matters of traffic safety; presentations are made to clubs, organi-
zations, schools, and other groups about requirements such as
using seat belts, the use of reflectors, the wearing of safety gear,
and so on (Wrobleski and Hess 2006, 210).
Investigation
Another major duty of the police is the investigation of criminal
activity. This is a universal responsibility for police agencies, but
the size and intensity of the investigation process varies by de-
partment. As with patrol duty, investigation has been around for
centuries, even before the advent of the modern police force.
Upon receiving a request for an investigation of a criminal mat-
ter, an investigator (uniformed or plainclothes, according to the
agency) responds and initially completes a preliminary investi-
gation by determining whether a crime has occurred, by ascer-
taining the people involved (either as suspects, victims, or
witnesses), and by reviewing the evidence. In addition, investi-
gators review solvability factors, or the leads that will likely re-
sult in the determination of the offender’s identity (Conser and
Russell 2000, 271–272). 
Several investigative methods are used both at the crime
scene and in the crime laboratory. At the crime scene, investiga-
tors are responsible for securing the area; recording all observ-
able facts; photographing, measuring, and making a sketch of the
area; obtaining and identifying evidence; documenting a “chain
of custody,” identifying each source handling the evidence; se-
curing and storing the evidence; interviewing people who might
be involved; and assisting in the identification of potential sus-
pects (Wrobleski and Hess 2006, 218–225).
Often the preliminary investigation is sufficient to uncover
the circumstances of the crime and to apprehend the offender.
However, if the results of the initial exploration do not meet this
end, a follow-up investigation is performed. The follow-up con-
sists of reviewing previous evidence, conducting additional in-
terviews, obtaining new information on potential suspects and
victims, collecting new evidence, and preparing for court
(Conser and Russell 2000, 272).
The Police Mission
39

A common activity at the crime scene is the taking of finger-
prints to determine the identity of criminal offenders. As they
touch objects at the crime scene, people often leave behind fin-
gerprints, which are made of sweat and body oils that seep from
the grooves in the fingertips. All fingerprints are different due to
unique patterns on the fingertips that are classified by fingerprint
analysts as loops, whorls, and arches. If the offender’s finger-
prints are on file in a police database, the prints can quickly de-
termine his or her identity. The prints are often invisible to the
human eye (“hidden” prints are known as latent fingerprints)
but can be detected through the use of fingerprint powders ap-
plied with a brush or chemicals, such as a certain glue that is
fumed over the prints (Saferstein 2001, 395–418).
A new form of crime scene investigation involves the use of
DNAtesting. DNA(deoxyribonucleic acid) is part of a person’s ge-
netic material that, like fingerprints, are unique to that person.
DNA samples can be extracted from blood, semen, sweat, saliva,
skin cells, or other body material. It is often left at crime scenes and
is obtainable from such items as weapons, clothing, cigarette butts,
stamps, glasses or cups, bottles, condoms, and bed sheets (Safer-
stein 2001, 353–388). The analysis of DNA is quite complex but is
performed in crime labs throughout the nation. As technology ad-
vances, the bugs are being worked out; for example, the length of
analysis has been shortened due to the more effective use of com-
puters in the analysis process. As DNA profile databases become
more abundant, it will become harder for offenders to leave be-
hind undetected traces of their identities. There have been many
calls for a DNA database of all people, whether or not they have
committed criminal offenses, but this is being met with resistance
due to concerns of violation of civil liberties (Lane 2004, 176).
There are many other means of investigating criminal activity
at crime scenes, such as the analysis of glass, soil, hair, fibers, paint,
tire tracks, bullet comparisons, blood splatters, documents, vocal
patterns, computers, drugs, and a host of other items (Saferstein
2001). Many police departments have specialized crime scene
units (CSUs) that perform these investigatory services and that are
composed of individuals well trained and often certified in inves-
tigations. Also, some detective units have specially trained per-
sonnel called profilers, who use behavioral analysis to develop a
psychological profile of an unknown subject (referred to as an
UNSUB), and some departments have begun using psychics to as-
sist in investigations, especially in cold cases (that is, cases that
40
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

have remained unsolved for a long period) (Wrobleski and Hess
2006, 227–228).
Other Order Maintenance Duties
Numerous other order maintenance duties are performed by spe-
cially trained officers, such as undercover detectives who pass
themselves as people involved in covert criminal activity; vice of-
ficers who work offenses involving prostitution, gambling,
pornography, and drug crimes; SWAT (special weapons and tac-
tics) squads that handle critical situations in which guerrilla tac-
tics, precision shooting, and night operations are needed; juvenile
units that carry out policing activity with juveniles; and canine
(K-9) units that use dogs to detect suspects, victims, drugs,
weapons, explosives, and evidence, or to control unruly crowds
and detain offenders (Wrobleski and Hess 2006, 228–238).
Community Service Function
The standard police motto is “to serve and protect.” However, a
tension often exists in policing agencies about whether their role
is one of primarily social worker or crime fighter. The police often
dislike the social worker label, but they rarely refuse to become in-
volved when social service needs arise. The duty is one that re-
quires much of a police officer’s time and energy. The social
service responsibilities are numerous and can involve assisting
citizens who have locked their keys in their cars, transporting
people to medical facilities, helping motorists with disabled vehi-
cles, and talking to people with a variety of different problems
and concerns (Dantzker 2003, 78). In addition, just a few of the
community service demands placed on the police are giving in-
formation and directions to travelers, intervening in domestic sit-
uations, working with lost or neglected children, assisting in
rescue or emergency operations, assisting in automobile license
and vehicle registration, and conducting educational programs to
schools and communities (Wrobleski and Hess 2006, 122).
The community service function is specifically addressed in
the governmental report called The Challenge of Crime in a Free Soci-
ety (President’s Commission on Law Enforcement and the Admin-
istration of Justice 1967, 97–98), in which the authors suggest that
the police are in a unique situation to observe the conditions that
can be changed to make communities safer. The authors recom-
mend that the police “make it their business” to report problems in
The Police Mission
41

city parks, on school playgrounds, in tenant buildings, or  with city
services such as garbage collection; these are considered important
police concerns as well as the more traditional aspects of police
work that involve crime fighting.
The World of the Police
The Police Mystique
Given the plethora of television shows, movies, and novels about
the police and criminal justice, the American public is obviously
fascinated with the romanticized police image. This fascination
with the “police mystique” probably extends back to the occupa-
tion’s beginnings. The advent of moving pictures and television
produced early depictions of police work, though much of what
appears in movies and on television shows is far from what most
police experience. The Hollywood versions of police work can be
compared to orange juice; the screen versions are akin to the con-
centrated type found in cans and only when the “water” of bore-
dom, routine, and insider ritual are added is the real product
accurately represented (Bouza 1990).
Even though the occupation of the police contains excite-
ment at times, it often pales in comparison to the screen versions.
The media focuses on the order maintenance function (the depic-
tion of police as crime fighters who chase, arrest, and bring crim-
inals to justice or who have the ability to investigate complex
cases and solve them in one hour) rather than on the more com-
mon function of community service. The crime fighter image
sells—it captivates audiences, whether they are viewing movies,
the news, fictional police shows, or even the documentary-type
reality police shows (Dantzker 2003, 3–6). Seeing this fictional-
ized representation is much more interesting than watching po-
lice officers respond to citizens complaining about animals in
their homes, investigating discarded vehicles on the side of the
road, or attending community meetings about local problems. To
their credit, some reality police programs do depict some of these
community service activities; however, the main focus is on the
exciting fast-paced, action-packed fight against crime.
Real police also do not have the technological “toys” that
many of their make-believe counterparts have on fictional televi-
sion shows or in the movies. Despite our technological advance-
42
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

ments in investigative equipment in recent years, the innovations
are expensive and many police agencies simply do not have the
money for them.
The Police Personality
Many scholars have explored the issue of a police personality, the
idea that a distinct set of beliefs and behaviors can be found in po-
lice agencies. The police, as with other occupations, have a certain
understanding of the world based on the social environment in
which they live and work. This working personality affects the
way they perform their duties and is influenced by certain occu-
pational conditions inherent in police work: danger and authority.
Officers are suspicious due to the vigilance required in dealing
with people who might wish to harm them and due to their being
on the watch for unlawful behavior. The police are often some-
what isolated from other people in that they feel uncomfortable
dealing socially with those they come into contact with daily—
both those who commit crimes and the citizens they serve. This
isolation from others often makes officers turn to each other, cre-
ating a significantly higher level of solidarity than among many
other occupational groups (Skolnick 1966, 44–70).
Individual officers often view their work uniquely and there-
fore have varying styles. Some officers focus primarily on the
order maintenance function of the job; theirs is the watchman style.
They use their discretion liberally in enforcing the law by concen-
trating on the offenses and situations deemed most detrimental to
the social order, often ignoring minor violations that come to their
attention. Legalistic style officers see the primary role of the police
as making sure the laws are enforced in a formal manner, and they
believe that performing their duties “by the book” is the correct
way of handling criminal behavior or other police matters. Offi-
cers with the service style (often working in middle-class commu-
nities) see maintaining the community’s moral codes as the
primary role, are very involved with citizen complaints, but nor-
mally try to handle them in an informal manner (Wilson 1978).
The Police Subculture
The concept of a police subculture has been the subject of much
discussion among scholars and has certainly found its way into
popular culture, especially in books, movies, and television shows.
The World of the Police
43

A subculture is basically a microcosm of the larger culture that pos-
sesses some of the culture’s dominant features but also has its own
unique and distinctive characteristics. In the case of the police, dif-
ferent dress, equipment, a specialized knowledge and training of
crime and the criminal justice system, and intensified vigilance
when relating to others while on duty all create unique subculture
traits (Purpura 2000, 118). These traits often define the world of the
police.
The police are distinctive in some important respects. Patrol
officers normally wear uniforms while on duty; this creates a
highly visible image of authority. The uniforms of the police nor-
mally catch the eye of people with whom they are in contact. The
badge, representing the “shield,” has special importance to the
wearer as well as to the observer. (The police badge, originally
made of copper, is probably the reason the police obtained the
moniker copper or cop.) It is a source of prestige for many police
officers to eventually possess the gold shield of the detectives.
Workers in other occupations also wear uniforms but do not nor-
mally carry the image of police authority.
Uniformed police also carry their tools of the trade on their
uniforms, always in plain view for citizens to observe. Officers
are normally equipped with a firearm (a handgun that is either a
revolver or semiautomatic pistol), a set of handcuffs, a pepper
spray canister, and sometimes a stun gun. In addition, communi-
cations equipment is normally worn on the shirt. Again, al-
though people of other occupations wear their tools in open
view, such as construction workers, the tools of the police—
including visible and potentially harmful weaponry—promote
an image of power.
The police have specialized knowledge in the areas of crime
and criminal justice. This knowledge is obtained from academy
training, on-the-job training, in-house instruction, and some-
times college or technical instruction. Obviously other profes-
sionals also have a significant knowledge of the criminal justice
system, such as attorneys and others in the court system, correc-
tions officials, forensic scientists, and criminal justice educators;
however, the combination of special procedural training and ac-
quired street knowledge make a police officer’s experience
uniquely different from that of others in the criminal justice field.
The inherent danger involved in law enforcement causes po-
lice to have protracted levels of vigilance when dealing with
those whom they are supposed to protect. Ordinary situations,
44
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

such as approaching an automobile for a routine traffic stop, re-
quires officers to be very cautious and especially cognizant of all
aspects of their surroundings due to the potential danger (Pur-
pura 2000, 118–119).
The police, as in many other professions, have developed
their own specialized language, or argot, that separates their occu-
pation from others. These terms tend to unify the police in their
collective mission. Examples of “copspeak” include the terms “bad
guys” for people who commit crimes, “black and whites” for po-
lice cars, “disorderlies” for people who violate laws against the
peace, and “shooflies” for internal investigations officials (Philbin
1996). Often the jargon used by the police consists of euphemistic
terms that serve an additional purpose of hiding truths that are
psychologically difficult to candidly discuss. For example, corpses
are commonly referred to as “stiffs” or “DOAs” (dead on arrival of
the police); law violators, especially involving violent offenses, are
labeled “perps” (perpetrators), who are arrested or “collared”
(Bouza, 1990, 3); and victims of crime, again often of violent crime,
are termed “vics.” In addition, the phrase “eating your thirty-
eight” (referring to a .38 caliber handgun) refers to officer suicide
(Philbin 1996). More recent terms also reflect this argot: “Lawyer-
ing up” refers to a suspect’s refusal to answer questions without an
attorney present, and “rent-a-cop” refers to a private security offi-
cer. “Suicide by cop” is a term used to describe a situation in which
people purposefully threaten the police or others, knowing that
their action will likely result in death (Champion and Hooper
2003, 309–310).
The unique aspects of their occupation cause the police to have
a perspective that is distinctive from many other career choices. All
people and groups develop this perspective, often called a world-
view, which colors how they perceive various situations. The
worldview that constitutes the police subculture is unique in that it
is characterized by an us-versus-them mentality—the “us” being
the police brotherhood and the “them” being the citizens. The po-
lice subculture is sometimes called the blue fraternity or the blue
brotherhood (although the terms are now inaccurate due to the
number of “sisters” in policing). 
Also, the development of the norms of the police begins with
selection. Officers are hired based on a number of factors that have
little if anything to do with the actual job, such as sexual orienta-
tion, gender role adherence, financial background, and others. The
selection process ensures that people of a like background are
The World of the Police
45

brought into the occupation, often with little understanding of the
marginalized groups with whom they will often be in contact
(Kappeler et al. 1998, 88–89).
Developing a police subculture continues with training at
the police academy, where those not fitting the police officer
image (which includes a middle-class bias) are eliminated and
those who follow the rules are rewarded. The paramilitary model
further strengthens the value of group cohesion and contributes
to an increased us-versus-them orientation. Training in the acad-
emy and on the job is focused on developing the recruits’ practi-
cal rather than intellectual skills, because greater importance is
given to firearms use, patrol techniques, and arrest and restraint
methods. In addition, the telling of war stories to the young re-
cruits by the older officers provides further socialization into the
paramilitary structure of the police (Kappeler et al. 1998, 88–92).
In other words, “cuff ’em and stuff ’em” techniques are empha-
sized over developing communication skills, even though the po-
lice perform more social work duties than law enforcement
operations.
According to Kappeler et al. (1998), three general character-
istics of the police subculture relate to the concept of ethos, or the
“distinguishing character, sentiments, and guiding beliefs of a
person or institution” (p. 97). The first is the ethos of bravery, the
most salient of the three, which refers to the fact that officers face
the potential of violent victimization when encountering others.
The second is autonomy, which requires the use of discretion by
the police when making decisions about whom and when to ar-
rest and about when to use force; this ethos highlights the police
role as gatekeepers. The third ethos is secrecy in which officers
adopt an informal code that allows only certain information to be
disclosed to outsiders.
Closely related to the police subculture concept is the blue
curtain (Goldstein 1977, 202). This concept, also called the blue
wall of silence, refers to an unwritten code of secrecy that is often
maintained by the police to provide protection to other officers.
Although other professions have similar codes of secrecy, the
code among the police is often more closely upheld. Police su-
pervisors often become entangled in the web of secrecy by pro-
moting the departmental image above complaints of misconduct
by outsiders. Good police work suffers in this type of environ-
ment (Delattre 2002, 394–395).
46
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

The police subculture appears to be perceived by many
scholars, movie producers, and citizens as an entirely negative
phenomenon. However, the high level of solidarity that is a part
of the subculture can be seen as functional to the occupation be-
cause implicit in the work itself is the reliance on other officers to
assist when needed, especially in life-threatening situations. The
social isolation that also comes with the job is alleviated when
other officers, with similar experiences and perceptions, become
part of an officer’s social network.
The Hazards of the Job
The police have jobs that put them into dangerous situations. A
salient component of police work is the legally sanctioned ability
to use deadly force if it is deemed necessary. Deadly force is de-
fined as any type of force that will likely cause the death or seri-
ous injury of another person (Alpert and Fridell 1992, 12). The
police are expected to use a graduated system of force when
some level of force is needed to obtain compliance and to main-
tain safety. Deadly force is, of course, the most extreme measure
and should be used as a last resort. Historically, the police in
America, unlike their counterparts in Europe, have had much
discretion in the use of deadly force, at least prior to the 1970s.
The doctrine of the fleeing felon gave officers the right to shoot,
or to use other means of deadly force on, anyone who ran from
the police. This changed in the 1970s when many police admin-
istrators instructed their officers to use restraint in such cases. In
1985, the case of Tennessee v. Gardner stopped the use of deadly
force when pursuing felons who are not presumed to be danger-
ous (Blumberg 1997, 507–530). The taking of a human life is not
easy for most people, and many officers are psychologically trau-
matized after using deadly force. This is one of the top stressors
police officers experience (Champion and Hooper 2003, 310).
Another area of police work that is dangerous and that is be-
coming increasingly controversial is the use of high-speed pur-
suits. Police officers are obligated to enforce the law, and this
often means giving chase to people in automobiles who refuse to
stop for the police or who decide to flee. During attempts to ap-
prehend and possibly arrest suspects, high-speed chases endan-
ger not only the lives of the officers, drivers, and passengers, but
those of innocent people as well. The actions of the police are
The World of the Police
47

guided by court decisions, but police officers have to make im-
portant decisions on the scene about whether to begin or to con-
tinue pursuit. Factors that must be taken into consideration are
the seriousness of the original offense; the speed involved; the lo-
cation; vehicle, weather, and road conditions; the availability of
accurate communications; and the laws and restrictions govern-
ing high-speed pursuits (Alpert 1997, 547–564).
As is expected, many aspects of police work make officers
highly susceptible to the dangers of stress. The stress comes from
the organizational work environment, which promotes feelings
of irritation and humiliation that come from the close scrutiny of
both the departments and the community  itself, as well as from
the potentially dangerous and psychologically harmful experi-
ences the police undergo in the field. It is common for the orga-
nizational stressors to cause feelings of alienation for the officers
or to cause aggressive responses to situations that would nor-
mally not require such a response. The dangerous and disturbing
encounters often lead to a host of psychological problems, sleep-
ing disorders, and alcohol abuse (Toch 2002, 5).
Due to the unpredictable nature of police work, officers
often experience what is known as burst stress, or stress that
comes from a single stressful occurrence, such as encountering a
citizen with a gun. When an officer spends a lot of time engaged
in tedious activities and then suddenly has to confront a critical,
potentially life-threatening situation, the effects can be highly
stressful. Officers experience the highest level of stress when they
witness the violent deaths of partners or citizens. Posttraumatic
stress disorder, suicide, substance use, and family problems that
are related to the occupation can cause many officers significant
problems (Champion and Hooper 2003, 297–320).
Police–community Relations
The term police–community relations refers to activities of police de-
partments to ensure that a continuing line of communication exists
between the police and the community. This dialogue should be
based on genuine concern and on the ability of police, especially
line officers on the street, to listen carefully to community needs.
The movement to promote better communication was driven by
the late 1960s social conflicts between police authority and the
youth and urban poor (Farmer and Kowalewski 1976, 3–4).
48
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Since the advent of the police forces in the United States, the
relationship between communities and the police has been
marked by conflict. At one point in their history, the police have
traditionally been charged with keeping the activities of the “dan-
gerous classes” away from the elite, with compelling members of
this class to adopt the moral standards of the upper class, and
with changing or at least concentrating the lower-class activities
to ghetto areas. Now police come under pressure from the upper
classes for not doing enough to shield them from the actions of the
lower socioeconomic class. At the same time, the police are criti-
cized by people of the lower socioeconomic classes, with whom
the police mostly live and work, for using excessive and inappro-
priate force against them (Richardson 1974, 158). 
During the 1930s, many rural African Americans and other
minorities migrated to cities to escape the deleterious effects of
the Great Depression. After World War II, another wave of mi-
gration occurred due to the economic recovery that took place
after the war. It was during this period that the number of black
people and other minorities in urban areas in the North and Mid-
west exceeded the number of minorities in the rural regions of
the country. The consequences of this urban migration were over-
crowded housing, unsanitary conditions in inner-city communi-
ties due to weak enforcement of codes, segregated residential
and occupational conditions, and criminal activity. Most police
officers in these minority neighborhoods were white and condi-
tions were right for a festering hostility between these groups
(Johnson and Campbell 1981, 101–113).
In the 1960s, violence erupted in many cities throughout the
nation. Relations between the police and community became
strained as riots exploded in many areas. As the conflict contin-
ued, many police tactics caused an exacerbation of the problem.
Although brutality by the police was a complaint often cited by
minority citizens, other grievances were more prominent, such as
differential law enforcement practices directed at blacks and
other minorities (especially involving protective services), and
verbal and physical harassment. Another key issue involved dis-
crimination in police work such as hiring, promotions, and gen-
eral treatment of minorities in the field (Radelet 1973, 262). The
level of aggressive conflict between policy and minority commu-
nities abated somewhat in the 1970s and 1980s as many programs
in police-community relations were promugated by police forces
The World of the Police
49

throughout the country. The Rodney King incident occurred the
following decade.
Citizen Review Boards
Due to the volatile situation between the police and community
in many parts of the country during the 1960s, the President’s
Commission on Law Enforcement and the Administration of Jus-
tice (1967) issued a report recommending that the processing of
citizen grievances and complaints should be adequately promul-
gated; however, the report advised against singling out the police
and other governmental authorities. It also left guidelines for the
institution of citizen complaints to local jurisdictions (President’s
Commission on Law Enforcement and the Administration of Jus-
tice 1967, 264–265).
Citizen review boards offer a way to examine police conduct
through the use of citizen complaints. Normally a panel of citizens
reviews the complaints by questioning officers and witnesses, de-
veloping conclusions about the legitimacy of the complaints, and
recommending possible sanctions against the officer or officers if
the complaints are found to be valid. Review boards are beneficial
when there is a high level of community distrust in the police and
when it is perceived that the police cannot adequately police them-
selves (Champion and Hooper 2003, 511).
Ethics in Policing: Police Misconduct
Varieties of police misconduct include police crime, occupational
deviance, corruption, and abuse of authority (Kappeler et al. 1998,
20–25). Police crime involves the direct violation of existing crimi-
nal laws and, in its most serious form, the excessive use of force
or drug violations. Occupational deviance refers to antisocial activ-
ities by the police that are made possible by the officer’s position
of authority: illegally taking impounded vehicles, taking money
found during an investigation, conducting illegal searches, and so
on. Corruption, or graft, refers to unethical activities that bring the
police some personal gain, especially economic gain, and that are
job related, for example, accepting bribes, embezzling funds, and
extorting money. The abuse of authority involves the use of exces-
sive force, psychological or emotional abuse, or legal abuse. These
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

activities, in this classification system, obviously overlap to a high
degree.
Another way to view police misconduct is through the con-
cepts of nonfeasance, misfeasance, and malfeasance. Nonfeasance
consists of actions by police in which officers fail to perform a
legal duty, such as stopping and ticketing a speeder. Misfeasance
involves actions in which officers fail to perform a legal duty in
an appropriate manner, such as searching a house without a
search warrant or other legitimate reason to do so. Malfeasance oc-
curs when the police perform an illegal act, such as keeping
money found in a drug raid (Albanese 2005).
Dealing with allegations of police misconduct is a two-stage
process: (1) investigation of the activity deemed inappropriate
and (2) determining punishment options if misconduct is deter-
mined. The police traditionally handled this process, but review
boards of community members eventually became involved with
both stages (Bayley 1994, 91).
Issues of Diversity in Policing
Race Relations and the Police
The issue of race has had a long and pervasive role in American
history, and this is certainly true in law enforcement. Conflicts
among various racial and ethnic groups have been reflected in
the relationships between those given the authority to impose
order and those who are subjected to such control.
Throughout the twentieth century, riots over issues of race
were common in America, and law enforcement agencies played
a part in these disturbances. Violent race riots erupted in 1917 in
East St. Louis, Illinois, and in Houston, Texas; in Washington,
D.C., Seattle, Chicago, Charleston, Longview, Texas, and rural
Phillips County Arkansas in 1919; in Tulsa, Oklahoma, in 1921; in
Harlem, New York, and Detroit in 1943 (Report of the National
Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders 1968). The 1960s
brought many riots, including those involving labor–management
issues and war protests, in addition to continued racial conflict.
Americans were able to witness the effects of police brutality
against African Americans when Birmingham, Alabama, city po-
lice commissioner T. Eugene “Bull” Conner ordered high-pressure
Issues of Diversity in Policing
51

water hoses and dog attacks on a number of young people who
were peacefully marching. Outbreaks of racial conflict in 1965 in-
cluded the highly disastrous riots in the Watts area of Los Angeles.
The long hot summer of 1967 produced over one hundred
and fifty civil disorders in the nation. The so-called ghetto riots
occurred throughout the country in cities such as Tampa, Cincin-
nati, Detroit, Atlanta, and Newark, New Jersey, and they in-
volved situations in which African Americans were arrested for
basically minor offenses. Police brutality, prejudice, insensitivity,
as well as a belief by black citizens that the police ignored their
concerns, were cited as causes for the riots. Other factors that po-
tentially contributed to the conditions were crowded and dan-
gerous urban living conditions, worsened by the heat of the
summer; a growing number of unsupervised young people on
the streets; poor relationships and communication between po-
lice and the communities; and slow and unsuitable responses by
the police (Report of the National Advisory Commission on Civil
Disorders 1968). Although continued racial conflicts between po-
lice and black citizens continued in the next two decades, most of
them were minor in comparison to those of the 1960s. 
In the 1990s, however, the situation changed when one partic-
ular case created a firestorm of protest. In Los Angeles in March of
1991, motorist Rodney King and two passengers fled from officers
of the California State Patrol, the Los Angeles Police Department
(LAPD), and the Los Angeles Unified School District Police. When
the car containing the three men was overtaken and stopped, the
two passengers complied with police instructions, but the driver, a
large and strong man, ran at the LAPD officers, who responded by
subduing him with a stun device. The police then began beating
and kicking him as he was lying on the ground while an amateur
video camera operator, who was witnessing the event, captured
the incident on tape. When the camera operator tried to discuss the
videotaped event with personnel at the Los Angeles Police De-
partment, the issue did not prompt much interest; so he turned the
footage over to local television stations. The ninety-second tape
was broadcast on local news and soon became a national story.
King ended up with numerous broken and fractured bones,
broken teeth, and internal organ and brain damage as a result of
the numerous blows that were dealt by the four officers. The offi-
cers went to trial for the charge of using excessive force, and a jury
that had no African Americans heard the case. When the officers
were acquitted of the charges, major rioting, violence, arson, and
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

looting occurred in Los Angeles for five days. Other violent
clashes broke out in other American cities. With the related fifty-
four deaths and heavy property destruction, this became one of
the nation’s largest outbreaks of riot violence in the twentieth cen-
tury. The four officers were later charged with civil rights viola-
tions and found guilty in a federal court.
As the twentieth century came to a close, relations continued
to be strained between the police and black citizens. The issue of
racial profiling came to the nation’s attention as African Ameri-
can and Latin-American motorists were targeted simply because
of their skin color. This practice was given the name DWB (dri-
ving while black/brown).
African American Police
African Americans have historically been excluded from equal op-
portunities in many aspects of American life, including employ-
ment. Entry into the various occupations was a difficult task, and
policing, with its mandate to control the behavior of citizens, was
especially difficult. The first black officers in America were em-
ployed in New Orleans as part of the city guard from 1805–1820.
With its history of racial mixing, New Orleans was the home of
many former African slaves who won their freedom due to their
service as soldiers. Many such “free men of color” became mem-
bers of the city guard because there weren’t enough white men to
serve on the force. The duties of this unit consisted primarily of
controlling slaves, a function of the slave patrols in other Southern
cities. The black city guard was discontinued and replaced with an
all-white work force when the police became increasingly under
political control (Dulaney 1996, 8–10).
After the American Civil War, the Black Codes were adopted
by many Southern states. The purpose of these codes was to keep
power from African Americans by denying certain rights, such as
voting. In spite of the codes, a federal order by the U.S. military to
restructure the New Orleans police department led to the employ-
ment of African American police officers for a second time. In the
1870s, other Southern cities followed New Orleans’ model and
began employing black police officers. Even though the number of
black officers was low in the mid- to late 1800s, there was much re-
sistance to their presence on police forces in any numbers, and, as
the political winds changed by the early 1900s, black police officers
in the South were virtually nonexistent (Dulaney 1996, 11–18). The
Issues of Diversity in Policing
53

number of African American police officers in the North also fell
sharply during this time but began to rise after World War II; how-
ever, they were confined to working in areas in black communities
and allowed to arrest only black citizens. Some African American
police even had to ride in patrol cars marked “colored police”
(Peak 2005, 358). Other officers were located in black station
houses or “Negro substations” (Barlow and Barlow 2000, 229). In
the 1950s, pressure from black communities and organizations
caused a shift, and, by the late 1960s and early 1970s, the recruit-
ment of blacks into the field began and relationships between po-
lice and minority communities improved (Barlow and Barlow
2000, 241–254).
Women Police
As with other male-dominated occupations, the entry of women
into the police profession was difficult. The roots of the move-
ment can be traced to the 1840s, when prison matrons were hired
to oversee women inmates in some of America’s penal institu-
tions through the efforts of the American Female Reform Society
and other groups. The philosophy of this movement carried over
into policing in the 1880s. Prior to the 1900s, women were al-
lowed in police departments through two routes: by having a
background and training in social work or by being the widow of
a police officer. Whichever route was taken, the duties of the po-
lice matron all conformed to the gender-based ideas of feminin-
ity. The matrons were responsible for working with female and
juvenile offenders, assisting in missing persons investigations,
and working with victims of sex offenses. They did not possess
police powers or wear uniforms (Horne 1974, 26–27).
The movement had a moralist tone, following in the model
of the American suffragists. The early women police officers in-
clude Lola Baldwin, employed by the Portland, Oregon, Police
Department in 1905; Alice Stebbins Wells, appointed by the Los
Angeles Police Department in 1910; and Mary Hamilton, who
served as the first female police officer with the New York Police
Department. These early female police officers promoted their
roles as prevention oriented and nonthreatening to the male offi-
cer image. This tack might have been the downfall of the move-
ment that peaked in the mid-1920s and quickly lost ground
thereafter. The movement to establish women as a viable force in
policing went into a sharp decline during the next three decades.
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

A new interest in the professional model of policing, with its em-
phasis on crime fighting rather than social work, contributed to
its decline (Walker 1979, 101–111).
After World War II, women entered the occupation in greater
numbers and with more responsibilities. In 1956, the International
Policewomen’s Association was reestablished as the International
Association of Policewomen, and it promoted a new agenda:
women police officers performing not in a matronly role but
rather as crime fighters. The separate women bureaus that existed
in the early years were incorporated into the regular police units.
This did not happen without resistance from male officers, how-
ever. It would be another decade before women began performing
the primary police responsibility of police patrol (Schultz 1995,
115–130). With the 1972 passing of the Amendment to the Civil
Rights Act, women began entering the field, although the pio-
neering female officers had a difficult time in the culturally sus-
tained masculine world of the police (Martin 1997, 363–366). As of
2004, women police represented almost 12 percent of all police of-
ficers (Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2004). As more women
enter the field, especially in the administrative ranks, gender dis-
tinctions should lessen.
Other Minorities
Other racial and ethnic minorities in police work reflect the di-
verse nature of the American workforce. Native-American, Latin-
American, and Asian-American officers, as well as officers with
different ethnic backgrounds, contribute to the policing system
that provides protection and service to communities that are sim-
ilarly diverse. It is important that police agencies recruit from
these groups, as they have in the case of African American and
female officers.
Another growing population within the police workforce are
gay and lesbian officers. Due to the antihomosexual sentiment
among some police officers, perhaps due to their traditional 
middle-class, white, heterosexual perspective, homosexual men
and women have often had a difficult time gaining acceptance
from colleagues. Females seem to have an easier time gaining this
acceptance from male officers due in part to stereotypes of the
“masculine nature” of lesbians and the “feminine nature” of gay
males. In an environment that values machismo, anyone seen as
not possessing masculine qualities is often marginalized. Openly
Issues of Diversity in Policing
55

disclosing a homosexual orientation can prevent someone from
being hired as a police officer and can lead to ostracism by other
officers. Associations and organizations have been formed in some
urban areas for gay and lesbian police (Barlow and Barlow 2000,
275–287). Time will tell if these officers will obtain acceptance into
the field of policing.
The Changing Police Milieu
The Evolving Nature of Policing
Kelling and Moore (1991) provide a model of police evolution as it
relates primarily to the sociopolitical factors that have influenced
American law enforcement. In their first of the three eras of polic-
ing, the political period (1840–1930), the police were controlled
by politicians who, to obtain votes, forced the police to engage in
service-type work; this era was understandably filled with high
levels of corruption. The second period, the reform era (1930–
1980), saw a more professional and efficient police organizational
structure that removed officers from political control but that also
removed them from the communities they served. The third and
present era, which began around 1980, is seeing a turn from a de-
tached police force to one that has a symbiotic relationship with
community citizens. The community policing approach that was
ushered in during the current era has changed the nature of po-
lice work since its beginnings.
One way to consider policing evolution is to observe the
changes brought about by technological advancements. Soulliere
(1999) has proposed four stages of policing that illustrate how the
changes in technology have influenced the field. The first stage
(1881–1945) is highlighted by the technological introductions by
the police innovator August Vollmer, such as mobile patrol, radio
communication, polygraph technology, fingerprint and handwrit-
ing classification procedures, and the establishment of a forensics
laboratory. The second stage (1946–1959) saw improvements in
traffic control devices as well as instruments used to record blood
alcohol levels in offenders. In the third stage (1960–1979), major
technological innovations were adopted (primarily due to the rec-
ommendations of the President’s Commission on Law Enforce-
ment and the Administration of Justice), such as the 911 emergency
call system, centralized dispatch systems, computer databases, and
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

the increased use of computer-assisted technology. The forth and
present stage, begun in 1980, has witnessed a number of techno-
logical advancements including telecommunication, mobile com-
puting, expert systems, imaging, and biometric technologies.
Bayley (1998) reflects on seven changes in American law en-
forcement since the 1960s. First, today’s police officers are at all
levels more intelligent, more knowledgeable, and more sophisti-
cated than officers of decades ago. Second, police executives are
more innovative, better trained in police administration, and
more desirous to leave their own unique legacies on their de-
partments. Third, police agencies are more likely than their pre-
decessors to make use of science, appreciate the value of the
rapid dissemination of information, and understand the impor-
tance of evaluation. Fourth, police ethical standards have in-
creased in recent years. Fifth, police forces are much more diverse
in their composition than those of the past. Sixth, the police have
had to become generally more familiar with advances in technol-
ogy, forensics, and crime; this familiarity creates distinct changes
in the organizational structure of law enforcement agencies. Last,
the civilian review of police actions is becoming more accepted
by the police, although acceptance is still a work in progress. 
Bayley does not accept the commonly held belief that major
changes have taken place in the strategies used by contemporary
police agencies; he instead posits that, while community policing
is certainly a major focus currently, it is not as widespread or as
novel as some suggest.
Current Police Philosophies
Current police philosophies can be organized under three head-
ings: community-oriented policing, problem-oriented policing,
and broken windows policing.
Community-oriented Policing
Community policing (or community-oriented policing) is the
present ethos in American police work. Over time, as community
members discovered that it was impractical to police themselves
and that a more professional police force was needed, paid police
officials were put in the communities to respond to crime. In the
twentieth century, police agencies became even more profes-
sional and took as their primary focus the function of order main-
tenance through crime fighting. In some communities, the more
The Changing Police Milieu
57

professional police forces seemed to have gained legitimacy, but
in others the police seemed too removed from the communities,
causing great stress and conflict between the groups. In the 1970s,
a new focus came on the scene: It reflected a move away from
viewing the police as controlling the community to viewing them
as partners with the community to prevent and combat crime. 
Community policing, sometimes referred to as community-
oriented policing, has a different philosophical and tactical ori-
entation than the traditional crime-fighting model in that it elicits
resources in the community in matters involving police policy. A
definition of this approach to policing is provided by Friedmann:
Community policing is a policy and strategy aimed at
achieving more effective and efficient crime control, re-
duced fear of crime, improved quality of life, improved
police services and police legitimacy, through a proac-
tive reliance on community resources that seeks to
change crime causing conditions. It assumes a need for
greater accountability of police, greater public share in
decision-making and greater concern for civil rights and
liberties. (1992, 4)
Walker and Katz describe the components of community
policing: decentralization, deformalization, despecialization, and
delayerization. Decentralization refers to the attempts by commu-
nity policing strategies to move decision-making power, both ad-
ministratively and geographically, to the communities rather
than maintaining a centralized police headquarters. Deformaliza-
tion requires a dispensation of formal agency regulations and
rules that thwart individual officer creativity and problem solv-
ing. Despecialization means a return to a generalist rather than a
specialist perspective, by which the officers on the beat handle a
variety of community problems and concerns. Delayerization
refers to the “flattening out” of the police hierarchy structure so
that there are fewer layers of administration between line officers
and managers. This new form of policing was an attempt to rid
the profession of the bureaucratic nature of the traditional model
of policing (2005, 97).
The movement to a community-based model is often not an
easy task for those trained in the traditional model of police
work. To make this transition, officers need to develop skills in
planning and organizing, problem solving, human relations and
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

communications, and critical thinking. They also need to learn to
utilize compassion and empathy in their dealings with the pub-
lic (Champion and Hooper 2003, 21).
Problem-oriented Policing
Closely connected with the community policing movement is a
philosophy known as problem-oriented policing (Goldstein 1990,
2001). The brainchild of police scholar Herman Goldstein, this
idea is based on the fact that the police can be proactive through
the early analysis of community problems rather than just reac-
tive by responding to problems after they can cause serious dam-
age. Problem-oriented policing is a strategy derived from
street-level policing through the administrative structure that has
as its primary goal the effectiveness of dealing with the problems
discovered in the various areas the police oversee. It involves a
close collaboration between police and citizens in an effort to un-
cover and adequately address problems that plague individual
communities.
Beginning with an article in 1979, Goldstein proposed this
new type of policing based on “end products” rather than just on
police response to crime with little investigation into its causes
(Eisenberg and Glasscock 2001). The model stresses that police
should be active in identifying the specific problems in their com-
munities, take a substantial role in addressing underlying symp-
toms of these problems, and enlist the aid of community
resources to solve them (Ortmeier 2006, 170).
Perhaps the most salient component of the problem-solving
philosophy is the SARA process: scanning, analysis, response, and
assessment, This process requires officers to initially scan, or ob-
tain information about a problem from a number of different
sources, such as citizen surveys or community complaints. Analy-
sis, the second step, is the intensive examination of the various
characteristics of the problem with a consideration for underlying
causes. The third stage is the response to the problem by the police
that involves all available resources. The final phase in the process
is assessment, in which response to the problem or situation is
evaluated to see if the measures taken had the desired effect
(Eisenberg and Glasscock 2001).
The problem-solving model gained influence over the next
two decades, and many agencies in America adopted the ap-
proach; even London found favor with the model (Eisenberg and
Glasscock 2001). Because of the growing interest in community
The Changing Police Milieu
59

policing during the same period, the two models merged, creat-
ing a philosophy of policing that had two primary components:
a community orientation to crime and a focus on police problem
solving (Bichler and Gaines 2005). Although the models both
focus on community, the concept of community is somewhat
nebulous; specifically, can federal and state policing agencies
solve problems utilizing the “community” as a resource, or is this
model only for use by municipal or county agencies (Quinet,
Nunn, and Kincaid 2003)? In any event, the two models have be-
come very closely related in policing philosophy, despite a
slightly different focus.
Broken Windows Policing
Also closely connected to community and problem-oriented
policing philosophies is broken windows policing. The assumption
behind this policing strategy is that communities suffering from
social disorder (a  concept similar to the “disorganization” bor-
rowed from the early criminologists around the turn of the twen-
tieth century) contribute to high crime rates. Disorder, a natural
occurrence in complex urban societies, is manifest in the presence
of street prostitution, insistent panhandling, vandalism and graf-
fiti, public drunkenness, and other indicators that a community
is not appropriately handling crime. The metaphor of broken
windows describes these conditions, which are normally misde-
meanor offenses but which can cause fear and anxiety in citizens
and lead to more serious problems. 
The solution to the high crime rates is therefore to clean up
the communities. The police, as key front-end players in the
criminal justice system, can significantly reduce crime with an ac-
tive patrol presence. This proactive strategy emphasizes crime
prevention through patrol officers walking their beats, getting to
know the small problems in the community (which will eventu-
ally lead to bigger problems if not corrected), and being active
agents in increasing the quality of life for community residents.
The restoration of order is a key element in broken windows
policing; thus order maintenance is favored over crime fighting
(Kelling and Coles 1996). 
One of the by-products of broken windows policing is a
model known as zero tolerance policing, as practiced in parts of
America and in the United Kingdom, which seeks to aggres-
sively enforce laws against the lower-level crimes of disorder
such as graffiti, public intoxication, prostitution, and vandalism.
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Although the more assertive style of enforcement is given cre-
dence by the broken windows philosophy, some suggest that it is
merely “an iron fist in an iron glove” and that it only promotes
police violence against citizens (Innes 2000).
Obviously, broken windows policing is a close fit with the
community-policing and problem-solving policing strategies. All
of these measures are proactive and community focused, and
they all utilize prevention and order maintenance as ways of con-
trolling crime. The community model is a marked departure
from the reactive, centralized, crime-fighting strategies of the ear-
lier professional model of policing.
New Approaches
There are currently a number of potentially valuable changes in
the field of policing. In New York, which embraced community
policing in 1984 and adopted a bottom-up approach to police
management, the situation evolved that younger, inexperienced
police officers found themselves in such a position of directing
police responses to crime. This problem, as well as problems in-
volving community boundary issues, prompted the nation’s
largest police department to adopt new procedures. Middle man-
agers became responsible for finding new ways of dealing with
crime and other community problems. Some of the goals were:
• Removing guns and drug dealers from the streets
• Effectively dealing with juvenile crime
• Adopting a domestic violence initiative
• Removing offenders and crime from public areas
• Returning ethnical credibility to the force (Champion
and Hooper 2003, 448–449)
In addition, Police Commissioner William Bratton developed
a program called CompStat in 1994. CompStat (computerized sta-
tistics) is an effort to make precinct commanders more responsible
for problem-solving strategies to control crime through the use of
computer-generated data on crime trends. The four components of
CompStat are (1) the collection and review of crime data, (2) the
development of strategies, (3) the deployment of available re-
sources, and (4) evaluation. Biweekly meetings of the precinct
commanders are held to review the problems and strategies used
New Approaches
61

and to determine future courses of action. Other American cities
have adopted similar programs with different names, such as Bal-
timore’s CRIMESTAC (crime tracking and analysis) and Indi-
anapolis’s IMAP (integrated management of patrol) programs
(Geoghegan 2006). Such an approach involving computer analysis
and human problem solving could become a modern philosophy
of policing that replaces community policing. Also, the compo-
nents of the model could serve as an accompaniment to the com-
munity policing philosophy. It could, of course, simply be an idea
that is used today and discarded tomorrow. Time will tell.
Another approach that is receiving some notice among po-
lice practitioners is the use of closed-circuit television cameras
(CCTV) to observe the behavior of people in a surveillance area.
This video policing effort has been in use in Great Britain since
1961, when cameras were installed in the subway system, but the
concern for privacy has caused this system to be rejected in most
American cities. However, Los Angeles, Chicago, and Philadel-
phia have surveillance systems in place. Program evaluations
will determine their usefulness in this country (Maroney 2006).
Another potentially beneficial technology in police work in-
volves global positioning system (GPS) devices. These devices
track the movement of people, boats, cars, and other mobile ob-
jects. The GPS tracking system sends signals to a satellite that
identifies geographic positions of people who are wearing moni-
tors that are often attached to the ankle. The system is in use for
people on pretrial release, work release, or under probation or
parole supervision (Swager 2005). Several jurisdictions also use
the device on juvenile offenders. Closely related to the issue of
placing surveillance cameras in public areas, this measure in-
volves the potential for societal rejection based on the idea of
state-guaranteed privacy.
Intelligence-led Policing: 
The New Paradigm in Policing?
Although the community policing and problem-oriented polic-
ing philosophies comprise the mode of policing predominantly
in use, a new model has entered the scene. Unlike the community
approaches to policing, which constitute a dramatic change from
their predecessor (professional policing), the intelligence-led
model of policing employs components and philosophical goals
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

of the community-oriented perspective. Unlike the community-
oriented perspective, it emphasizes the use of intelligence to pro-
mote its goals.
Intelligence has long been used by military organizations to
accomplish its missions, but, in the aftermath of the September
11, 2001 terrorist attacks in America, the idea of using intelligence
became a prominent component of police work (United States
Bureau of Justice Assistance 2005, vii). The need for intelligence
to prevent future terrorist attacks on American soil was the im-
petus for using intelligence at the street level, but its use was ap-
plied to conventional crimes as well. “Intelligence” does not
mean simple information; the term refers to information that has
been collected and analyzed. Sometimes the information is gath-
ered from and analyzed within the police agency itself, and in
other cases the information is gathered from an outside party,
then analyzed to determine where police resources may be best
utilized.
The idea of using intelligence in law enforcement goes back
to the early 1970s. During this period, the Law Enforcement As-
sistance Administration of the United States Department of Jus-
tice promoted the gathering of crime-related information and its
dissemination to other agencies in all police agencies in the na-
tion. Due to misuse by intelligence units in some police depart-
ments during the decade, a series of practical guidelines for
police intelligence was introduced in federal programs and a few
state agencies. The International Association of Law Enforcement
Intelligence Analysts (IALEIA) was formed in 1980, and initia-
tives such as the Regional Information Sharing Systems (RISS)
Centers and others were instrumental in bringing intelligence
into police work (United States Bureau of Justice Assistance 2005,
5). After September 11, 2001, the use of intelligence in policing
gained momentum.
At that time in England, a major development was under-
way with the Kent Constabulary. To combat an increasing prob-
lem with property crimes and a corresponding decrease in
government criminal justice funding, the British police force
began to prioritize police duties and was able to devote time cre-
ating and maintaining specialized intelligence units. The duties
needing the least professional police response were farmed out to
nonsworn personnel. This initiative, known initially as the Kent
Policing Model, first used the term “intelligence-led policing,”
and the idea was adopted by the government in the form of the
New Approaches
63

United Kingdom’s National Intelligence Model (United States
Bureau of Justice Assistance 2005, 10).
The intelligence-guided model in the United States, as men-
tioned, seeks to incorporate intelligence with current community-
and problem-based approaches. Criminal justice practitioners
using this model differentiate the types of intelligence: strategic in-
telligence, which refers to long-term, broad-based processes; tactical
intelligence, which refers to activity using intelligence to deal with
direct, immediate concerns; evidential intelligence, which provides
information needed to solve crimes; and operational intelligence,
which applies long-term investigatory methods to numerous in-
stances of crime in a given category (United States Bureau of Jus-
tice Assistance 2005, 3). The intelligence-led philosophy primarily
involves gathering tactical intelligence related to criminal activity
(including terrorism) and using it to catch offenders, to harden tar-
gets, or to prevention crime. The philosophy also uses strategic in-
telligence, which involves the planning and allocation of resources
needed to carry out the mission and to provide all involved peo-
ple with the information to successfully incorporate the model into
crime-related policies (Carter 2005).
The intelligence-led model uses strategically gathered and
professionally analyzed information about criminal activity to
control and preferably prevent traditional crimes as well as ter-
rorist activity. From its inception, the model has benefited from
agencies called fusion centers that gather and share information
on specific people, groups, or activities related to crime. These
centers have sprung up in at least twenty-five states, with more
currently in the planning or developmental stages. Also, several
federal organizations are operating fusion centers.
Fully developed intelligence-led agencies have specialists
known as intelligence analysts, intelligence officers, and intelli-
gence managers. The personnel who occupy these positions are
trained in crime research and criminal justice data analysis, and
the agencies provide the resultant information to street-level po-
lice practitioners and managers. Although it is not feasible for all
police departments to fund professional positions like these,
there is a push for policing agencies to adopt information-
gathering and dissemination methods as espoused by the model
(United States Bureau of Justice Assistance 2005, 9–13). One of
the problems that can easily occur is conflict between the profes-
sional analysts and the police officers due to difference in infor-
mation orientation: Whereas the analysts’ orientation is data
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

driven, the officers possess an experiential-based knowledge,
knowledge required “on the street.” These problems can be over-
come, however, through the training of both groups and with an
emphasis on the benefits of the intelligence-led policing philoso-
phy (Cope 2004).
Cope (2004) describes the five-stage process of intelligence-
led policing. The first stage in the process is the acquisition of in-
formation by means of a substantial information infrastructure,
which provides the police with the ability to obtain, store, and cat-
alog information on crimes and offenders. The second stage is
analysis, which converts the raw information to “actionable intel-
ligence” by discovering patterns in the crime data and by con-
necting events or evidence to potential offenders or groups. Stage
three consists of review, in which the information is prioritized to
determine the criminal events that should be addressed most im-
mediately. In the next stage, the actioning procedure, the infor-
mation is acted on; tasking meetings by police administrators
determine the actions to be taken, based on the data analyzed. The
last stage is the evaluation process, which determines whether the
measures taken to deal with the criminal activity are indeed ef-
fective. This five-stage intelligence-led process can be linear, sim-
ply progressing through the stages, or it can be used as a cycle in
which the last stage of evaluation produces information that can
be acquired, analyzed, reviewed, and acted on.
Ratcliffe (2005) proposes an alternate process—the 3i model,
which posits that there are three factors in the intelligence-led
paradigm. The first is interpretation of the criminal environment,
in which aspects of crime in certain areas are evaluated through
the use of a formidable intelligence structure, as well as the ap-
propriate data sources and the means by which to analyze this
data. The second is influence on decision makers, in which the ap-
propriate people with power to implement change are made
aware of the importance and proper use of intelligence in polic-
ing. The last stage is impact on the criminal environment, in
which the tenets of intelligence-led policing create an actual de-
crease in crime.
Because intelligence-led policing utilizes a number of meth-
ods already in use by police agencies (such statistical information
gathering, crime mapping, hot spot analysis, and other types of
targeted enforcement, forensics, and criminal profiling) and be-
cause it is expected to work in tandem with current philosophi-
cal perspectives, it is questionable that this can be considered a
New Approaches
65

new paradigm in policing. In other words, the eclectic nature of
this approach makes it less easy to identify it as a new model of
policing. In fact, its use of professional analysis and a strict divi-
sion of labor, as well as the specific targeting of certain people
(and potentially aggressive enforcement tactics), has some as-
pects of the professional, or paramilitary, style of policing that
was replaced by the community orientations currently in use.
The proactive nature of the intelligence-led model, however, dis-
tinguishes it from the professional model.
In any event, interest in this perspective appears to be gain-
ing influence with police agencies across the globe, as reflected in
the mission statements in police agencies from many countries. In
England and Wales, legislation is in effect that requires all police
forces to adopt the National Intelligence Model, which supports
the policing philosophy. In Australia, all police organizational
websites make reference to their intelligence-led or intelligence-
driven approach. The police in New Zealand have also adopted
the model as a major component of their service.
The fact that the intelligence-led approach is complementary
to  current models could possibly propel it to the forefront of
policing in America. In 2003, the Secretary of the Department of
Homeland Security Tom Ridge, in his address to the Interna-
tional Association of Chiefs of Police, acknowledged the National
Intelligence Sharing Plan (NCISP), which adopts the intelligence-
led philosophy (Ratcliffe 2005, 435–451). Through the efforts of
the NCISP, state, local, and tribal police agencies have begun to
reexamine their roles and adopt intelligence-oriented programs
into their departments (Carter 2005). Such novel programs as
CompStat, CRIMESTAC, and IMAP, as well as other programs
that use information to drive police action, work well in the in-
telligence-led framework. Even older, more primitive methods of
police work, such as the use of informants to provide information
that can be put to use, are part of this philosophy; no technolog-
ical advancement in policing has yet to supplant this traditional
practice (Sheptycki 2000).
The Future of American Policing
There have been many changes in American police ideologies
and practice through the years. It is interesting to speculate about
potential transformations that will occur in the field over the next
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

generations. The issue of whether or how long community polic-
ing will remain the dominant ideology is a key question. Some
scholars (Crank 1995) believe that the focus on community polic-
ing will dissipate and that there will be a return to the traditional
model of policing, while others (Friedmann 1992) believe that the
community policing wave has just begun.
Other changes will be on the horizon for the police in Amer-
ica and indeed for police agencies throughout the world. Al-
though it is impossible to forecast the future, one police scholar
predicts these changes in American policing by the end of the
first decade in this century:
• Technological advancements, including greater use of
laptop computers and digital phone technology
• Better computer software, including voice-activated pro-
grams
• Improved computerized databases on criminal behavior
• Closed-circuit televisions and interactive video capabili-
ties, especially involving court duties by the police
• Devices with “kill switches” to disable vehicles fleeing
the police
• Other technological advancements such as jet backpacks
for patrolling in the air, wrist radios, and satellite pho-
tography for investigations (Purpura 2001, 318)
A group of police futurists see the following as some of the
changes in police work over the next few years:
• A business, rather than a military, model of management
• Customized policing based on the needs of individual
communities
• Policing without borders
• Militarily tested advancements, such as satellite-assisted
surveillance using global positioning satellites (GPS)
• Digital documentation of all encounters (Stephens 2005,
51–57)
Certainly the technological advancements that will be used
by those committing crimes will require offsetting advancements
by the police to combat them. It remains to be seen whether com-
munity policing will persist into the future or whether it will be
replaced by some other policing ideology. It also remains to be
The Future of American Policing
67

seen if international events, such as those relating to terrorism,
will cause policing to take on a more global nature. These ques-
tions will be answered in the course of time.
Responses by the police to meet these challenges will involve
adaptation, and the police will adapt, as they have in the past.
Three professional challenges for the police include the provision
of effective services in a community policing environment; the
ability to maintain a watchful eye over such growing concerns as
terrorism, violence, drug abuse, gang activity, and white-collar
crimes; and the development of a strong ethos of professional
ethics to discourage misconduct (Conser 2000, 496–512).
References
Albanese, Jay. 2005. Criminal Justice, 3rd ed. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Alpert, Geoffrey P. 1997. “The Management of Police Pursuit Driving:
Assessing the Risks.” In Critical Issues in Policing: Contemporary
Readings, 3rd ed. Edited by R. G. Dunham and G. P. Alpert. Long
Grove, IL: Waveland Press.
Alpert, Geoffrey P., and Lorie A. Fridell. 1992. Police Vehicles and
Firearms: Instruments of Deadly Force. Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press.
Barlow, David E., and Melissa Hickman Barlow. 2000. Police in a
Multicultural Society: An American Story. Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press.
Bayley, David H. 1994. Police for the Future. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Bayley, David H. 1998. Policing in America: Assessment and Prospects.
Police Foundation. Available at: http://www.policefoundation
.org/pdf/Bayley.pdf. Accessed March 1, 2007.
Bichler, Gisela, and Larry Gaines. 2005. “An Examination of Police
Officers’ Insights into Problem Identification and Problem Solving.”
Crime and Delinquency 51 (1): 53 74.
Blumberg, Mark. 1997. “Controlling Police Use of Deadly Force:
Assessing Two Decades of Progress.” In Critical Issues in Policing:
Contemporary Readings, 3rd ed. Edited by R. G. Dunham and G. P.
Alpert. Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press.
Bouza, Anthony V. 1990. The Police Mystique: An Insider’s Look at Cops,
Crime and the Criminal Justice System. New York: Plenum Press.
Carter, David L. 2005. “The Law Enforcement Intelligence Function:
State, Local and Tribal Agencies.” Law Enforcement Bulletin 74 
(6): 1.
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Champion, D., and Michael K. Hooper. 2003. Introduction to American
Policing. New York: Glencoe/McGraw-Hill.
Conser, James A., and Gregory D. Russell. 2000. Law Enforcement in the
United States. Gaithersburg, MD: Aspen Publishers.
Cope, Nina. 2004. “Intelligence Led Policing or Policing Led
Intelligence: Integrating Volume Crime Analysis into Policing” British
Journal of Criminology 44 (2): 188 203.
Crank, John. 1995. “The Community-Policing Movement of the Early
Twenty-First Century: What We Learned.” In Crime and Criminal Justice
in the Year 2010. Edited by J. Klofas and S. Stojkovic. Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth.
Dantzker, M. L. 2003. Understanding Today’s Police, 3rd ed. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Delattre, Edwin J. 2002. Character and Cops: Ethics in Policing, 4th ed.
Washington, DC: AEI Press.
Dulaney, W. Marvin. 1996. Black Police in America. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press.
Eisenberg, Terry, and Bruce Glasscock. 2001. “Looking Inward 
with Problem-Oriented Policing.” Law Enforcement Bulletin. 70 
(7): 1 5.
Farmer, Richard E., and Victor A. Kowalewski. 1976. Law Enforcement
and Community Relations. Reston, VA: Reston.
Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2004. “Law Enforcement Personnel
Crime in the United States 2004.” Available at: http://www.fbi.gov/
ucr/cius 04/law enforcement personnel/index.html. Accessed 
March 2, 2007.
Friedmann, Robert R. 1992. Community Policing: Comparative
Perspectives and Prospects. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Geoghegan, Susan. 2006. “CompStat Revolutionizes Contemporary
Policing.” Law and Order 54 (4): 42 48.
Goldstein, Herman. 1977. Policing a Free Society. Cambridge, MA:
Ballinger Publishing Co.
Goldstein, Herman. 1979. “Improving Policing: A Problem-Oriented
Approach.” Crime and Delinquency 25 (2): 236 258.
Goldstein, Herman. 1990. Problem-Oriented Policing. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Hess, Karen M., and Henry M. Wrobleski. 2006. Police Operations:
Theory and Practice, 4th ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Horne, Peter. 1974. Women in Law Enforcement. Springfield, IL: Charles
C. Thomas.
References
69

Innes, Martin. 2000. “An Iron Fist in an Iron Glove? The Zero Tolerance
in Policing Debate.” Howard Journal 38 (4): 397 410.
Johnson, Daniel M., and Rex R. Campbell. 1981. Black Migration in
America: A Social Demographic History. Durham, NC: Duke University
Press.
Kappeler, Victor E., Richard A. Sluder, and Geoffrey P. Alpert. 1998.
Forces of Deviance: Understanding the Dark Side of Policing. Long Grove,
IL: Waveland Press.
Kelling, G. L., and Catherine M. Coles. 1996. Fixing Broken Windows:
Restoring Order and Reducing Crime in Our Communities. New York: Free
Press.
Kelling, G. L., and M. H. Moore. 1991. “From Political Reform to
Community: The Evolving Strategy of Police.” In Community Policing:
Rhetoric or Reality. Edited by J. R. Green and S. D. Mastrofski. Westport,
CT: Praeger.
Lane, Brian. 2004. The Encyclopedia of Forensic Science: A Guide to the
Science Behind Crime Investigation, 2nd ed. London: Magpie Books.
Maroney, Al. 2006. “Video Policing.” Law and Order 54 (4): 66 68.
Martin, Susan E. 1997. “Women Officers on the Move: An Update on
Women in Policing.” In Critical Issues in Policing: Contemporary Readings,
3rd ed. Edited by R. G. Dunham and G. P. Alpert. Long Grove, IL:
Waveland Press.
Oldham, Scott. 2005. “The Quest for Less Lethal Systems.” Law and
Order 53 (8): 94 100.
Ortmeier, P. J. 2006. Introduction to Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice,
2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Peak, Kenneth J. 2005. “African-Americans in Policing.” In Critical
Issues in Policing: Contemporary Readings, 3rd ed. Edited by R. G.
Dunham and G. P. Alpert. Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press.
Philbin, Tom. 1996. Copspeak: The Lingo of Law Enforcement and Crime.
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons.
President’s Commission on Law Enforcement and the Administration
of Justice. 1967. The Challenge of Crime in a Free Society: A Report.
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Purpura, Philip. 2000. Police and Community: Concepts and Cases. Boston:
Allyn and Bacon.
Quinet, Kenna, Samuel Nunn, and Nikki L. Kincaid. 2003. “Training
Police: A Case Study of Differential Impacts of Problem-Oriented Police
Training.” Police Practice and Research 4 (3): 263 283.
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Radelet, Louis A. 1973. The Police and the Community. Beverly Hills, CA:
Glencoe Press.
Ratcliffe, Jerry. 2005. “The Effectiveness of Police Intelligence
Management: A New Zealand Case Study.” Police Practice and Research
6 (5): 435 451.
Report on the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders. 1968.
Available at: http://www.eisenhowerfoundation.org/docs/kerner.pdf.
Accessed March 1, 2007. 
Richardson, James F. 1974. Urban Police in the United States. Port
Washington, NY: Kennikat Press.
Saferstein, Richard. 2001. Criminalistics: An Introduction to Forensic
Science, 7th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Schultz, Dorothy Moses. 1995. From Social Worker to Crimefighter:
Women in United States Municipal Policy. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Sheptycki, James. 2000. “Editorial Reflections on Surveillance and
Intelligence-Led Policing.” Policing and Society 9 (4): 311 314.
Skolnick, J. H. 1966. Justice Without Trial: Law Enforcement in Democratic
Society. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons.
Standen, David. 2005. “Use of Force Options.” Law and Order 53 (8):
88 92.
Stephens, Gene. 2005. “Policing the Future: Law Enforcement’s New
Challenges.” The Futurist 39 (2): 51 57.
Swager, Brent. 2005. “GPS Monitoring Offenders.” Law and Order 53 (9):
147 150.
Toch, Hans. 2002. Stress in Policing. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
United States Bureau of Justice Assistance. 2005. “Intelligence-Led
Policing: The New Intelligence Architecture.” Available at:  http://
www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/bja/210681.pdf. Accessed March 1, 2007.
Walker, Samuel. 1979. “The Rise and Fall of the Policewoman’s
Movement, 1905 1975.” In Law and Order in American History. Edited
by J. M. Hawes. Port Washington, NY: Kennikat Press.
Walker, Samuel, and Charles M. Katz. 2005. Police in America: An
Introduction, 5th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Wilson, James Q. 1978. Varieties of Police Behavior: The Management of
Law and Order in Eight Communities. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Wrobleski, Henry W., and Karen M. Hess. 2006. Introduction to Law
Enforcement and Criminal Justice, 8th ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
References
71


3
Worldwide Perspective
International and 
Comparative Criminal Justice
A comprehensive understanding of the American policing sys-
tem requires an exploration of international and comparative
criminal justice. International criminal justice refers to how coun-
tries deal with allegations of criminal behavior when the sus-
pected offenders are from other countries and likely possessing
different social customs and practices related to criminal justice.
International criminal justice also seeks to resolve the conflicts
between nations when significant differences exist in matters of
social control, prosecution, and corrections.
Comparative criminal justice is the study of basic differences in
criminal justice systems in various countries. No two criminal jus-
tice systems are the same, and the basic means of dealing with
crime are determined by a variety of factors, including religion,
traditional beliefs and practices, unique aspects of the country’s
history, the economic situation, and the nation’s political structure.
A good example of international criminal justice analysis
came in the highly publicized case of the “caning” of eighteen-
year-old American Michael Fay in Singapore. In 1994, the young
man was accused of graffiti vandalism of an automobile in Singa-
pore, for which he received a ninety-day jail sentence and twenty-
four lashes with a cane. Many in the United States were abhorred
by this action because such an offense in America would have
probably been punished much more leniently and would have re-
sulted in a warning, restitution payment, or probation (Ebbe 2000,
73

1). It is also a common practice to require vandals, especially
young offenders, to perform community service. Therefore, to
many Westerners, the punishment for this particular criminal ac-
tivity was excessive. The event revealed cultural differences in re-
gard to social control measures.
Although the term “comparative” is used to describe the
study of criminal justice in different geopolitical areas, Bayley
(1999, 4) prefers the term “international,” arguing that all science
is comparative and that a better choice of terminology is to use
“international” to refer to aspects of the subject under study or
“transnational” for the study of activities that cross borders.
However, the term “comparative” is commonly used in many
disciplines, including criminal justice.
Transnational Crime
Important for adopting a worldwide perspective on policing,
transnational crime, originally called transboundary criminology,
refers to criminal activity that involves more than one county.
The United Nations has identified certain acts that fall under this
category of crime—internationally organized crime, terrorism,
economic offenses, crimes against cultural heritage, and environ-
mental crimes:
• International crimes consist of trafficking in drugs,
weapons, industrial secrets, artwork, and human beings.
Trafficking in humans is a growing problem and in-
volves transporting people for the purpose of labor,
prostitution, pornography, forced marriage, or involun-
tary military service (Reichel 2002, 43).
• International terrorism, a major concern especially since
the September 11, 2001 attacks on the United States, in-
volves terrorist activity in which the initiators conceive
of a plan, direct their actions toward, flee to, pursue
refuge in, or receive assistance from a nation or nations
other than the one in which the acts occur (Reichel 2002,
44–45). In the case of the September 11 attacks, terrorists
from a radical fundamentalist group with members in
several nations directed acts against the United States.
• Economic crimes, which can benefit either corporations
or individuals, are crimes such as transnational bribery;
74
Worldwide Perspective

the “dumping” of unapproved or banned productions
on countries; and fraudulent practices with investors,
institutions, or governments. Those involved in eco-
nomic crimes also use the resources of organized crime
to orchestrate their criminal acts.
• Crimes against cultural heritage often occur when a
country’s treasured historical artifacts are illegally ob-
tained and often sold.
• Environmental crimes refer to a host of activities that re-
sult in the damaging of a country’s ecosystem and in-
clude various forms of air, water, and land pollution
that can also extend into other bordering countries, es-
pecially in the form of ozone depletion and acid rain
(Reichel 2002, 43–49).
International Policing
More specifically related to policing, international policing encom-
passes several activities. One is the sharing of information be-
tween nations on a particular case involving criminal activity or
for the purpose of crime data collection and analysis. In addition,
surveillance activities in more than one country constitute a type
of international policing. The collaboration of two or more na-
tions in combating transnational crime—e.g., drug production
and transport across borders—is another example of interna-
tional policing. The use of liaison personnel to work between the
involved countries is a vital component to this type of policing
(Norman 1998, 93).
The Study of International and
Comparative Policing
Bayley (1999) describes four important reasons for studying
policing from an international or comparative perspective. The
first involves the potential for the exploration of other policies
and methods that can be beneficial in our own system of polic-
ing. Another reason is that a better understanding of how soci-
eties control the behavior of citizens gives greater insight into
human behavior in general, which can help explain other facets
The Study of International and Comparative Policing
75

of human reasoning and action. A third is that, from the study of
the policing structures of other nations, information is extracted
that can be used to inform and promote successful reform where
such change is needed. The final benefit to a cross-national analy-
sis of police systems is a better understanding of ourselves in re-
lation to those of other cultures. Therefore, international study
supplies not only greater insight into social-psychological as-
pects of policing and also a blueprint for practical policy change
and implementation (Bayley 1999, 3–12).
Studying criminal justice and specifically policing, from both
international and comparative perspectives, is important in our
changing world. Comparative criminal justice helps us understand
which policing measures are effective and which ones are not, pro-
vided appropriate research methods are used. Also, in a world that
is becoming increasingly connected due to global media, travel,
and communications—especially due to the recent concerns re-
lated to terrorism—understanding and dealing with the criminal
justice systems of other nations in an international context are no
longer a luxury for police agencies; they’re a necessity.
No single international police agency discharges police duties
throughout the world. A small number of organizations exist,
however, to assist a group of member nations in matters involving
law enforcement and investigation or crime. Interpol, Europol, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and the Schengen
Agreement all represent attempts to create an international or re-
gional policing framework.
Interpol
The agency Interpol, which is a shortened version of its true
name—International Criminal Police Organization—is the
largest organization with a global policing function. It does not
provide direct police services, but it assists in the investigation of
criminal activity by facilitating the exchange of information
among its 184 member nations. Interpol adheres to measures that
ensure respect for the cultural differences among its members
(Norman 1998, 96). Interpol, headquartered in France, is the
largest law enforcement organization in the world. Its member
nations enjoy facilitation and coordination of police services, as
well as the cooperation of policing agencies around the world.
The agency’s precursor, the International Criminal Police
Commission (ICPC), was formed in 1923 and headquartered in
76
Worldwide Perspective

Vienna, Austria. This agency was disbanded in 1945 but was
reestablished and stationed in Paris in 1946 by five pioneer police
officers. In 1956, the organization became known as the Interna-
tional Criminal Police Organization, later shortened to Interpol
and a constitution was established.
Interpol’s three major functions are (1) facilitating police
communication throughout the world, (2) providing data access
regarding criminal activity on an international basis, and (3) sup-
plying field support services for policing organizations. The
agency has established a global police communication system
called the I-24/7 program that links the agency’s General Secre-
tariat in France to the member nations’ National Central Bureaus
(NCBs). Information on people suspected of terrorist involve-
ment, perpetrators of child sexual abuse, and items determined
to have been stolen are provided to the NSBs through a number
of databases. Other information available through the database
includes crime trend data and training in criminal justice
methodology.
A unit whose function is to provide public safety against
threats to individuals and nations, such as bioterrorism, aviation
and maritime crime, and weapons of mass destruction, is also op-
erated by the organization. The agency operates an antiterrorist
unit, called the Fusion Task Force, that coordinates and distributes
information on suspected terrorist actions. In addition, another
unit, called the Command and Coordination Center (CCC), inves-
tigates fugitive activity, terrorism, organized crime, drug traffick-
ing, financial crimes, and crimes involving advanced technology.
In case of a terrorist attack or natural disaster, the CCC works in
conjunction with the agency’s Crisis Support Group to assist in
rescue and victim identification tasks. In addition to involvement
with these crimes, termed “priority crimes,” Interpol also provides
NCB support for nonpriority crimes such as genocide, war crimes,
human rights violations, environmental crime, and police corrup-
tion (Interpol 2006).
Europol
Based in The Hague, Netherlands, Europol is a law enforcement
organization for the nations in the European Union, similar to In-
terpol, but it is operated on a regional basis. It is a clearinghouse
for information on matters involving criminal activity and terror-
ism, and it focuses on investigating organized crime syndicates.
The Study of International and Comparative Policing
77

The organization was formed during the Maastricht Treaty
in 1992 and began operations on a limited basis in 1994. The new
agency was known as the Europol Drugs Unit because the origi-
nal mission was to combat drugs. In 1999, Europol became fully
operational, and in 2002 it expanded its reach into matters of in-
ternational crime.
Europol’s mandate consists of supporting the member states
in matters concerning drug trafficking, illegal immigration rings,
terrorist activity, forgery and counterfeiting, human trafficking,
vehicle trafficking, cyber crime, and other types of financial and
organized crime. The agency operates a computerized system that
allows the flow of information on matters of criminal interest to
member nations as well as indexing and providing an analysis of
the data (Europol 2006). As with Interpol, Europol does not have
a single police agency with police powers but operates a system
to facilitate cooperation and coordination among the contributing
nations (Reichel 2002, 181).
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
The United Nations also has a program that deals with policing
in an international format. The United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC), previously known as the United Nations
Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention (UNODCCP), is
the arm of the United Nations that is mandated with combating
illicit drugs, terrorism, and other criminal activity. Vienna, Aus-
tria, is the headquarters of the program, and there are twenty-one
field offices around the world, including a liaison office in New
York. Approximately five hundred countries are affiliated with
the international agency. The member nations create drug control
policies that are responsive to their individual needs.
The United Nations, which supports many international
programs to alleviate social suffering, created the Office on
Drugs and Crime to facilitate coordination and to create a bal-
anced approach to drug control and the resulting criminal ac-
tivity. Toward that end, it enacts policies that prevent the
production and trafficking of drugs and supports programs that
aid in the prevention of drug use and the treatment for those
who are addicted.
The UNODC has three major goals: (1) research and analysis
of substance abuse issues; (2) the promotion of treaties and legis-
lation to thwart drug activity, crime, and terrorism; and (3) coop-
78
Worldwide Perspective

eration among member nations through field-based drug en-
forcement projects.
The UNODC has a Global Program for Trafficking in Human
Beings to stem the rapidly growing problems of trafficking in peo-
ple for use in prostitution, slave labor, and the sex industry. The
agency’s Global Program against Transnational Crime provides
member nations information, data, training, and strategies to
fight organized transnational crime. A program aimed at sup-
pressing corruption in governments and political organizations,
the Global Program against Corruption assists members by im-
plementing watchdog strategies. To combat the growing concerns
over terrorism, the agency’s Global Program against Terrorism as-
sists members in enacting legislative policies designed to prevent
and suppress terrorist activity. In addition, the Legal Advisory
Program provides member states assistance in creating legal and
structural components for antidrug, antiterrorism, and antiorga-
nized crime programs (United Nations 2006).
Schengen Agreement
Another attempt at transnational cooperation for crime preven-
tion and control is the Amsterdam Treaty, often called the Schen-
gen Agreement after the city in Luxembourg where the treaty was
signed. In 1985, the European nations of Belgium, France, Ger-
many, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands entered into an agree-
ment that allowed for external, rather than internal, border checks
of people moving about the member nations. It provided a series
of rules governing transport between these nations and stipulated
the legal functions of the police regarding the movement of peo-
ple across borders. It also created a system of extradition that pro-
moted better cooperation among member countries on matters of
extradition of offenders who cross borders and their subsequent
prosecution. The cornerstone of the agreement, however, is the
computerized system of crime data exchange that allows member
nations greater control over the information than was possible
through Interpol. The only members of the European Union that
are not part of the Schengen Agreement are the United Kingdom
and Ireland, who maintain their own border control systems. Na-
tions other than those in the European Union, such as Norway
and Iceland, are currently also linked to the agreement, which is
now part of the legal and structural system of the Union (Reichel
2002, 182–183).
The Study of International and Comparative Policing
79

Policing Systems in Other Countries
Australia
Australia has a history of military-style policing beginning with
the earliest force of marines that arrived from England in 1788
and that were sent to control the population of inmates trans-
ported to the island to serve their sentences. The early marine
force begrudgingly adopted the police role and subsequently
committed a number of acts of misconduct. They were replaced
in 1795 by the Rum Corps, so named for their role in the illegal
smuggling of alcohol. Police in this penal colony were exconvicts
themselves who imposed heavy punitive control over the popu-
lation. This country, with its vast frontier and convict inhabitants,
mostly consisting of transported British and Irish inmates (Swan-
ton, Hannigan, and Biles 1989, 11), experienced an increase in
crime in the nineteenth century when gold was discovered. A
more professional police force was formed in the mid-nineteenth
century; however, conflicts between the police and community
were common, especially in reference to labor strikes and cor-
ruption related to the enforcement of vice laws (Prenzler and
Sarre 2002, 59).
Most of Australia’s current police are federal forces. The
Australian Federal Force is charged with the enforcement of fed-
eral laws such as certain types of fraud and drug trafficking, as
well as contracting out standard police services to other jurisdic-
tions in the Commonwealth (Prenzler and Sarre 2002, 53). A
major feature of policing in the nation is the practice of single po-
lice departments’ providing services to both urban and rural
areas. Recruits normally begin their employment in the metro-
politan regions and, as they gain experience, move to the rural
sections of the country (Swanton, Hannigan, and Biles 1989, 13).
The early forms of policing in the country involved a large
number of diverse duties, many of these (e.g., inspection of
slaughterhouses, collection of various statistics, registering births)
were outside of what one normally considers police duties. There
has been a recent shift toward more specialized duties; however,
the police on patrol normally tend to matters that will not result
in criminal prosecution—a duty normally reserved for investiga-
tors. Private security agencies are popular in Australia, as well as
the privatization of many service-related functions, causing con-
80
Worldwide Perspective

cern for some that the country might institute a system of priva-
tized police; this is probably an unfounded concern because basic
law enforcement duties will likely remain with the public agen-
cies (Prenzler and Sarre, 2002, 53–58).
Australia has traditionally used crime prevention methods in
policing; however, the official response to crime until recently has
been one primarily of crime fighting. Since the late 1980s, a num-
ber of specific crime prevention techniques have been in place,
but the focus has been on the community dealing with problems
related to crime. Standard police–community collaborations, such
as a variety of “watch” programs and target-hardening initiatives,
make up much of Australia’s prevention programs (Cameron and
Laycock 2002, 319–322).
Police commissioners, who individually determine their
agency’s command structures, head the state and territorial po-
lice agencies. In Australia, there is a marked distinction in status
between commissioned officers, who are appointed by their state
or territorial executive councils, and the noncommissioned offi-
cers, who are selected by the police commissioners (Swanton,
Hannigan, and Biles 1989, 14).
Due to Australia’s size, there are numerous police depart-
ments throughout the country with as few as one officer in rural
areas to numerous officers in the metropolitan forces. This is sim-
ilar to the variations in force sizes in the United States. In addition,
the duties of officers in the small agencies encompass many activ-
ities. Australia’s police forces are unique in that they are only
state-based or terrority-based and single departments are often re-
sponsible for policing in both rural and urban areas. Communica-
tion is often poor between patrol officers and detectives, and this
causes discontinuities in investigating crime. Relative to other na-
tions, Australia’s command structure has a smaller number of ad-
ministrative and managerial levels—this creates a veteran crew of
police managers but little incentive for lower-level officers to ad-
vance in the profession (Swanton, Hannigan, and Biles 1989,
13–15).
Australian police have had some problems in recent years
regarding reports of misconduct (Reichel 2002, 177). In 1996, the
federal police force was the focus of numerous allegations of se-
rious misbehavior, such as corruption, drug trafficking, and child
pornography, that resulted in incidents of insider whistle blow-
ing and investigative committees.
Policing Systems in Other Countries
81

Canada
Canada’s present system of policing is highly decentralized 
with three levels of law enforcement—federal, provincial, and
municipal—that are controlled by administrative structures at
each level. Most people are familiar with the Royal Canadian
Mounties, the federal force that is often compared to America’s
Federal Bureau of Investigation, but a number of other agencies
exist in the country (Reichel 2002, 165–174).
Canada’s early police forces mirrored those of Britain; con-
stables provided police duties and were initially appointed by
magistrates and later by police boards. After the Dominion of
Canada was established (1867), a national police agency, the Do-
minion Police Force, was created to protect government build-
ings and to combat counterfeiting. A paramilitary styled police
agency, known as the North-West Mounted Police, was formed to
control the criminal activities of people on the frontier. This po-
lice agency merged with the Dominion Police Force in 1920 and
became known as the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, the most
famed of all Canadian forces (Terrill 2003, 123–124). The Moun-
ties, as they are commonly called, have maintained close rela-
tionships with the Federal Bureau of Investigation in the United
States due to the large number of people who flee to Canada to
avoid capture and prosecution (Kurian 1989a, 51).
In Canada, police in the provincial and municipal areas may
create their own forces or enter into a contract with the Royal
Canadian Mounted Police. This unique format differs markedly
from the shared governance between the state and municipalities
in England and the fragmented system in the United States (Ter-
rill 2003, 125).
At the top of the police hierarchy is the Solicitor General of
Canada, who is a cabinet member of Parliament and a person
who yields considerable power over the federal criminal justice
agencies. This position provides direct supervision over the
Canadian Security Intelligence Service, which is responsible for
national security and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, the
sole national policing agency in the country. Most of the
provinces have contracts with the Mounted Police; only Ontario
and Quebec have their own provincial forces, which are headed
by commissioners. Of the six hundred municipal police depart-
ments in the country, two hundred contract with the national
agency while the others are independent; these forces have re-
82
Worldwide Perspective

cently banded together to create regional forces to control costs
and to become more efficient (Terrill 2003, 125–130).
While all police officers in Canada start out as uniformed pa-
trol officers, as in the United States and England, recruitment and
training standards are different among the national, provincial,
and local agencies. Courses for technical training and management
are offered in various academies, including regional programs
(Terrill 2003, 134–135). New recruits are assigned to departments
throughout the country except for the Northwest, where assign-
ment is voluntary (Kurian 1989a, 56).
Canadian police have embraced a community-focused crime
prevention model of policing. Local police mini stations and foot
patrols are being increasingly used in the country. Special efforts
are being made to deal with some of the police–community con-
flicts, especially those involving the nation’s minority aboriginal
people; community forums, youth summer programs, suicide
prevention programs, and police recruitment programs are being
used to reach out to this population (Terrill 2003, 127–133).
Perhaps the unique feature of Canada’s police is the contract
system. Eight of the country’s ten provinces contract with the
Mounties and, borne of a need to monitor governmental expendi-
tures, it has proven to be a cost-effective system. Under the con-
tracting system, local agencies spend a reasonable fee to the federal
government, and in turn receive a highly organized force that has
proven to be effective in controlling Canada’s crime (Reichel 2002,
172–173).
China
China has a written history of almost 4,000 years, making it one of
the world’s oldest civilizations. It has a long history of autocratic
rule and has been under a communist political and economic struc-
ture since 1949; from that time until 1978, China adopted an isola-
tionist stance. In recent years, however, the country’s potential to
be a major force in world affairs has become evident (Terrill 2003,
549–551). Its unique past and culture have influenced China’s sys-
tem of social control.
The country’s civil war (1945–1949), fought by the National-
ist Party (the Kuomintang) and the Chinese Communist Party, re-
sulted in a regimented form of policing. These two groups were
given the task of policing the nation during this struggle: Public
security forces policed the base areas; the militia groups were
Policing Systems in Other Countries
83

responsible for the Communist-controlled border areas; and the
People’s Liberation Army (the military arm of the Communist
government) was also used to maintain control. The Communists
won the war and took control in 1949. A few years of instability
gave way to a relatively calm period (regarding crime control)
from the mid-1950s to the mid-1960s. When the Cultural Revolu-
tion took place from 1966 to 1976, ruler Mao Zedong encouraged
a group of young activists called the Red Guard to engage in cul-
tural and political revolution. The activists attacked the police
and their headquarters, and the People’s Liberation Army used
their military might to maintain order. Upon Mao’s death in 1976,
Deng Xiaoping became the country’s new ruler. Xiaoping took
steps to modernize the county through interactions with the
West. He also instituted modern police practices and made the
police more accountable to the public. A viable police force was
needed during this period due to changes in the economic struc-
ture that caused an increase in crime rates.
Current Chinese policing is defined by its three distinct ele-
ments: the Party Line, the Mass Line, and the Prevention Line.
The Party Line, with its roots in both Confucianism and Com-
munist Party tradition, emphasizes a system of policing based on
moral and ethical behavior and the responsibility of police as
providing a role model. The Mass Line is consistent with the
Party philosophy and positions the police on an egalitarian level
with citizens; this reflects the Communist desire for a classless so-
ciety. The Prevention Line stresses the police role as one of crime
prevention with a high level of community involvement.
Tanner (2005, 171–172) describes a controversial style of
policing in China known as campaign-style policing. This in-
volves a fixed-term targeting of special types of crimes, along
with aggressive and punitive enforcement of these crimes. The
campaign style results in rapid arrests of large numbers of of-
fenders, followed by swift and severe legal sanctions. Due to the
large amount of citizen involvement in this type of law enforce-
ment, the Mass Line form of policing characterizes campaign-
style policing.
The police structure in China is divided into five adminis-
trative organizations: (1) public security, (2) state security, (3) the
judicial police serving the people’s courts, (4) the judicial police
serving the procurator, and (5) the police serving the country’s
prisons. A minister of public security, who oversees the adminis-
84
Worldwide Perspective

trative and operational divisions of a large force that provides pa-
trol duties, investigations, security, traffic duties, specialized du-
ties, and fire control, also heads the public security force. The
state security police primarily combat governmental crimes such
as espionage, conspiracy, and sabotage. The judicial police are se-
curity agents for the courts, serving papers and carrying out legal
orders, including those involving the death penalty. The police of
the prisons are correctional officers serving in the nation’s pris-
ons (Terrill 2003, 571–577).
Despite the fact that the country has historically enjoyed a
fairly close relationship between the police and the public, China
has never been known for its professional police forces (Terrill
2003, 580–585). In recent years, China has worked to improve the
professionalism of the police. Numerous colleges offer course-
work in the field of policing, and academies provide in-service
training to recruits and officers. The police have adopted strate-
gies to control the rising crime rates, traffic accidents, and in-
creasing drug-related problems.
Controlling behavior informally is part of the Chinese cul-
ture, and local committees at the neighborhood, work, and school
levels are formed to meet this end, in collaboration with the police
(Terrill 2003, 571). Police departments in China currently have
close ties to the community because community involvement is
believed to be crucial to police success (Dai 2001, 156). A number
of crime prevention measures involving citizens are being used in
the country, such as neighbor watch programs, community news-
letters, and “target hardening” strategies intended to make crimi-
nal activity more difficult. However, due to the rising crime
problem since 1978, police are using more patrolling strategies,
more punitive measures to control crime, increased efforts to
thwart gang activity, and an overall more aggressive stance since
the informal means of controlling crime appear to be inadequate
for a changing nation (Lu and Miethe 2001, 109–111). The recent
economic expansion experienced by China has contributed to the
erosion of national traditions and has promoted a more profes-
sional and scientific type of police structure (Wong 2003, 223).
England
The influence of British policing, especially the professional po-
lice model of the 1829 Metropolitan Police as developed by
Policing Systems in Other Countries
85

Robert Peel (see Chapter 1), had a major impact on policing
throughout the world and is still in evidence in England today.
The top official in the British police hierarchy is the Home
Secretary (also known by the longer title of Secretary of State for
the Home Office), who is also a member of Parliament, acting in
the capacity of a cabinet member of the prime minister. This po-
sition has many salient powers, including administrative input
on matters of police management, monetary funding, and the
formation of police standards throughout the nation’s police de-
partments. Under the Home Secretary are the chief constables
and their assistants for the forty-one provinces; the chief police
officials for the Metropolitan Police and City of London are given
the title of commissioner. Another level of authority is vested in
what are known as police authorities, a group of seventeen mem-
bers consisting of politicians, lower court judges, and others ap-
pointed by the Home Secretary, who serves in an advisory
capacity to the police forces. There are other organizations in the
English police system, such as inspectors (who assess the effec-
tiveness of the different agencies), a complaints authority (to in-
vestigate charges of police misconduct), and an intelligence
service. Also, three associations represent the police on personnel
issues; however, police officers in England cannot join unions, as
is a common practice in America (Terrill 2003, 15–22).
Recruits all begin at the rank of constable and are able to ad-
vance to positions in administration and investigation by com-
pleting training and educational courses. There is a police college
at Bramshill with a curriculum in police management, and sev-
eral scholarships exist for officers desiring to attend the country’s
institutions of higher education (Terrill 2003, 24–25). It is impera-
tive that officers are educated adequately in police work because
all officers are required to justify their behavior or acts of omis-
sion (Lamford 1989, 406).
Crime prevention has continued to occupy a major focus in
England, and strategies have been promulgated to achieve this
end. All police forces have specialized crime prevention officers
and a training academy exclusively designed for crime preven-
tion. Also, officers practice proactive focused policing in high
crime areas, especially when accompanied by neighborhood
watch programs in which citizens take responsibility for moni-
toring their communities. Another strategy is the long-term as-
signment of beat constables to particular areas (Terrill 2003, 27).
86
Worldwide Perspective

Maintaining social control is important in England, as in all
countries. The British forces do not emphasize the use of deadly
force and still choose to rely on verbal and nonverbal language to
contain potentially serious situations (McKenzie 1998, 67–71).
This is in contrast to many of the world’s police agencies, which
resort to physical force to maintain order.
Officers in England, especially the urban police, suffer from
feelings of alienation from the citizens they serve, although these
perceptions are not entirely correct; many citizens see the police
in a favorable light (Terrill 2003, 28–29). Greater criticism of the
police comes from racial and ethnic minorities, and consequently
programs have been created to bridge the gap between the police
and the public, especially young minority group members.
France
The first police force in the nation was created in Paris in the
tenth century. Following a model by the Romans, the position of
Provost of Paris was established to use military forces, as well as
watchmen and patrols, to enforce legal conditions. It was not
until the seventeenth century, however, that a professional, na-
tional police was organized. The forces, which were headed by a
position known as the Lieutenant General, were not only focused
on law enforcement but also on other quality-of-life issues, such
as fire control and street cleaning. To keep tabs on the citizenry,
the police used a complex spy network. The Lieutenant Generals
were not only the nation’s chief law enforcement agents, they
were also magistrates. After the revolution in 1791, the National
Guard, which would later be called the National Gendarmerie,
was formed. The Lieutenant General system was modified, and
the chief law enforcement officers of the ninety-six counties be-
came known as prefects who, unlike their predecessors, did not
serve as magistrates. In 1854, a detective force called the Surete,
with both uniformed and nonuniformed officers, was formed,
and in 1966 the Surete merged with the Police of Paris to create
the National Police (Terrill 2003, 211).
The present French system of policing is a national system
with two primary forces: the National Police and the gendarmerie.
The National Police force is the largest and is headed by the Min-
istry of the Interior, who has full oversight responsibility of the
agency. The Director General is accountable for organizing and
Policing Systems in Other Countries
87

coordinating police field services. The chief law enforcement offi-
cer of the counties is the prefect who is directly in charge of local
operations (Terrill 2003, 213–214).
The National Gendarmerie is the military police for the
country’s army, naval, and air force services, as well as the police
agents assigned to law enforcement duties in small towns with
populations fewer than 10,000 (Terrill 2003, 217–219). The gen-
darmerie falls under the Ministry of Defense, which is headed by
an army general, called the Inspector General. This police agency
is considered to be an elite police force, primarily due to their
military training.
There are also a small number of municipal police in France.
In an effort by former President François Mitterand, some forces
have been created that are responsible to the city mayors. These
officers have the authority only to provide patrol duties and can-
not investigate crimes or make arrests; these duties must be per-
formed by the National Police or the National Gendarmerie
(Terrill 2003, 211–219).
French police focus on both proactive and reactive measures
to control crime (Terrill 2003, 226–227). A recent push has been to
the proactive type through the use of increased beat patrols, busi-
ness security programs, and a program called tranquility vacations
in which greater patrol and observation are given to residences
during the summer months when people are on vacation.
The French police have a national system that varies dis-
tinctly from other Western systems, especially the American sys-
tem, which has a highly decentralized structure. The police in
France have strong historical connections to the judiciary and are
often viewed by the public as having court functions (Terrill
2003, 220).
In recent decades the police in France have had to deal with
rising crime rates, volatile group uprisings, juvenile delinquency,
and a growing fear of terrorist activity. The police suffered from
poor perceptions by the citizens, and relations between them
have historically been strained. As a result, police administrators
have taken measures involving police recruitment and profes-
sional training to enhance the appeal of the police to the citizens.
The police culture is similar to the political culture in France in
that there is an enduring love of freedom from oppression and at
the same time a belief that police power is absolute (Terrill 2003,
220–228).
88
Worldwide Perspective

India
India is a densely populated area whose inhabitants speak eigh-
teen different languages, as well as a number of regionally specific
dialects (Raghavan and Sankar 2003, 114). The diverse and
crowded nature of the country presents unique challenges for
those in the criminal justice field. The functions of the Indian police
are maintaining internal security, preserving order, social control,
defense, social welfare, and enforcing laws through prevention and
the effective prosecution of offenders (Diaz 1989, 172).
In early times, India used a version of the watch program in
the rural areas in which a few watchmen, under the supervision
of a village headman, maintained vigilant observation over their
communities. This system, which was in place during the seven-
teenth century when the East India Company ruled the area,
even had a provision to pay possible invaders a fee in an effort to
prevent crime. Attempts were made to change the village polic-
ing scheme that was such a traditional part of rural Indian life,
but the results were highly unsatisfactory and the former struc-
ture was resumed with minor modifications (Raghavan and
Sankar 2003, 117–118).
The early professional police forces were modeled after the
Royal Irish Constabulary in the mid-1800s after Charles Napier
conquered the area. The Indian Police Act of 1861 provided a state-
based police organized on a military structure. When India be-
came independent in 1947 and organized itself as a republic in
1950, it primarily left the British structure in place (Diaz 1989, 171).
The twenty-five states in India have police departments that
are headed by Directors General and supported by their deputies
and inspectors. The states are divided into districts that are
headed by administrators called Collectors. On a local level, po-
lice departments are supervised by Station House Officers
(Raghavan and Sankar 2003, 114).
The crime rate in India has grown considerably in recent
years, becoming a major concern for the nation’s police and citi-
zens. Given India’s long history of community involvement in its
efforts at social control, some rural communities still use a village-
policing system called Village Defense Parties. Citizen commit-
tees, crime awareness and prevention programs, neighborhood
watch programs, motorcycle patrol, and the use of the police beat
system (in which officers use foot patrol on beats and extensively
Policing Systems in Other Countries
89

interact with citizens) are all initiatives toward crime prevention
and community policing. A special challenge for India is religious-
based conflict and the resulting violence, especially between the
area’s Hindu and Muslim population; efforts like the formation of
citizen groups called the Mohalla Communities keep the police in-
formed of developing tensions so that violence can be prevented
(Raghavan and Sankar 2003, 123).
Due to the nation’s increasing industrialization and com-
merce, India has increased its use of private security policing
around residential neighborhoods. It has adopted other mea-
sures such as closed-circuit television in malls and hotels, along
with security enhancement to prevent and investigate crimes
(Raghavan and Sankar 2003, 126).
Ireland
Ireland has been an area of much internal conflict, and the role of
the police as social control agents has obviously been affected by
the national strife. The Irish police as a professional entity date
back to 1822, when provincial police departments were formed
in the country’s northern, southern, western, and middle sec-
tions. These unarmed forces merged as the Irish Constabulary in
1836, the same year the Dublin Metropolitan Police was
founded. The Irish Constabulary was renamed the Royal Irish
Constabulary in 1867. These two police agencies were consoli-
dated into the Garda Siochana (Guardians of the Peace) in 1922
when Ireland became an independent nation (Kurian 1989b,
190). Prior to the establishment of the Garda Siochana, Ireland’s
police structure was similar to the other police systems in the
United Kingdom (O’Mahony 2000, 33).
The Garda Siochana constitutes the major police agency in
Ireland and is the national police force. There are a number of
specialized bureaus and units within the national agency, such
the National Bureau of Criminal Investigation, National Drug
Unit, National Crime Prevention Unit, and the National Bureau
of Fraud Investigation. In addition to the Garda Siochana, there
are also small, specialized local police agencies that possess lim-
ited authority and power such as the airport and harbor police
(O’Mahony 2000, 39).
The national police agency is headed by a commissioner
who reports to the minister of justice, who in turn has direct su-
pervision over the police activities (O’Mahony 2000, 39) and who
90
Worldwide Perspective

is assisted by a number of deputies and other assistants (Kurian
1989b, 190). The agency’s philosophy is that control of citizen be-
havior is possible through noncoercive means; the police force is
for the most part unarmed and until recent years has been effec-
tive in operating in this manner. Rapidly changing social condi-
tions that have created increased criminal activity have caused
some vigilante groups to assume the enforcement role of the po-
lice and have created strain between police and citizens, espe-
cially in the inner cities of the country (O’Mahony 2000, 39).
The national police have instituted a number of strategies to
deal with drug abuse and other conditions that have contributed
to disorganization in Ireland’s cities. The establishment of a 
police–community liaison to deal with disgruntled citizens who
take the law into their own hands has been a recent strategy. In-
ternal problems involving employment conditions and com-
plaints of maltreatment of citizens in the 1990s have created a
challenge for the agency to repair public perception of the police
(O’Mahony 2000, 39–41).
Israel
Israel is policed by the Israeli National Police (INP), a highly cen-
tralized state agency that came into being in 1948 when the coun-
try won its independence from England (Haberfeld and Herzog
2000, 60). Prior to that, the country was policed by the Palestine
police force, operating under the Police Ordinance of 1926. The
legal regulations of Israel are derivatives of British law, Ottoman
law, and religious law (Kurian 1989c, 192).
As a national force, the police are centralized in a national
headquarters governed by the office of the Ministry of Police.
The highest authority is the inspector general, who reports di-
rectly to the ministry and who is normally a seasoned veteran in
the field of police work. The national force is divided into three
units with distinct responsibilities:
1. The patrol and training division is responsible for patrol
duties and all training programs for the police.
2. The investigative division handles criminal activity not
dealt with by the patrol and training unit.
3. The administrative section oversees personnel issues,
communication, facilities and property, and supplies
(Kurian 1989c, 192).
Policing Systems in Other Countries
91

The INP was developed from the model of the British colo-
nial police, which was a highly regulated, military-style force.
This force further adopted a structure with an authoritarian style,
forced discipline, stringent control over officer discretion, and a
recognized distance between administrative and line staff. The
headquarters of the state agency is presently located in Jerusalem
and organized into six districts and thirteen subdistricts, com-
prised of nearly seventy police departments (Haberfeld and Her-
zog 2000, 60).
One of the benefits of having a national agency is that the
force can respond very rapidly to situations that threaten na-
tional security. This is important in an area of the world with a
history of international conflict, including terrorist attacks. Units
specializing in internal security, antiterrorism, bomb response,
border control, and special patrol police the state in an attempt to
address the concerns over potential disturbance from other na-
tions or governments. While this system has been effective in this
mission, the rapid mobilization of the police in such a military
fashion also has the unintended consequence of depleting certain
areas of police resources when such an alarm is raised and offi-
cers are deployed to other areas (Haberfeld and Herzog 2000, 61).
The state police are fairly advanced in their use of techno-
logical innovation and compare favorably in this area to the na-
tions in the West. Video motion-detection devices, traffic stop
cameras, laptop-equipped patrol units, an automated fingerprint
database, and DNA technology are all used by the Israeli police
(Haberfeld and Herzog 2000, 64). The criminal identification di-
vision operates a number of laboratories that specialize in ballis-
tics, forensic medicine, fingerprint analysis, document analysis,
interrogation, and many other areas (Kurian 1989c, 194).
Since 1994, the INP has adopted community-oriented polic-
ing strategies (Haberfeld and Herzog 2000, 62). That year, a police
unit called the Community Policing Unit (CPU) was established
to institute community policing in the nation. The CPU trains its
officers in community policing techniques and models and in
crime prevention strategies, and it assists with program assess-
ment. The CPU has instituted mini police stations in less popu-
lated neighborhoods and service centers in larger stations that
provide many police services in one location. Allegations of offi-
cer brutality in Israel has prompted police administration to take
action in recent years, such as the formation of commissions in-
92
Worldwide Perspective

vestigating police misconduct, to improve the stature of the local
police, which has been worsened by media portrayal.
Japan
The police in Japan enjoy a lower crime rate than many other na-
tions (Terrill 2003, 387). This has changed since 1991, however, as
crime has increased somewhat. Of special concern is the rise of
crimes of violence, which are more and more the result of orga-
nized crime in the country, and crimes involving illicit drugs.
Even though the crime rate is growing, it is still relatively low
and not a concern as in other areas.
Cultural aspects have an effect on national crime and the re-
sponse to it. The Japanese have a tendency to define delinquency
not as evil but as a condition in which individuals break from the
culturally valued constraints of conformity. Therefore the response
to crime is often less punitive than in many other nations (Terrill
2003, 373–375). The police are an integral part of the overall crimi-
nal justice system in Japan and have a unique policing style.
The Japanese model of policing has evolved through the
years in a similar fashion to that of police systems in Europe, al-
ternating between centralized and decentralized forms of admin-
istration (Terrill 2003, 377–381). The current system is based on
the Police Law of 1954, although it has gone through other mod-
ifications since that time and maintains a very centralized focus
through the establishment of a National Police Agency. Although
it has a centralized agency, individual police forces, called pre-
fectures, are scattered throughout the nation.
The bureaucratic structure of the National Police Agency con-
sists of the Prime Minister at the top, who supervises the National
Public Safety Commission, a group of six appointed members who
serve five-year terms. This agency is given the administrative re-
sponsibilities of law enforcement budgetary oversight, police op-
erations and training, traffic control, crime and offender data, and
national disasters (Terrill 2003, 382–385).
The next level in the administrative structure is occupied by
the National Police Agency, which directly supervises the prefec-
tural forces located throughout the country as well as the Na-
tional Institute of Police Science, the National Police Academy,
and the Imperial Guard. The national agency is headed by a com-
missioner general and divided into five bureaus that oversee the
Policing Systems in Other Countries
93

administrative, investigative, traffic, and general law enforce-
ment functions of the organization. In addition, district offices
coordinate training and communications functions in different
regions of the country.
The prefectural police comprise the next level and maintain
some level of autonomy over the geographic areas they serve.
The head of the prefecture is a governor, although a public safety
commissioner who reports directly to the governor provides di-
rect oversight of the prefecture. The exception to this structure is
the Metropolitan Police Force of Tokyo, which is supervised by a
superintendent general, along with directors who supervise dif-
ferent units.
An interesting feature of the Japanese system is the use of
small mini police stations in the prefectures (Terrill 2003, 392).
The mini units, called koban are operated by a few officers on ro-
tating shifts. Some rural areas have only one-officer units and are
referred to as chuzaisho. The citizens who work in concert with
them in crime prevention programs view the officers in these
small police offices in a positive manner.
Japanese police carry weapons but only while on active duty;
at all other times the weapons are stored at the police office. The
rate of firearms use by officers is very low compared to the United
States, and the preferred method of controlling offenders is
through the use of nonlethal technology. Also low in relation to
their American counterparts is Japanese police misconduct, in-
cluding the use of excessive force. However, the Japanese police
have been under scrutiny by human rights groups for instituting
harsh law enforcement measures, particularly involving warrant-
less arrests and overly aggressive interrogation tactics of suspects,
who are often denied the right to counsel until after indictment.
Also, the police are allowed to hold suspects for questioning for
up to twenty-three days and can hold them longer if additional
charges are brought. Opponents of these measures complain that
police are given additional time to work on extracting confessions
rather than on pursuing other avenues of investigation (Terrill
2003, 387–390).
Mexico
Mexico has long been perceived as possessing one of the world’s
most corrupt police forces with the levels of corruption pervad-
ing the ranks. A major challenge of the nation has been to counter
94
Worldwide Perspective

this perception and to make the police more accountable and pro-
fessional (Reichel 2002, 73).
In its organizational structure, the Mexican police organiza-
tion has federal, state, and municipal systems, with overlapping
jurisdictional levels (Kurian 1989d, 258). The federal system has
as its primary agency the Federal Judicial Police (Policia Judicial
Federal) that has single departments in the larger cities and re-
gional officers for the rural areas. A director who supervises the
commanders of the thirty-one states heads the Federal Judicial
Police.
The state agencies operate in a variety of different structures,
but a common organizational form has state police agencies di-
vided into the State Judicial Police (Policia Judicial Estatal) and
the Public Safety Police. The preventative police department, a di-
vision of the Public Safety Police, has two subdivisions: the tran-
sit police, who handle traffic-related crimes and traffic control,
and the metropolitan police, who deal with crime control and the
investigation of both minor and major crimes. The investigation
of major offenses by the metropolitan police is then turned over to
the State Judicial Police director (Reichel 2002, 174–176).
Combating drug trafficking has been an ongoing challenge
for Mexican authorities. In addition to conventional enforcement
strategies, the nation has adopted a holistic approach involving a
crime prevention component that deals not only with the crime
of drug trafficking but also with the sociological, psychological,
medical, toxicological, fiscal, and other related issues. The com-
munity is involved through campaigns and others efforts to edu-
cate the citizens on the danger of drugs and to direct the activities
of youth to more prosocial activities (Talboado 2003, 195–206).
As noted earlier, many of the police forces in Mexico have
gained notoriety for corruption, brutality, and criminal activity in
recent years. In 2000, the country’s then newly elected president
vowed to institute changes in the country’s police through the re-
structuring of departments and breaking of political ties in order
to professionalize the nation’s police (Reichel 2002, 176).
There have been recently instituted reforms at the federal
level. One is the 2001 establishment under the presidency of Vi-
cente Fox of a new national investigative unit called the Agencia
Federal de Investigaciones (Federal Agency of Investigation),
which replaces the corrupt Policia Judicial Federal (Federal Judi-
cial Police), Another is the creation of the Policia Federal Preven-
tiva (Federal Preventative Police) in 1999 under President Ernesto
Policing Systems in Other Countries
95

Zedillo, which assumes the control of crime throughout the coun-
try. Finally, the Secretaria de Seguridad Publica del Distrito Fed-
eral (Secretariat of Public Security of the Federal District) is
charged with controlling crime in Mexico City, an area that has the
nation’s highest crime rate (Reames 2003, 2).
Russia
In 1917, Russia embarked on an attempt to establish a communist
society, but by the late 1980s citizen dissatisfaction with the earlier
Soviet form of government culminated in the dissolution of the
system in 1991. Russia is now highly industrialized, although
technologically it stills lags behind other nations. It is a nation rich
in natural resources and inhabited by a people loyal to their coun-
try (Terrill 2003, 441–443). With a long history of citizen repres-
sion, Russian has experienced an evolving system of policing.
Russia has a long history of violently oppressive police forces.
Under the leadership of Ivan the Terrible, a force known as the
Oprichnina was formed around the mid-sixteenth century that
was well-known for its terrorist activities. Other rulers maintained
similarly distinctive police forces, and by 1917 the police agency
known as Cheka used executions to promote the cause of the new
Communist Party; the Cheka was disbanded in 1922. Astate police
force known as the Committee for State Security (better known to
Westerners as the KGB) was formed by Communist Party leaders
in 1954. The agency used espionage, subversion, and terrorism to
promote communist ideology across the globe. The agency was
disbanded in 1991 when the Soviet Union collapsed and the new
Russian Federation was founded (Terrill 2003, 457–464).
Another police force used in Russia during the Soviet years
was the militia. This group provided law enforcement and order
maintenance for the new government and also performed inves-
tigations, intervened in economic and technical crime, monitored
citizen movement, and provided driver education. When the So-
viet Union was disbanded, the militia groups remained and a
new focus on controlling street crime was instituted (Terrill 2003,
464–467).
Another type of police in Soviet Russia consisted of ancillary
forces of volunteer citizens whose purpose was to protect prop-
erty, defend the nation, and maintain stability. Workers, farmers,
and young people often volunteered for this service but interest
96
Worldwide Perspective

waned for this program even before the dismantling (Terrill 2003,
467–468).
The oppressive strategies of the police under the Soviet
Union have changed under the new regime, though understand-
ably citizens remain skeptical of the police. A large number of of-
ficers were dismissed from employment in the 1980s due to a
massive exposure of police corruption that resulted in a campaign
for restructuring. High crime rates, economic problems, and a
changing police force will determine how effective Russia can
maintain order under its new government.
Sweden
Sweden has traditionally had a devotion to social welfare pro-
grams, and this emphasis on a nationalized system is reflected in
its police structure. Its historical emphasis has been on neutrality
in military matters, which has allowed time to focus on domestic
issues (Terrill 2003, 287–289). Therefore, much time and effort
have been given to instituting crime prevention practices and to
social work methods in its police forces.
The policing system in Sweden prior to the mid-nineteenth
century was similar to those of many other European nations—
characterized by disorganization and decentralization (Terrill
2003, 300–303). Watchmen, constables, firefighters, and military
forces served municipalities at various times. This changed as the
century progressed and officers were responsible for investigating
and prosecuting minor offenses. Specialized units were formed
and professionalism among the ranks became a priority. It wasn’t
until 1965 that the idea of nationalizing the police, which had al-
ready been considered for decades, became a reality.
The Ministry of Justice is at the top of the police hierarchy in
Sweden and is part of the national cabinet. The person occupying
the justice minister position is a civilian with much power over
basic police administration. The primary unit that governs direct
police policy is the National Police Board, which includes a com-
mittee headed by a commissioner, a deputy, and eight members.
Also, specialized forces have a host of functions including drug
traffic enforcement, corruption investigation, forensic investiga-
tion, and international crime control. Counties separate the
twenty-one local police districts, but the National Police Board is
responsible for police functions in them (Terrill 2003, 303–305).
Policing Systems in Other Countries
97

Historically, Sweden has been a long-time proponent of crime
prevention in policing. Beat patrol officers have been used since
1959, and neighborhood police stations, used in many towns, have
proven to be successful. Other local programs and legislation as
well have provided evidence of a local crime prevention program:
for example, a six-hour temporary detention for anyone consid-
ered an immediate danger to the public; an Operation Identifica-
tion system using a number given to each citizen at birth; and
random roadside sobriety checks, in effect in Sweden for a number
of years. Since 1996, Sweden has instituted a national program for
crime prevention, recognizing that the government is ultimately
responsible for crime control, that the underlying cause of crime
must be addressed, that a local approach to crime control is the
most effective, and that citizens must also be involved in crime
prevention. The social police reflect an attempt by police agencies
to mix social work aspects with police work, especially with juve-
nile offenders (Terrill 2003, 308–313).
On a national level, Sweden became involved in a crime pre-
vention program in 1996 with four core values:
1. The government has the ultimate responsibility for
crime prevention.
2. Crime policy should include measures that explore the
social problems leading to crime.
3. Attempts to attack criminogenic factors should be used
at the local level.
4. Strategies to prevent crime should include citizen in-
volvement (Terrill 2003, 312).
An Overview of 
World Policing Systems
As the previous review of world policing systems shows, there is
a marked difference in the ways that nations carry out the func-
tions and duties of the police. An understanding of these varia-
tions, especially in relation to the American system, is important.
A review of these differences can benefit students of the criminal
justice system, particularly students of policing.
98
Worldwide Perspective

The United States has more separate police forces than any
other nation in the world. It is such a highly fragmented and de-
centralized system that even counting the number of individual
forces is problematic. The Federal Bureau of Investigation lists the
number of municipal police personnel at around 580,749 (with ap-
proximately 451,737 sworn officers) and sheriffs’ departments
personnel at around 330,274 (with approximately 174,251 sworn
officers). The FBI also lists the number of federal officers with po-
lice powers as approximately 106,354 (Bureau of Statistics 2006).
However, it is obvious that determining the exact number of
agencies (including federal, state, county, city, private security,
campus, and a host of specialized forces) is a very difficult task.
Harper (2005) notes that counting the various police forces is
a demanding and frustrating endeavor, commenting that, if a
business is likewise unable to count all of its departments, it will
surely fail. The American system has federal, state, county, and
municipal agencies and a large number of specialty forces that
often overlap by geographic jurisdiction (e.g., municipalities are
located in counties, counties are located in states, states are lo-
cated in the nation), and this overlap routinely causes conflict in
the areas of police law enforcement and investigation. The com-
plex arrangement in American policing has been described by
Lab and Das (2003) as “easily the most extreme case of a decen-
tralized multiple uncoordinated system” (171). Thus, although
this fragmented system is the case in the United States, it varies
greatly from those in other countries.
If the United States is an extreme example of decentraliza-
tion of its police agencies, many other countries are examples of
a centralized system. Whereas Mexico’s decentralized police
structure resembles that of America to some degree, the struc-
tures of the French and Swedish forces are highly decentralized.
Many nations have a national police in addition to other police
forces, but most do not have the overlapping levels of authority
characteristic of the United States system.
Every nation has a political and social history that has af-
fected the structure of its police force. Revolutions, wars, inva-
sions, and changes in political and economic organization have
produced systems of social control that have evolved as needed.
Also, cultural aspects reveal changes in police structure. In the
United States, the so-called rugged individualism and fear of ex-
cessive government intrusion among the citizenry are certainly at
An Overview of World Policing Systems
99

least partially responsible for the nation’s unique system of sepa-
rate and disjointed agencies. In addition, the division of labor that
is so highly valued in America puts the onus of social control on
the police, bestowing responsibility on this specialized profession.
This is in contrast to the systems of many nations (notably Asian
countries) that value social cohesion and possess a desire to assist
in the social control of individuals rather than to leave the re-
sponsibility to a group of people whose occupation is to control
deviant behavior.
As nations industrialize, crime rates tend to rise and create
new challenges for the police. And, as the world becomes more
of a global community and countries become more aware of the
activities of others, police forces may tend to become similar. It
is also likely that criminal patterns will also become more simi-
lar. By taking new ideas and adapting them to fit into a nation’s
cultural identity and other factors, police systems throughout
the world can possibly become more effective in controlling
crime.
References
Bayley, David. 1999. “The World Stage.” In Policing Across the World:
Issues for the Twenty-first Century. Edited by R. I. Mawby. London:
University College London Press.
Bureau of Justice Statistics. 2006. Available at http://www.ojp.usdoj
.gov/bjs. Accessed March 2, 2007.
Cameron, Margaret, and Gloria Laycock. 2002. “Crime Prevention in
Australia.” In The Cambridge Handbook of Australian Criminology. Edited
by Adam Grayear and Peter Grabosky. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Dai, Yisheng. 2001. “New Directions in Chinese Policing in the Reform
Era.” In Crime and Social Control in a Changing China. Edited by
Jianhong Lui, Lening Zhang, and Steven Messner. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press.
Diaz, S. M. 1989. “India.” In World Encyclopedia of Police Forces and Penal
Systems. Edited by George Thomas Kurian. New York: Facts on File.
Ebbe, Obi N. Ignatius. 1996 (2000). “The Purpose of Comparative and
International Criminal Justice Systems.” In Comparative and
International Criminal Justice Systems: Policing, Judiciary, and Corrections.
Edited by O. N. I. Ebbe. Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann.
100
Worldwide Perspective

Europol. 2006. “Fact Sheet on Europol.” Available at: http://www
.europol.eu.int/index.asp?page=facts. Accessed March 2, 2007.
Haberfeld, Maria, and Sergio Herzog. 2000. “The Criminal Justice
System in Israel.” In Comparative and International Criminal Justice
Systems: Policing, Judiciary, and Corrections. Edited by O. N. I. Ebbe.
Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Harper, Hill. 2005. “Counting Police Agencies Is Hard to Do.” Paper
presented at the annual meeting of the Criminal Justice Association of
Georgia, Savannah, Georgia.
Interpol. 2006. “About Interpol.” Available at: http://www.interpol
.int./public/icpo/default.asp. Accessed March 2, 2007.
Kurian, George Thomas. 1989a. “Canada.” In World Encyclopedia of
Police Forces and Penal Systems. Edited by George Thomas Kurian. New
York: Facts on File.
Kurian, George Thomas. 1989b. “Ireland.” In World Encyclopedia of
Police Forces and Penal Systems. Edited by George Thomas Kurian. New
York: Facts on File.
Kurian, George Thomas. 1989c. “Israel.” In World Encyclopedia of Police
Forces and Penal Systems. Edited by George Thomas Kurian. New York:
Facts on File.
Kurian, George Thomas. 1989d. “Mexico.” In World Encyclopedia of
Police Forces and Penal Systems. Edited by George Thomas Kurian. New
York: Facts on File.
Lab, Steven P., and Dilip K. Das, eds. 2003. International Perspectives on
Community Policing and Crime Prevention. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Lamford, T. G. 1989. “United Kingdom.” In World Encyclopedia of Police
Forces and Penal Systems. Edited by George Thomas Kurian. New York:
Facts on File.
Lu, Hong, and Terance E. Miethe. 2001. “Community Integration and
the Effectiveness of Social Control.” In Crime and Social Control in a
Changing China. Edited by Jianhong Lui, Lening Zhang, and Steven F.
Messner. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
McKenzie, Ian K. 1998. “Policing in England and Wales.” In Law, Power,
and Justice in England and Wales. Edited by I. McKenzie. Westport, CT:
Praeger.
Norman, Paul. 1998. “The European Dimension.” In Law, Power and
Justice in England and Wales. Edited by I. McKenzie. Westport, CT: Praeger.
O’Mahoney, Paul Douglas. 2000. “The Criminal Justice System in
Ireland.” In Comparative and International Criminal Justice Systems.
References
101

Prenzler, Tim, and Rick Sarre. 2002. “The Policing Complex.” In The
Cambridge Handbook of Australian Criminology. Edited by Adam Grayear
and Peter Grabosky. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Raghavan, R. K., and A. Shiva Sankar. 2003. “A Community Policing
Approach to Crime Prevention: The Case of India.” In International
Perspectives on Community Policing and Crime Preventions. Edited by
Steven P. Lab and Dilip K. Das. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Reames, Benjamin. 2003. “Police Forces in Mexico: A Profile.” Center
for U.S. Mexican Studies. Available at: http://www.repositories.cdlib
.org/usmex/prajm/reames. Accessed April 16, 2007.
Reichel, Phillip L. 2002. Comparative Criminal Justice Systems: A Topical
Approach, 3rd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Smith, Ken. 1979. Australia. New York: Mayflower Books.
Swanton, Bruce, Garry Hannigan, and David Biles. 1989. “Australia.”
In World Encyclopedia of Police Forces and Penal Systems. Edited by
George Thomas Kurian. New York: Facts on File.
Talboado, Walter Beller. 2003. “Crime Prevention Policies and Civic
Morals in Mexico.” In International Perspectives on Community Policing
and Crime Prevention. Edited by Steven P. Lab and Dilip K. Das. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Tanner, Murray Scott. 2005. “Campaign-style Policing in China and Its
Critics.” In Crime, Punishment, and Policing in China. Edited by Borge
Bakken. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Terrill, Richard J. 2003. World Criminal Justice Systems: A Survey, 5th ed.
Cincinnati, OH: Anderson Publishing Co.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. 2006. News page.
Available at: http://www.unodc.org. Accessed March 2, 2007.
U.S. Bureau of Justice. 2006. “Bureau of Justice Statistics.” Available at:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/. Accessed March 2, 2007.
Wong, Kam. 2003. “Crime Prevention in China: A Community Policing
Approach.” In International Perspectives on Community Policing and
Crime Prevention. Edited by Steven P. Lab and Dilip K. Das. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
102
Worldwide Perspective

4
Chronology
T
his chapter provides a chronology of the major events that
have influenced policing practices in America. It shows the
evolution of ideas and associated law enforcement measures
that have emerged in an effort to control crime. Although much
of this information is presented elsewhere in the book, especially
in Chapter 1, a chronology provides the sequential context for
these events.
1780 BCE In Babylonia, the codified laws of King Hammurabi
define criminal violations and punishments. The
laws, which are preserved in basalt, are based on lex
talionis, the idea that punishment for crime should be
retaliation in kind; for example, if person steals, his
hand might be cut off, or if she lies, her tongue might
be taken out. The regulations in the code number al-
most three hundred, and the penalty of death is re-
served for twenty-five of them.
1350 BCE Pharoah Hur Moheb creates a police force in Egypt to
safeguard water transportation on the Nile River.
450 BCE
The Roman Twelve Tables are implemented, codifying
criminal, civil, and religious laws. Originally ten tables,
the codes classify certain activities as crime (e.g., mur-
der, theft, and sorcery) and stipulate punishments,
such as crucifixion, burning, beating, and drowning.
The two other tables that are added offer additional
103

crimes and punishments. The tables, made of brass, are
placed on the walls of the Temple of Jupiter for public
viewing.
27 BCE
The Praetorian Guard (the privileged corps) and the
Urban Cohort are created in Rome by Augustus.
These early forms of police are, in essence, military
organizations charged with guarding the emperor’s
palace and maintaining order.
14 BCE
Emperor Augustus creates the Vigiles (watchmen of
the city), a group of officials whose job is to control
fires and to maintain order in the cities. They are
formed due to the ruler’s concerns of destructive fires
and the criminal activity occurring in Rome. They
later become responsible for making arrests, captur-
ing escaped slaves, and guarding the public baths.
529 CE
The Justinian Code is completed. In Rome, Emperor
Justinian desires to create a less complicated system
of laws than those in place. He commissions scholars
to make a simpler code, which is later expanded to in-
clude two additional legal works.
700s
The frankpledge system is begun in England and
France. Also known as the tithing system, this plan
makes teams of community citizens and families re-
sponsible for observing criminal behavior and appre-
hending violators.
865
In France, a special security force of marshals is
formed to enforce the law. They are the forerunners of
the Gendarmerie.
1066
The Norman Conquest occurs in England. Govern-
ment officials are used to carry out the wishes of the
king to collect taxes, assemble armed forces, and con-
trol crime. Constables and shire reeves supplement the
frankpledge system. Shire reeves (later known as sher-
iffs) have great power, and judges travel throughout
the county holding trials. (Counties [shires] had been
in existence at least since the Anglo Saxon period.)
104
Chronology
450 
BCE
(cont.)

1215
King John signs the Magna Carta in England. This
document is created under pressure, in an effort to
avoid a rebellion by people growing tired of the king’s
excessive control over their lives. It takes much legal
power away from the king and creates the rule of law.
The document establishes many provisions that even-
tually find their way into American law, such as the
right to due process, the right to trial by jury, the right
to a speedy trial, and limitations on punishment.
1285
The Statute of Winchester in England provides for the
watch and ward system of day and night watches by
citizens in walled cities. It also places more power in
the hands of the constables. Initially a position of
prestige, the constable loses much status over time as
less and less competent people fill the position.
1300s
At midcentury, the Justice of the Peace position is
added to the criminal justice system in England. Origi-
nally conceived as an assistant to the shire reeve, the
Justice of the Peace eventually becomes a supervisor of
both the shire reeve and the constable. The constables’
duties evolve into supervision of the watch and ward
system, serving warrants, and apprehending offenders.
1631
The first night watch in America is formed in Boston
on April 12. This primitive method of controlling de-
viant behavior requires volunteers to observe suspi-
cious activity and report it to authorities. The citizen
volunteers are required to perform the service or pay a
fine for noncompliance; many of the community mem-
bers elect to pay fines rather than perform the duty.
1658
The first paid watch system is begun in New Amster-
dam (later renamed New York).
1700s
Some states in the southern United States, specifically
South Carolina, Virginia, and North Carolina, enact
slave patrol legislation that seeks to legally control the
activity of slaves and to prevent escapes and uprisings.
The slave patrols that are established as a result of
the legislation have law enforcement responsibilities
Chronology
105

including investigating traveling persons, interrupting
slave meetings, and searching slave quarters.
1750s
Henry Fielding, a magistrate in London, establishes
the group that will become known as the Bow Street
Runners in London. This group, also known as the
Bow Street Flyers or the Bow Street Flying Squad, is
often considered the world’s first professional detec-
tive force. Upon Henry’s death, the group comes under
the control of his half brother John.
1767
The first organized vigilante movement in the United
States is formed in South Carolina; the group eventu-
ally becomes known as the South Carolina Regulators.
1785
The first American police commissioners are ap-
pointed in Boston.
1789
The first federal law enforcement agency, the United
States marshals, is created by an Act of Congress, and
appointments are made by George Washington. The
marshals’ duties include the service of legal papers to
carry out the directives of legal and political authori-
ties, but not traditional police duties.
1797
Patrick Colquhoun’s Treatise on the Police of the Metrop-
olis is published. The book influences Robert Peel in his
establishment of the London Metropolitan Police.
1829
The United States Postal Service is created. This is the
first federal agency granted law enforcement author-
ity, charged with policing crimes involving the mail
service.
The London Metropolitan Police, the world’s first
modern police agency, is established by Sir Robert
Peel in his Metropolitan Police Act. This new style of
policing, based on Peel’s principles of policing, is du-
plicated in other nations, most notably the United
States.
106
Chronology
1700s
(cont.)

1832
François Vidocq becomes the director of the French
detective agency known as the Surete.
1835
In America, the Texas Rangers are formed. While
many consider this group to be the first state law en-
forcement agency, Texas is still a territory of Mexico at
this time.
1844
New York City becomes the first American city to
combine its day and night watch programs. This new
structure is based on Robert Peel’s Metropolitan Po-
lice model.
1845
All of the New York City Police Department’s pre-
cinct stations are connected by telegraph.
1850
Henry Wells and William Fargo establish the Ameri-
can Express Company to protect freight services from
theft. Their shotgun riders on the trains become part
of the American landscape.
1851
The vigilante group known as the San Francisco Com-
mittee of Vigilance is formed in California to control
the crime and corruption that developed in the area as
a result of the gold rush. It also attempts to control the
activities of newly arriving immigrant groups. The
Vigilance Committee is responsible for several lynch-
ings and other acts of violence. The 1851 committee
disbanded after one year, came back into existence in
1856, and disbanded again in the same year when its
members were officially elected to office.
1855
Allan Pinkerton founds the Pinkerton Detective
Agency as a private security company to protect rail-
roads. Pinkerton goes on to achieve fame not only as
a lawman but also a writer.
1856
The New York City police department becomes the
first modern American police force to require its offi-
cers to wear uniforms.
Chronology
107

1860s
Police departments in several major American cities
briefly come under state control during the early to
mid-1860s. 
1865
The United States Secret Service is created. The initial
function of this agency is the investigation of coun-
terfeiting crimes. It is later charged with protecting
the president of the United States and other political
figures.
1866
New York Mayor William “Boss” Tweed gains politi-
cal control of New York City and begins a period of
pervasive governmental corruption. Police miscon-
duct becomes commonplace during this time. The era
ends when Tweed is incarcerated in 1871.
1867
Police telegraph call boxes go into use in New York
City.
1870
The Standing Committee of the National Prison Asso-
ciation endorses a crime prevention and social work
approach for the police rather than an order mainte-
nance or law enforcement orientation. The crime 
prevention/social work approach changes dramati-
cally in the next century with the development of po-
lice professionalism.
1878
The Posse Comitatus Act is passed, placing limits on
the power of the government to use armed forces in
law enforcement.
The first telephone system is established in Washing-
ton, D.C.
1880s
The new technique of identification by fingerprinting
is developed by a number of people at nearly the
same time.
1881
The Chicago Police Department installs the first po-
lice telephone booths.
108
Chronology

1883
The Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act, which cre-
ated civil service, is passed. This act ends the spoils
system, which allowed political figures to appoint
friends and others to federal government positions
based on personal and political ties rather than on
qualifications and merit.
In France, Alphonse Bertillon identifies his first repeat
offender through the use of his system of identifying
criminals by using body measurements begun in the
late 1870s; this method is called the Bertillon method.
1886
The Haymarket Riots occur in Chicago. The riots are
started over labor tensions and result in a bomb
killing an officer and others at the scene.
1887
The Bertillon system of anthropometric identifica-
tion, which used body measurements to identify of-
fenders, is implemented by the New York City Police
Department.
1891
The Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) is
founded as part of the federal Justice Department. It
is the department’s first bureau dealing with law en-
forcement matters and is charged with enforcing laws
governing the admission, deportation, and natural-
ization of non–United States citizens.
1893
The National Chiefs of Police union is formed to
allow police administrators around the nation to meet
and discuss innovations in the field. The name
changes to the International Association of Chiefs of
Police (IACP) in 1903.
1895
Theodore Roosevelt becomes the police commissioner
of New York City. He institutes many innovations
such as a bicycle patrol, a telephonic communications
program, a recruit training program, and merit pay.
Roosevelt also works to make the system less corrupt
during his three years in office.
Chronology
109

1898
The National Bureau of Criminal Identification is
opened in Chicago. This office uses the Bertillon
method to track criminal offenders.
1900s
Telephotography comes into use in several police de-
partments, permitting the transmission of pho-
tographs between departments.
1905
The Pennsylvania State Constabulary is created. Al-
though other states have already begun experiment-
ing with state policing systems, the constabulary is
unique and fairly comprehensive. The unit has a
mounted force and substations scattered throughout
the state. Other states follow this model.
1908
The Bureau of Investigation (later renamed the Fed-
eral Bureau of Investigation) is formed during the
presidential administration of Theodore Roosevelt.
The agency has jurisdiction over more than two hun-
dred categories of federal offenses, including kid-
napping, embezzlement, bank fraud, civil rights
violations, drug charges, and others. The agency is
also charged with providing investigation services,
particularly crime lab and psychological services, to
requesting agencies.
The first formal police training academy is created in
Berkeley, California, under the leadership of August
Vollmer.
Lola Greene Baldwin is hired by the police depart-
ment in Portland, Oregon, one of the nation’s first fe-
male police officers. 
1910
Alice Stebbins Wells is hired by the Los Angeles Po-
lice Department, becoming the nation’s first full-time,
salaried female officer. Her appointment paves the
way for female officers in other cities, although their
roles are initially very limited.
1912
Isabella Goodwin becomes the first female detective.
She is employed by the Los Angeles Police Depart-
110
Chronology

ment, and her duties consist of investigating crimes
involving juveniles and women.
A series of silent comedy movies by the Keystone
Company depict police officers as bumbling idiots.
The Keystone Kop movies continue for a few years,
and the name comes to represent incompetence in po-
lice work for generations.
1914
The Berkeley Police Department (California) becomes
the first American police department to have all offi-
cers supplied with police cars.
1915
The Fraternal Order of Police is created in Pittsburgh
by two police officers. The organization is generally
received well and not specifically viewed as a labor
threat by police administrators.
1916
The University of California at Berkeley becomes the
home of the first university-level police training
school.
1919
The Boston Police Strike takes place after nineteen po-
lice officers are fired due to their membership in a
union calling itself the Boston Social Club. Over a
thousand officers strike in protest over the dismissals.
The state militia is called in to quell the chaos after
days of rioting, and new officers are hired to replace
the dismissed police. The officers take the case to court
but the dismissals are upheld. Legislation is passed in
Massachusetts that prohibit people in public service
from striking, and several other states follow.
1921
The polygraph (also known as  the lie detector) is first
used in law enforcement in Berkeley, California. This
was a project of August Vollmer.
1922
August Vollmer becomes president of the Interna-
tional Association of Chiefs of Police.
1923
The International Criminal Police Organization (Inter-
pol) is created to facilitate the exchange of information
Chronology
111

among member nations regarding criminal activity
across international borders.
1924
J. Edgar Hoover becomes the long-term director of
the Bureau of Investigation, later named the Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI). He institutes major
technological innovations and takes an aggressive
crime-fighting stance that gains the agency respect
worldwide. His methods come into question during
the latter part of his leadership as violations of con-
stitutional rights are raised. Hoover serves as agency
director until 1972.
1926
The first radio system is used in police cars in the
Berkeley Police Department (California). This system
was one-way, however; officers could only receive
communication from dispatch.
1927
The United States Custom Service becomes a federal
bureau. The agency has been in existence for many
years before becoming a bureau and is charged with
investigating crimes involving the illegal transport of
contraband across U.S. borders.
1929
Eliot Ness becomes the leader of a group of federal
law enforcement agents who become known as the
Untouchables. They create great interest in federal
law enforcement, becoming immortalized in books,
movies, and television in later years.
The Pennsylvania State Police become the first agency
to use a statewide teletypewriter system.
1931
The Wickersham Crime Commission (formally
known as the National Commission on Law Obser-
vance and Enforcement) releases its report of the in-
vestigative unit created by President Herbert Hoover
in 1929. The report states that police corruption and
brutality, especially regarding the use of the “third
degree,” pervade United States police departments.
The report also provides guidelines for police admin-
istrators, technological advancement, and record
112
Chronology
1923
(cont.)

keeping, recommending crime prevention units in
police departments and the proliferation of state po-
lice agencies. Despite some resistance, the report es-
tablishes a foundation for police reform.
1932
The Uniform Crime Reports (UCR), a project of the
International Association of Police Chiefs, is put into
place. The program is formulated to gather statisti-
cal information on crime from local police agencies.
In addition, the FBI opens its Latent Fingerprint Sec-
tion and a crime laboratory for examining ballistic
evident.
1933
The Bayonne Police Department (New Jersey) initi-
ates a two-way police communications system.
The first baccalaureate program in criminology is of-
fered at the University of California at Berkeley.
1935
The National Police Academy is opened by the U.S.
Justice Department. This center provides police ad-
ministrators with prestigious and highly sought-after
training by FBI agents.
The FBI opens the National Training Academy to pro-
vide training for state, city, and county law enforce-
ment officials.
The first baccalaureate program in police administra-
tion is started at Michigan State College.
1950
The Kefauver Commission (officially named the Sen-
ate Special Committee to Investigate Organized Crime
in Interstate Commerce) reports the prevalence of or-
ganized crime and exposes widespread corruption, es-
pecially in the form of bribe acceptance, among police
officers.
William Parker becomes the Chief of Police of the Los
Angeles Police Department. He is credited with reor-
ganizing the department by forming a highly profes-
sional police force with a paramilitary structure. Later
Chronology
113

many suggest that his techniques are responsible for
the chasm between the LAPD and inner-city resi-
dents, manifested in the riots that erupt in the 1960s.
He remains at the helm until 1966.
Police Administration by O. W. Wilson is published.
This book becomes the standard text for students of
police management.
1955
The police–community relations movement begins.
This movement to improve the image of the police
comes about as a response to citizen criticisms of po-
lice organizations and certain administrators.
1961
Mapp v. Ohio establishes the exclusionary rule, which
provides police with guidelines for making reason-
able searches.
1964
Many demonstrations erupt over the Vietnam War,
sometimes causing violent conflict between the pro-
testers and the police. The protests continue into the
early 1970s. Tensions begin to grow between protest-
ers and the police, who are seen by many Americans
as using excessive levels of force.
1965
A race riot in the Watts area of Los Angeles results in
thirty-six deaths and nearly nine hundred injuries.
The violence soon spreads to San Francisco, with six
deaths and two hundred injured there. A chasm be-
tween the predominantly minority citizens and pri-
marily white police officers widens as riots continue.
The perception of a double standard of treatment by
the police fuels the growing conflict.
President Lyndon B. Johnson declares a war on crime
and appoints the President’s Commission on Law En-
forcement and Administration of Justice.
1966
Miranda v. Arizona establishes safeguards to protect
citizens against self-incrimination when being ques-
tioned by police. This decision results in the well-
known Miranda rights that officers recite to suspects.
114
Chronology
1950
(cont.)

1967
The National Crime Information Center (NCIC), op-
erated by the FBI, becomes operational. The center
provides information on criminals and criminal be-
havior in the following categories: wanted persons,
stolen firearms, stolen vehicles, stolen license plates,
and other identifiable stolen items. By the end of the
year, the agency processes approximately two million
transactions.
Race riots occur in one hundred and fifty cities in the
United States. Many of the riots occur in inner-city
minority communities, and pressure mounts for
politicians and police administrators to find a peace-
ful solution in the midst of racial strife between offi-
cers and citizens.
The Challenge of Crime in a Free Society, the report of the
President’s Commission on Law Enforcement and Ad-
ministration of Justice, is published. This report fo-
cuses on the crime problem, the protests of the era,
and police conduct. It is the first report to identify the
criminal justice establishment as a system, comprised
of law enforcement, the courts, and corrections. It rec-
ommends that these interrelated parts should function
as a cohesive single unit and that more police–
community partnerships should be set up.
1968
Terry v. Ohio establishes the guidelines for the police’s
stop-and-frisk searches, which allow officers to con-
duct a cursory pat-down search of people to deter-
mine if weapons are present.
The death of Martin Luther King, Jr. results in riots
and protests in nearly one hundred and seventy cities
in the United States. Many minority groups, includ-
ing the Black Panther Party, begin to believe that Dr.
King’s philosophy of nonviolence is unproductive
and that the police will continue to act violently and
unfairly against them if they take a posture of nonvi-
olence.  These groups decide to take up arms and de-
fend themselves against what they consider racist
and corrupt activity by the police. 
Chronology
115

The National Democratic Convention in Chicago
erupts in demonstrations and major violence. The
televised event, which results in hundreds of injuries
including physical harm to nearly two hundred po-
lice officers, is called a police riot by some writers.
The Kerner Commission (also known as the National
Advisory Center on Civil Disorders) conducts an ex-
amination of riotous activity. The commission is es-
tablished due to the high level of civil unrest of the
period, especially regarding racial matters.
The Law Enforcement Assistance Administration is
created by Congress to fulfill the mandate of the Om-
nibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968
(often referred to as the Safe Streets Act or the Crime
Control Act) by providing financial assistance to
criminal justice agencies.
1970
Four students are killed at Kent State University in
Ohio by National Guard soldiers who were brought
in to quell demonstrations on the campus. This event
reignites controversy regarding the role of social con-
trol agents in containing citizen demonstrations
through force.  
The Federal Law Enforcement Training Center
(FLETC) is opened in Washington, D.C., to provide
training to all federal law enforcement officers except
the FBI. The center is relocated to Glynco, Georgia, in
1975.
1972
The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (ATF)
is formed as a federal bureau charged with enforcing
laws dealing with illicit alcohol and tobacco manu-
facturing, distribution, or sale and illegal firearms 
activity.
The Knapp Commission (established by New York
City Mayor John Lindsay) produces its report detail-
ing the prevalent abuse of power by police officers of
the New York Police Department. The Commission is
116
Chronology
1968
(cont.)

prompted by NYPD officer Frank Serpico’s allega-
tions of police corruption.
1973
The Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) is created and
becomes the primary federal agency responsible for
combating the burgeoning drug problem in the United
States. It is charged with the investigation and enforce-
ment of drug laws nationally and internationally.
Two hundred and sixty-eight law enforcement offi-
cers are killed, making this the single deadliest year
for the police in recorded history.
1979
In Atlanta, twenty-nine young African Americans are
murdered between 1979 and 1981. Fear and racial
conflict grip the city, and the police are confounded
by the elusiveness of the subject. Wayne Williams is
arrested and subsequently sentenced to life imprison-
ment for two of the murders.
1980s
New police initiatives involving community policing,
problem-oriented policing, and zero-tolerance polic-
ing are implemented on a large scale throughout the
nation’s cities.
DNA testing, a new extension of forensic science, be-
comes a major new tool for detectives, ushering in a
new age of criminal investigation.
1982
Broken Windows is published. Written by James Q.
Wilson and George Kelling, this book describes the
theory by the same name positing that socially disor-
ganized communities invite crime through the visible
manifestations of condemned houses, abandoned au-
tomobiles, homeless people, overt prostitution, and
other things that suggest that the residents are un-
concerned with controlling crime. The authors recom-
mend that police officers should aggressively deal
with nuisance-type crime in order to prevent major
crimes from occurring. The work is highly influential
and police departments throughout the nation adopt
a broken windows model of preventive policing.
Chronology
117

1990s
An alarming number of school shootings occur in
several states, including Washington, Alaska, Mis-
sissippi, Kentucky, Arkansas, Pennsylvania, Ten-
nessee, Oregon, Virginia, Georgia, New Mexico, and
Oklahoma. The highest-profile event happens at
Columbine High School in Littleton, Colorado, where
two students go on a shooting rampage and kill thir-
teen people before killing themselves. This sets the
stage for debates on juvenile access to handguns and
bullying in schools.
1991
Motorist Rodney King is beaten by officers of the Los
Angeles Police Department. The event is recorded on
film by an observer and turned over to a local televi-
sion station. Four of the officers are indicted for police
brutality.
1992
The four indicted police officers in the Rodney King
incident go to court and are found not guilty. Riots
begin and last for five days, resulting in over forty
deaths and over two thousand injuries. The rioting
spreads to other cities in the United States.
1993
Two of the four officers in the Rodney King beating
are convicted in federal court for civil rights viola-
tions and sentenced to thirty months’ incarceration.
A compound at Waco, Texas, is burned after a stand-
off between members of the Branch Davidian reli-
gious cult and federal officers. The exact cause of the
fire in the compound is under speculation. Approxi-
mately eighty people are believed to be killed in the
incident.
1994
The Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City is
bombed by Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols, re-
sulting in one hundred and sixty-nine deaths and over
eight hundred injured. This event, the deadliest ter-
rorist action on American soil until the September 11,
2001, attacks, occurs exactly one year after the Waco,
Texas, incident. McVeigh is executed in 2001.
118
Chronology

The Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act
is passed. This act establishes the Police Corps pro-
gram, provides funding opportunities for community
policing initiatives, increases penalties for a number
of criminal offenses, strengthens antiterrorism policy,
and provides changes in the treatment of police offi-
cers engaged in corrupt activities.
1996
A bomb explodes during the 1996 Olympic Games in
Atlanta. Eric Rudolph, who has been placed on the
FBI’s most wanted list, remains a fugitive until 2003.
He is found that year by a police officer in North Car-
olina and is found guilty in 2005, when he is sen-
tenced to life in prison.
2001
On September 11, nineteen terrorists, members of a
group known as Al Qaeda, hijack three commercial air-
planes. The planes are then flown into two key targets
that symbolize America’s financial and military institu-
tions: the World Trade Center in New York City and the
Pentagon in Washington, D.C. A third plane, probably
intended to strike a target that represents America’s
governmental institution—the White House—crashes
into a field in Pennsylvania after passengers on the
plane manage to thwart the terrorists on board. Nearly
three thousand people lose their lives in the attacks.
Many New York City police officers and other emer-
gency personnel lose their lives or experience injury in
attempting to rescue survivors from the World Trade
Center. The attacks start the American War on Terror-
ism, which brings about major changes in policing pol-
icy, expands the need for knowledge of comparative
policing, and requires local and state police agencies to
become engaged in terrorism preparedness.
In October, Congress creates the USA Patriot Act in re-
sponse to the September 11 attacks. The Patriot Act pro-
vides greater ability to intercept communications
information to federal officers, gives regulatory powers
to combat violations of federal financial law, and at-
tempts to thwart terrorist activity and remove terrorists
Chronology
119

from the country. The Act becomes controversial, with
some critics claiming that the provisions are not ade-
quate to deter terrorism and others claiming that it al-
lows federal officials to commit civil rights violations.
2002
The Homeland Security Act of 2002 is created on Sep-
tember 20, establishing the Department of Homeland
Security. The executive department has a mission to
prevent terrorist attacks in the country, make the
county less vulnerable to terrorist attacks, and lessen
the damage created by such an attack if it occurs and
assist in recovery efforts. The new department is cre-
ated to establish a single agency whose sole responsi-
bility is the protection of citizens from terrorist
activity. While other agencies have this responsibility
from different perspectives, a single structure is de-
sired in the wake of the September 11 attacks. In ad-
dition, the department creates the Homeland Security
Advisory System, a five-level colored diagram with
the designations of green (low risk of terrorist at-
tacks), blue (general risk), yellow (elevated risk), or-
ange (high level), and red (severe risk).
2005
In August, a hurricane given the name Katrina hits the
Gulf Coast, creating much damage in Louisiana and
Mississippi. In New Orleans, levies constructed to
prevent flooding are breached, causing massive flood-
ing. People living in the inner-city areas are stranded
for days. The New Orleans Police Department experi-
ences great stress, causing officers to leave the force.
Looting and violence occur downtown, and officers
are directed by the mayor to direct their efforts more
to controlling disorder than to search and rescue.
2006
In August, the national security level is raised to red,
the highest level, after several arrests are made in
London regarding another possible attack on several
commercial airplanes. Although the attempts are fo-
cused on planes flying from Heathrow Airport,
American authorities take extra precautions about
items brought aboard planes, especially liquids, since
disguised liquid explosives are said to be used.
120
Chronology
2001
(cont.)

5
Biographical Sketches 
M
any people have had a significant impact on the field of
policing. It would be well beyond the scope of this text to
mention all of them, but it is possible to list some of the
most prominent figures. The following are concise biographies of
some of the pioneers of policing.
Harry Anslinger (1892–1975)
Harry Anslinger was a contemporary of FBI Director J. Edgar
Hoover and is best remembered as the long-term director of the
Federal Bureau of Narcotics who launched a massive campaign
against illicit drugs in America. Anslinger was a part-time rail-
road employee who developed an interest in solving crime. His
personal observations of the devastating effects of narcotics use
on the lower-class people in his hometown in Pennsylvania put
into place a lifelong desire to eradicate drug use in the nation.
Anslinger worked with the federal government, beginning in the
World War I period and serving in a variety of positions in several
regions of the world. In 1930, the Federal Bureau of Narcotics was
formed to deal with the growing concern over illicit drug use in
America. Anslinger became acting director of the new agency
and, that same year, the permanent manager. He immediately
went to work fighting drug trafficking and placed a special em-
phasis on marijuana. His aggressive antimarijuana campaign put
out a significant amount of misinformation about the effects of the
drug. As was the case with Hoover and his war on communism,
Anslinger used the media to gain public support for his cause by
121

relating many social ills to drug use. Also like Hoover, Anslinger
had incredible longevity in his position—in his case, thirty-two
years. America has had many drug czars, but Anslinger has the
distinction of being the nation’s first.
Lola Greene Baldwin (1860–1957)
Some consider Lola Baldwin to be the nation’s first female police
officer; much controversy exists, however, because Alice Stebbins
Wells is considered by others to have this distinction. While who
truly deserves the honor is in question, Lola Baldwin’s legitimacy
as a pioneer police officer is not. A native of New York State, she
moved with her husband and children to Portland, Oregon, at
the turn of the twentieth century. She began working with young
“wayward” or displaced women, including area immigrants,
and was instrumental in creating a juvenile court in the city. Bald-
win worked as a volunteer probation officer and vice agent, and,
when her volunteer position ended, she asked for and was given
a paid position as a police officer in 1908 at the age of forty-eight.
This position was distinct from those of the male officers and
Baldwin preferred it this way. She did not wear a uniform or
badge, and she was housed in the YMCA building rather than the
police headquarters. She performed more in a social work capac-
ity than in a crime-fighting capacity. She went on a crusade to rid
the city of brothels, dance halls, nightclubs, and even movie the-
aters, which she felt contributed to the sexual exploitation of
young females. Due to her efforts in Portland, Baldwin was se-
lected by the federal government to keep prostitutes from mili-
tary installations in the West at the onset of World War I. After the
war, she returned to her position as a police officer in Portland,
where she continued her fight for wayward youth and women.
She traveled around the country promoting the inclusion of
women in police work but retained her ideas about the social ser-
vice role of women. She retired in 1922 but continued her active
work for social issues.
Samuel Battle (1883–1966)
Samuel Battle has the distinction of being one of the earliest
African American police officers in the modern police era in
122
Biographical Sketches

America and the first black officer in New York City. The son of
former slaves in North Carolina, Battle moved north to Connecti-
cut to attend a training school. He moved to New York City,
where he worked as a train porter and later took the police officer
civil service examination, despite the fact that African Americans
were certainly not encouraged to apply for law enforcement oc-
cupations. Battle passed and started his career, where he was met
with the disapproval of his fellow officers. He refused to make
waves, however, and was assigned to the primarily black com-
munity known as Harlem. Due to his fine performance as a police
officer in the area, which included rescuing a white officer from an
angry mob during a racial disturbance, he was promoted to
sergeant in 1926, although this process took longer than that of his
white counterparts. Battle achieved another milestone when he
became lieutenant in 1935, the NYPD’s first person of color to
hold the rank. He became an early pioneer in community policing
by forming organizations to keep young people out of legal trou-
ble. Battle was appointed the city’s parole commissioner in 1941,
a truly significant accomplishment during this era. He worked
diligently to quash the racial discord that was rampant in the
early 1940s and was successful in curbing the violence. He retired
in 1951 but continued to work with underprivileged youth in
crime prevention efforts.
Alphonse Bertillon (1853–1914)
In the field of criminalistics, few pioneers’ work measures up to
that of Alphonse Bertillon of France. His system of anthropomet-
ric description, which involved exact measurements of an of-
fender’s body parts for greater ease in identification, paved the
way for more serious scientific forensic criminal investigation.
Bertillon was an unusually precocious individual, born into an
intellectual family that cultivated a curious young mind, espe-
cially in matters of medicine, anthropology, and statistics—areas
that would serve him well in later life. He studied medicine but
failed to obtain an academic degree. He secured employment at
the Prefecture of Police of Paris, where he was given a low-status
job as records clerk, where he was responsible for putting ar-
restee data into a filing system. 
Noticing the slapdash method of maintaining offender files
and the unscientific manner of recording offender characteristics
Biographical Sketches
123

of the period, he began a new system of cataloging body mea-
surements, markings, tattoos, and other features to have a better
system of recognition. In an age when poor identification re-
sulted in many offenders’ release from the criminal justice system
or improper sentences, his system became a major success, re-
sulting in the detection of many recidivists. Bertillon’s system in-
cluded not only a record of physical measurements but also
photographs and fingerprints. He thus increased the effective-
ness and efficiency of the outdated filing system for ease in re-
trieval. Bertillon’s system was initially not accepted by many
police officers, who objected to crime fighting through the use of
a measuring device. However, his system became incredibly
popular throughout Europe and the rest of the world. In France,
Bertillon’s name was spoken with the same reverence as his con-
temporary, Louis Pasteur.
William Burns (1858–1932)
Few people in the late nineteenth or early twentieth century
gained as much celebrity in the field of criminal investigation as
William Burns. His immaculate dress reflected his background as
a tailor, and his interest in acting supplemented his interest in
cracking cases with dramatic style. He was a contract detective
until he obtained a part-time position with the Secret Service in
1891; in five years the position became permanent and his devo-
tion to work was evidenced in the way he went to extremes doing
undercover work, including moving away from his family for ex-
tended periods to chase criminals. He received an appointment in
the Department of the Interior in 1903, where his investigative
work resulted in the conviction and imprisonment of key govern-
ment and political figures in the West. He left the government and
started his own agency in 1910. His investigation of labor dis-
putes, which pitted Burns against famed attorney Clarence Dar-
row in high-profile cases like that of Leo Frank, gained Burns as
much fame at the time as his contemporary, Allan Pinkerton.
Burns became head of the Bureau of Investigation (later renamed
the Federal Bureau of Investigation) from 1921 to 1924, but the
Teapot Dome Scandal, which ruined the careers of several key
government officials, including some Bureau of Investigation
agents, caused him to resign. Burns retired and died eight years
124
Biographical Sketches

later. The detective agency, which still bears his name, continues
to exist even though the Burns family no longer has a business in-
terest in it.
Patrick Colquhoun (1745–1820)
Patrick Colquhoun was a Scottish merchant who later became a
pioneer in British policing. Colquhoun, the son of a government
officer, went to the United States at age sixteen, returned to Scot-
land in 1766, and later moved to England where he became a
magistrate. Convinced that London possessed a large population
of lower-class habitual street criminals, he envisioned a police
force like the Bow Street Runners on a much larger scale. The
magistrate studied law enforcement extensively and sought to
establish a police force that would prevent crime. In 1795, he
published the highly influential Treatise on the Police of the Me-
tropolis, which would be reprinted and reedited numerous times
over the next several years. The magistrate was concerned about
the theft of commercial ships by a group of thieves who were
nicknamed the mudlarks, and in 1800 he published a treatise on
the need for a marine police force. Under his guidance, London
established the Thames Police Act of 1800, which created the
Thames Police Office that was quite effective. In 1797, Colquhoun
was given an honorary law degree by the University of Glasgow.
He continued to publish works on criminal justice and politics,
serving as magistrate until shortly before his death in 1820 at age
sixty-six.
Wyatt Earp (1848–1929)
The image of the ideal law enforcement officer on the Western
frontier has long been exemplified by Wyatt Earp. Although
much of his renown is probably due more to legend than fact,
Earp was certainly a key figure in policing during the cowboy
era. He began his career in 1870 in Missouri as a constable, and in
1874 he served as a deputy marshal in Wichita, Kansas. He later
became a marshal in Dodge City, and his reputation as a no-non-
sense lawman grew. He moved to Texas and later to Arizona,
where he and his brothers decided to enter a career in mining.
Biographical Sketches
125

The Earp brothers became the town marshals and began a con-
temptuous relationship with Sheriff Johnny Behan. An out-and-
out conflict erupted in 1881 when the Earp brothers had a
gunfight with cattle rustlers who had connections to the sheriff.
The shootout was the infamous gunfight at the OK Corral in
Tombstone, Arizona, and became the material for the legend of
the lawless Western frontier and Wyatt Earp. Earp was not the
paragon of virtue he is made out to be in the numerous tales,
songs, movies, and television shows depicting the legend. His in-
fluence on law enforcement in popular culture is indisputable,
and his image is certainly one of the field’s most enduring.
Henry Faulds (1843–1930)
Henry Faulds was a Scottish physician and missionary working
in Japan who, after developing a keen interest in the fingerprints
found on ancient pottery, published an article in the journal Na-
ture in 1880 on how the analysis of “skin furrows” could be used
in criminal investigation. Faulds himself had already used this
method to solve two cases in Japan. After the publication of the
article, Faulds drew a response from a magistrate in India named
William Hershel, who claimed that he had been using finger-
prints in criminal investigation much earlier. Faulds defended
his legitimacy as the “inventor” of fingerprint analysis and at-
tempted to gather support from police agencies, including the
famed Scotland Yard, to set up fingerprint laboratories, but his
requests were dismissed. Faulds continued to produce scholarly
articles on the subject while maintaining his place as the origina-
tor of dactyloscopy. (See also William James Hershel, Francis Gal-
ton, Edward Richard Henry, Juan Vucetich.)
Henry Fielding (1704–1754)
Henry Fielding was a former playwright who became a magis-
trate in the Bow Street area of London. Fielding, who had gained
fame as the author of Tom Jones, decided to enter law as an attor-
ney and was appointed to the position of magistrate. Fielding
took the new task very seriously because crime rates were in-
creasing in the rapidly growing British cities. The magistrate as-
126
Biographical Sketches

sembled a group of exconstables to function as criminal investi-
gators; these nonsalaried employees were called thief-takers and
received financial compensation through rewards from the vic-
tims and the confiscated possessions of the offenders. These in-
vestigators, also known as Fielding’s people, were under the
control of the magistrate and eventually received a small stipend
for their services. Fielding’s detectives later gained fame as the
Bow Street Runners. Fielding was able to use his writing skills to
produce a series of pamphlets on crime and crime prevention.
His most notable of the pamphlets is An Enquiry into the Cause of
the Late Increase of Robbers, published in 1748, which reported that
the causes of theft included too many lazy immigrants into the
area, governmental corruption, and inept constables. Fielding
also created the Covent Garden Gazette, a publication that gave de-
scriptions of people wanted for crimes as well as explanations of
the crimes. Fielding also placed flyers detailing crimes and
wanted persons in newspapers with a request to contact him if
people had relevant information. Henry Fielding died a young
man at forty-seven but was succeeded in office by his half
brother, John Fielding.
John Fielding (1721–1780)
Although blinded at age nineteen as the result of an accident,
John Fielding was a businessman in London who also studied
law with his half brother Henry Fielding at the Bow Street police
office and who worked as his assistant. When Henry died in
1754, John became the magistrate. John had been an instrumen-
tal part of many of Henry Fielding’s innovations, and he contin-
ued them and instituted a few more during his tenure as Bow
Street Magistrate. John Fielding also stressed preventative crime
control and organized two types of patrol: a mounted horse unit
and a foot patrol. Fielding also founded a police bulletin called
the Police Gazette that dispensed information about criminal ac-
tivity and wanted offenders. John became known as the Blind
Beak of Bow Street who, despite his disability, visited crime
scenes to assist in solving area crimes. A popular notion devel-
oped in London that John Fielding could recognize over three
thousand criminals by the sounds of their voices. The Blind Beak,
Sir John Fielding, died in 1780.
Biographical Sketches
127

Francis Galton (1822–1911)
By the time Sir Francis Galton had entered the fury over the legit-
imacy of dactyloscopy’s true discoverer, he already had renown
as a highly successful scientist. Galton, also well-known as
Charles Darwin’s cousin, had a strong interest in aspects of hered-
ity and genetics, and, when called upon by the Royal Institute to
deliver a speech on the Bertillon System in 1888, he elected to
focus on fingerprinting rather than on other aspects of Bertillon-
age. Building on the work of Henry Fauld and William Hershel,
he began an investigation of the subject after contacting Hershel.
His examination culminated in his seminal work Finger Prints,
published in 1892. In this volume, Galton provided a typology of
fingerprints, including the now famous classification of arches,
loops, and whorls. Soon afterward, Scotland Yard began utilizing
fingerprints in its anthropometric classification system. Finger-
printing had now gained legitimacy and found its way into main-
stream criminal investigation as a result of the scientific
contributions by Galton. In 1894, Galton turned over the reins of
dactyloscopy to Edward Richard Henry. (See also Henry Faulds,
William James Hershel, Edward Richard Henry, Juan Vucetich.)
Pat Garrett (1850–1908)
Patrick Floyd Jarvis Garrett, better known simply as Pat Garrett, is
another legendary lawman from the Old Western frontier and best
known for his pursuit and killing of perhaps the most legendary
outlaw of the period, Billy the Kid. Born in Alabama and raised in
Louisiana, Garrett moved west as a young man where he worked
as a cowboy in Texas. He continued west to New Mexico, where
he ran a saloon. As sheriff of Lincoln County, New Mexico, he was
charged with hunting down twenty-one-year-old Henry McCarty,
also known as Billy the Kid or, as he was better known at the time,
simply the Kid. In 1885, Garrett, a tall man with a gunslinger’s
reputation, deputized two people and went to Fort Sumner, New
Mexico, on a tip that the renegade was hiding there. Billy the Kid
walked up on a startled Garrett who was able to respond more
quickly than the equally startled outlaw and shot the Kid dead.
The news of the death of Billy the Kid made Garrett a legend, and
this legend grew as the years passed. Garret published his account
128
Biographical Sketches

of the incident in a book with the lengthy title The Authentic Life of
Billy the Kid, Whose Deeds of Daring and Blood have Made His Name a
Terror in New Mexico, Arizona, and Northern Mexico, written at least
in part by Ash Upson. Garrett later dabbled in politics and law en-
forcement, again becoming a sheriff in another county. He also or-
ganized a unit of the Texas Rangers and became a customs official,
appointed by Theodore Roosevelt. In his last years he became a
rancher and was killed in an incident involving livestock on his
ranch.
Daryl Gates (b. 1926)
Although Daryl Gates is probably remembered best as the police
chief of the Los Angeles Police Department during the Rodney
King beating and the subsequent riots in Los Angeles and other
cities across the country, he is also credited with a number of in-
novations that are now standard in police work. Gates was a
strapping young man when he used the GI bill to obtain a degree
in public administration while working as a police officer with
the LAPD. Although he took this route simply to pay the bills, he
had no intention of making policing a career. He became the
chauffeur for the LAPD’s famed chief, William Parker, eventually
adopting some of Parker’s aggressive police tactics. 
Gates took his job seriously and quickly rose through the
ranks despite making several controversial comments involving
race. As a detective, he worked on several famous cases, such as
the death of actress Marilyn Monroe, the assassination of Senator
Robert Kennedy, and the Charles Manson murders. He was also
involved in the violent riots that shook the Watts area of Los An-
geles in 1965. As a result of his involvement, he became known
as an authority in riot control. As police administrator, Gates pro-
mulgated a series of innovations that have become a staple in po-
lice work, such as the special weapons and tactical (SWAT) units,
structured units that use military tactics to bring crisis situations
under control, and the Drug Abuse Resistance Education (DARE)
program, in which police officers provide drug education to
school students. When LAPD officers were acquitted of the Rod-
ney King beatings and riots were sparked, Gates was criticized
by many people for not keeping the situation under control.
Gates left the LAPD in 1992.
Biographical Sketches
129

Herman Goldstein (b. 1931)
Police scholar Herman Goldstein is the originator of one of the
field’s most popular innovation strategies: problem-oriented polic-
ing. Goldstein started out as a young assistant municipal adminis-
trator in Portland, Maine, concerned with efficiency in city
government. He began to study the city’s policies on police ad-
ministration alongside famed police management expert, O. W.
Wilson. He obtained a few other government positions before end-
ing up in Chicago in 1960 as assistant to Wilson, who had become
the city’s chief of police. He worked with Wilson in this position
for four years and during this period developed ideas about police
operations and administration, which he published in academic
journals. In 1964, he accepted a professorship at the University of
Wisconsin Law School; this appointment reflects the prestige
Goldstein was enjoying at the time since he did not possess a law
degree or a Ph.D. While at the university, he served on several
high-profile commissions such as the pivotal President’s Commis-
sion on Law Enforcement and the Administration of Justice (1964–
1968), the Kerner Commission on race riots (1967–1968), and the
Knapp Commission that investigated corruption in the New York
City Police Department (1971–1973). He also published the classic
book Policing a Free Society in 1977, and two years later he pub-
lished an article called “Improved Policing: A Problem-Oriented
Approach,” in which he outlined a new style of policing that ad-
vocated a holistic, proactive approach to police work. In this
model, the police are active participants in discovering the root
causes of crime, working with the communities to solve these
problems. This approach became connected with the broader phi-
losophy of community policing that has characterized policing
since the 1980s. Goldstein retired from his position at the Univer-
sity of Wisconsin, but his problem-oriented style of policing con-
tinues in many departments throughout the nation.
Hans Gross (1847–1915)
The criminal investigators of today owe much to the pioneer,
Hans Gross. Gross, an Austrian attorney who practiced law in
the 1870s, became concerned about the technical application of
investigation by police officers. He completed a significant
130
Biographical Sketches

amount of self-study in the areas of physics, medicine, psychol-
ogy, and other forms of science, as well as photography in rela-
tion to their potential utility in assisting the police in their
detective work. Gross contended that no crime scene is devoid of
some type of clue that, if appropriately observed, will lead in-
vestigators to the perpetrator. Gross believed that investigating
officers should be provided with forensic knowledge along with
advanced technology for use in convicting criminals. 
In 1883, Gross published a handbook called The Manual for
the Examining Magistrate: A System of Criminalistics and in 1898
founded a journal called Archives for Criminal Anthropology and
Criminalistics. Gross went on to become a professor of law and
continued to publish more volumes on the techniques of criminal
detection such as his prominent work, Criminal Investigation, re-
leased in 1906 with an English translation. Gross’s scholarly work
and his ideas about criminal investigation in his era, including the
concept of modus operandi (method of criminal activity), blood-
stain analysis, and other forensic techniques, later became hall-
marks of forensic science.
Beverly J. Harvard (b. 1951)
The distinction of being the first African American woman to
head a big-city police department belongs to Beverly Harvard.
Harvard was born in Macon, Georgia, and received her degree in
sociology from Morris Brown College in Atlanta. In 1973, she
began her career as a police officer with the Atlanta Police De-
partment. She worked her way up through the department hier-
archy, holding a number of administrative positions such as the
chief affirmative action officer, executive protection officer, direc-
tor of public affairs, and deputy chief of the three major divisions
in the department: career development, criminal investigations,
and administrative services. In addition, Harvard became the
first woman in the department to graduate from the Federal Bu-
reau of Investigation’s National Academy in Quantico, Virginia.
She was promoted to chief of police in 1994 and instituted a num-
ber of changes in the department including additional services
for juveniles, a domestic violence unit, a firearms task force, and
an improved citywide communications system with the fire de-
partment. She was the chief during the 1996 Olympic Games in
Biographical Sketches
131

Atlanta and was responsible for coordinating all law enforce-
ment measures for the event. A strong advocate of community
policing, Harvard sought to put the police more in contact with
the people they served. She left the office in 2002.
Edward Richard Henry (1850–1931)
In 1873, a young British magistrate collector with the civil service
stationed in India, named Edward Henry, began a career that
would eventually lead to his appointment as inspector general of
police in Bengali in 1891. Within two years, the administration in-
tegrated Bertillonage into his police operations. Although the
system was successful in solving  many criminal cases, the sys-
tem was cumbersome and lacking in organization; the technol-
ogy to match the existing prints to those of suspects was not in
place at the time. After visiting Sir Francis Galton in 1894 to
gather ideas on the problem that perplexed even the eminent sci-
entist, Henry returned to India and continued to try to devise a
cataloging system. He accomplished this and even extended Gal-
ton’s fingerprint classification system. By 1898, the Indian police
agency replaced Bertillonage with Henry’s fingerprint cataloging
system. In 1901, Henry was summoned to Scotland Yard to serve
as assistant commissioner of police of the metropolis and as di-
rector of the criminal investigation department; he also used his
new cataloging system at the agency. Henry’s classification
scheme was quickly adopted throughout Europe and the United
States. (See also Henry Faulds, William James Hershel, Francis
Galton, Juan Vucetich.)
William James Hershel (1833–1917)
While working in India as a civil service employee and later mag-
istrate, William Hershel of Britain used the ancient ritual of hand-
print inking on legal documents to determine accurately the
correct recipients of pension payments. Many of the native Indi-
ans were illiterate and the conventional use of fingerprints was
unavailable; so the misrepresentation of claimants, resulting in
fraud, was common. Hershel used inked handprints, which inad-
vertently had cultural significance to the Indians, because he had
132
Biographical Sketches

determined that the prints varied remarkably among individuals
and that they changed very little as people aged. He reported
these finding to his superiors, who were not interested in his
claims. 
After reading Dr. Fauld’s article in Nature, Herschel submit-
ted a letter, which was published in the subsequent edition of the
journal. The great debate had begun on fingerprinting’s origina-
tor. It continued through the years and Hershel’s claim received
a boost when acclaimed scientist and fellow countryman Francis
Galton came to his defense in his claim as the true originator of
the new field. (See also Henry Faulds, Francis Galton, Edward
Richard Henry, Juan Vucetich.)
J. Edgar Hoover (1895–1972)
The Federal Bureau of Investigation has had seventeen directors
since its inception, none nearly as well-known or as controversial
as John Edgar Hoover, who headed the organization for forty-
eight years. Hoover was a young lawyer who began his career
with the Justice Department in 1917, becoming the director of the
General Intelligence Division the following year. He worked his
way up the ladder to become assistant to the Attorney General,
and, when the Bureau of Investigation absorbed the intelligence
division, Hoover became assistant director of the agency and in
1924 he became the director. 
Hoover set out to make the organization more professional,
removed several agents, and ordered background checks, inten-
sive interviews, and physical testing on all new recruits. Given
the freedom from political influence, the new director embarked
on a campaign to eliminate organized crime, and he tracked and
brought to justice such high-profile figures as John Dillinger, Ma-
chine Gun Kelly, Ma Barker, and Bonnie and Clyde. Hoover also
relentlessly pursued suspected agents of espionage and subver-
sion during his tenure, causing much criticism that he violated
civil liberties with his methods of intelligence gathering. How-
ever, during his tutelage, the Federal Bureau of Investigation
made tremendous advancements in the areas of computer and
laboratory technology, police training, and forensic investigation.
Hoover’s long term of service as the FBI director ended with his
death in 1972.
Biographical Sketches
133

George L. Kelling (b. 1935)
The community-oriented policing philosophy in its modern
form, which has been the dominant model in American law en-
forcement for over two decades, can be in large part attributed to
George Kelling. Kelling, who received his Ph.D. from the Uni-
versity of Wisconsin, is currently a professor at Rutgers Univer-
sity and a fellow at Harvard’s Kennedy School of Government.
His work at the Police Foundation produced two pivotal studies.
The first is his study of police officers, called the Kansas City Pre-
vention Patrol experiment, that found that, contrary to popular
views, a police presence does not necessarily prevent crime or
make residents feel safer. The second study, called the Newark
Foot Patrol Study, found that foot patrol likewise did not signifi-
cantly reduce crime, although residents felt safer and more posi-
tive toward the police. Kelling’s ideas on policing, which were
developing during the Kansas City and Newark studies, culmi-
nated in a landmark 1982 article published in the Atlantic
Monthly called “Broken Windows: The Police and Neighborhood
Safety,” coauthored with James Q. Wilson. The article described
the ideas of broken windows policing and set the stage for the
development of community policing. A book published in 1996,
called Fixing Broken Windows: Restoring Order and Reducing Crime
in Our Communities, coauthored with his wife Catherine Coles
(and containing a foreword by James Q. Wilson), further outlined
the broken windows model. The model has been met with some
criticism; however, the impact of his research and his ideas on po-
lice work has been significant.
Greg MacAleese (b. 1947)
Greg MacAleese combined his skills as a journalist with his ex-
periences as a police officer and created a novel idea to get the
public more involved in helping police solve crimes and locate
suspects; this idea has been used in many cities and has inspired
a major television series. MacAleese was born in Canada and
moved to New Mexico with his family as a teenager. He received
a degree in journalism from the University of New Mexico in
1969 and worked with the Albuquerque Tribune and the Associ-
ated Press as a sports writer. He left journalism due to the stress
involved in constantly having to meet deadlines and embarked
134
Biographical Sketches

on a career in policing because  he thought his experiences would
provide good information for future books. He started as a beat
patrol officer with the Albuquerque Police Department in 1973
and moved into criminal investigation, for which he had a pas-
sion. In 1976, after working on a violent crime case, MacAleese
decided to reenact the event on a local television station with the
hope of getting tips from viewers. The case was solved and the
show, called Crime Stoppers, became very popular with viewers
and quickly spread to other states across the country and even-
tually to other countries as well. The hit television show America’s
Most Wanted was based on the idea, continues to have massive
appeal with audiences, and has led to the solving of many
crimes. MacAleese worked at other criminal justice positions and
continued to work with Crime Stoppers, but eventually opted go
into the private security industry.
Eliot Ness (1903–1957)
Like Wyatt Earp and others who conjure up the image of the West-
ern lawman on the frontier, the name “Eliot Ness” evokes the per-
sona of the G-man, the gangster-chasing federal agent of the
Prohibition Era. Ness, a 1925 graduate of the prestigious Univer-
sity of Chicago, initially worked as an insurance investigator. Dur-
ing the Prohibition Era, the manufacture, sale, and use of alcohol
were prohibited, and the criminalization of spirits created fertile
soil for organized crime syndicates, which in turn caused the cre-
ation of new agencies in law enforcement to control them. Ness
developed an interest in policing and began taking courses in
criminology at the university to gain a better knowledge of the
subject, and at the same time he participated in alcohol raids. He
was hired as an agent with the Treasury Department in 1926,
where he developed a reputation as a serious, incorruptible officer. 
He was charged with tracking down the notorious gangster,
Al Capone, and set out on this task with vigor, much as Pat Gar-
ret did in his pursuit of Billy the Kid in the frontier West many
years earlier. To pursue Capone, Ness formed a group of a dozen
law enforcement officers and tracked him for two years; Capone
was eventually captured and charged with tax evasion. Ness and
his crew, dubbed the Untouchables, gained much fame in the
1930s. Ness left the bureau and coauthored a book about his ex-
periences called The Untouchables, which was developed into a
Biographical Sketches
135

television series and movies over the years since then. Even
though the image of the incorruptible, crime-fighting G-men, as
represented in these stories, did not totally reflect reality, the pub-
lic was fascinated with this new image of the police as promoted
by Ness and the Untouchables.
William H. Parker (1902–1966)
William Parker made an undeniable imprint on the field of polic-
ing and specifically on police professionalism. As the chief of po-
lice with the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) during the
years 1950 until his death in 1966, he followed the path of August
Vollmer and his own contemporary O. W. Wilson in demanding a
higher level of professionalism in police work. He was born in
South Dakota and moved to California (as did his friend Wilson),
where he entered the LAPD and worked his way up the police hi-
erarchy. He took a leave of absence when he worked with Wilson
in organizing a European police force during World War II but re-
turned to the LAPD; in 1950, he became the agency’s chief. Parker
emphasized vigorous officer selection and training in his attempts
to build a police force modeled on the military structure. He was
adroit at marketing a highly favorable image of his agency and
used the media very effectively to meet this end. Parker was able
to showcase his department’s image through a very popular radio
and later television series, Dragnet, achieved through his personal
connection with the show’s originator, Jack Webb. The chief, how-
ever, had a continuing conflict with many African American citi-
zens who felt his aggressive style of policing was a means of
oppression. The violent Watts riots and other outbreaks of racial
strife in Los Angeles during his tenure have been viewed by many
as a revolt against Parker’s policing style.
Robert Peel (1788–1850)
Robert Peel is the world’s most noted police pioneer in that he is
attributed with creating the first true police force in the world.
Peel was born in Lancashire, England, to a middle-class house-
hold. His father, of the same name, was a manufacturer who be-
came a member of the British Parliament and who was later
knighted; the title “Sir” was passed to young Robert upon his fa-
136
Biographical Sketches

ther’s death. The younger Peel was educated at Oxford Univer-
sity  and afterward embarked on a career in British politics. He
was eventually selected Home Secretary and, due to a rising
crime problem, wanted a professional police force to combat it.
The idea of a professional force was unpopular in England be-
cause many thought such a force would be a detriment to free-
dom, as they perceived the oppressive police force in France to
be. Peel was successful in getting his Metropolitan Police Act
passed in 1829, a feat attempted by his father many years earlier.
This act revolutionized policing by separating police and magis-
trate functions and by providing police officers with uniforms,
small batons called truncheons, and assignments to patrol beats.
Though initially viewed with skepticism and sometimes con-
tempt, the officers, popularly called peelers, won the respect of
citizens for their use of restraint during potentially explosive out-
breaks. The force, known as the London Metropolitan Police, was
guided by Peel’s principles of policing, which formed the basis of
professionalism in the field. His innovations won him the title
“father of modern policing,” and his officers later received the
often used nickname bobbies as a testament to his influence.
Allan Pinkerton (1819–1884)
Allan Pinkerton is the name most often associated with private se-
curity in the annals of police history. He and his private detective
agency, reinforced by the company logo of the all-seeing eye, have
made an indelible mark on private investigation in America. Born
in Scotland, Pinkerton’s father was a police officer; however, a law
enforcement career was not initially the young man’s occupa-
tional choice. When forced to flee Scotland due to his political be-
liefs, Pinkerton settled in Dundee, Illinois, near Chicago, where he
ran a cooperage. When a counterfeiting ring interrupted area
business endeavors, Pinkerton became a deputy sheriff to pursue
the counterfeiters. He left Dundee for Chicago in 1850 and was
hired by the Treasury Department to investigate counterfeiting in-
cidents because of the reputation he had gained in Dundee. He
formed a special private police force to deal with railroad crime
and was also hired as a postal agent. The Pinkerton’s Protective
Police Patrol was created in 1857 and contracted out private secu-
rity services to local businesses. The agency grew and covered an
area encompassing five states. After some successful high-profile
Biographical Sketches
137

investigations, Pinkerton’s fame grew and agencies were estab-
lished in other cities during the 1860s. The master detective wrote
a handbook on criminal investigation, followed by sixteen detec-
tive stories. Even after his death the agency continued through the
efforts of his sons, but the focus was more on private security than
on investigation.
Theodore Roosevelt (1858–1919)
Although best remembered as the twenty-sixth president of the
United States and leader of a military group known as the Rough
Riders during the Spanish-American War, Theodore “Teddy”
Roosevelt was at one time New York City’s police commissioner.
Roosevelt, born into a wealthy family in New York, overcame
childhood sickness to become a robust athlete and later a well ed-
ucated political figure. He was elected to the state legislature,
and later he received an appointment to the United States Civil
Service Commission at a time when the spoils system was ram-
pant. (The spoils system was the practice of obtaining public po-
sitions on the basis of personal connections and money.) 
Roosevelt was able to secure the police commissioner posi-
tion in 1895, and he immediately set out to change the corrupt sys-
tem of law enforcement in the city. He gained fame by using
midnight rambles to observe police behavior on his own nightly
rounds. He exposed dishonest cops all the way to Police Chief
Thomas Byrnes, a notoriously corrupt police administrator, and
Alexander “Clubber” Williams, a notoriously violent police offi-
cer. Roosevelt was a progressive commissioner and used modern
police advancements such as bicycle squads, firearms training,
and an early version of the broken windows style of policing by
increasing the policing of nuisance behaviors. His tenure as com-
missioner was only two years and he had bigger ambitions, but
Roosevelt’s term as the top administrator of the country’s largest
police department is remembered as a time of professionalism
and reform in a troubled period of policing in the nation’s history.
Frank Serpico (b. 1936)
A book published in 1973 and a movie release in the same year
made “Serpico” a household name and a term synonymous with
138
Biographical Sketches

whistle-blowing in police work. If it had not been for the coura-
geous action he took to deal with police corruption, he probably
would have received no fame, and the corruption that was going
on in the New York Police Department would have possibly not
been exposed. Serpico was a young, idealistic cop with the NYPD
in the 1960s with a strong desire to become a detective. He re-
fused to accept the gratuities normally offered to the police in re-
turn for protection. He transferred to the plainclothes division in
1966, where he was exposed to even greater acts of corruption,
including bribes and payoffs involving drug and gambling oper-
ations. His refusal to become involved with this activity, along
with his unpolice-like appearance consisting of the long hair and
hippie clothing normally detested by the police at that time,
made him a pariah among his fellow officers. 
After he continued to be confronted with corruption, he
tried with no success to report the misconduct through appropri-
ate channels. He gave his story to the New York Times in 1970 and
the whole affair went national. The Knapp Commission was
formed to investigate the complaints, and the activity of the
NYPD was exposed. Serpico was shot in the face during a drug
bust in 1971, and many believe that the failure by his partners to
protect him was a show of their disapproval of his whistle-blow-
ing. Serpico left the force after the incident and moved out of the
country. He later returned to New York where he still gives
speeches against police corruption.
Bruce Smith (1892–1955)
Bruce Smith never served as a police officer, but he had a tremen-
dous impact on policing during his lifetime. During the 1920s
through the 1950s, Smith was one of the most prominent police
scholars in America. He was one of the few civilian reformers to
have an impact on the field, through the efforts of professional po-
lice, such as August Vollmer, O. W. Wilson, and William Parker,
who promoted his reform ideas. A large, outgoing, and well edu-
cated New Yorker, Smith had a law degree but never practiced
law. Instead he began completing research projects using the sur-
vey method in various police organizations, including the FBI, the
Institute for Public Administration, and the International Associ-
ation of Chiefs of Police. The survey method involved a compre-
hensive analysis of police agencies; Smith performed the surveys
Biographical Sketches
139

of police departments in New Orleans, Chicago, and other cities.
He was also instrumental in launching the Uniform Crime Report
(UCR) system, a standardized crime reporting system in the
1920s. As a result of his affiliation with political leaders and the
FBI on this project, he became close friends with J. Edgar Hoover,
the long-term agency director. In the late 1930s and 1940s, Smith
was actively involved in police reform, and he especially took up
the cause decrying the use of the third degree, an accepted prac-
tice of police violence during interrogation. He was also the au-
thor of three texts, including the seminal Police Systems in the
United States in 1940. He was in the process of completing a fourth
book at his death in 1955.
Eugene François Vidocq (1775–1828)
Sometimes referred to as the world’s first master detective, Eu-
gene François Vidocq established many methods of criminal in-
vestigation that are still in use today, including psychological
interrogation techniques, detailed crime records, mug shots, and
the detailed study of criminal offenders to solve crimes. Born in
France, Vidocq ran away from home as a youth to embark on a
life of adventure and assumed a number of positions, such as
street performer, soldier, and sailor. He also became an escape
artist, not for entertainment but to escape his detention in local
jails for assaulting a police officer. Vidocq became well-known
for this skill and escaped for the last time in 1779, when he later
assumed a new life as a legitimate clothes seller. He turned him-
self into the police ten years later when he was faced with grow-
ing fears of being turned in by his underground acquaintances. 
Vidocq agreed to be an informant for the police, setting in
place a short but extremely eventful career as a detective. His
personal knowledge of criminal activity and the Paris criminal el-
ement suited him well in his development of a force of investi-
gators known as the Surete. Vidocq used excriminals to make up
this group. His innovations include the introduction of record
keeping of criminal files in a card index format, criminalistics,
ballistics, shoe and foot impressions in plaster of paris, and im-
proved surveillance techniques. In 1828, a new prefect of police
(police chief), disdaining the idea of using exconvict investiga-
tors, relieved Vidocq of his duties. Vidocq published in memoirs
in 1828 and later formed a private detective agency. The master
140
Biographical Sketches

detective died in 1857 in poverty due to a series of lawsuits that
depleted his savings. A legacy to his great skills can be found in
America in a group called the Vidocq Society, a volunteer orga-
nization (by invitation only) of investigators who pursue cold
cases (those left unsolved after many years).
August Vollmer (1876–1955)
August Vollmer is the person most often associated with police
reform and professionalism in America. Born in New Orleans
and raised in Germany and the San Francisco Bay area, Vollmer
was a feed store merchant in Berkeley who served in the military
during the Spanish-American War. A prominent citizen in Berke-
ley, he received a job as postal carrier, where he learned a good
deal about the citizens in the community. He was encouraged to
run for town marshal by citizens concerned about crime in the
area; he ran and obtained the position, which later became the of-
fice of chief of police. He was able to reduce the incidence of gam-
bling, a major problem at the time, and then turned his attention
to modernizing the police force. He started the bicycle patrol;
brought traffic light technology to Berkeley; used automobile pa-
trols, polygraphs, and assessment instruments for new recruits;
started a forensic lab; and started the first police academy in con-
junction with the University of California. He advocated college
education for his officers and developed a degree program in
criminology for them; in fact, he often used college students
(termed college cops by people in Berkeley) as part-time officers.
He also held key law enforcement organization positions, au-
thored books, contributed to the Wickersham Commission re-
port, and served as professor of police administration at the
University of Chicago and the University of California. For all of
his contributions to the field of law enforcement, he has often
been called the father of American policing.
Juan Vucetich (1858–1925)
Austrian-born Juan Vucetich moved to Argentina where he
began his employment as a police officer. Although possessing a
low level of education, Vucetich’s natural proclivity for mathe-
matics provided him with an appointment to director of the 
Biographical Sketches
141

police statistical bureau, where he was given the responsibility of
establishing a criminal classification system. He used the stan-
dard Bertillon system but sought to devise a better one based on
fingerprint analysis. Vucetich worked tirelessly to establish such
a system and was able to do so in less than two months. 
His system was adopted by the La Plata police department,
making his the first officially accepted fingerprint identification
classification system, predating the Henry system. However, an-
thropometry was still the only accepted system, and Vucetich
fought unsuccessfully to install his system for years. In 1894, a
new police chief allowed him to implement his system in lieu of
anthropometry. In 1904, his text on fingerprinting, Dactyloscopia
Comporada, was published. His scheme gained much credibility
when the Academy of Sciences honored it as the best criminal
classification system; five years later the system was adopted na-
tionwide. A growing public distaste for the system caused the
government to abandon it. Vucetich, who had labored so vigi-
lantly to implement the system, was exiled and died a few years
later in poverty. (See also Henry Faulds, William James Hershel,
Francis Galton, Edward Richard Henry.)
Joseph Wambaugh (b. 1937)
The police have been depicted in movies, television, and books in
a number of ways throughout the years; they have been cast as
bumbling buffoons, as totally unscrupulous egoists, as overly ag-
gressive super cops who relish killing suspects, and as unblem-
ished, incorruptible automatons. Police author Joseph Wambaugh
can be credited with bringing a more realistic image of the police
to the American reader and viewer. The son of a police officer,
Wambaugh served a stint in the Marine Corps and began em-
ployment with the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) in
1960 while a college student at California State University. He was
a patrol officer and later a detective who observed the exciting
field of police work and witnessed the Watts riots in 1965. As he
pursued his master’s degree, he wrote a number of short stories
and quit the force when it was suggested that he write a book of
his experiences. He quit the force to write full-time and wrote a
novel about three LAPD officers called The New Centurions, which
was published in 1971 and later made into two television projects.
He continued to write novels, including his best seller, The Choir-
142
Biographical Sketches

boys, which was made into a major motion picture. Wambaugh,
who was frequently not always happy with the translation of his
work into the screen version, also supervised a major television
series that ran during the 1970s called Police Story. He also pro-
duced some nonfiction work, such as the critically acclaimed The
Onion Field, published in 1973. Wambaugh’s writing skills helped
bring realistic police work to a public anxious to understand this
fascinating field.
Alice Stebbins Wells (1873–1957)
Was Lola Baldwin or Alice Stebbins Wells the country’s first fe-
male police officer? In 1910, Wells was hired by the Los Angeles
Police Department as a full-time police officer with full police
powers. Wells had petitioned some prominent people in Los An-
geles to provide her with the appointment. She followed in the
footsteps of the early prison matrons and other women who
worked in the criminal justice field but who were not given re-
sponsibility for regular police duty. Although she was a sworn
officer, she was housed away from the male officers and was ex-
pected to work primarily with women and children by keeping
them away from the evil elements of the day. This social service
responsibility was fine with Wells due to her strong moral and re-
ligious beliefs. She frequented movie theaters, dance halls, ar-
cades, skating rinks, city parks, and other places in an effort to
ensure they were safe for women and children. She became a
popular figure in the city and soon other cities began hiring fe-
male officers. (Unfortunately the trend did not continue, and it
was decades before women in policing became acceptable.) In
1915, a group formed the Internal Association of Policewomen
(IAP) in Baltimore and elected Wells as its president. Despite the
decrease in interest in women police that would soon occur,
Wells was a true trailblazer and reformer.
James Q. Wilson (b. 1931)
Respected police scholar James Q. Wilson emerged on the scene
during a chaotic period of riots, rebellion, and disorder. The fact
that many political leaders sought his advice during such a pe-
riod attests to his influence in the criminal justice field. Wilson
Biographical Sketches
143

was born in Colorado and raised in California. He received his
Ph.D. in political science in 1959 and became a member of the
University of Chicago’s faculty. His research interests included
race and urbanization, not criminal justice; in fact, he received no
academic training in criminology and had no major interest in
the field. The University of Chicago, however, had one of the na-
tion’s first criminology programs and commanded the respect of
many political figures. In 1961, Wilson took a position at Harvard
University, where he made many important professional connec-
tions. When President Lyndon B. Johnson took an aggressive
stance toward the growing crime problem and sought a blue chip
panel of crime experts, Wilson was included. Wilson’s perfor-
mance on the President’s Commission on Law Enforcement and
the Administration of Justice (1966–1967) resulted in his appoint-
ment to task forces on crime and justice. He gained much notice
in 1968 with the publication of his book, Varieties of Police Behav-
ior, in which he outlined his oft quoted typology of police offi-
cers—watchmen, legalists, and service officers—a classification
taught now in almost all introductory criminal justice and polic-
ing courses in the nation. He continued working on criminal jus-
tice committees and in 1974 he published Thinking About Crime, a
book that appealed to many political figures of the era. A journal
article published in 1982 and coauthored with George Kelling,
called “Broken Windows,” helped usher in the era of community
policing. Wilson retired from Harvard in 1987 and returned to
California, where his advice and ideas on the criminal justice sys-
tem are still actively sought.
O. W. Wilson (1902–1972)
Orlando W. Wilson, one of August Vollmer’s college cops, would
become one of the leading experts on policing, particularly on
police management. Wilson was born in South Dakota but
moved with his family to Berkeley, California, where he enrolled
at the University of California. Wilson had to work to pay his
way through college and became a police officer in the city police
department under Vollmer, who was also teaching courses in
criminology at the university. Wilson graduated with his degree
in criminology in 1924 and, upon Vollmer’s recommendation,
began his employment as the chief of police in Fullerton, Califor-
nia. He would also serve as police chief in Wichita, Kansas, from
144
Biographical Sketches

1928 to 1939 where, following his mentor Vollmer’s lead, he in-
stituted a number of innovations, including marked patrol vehi-
cles, improved communication systems, polygraphs, and a crime
laboratory. Wilson entered the military during World War II,
where he served as a colonel and chief public safety officer in Eu-
rope. He taught courses in police administration at the Univer-
sity of California from 1939 to 1960 and served as dean the last
ten years he was at Berkeley. In 1960, Wilson accepted a position
as the chief of police in Chicago. He retired from public service in
1967 and moved near San Diego, California, where he died five
years later. He published a number of works on police manage-
ment, the most important of which was Police Administration, first
released in 1950, which became the standard text in the field. Wil-
son was a strong supporter of police professionalization who
sought to thwart corruption in the departments he supervised.
He influenced generations of police managers as an administra-
tor, professor, and scholar.
Biographical Sketches
145


6
Facts and Data
T
his chapter consists of pertinent information about the field of
policing in America. It contains tables and figures presenting
data from government researchers. All tables and figures are
located at the end of this chapter.
Police Personnel
This section provides information about the personnel makeup
of federal, state, and local municipal police offices and sheriffs’
departments.
Federal Police Agencies
There are approximately 106,000 federal law enforcement per-
sonnel, based on 2004 data; these officials carry firearms and
have arrest powers. The numbers of these employees and their
primary functions are shown in Table 6.1.
Additional information about federal police officials in 2004:
• Of all federal officers, 16.1 percent were women and 33.2
percent were members of a racial or ethnic minority.
• The largest employers of federal officers, accounting for
63 percent of the total, were the:
-U.S. Customs and Border Protection (28,200)
-Federal Bureau of Prisons (15,361)
147

-FBI (12,414)
-U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (10,691)
• About half of all federal officers were employed in:
-Texas (14,633)
-California (13,365)
-The District of Columbia (9,201)
-New York (8,159)
-Florida (6,627)
• Nationwide, there were 36 federal officers per 100,000
U.S. residents, including 1,662 per 100,000 residents in
the District of Columbia. There were more than 60 per
100,000 residents in Arizona, North Dakota, Vermont,
Montana, New Mexico, Texas, and Alaska. There were
fewer than 10 per 100,000 in Wisconsin, New Hamp-
shire, and Iowa.
State and Local Police Agencies
The United States has an abundance of various types of state and
local law enforcement agencies:
• As of June 2000, state and local law enforcement agen-
cies had 1,019,496 full-time personnel, 11 percent more
than the 921,978 employed in 1996. From 1996 to 2000,
the number of full-time sworn personnel increased from
663,535 to 708,022.
• As of June 2003, local police departments had 580,749
full-time employees, including 451,737 sworn personnel.
Sheriffs’ offices had 330,274 full-time employees, includ-
ing 174,251 sworn personnel.
• From 1987 to 2003, minority representation among local
police officers increased from 14.6 percent to 23.6 per-
cent. In sheriffs’ offices, minorities accounted for 18.8
percent of sworn personnel in 2003, compared to 13.4
percent in 1987.
• From 1996 to 2000, total employment by local police de-
partments was up an average of 2.1 percent per year. 
Sheriffs’ offices increased their number of employees by
3.5 percent per year. (U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of
Justice Statistics, State and Local Law Enforcement Statistics)
148
Facts and Data

Table 6.2 gives a breakdown by state of the full-time state
and local law enforcement agencies and employees based on
June 2000 figures.
Table 6.3 provides information about the types of agencies
that employ police personnel (both full- and part-time) and dif-
ferentiates between sworn and nonsworn employees.
Figures 6.1 and 6.2 show the rise in the number of full-time
police officers and sheriffs’ departments from 1987 to 2003. It is
easy to see the increase in both types of agencies, even though the
number of police department officers is considerably larger than
those of sheriffs’ offices
Tables 6.4 and 6.5 provide information about the numbers
and percentages of full-time sworn officers and full-time civilian
employees in police departments and sheriffs’ offices.
Tables 6.6 and 6.7 provide information about the largest po-
lice departments and sheriff’s offices in the country. New York
City has the largest police department, and Los Angeles County,
California, has the largest sheriff’s department.
Sworn and nonsworn reserve or auxiliary officers are utilized
in police departments and sheriffs’ offices throughout the nation
and provide a valuable resource in law enforcement. The num-
bers of these officers are shown in Tables 6.8, 6.9, 6.10, and 6.11
The numbers of officers in police departments and sheriffs’
offices are broken down by gender and race in Tables 6.12 and
6.13. White males make up the majority of police officers; these
figures are extremely consistent in both police departments and
sheriffs’ offices.
The changes in the number of female and other minority po-
lice officers and sheriffs’ deputies are shown in Figures 6.3 and
6.4. A slow but consistent growth is occurring in female and mi-
nority hiring and retention in police departments, but both have
experienced decreases in sheriffs’ departments since 1997.
There are several methods for screening potential police offi-
cers and sheriffs’ deputies, including criminal background checks
and investigations, driving record checks, medical and psycho-
logical examinations, personal interviews, drug tests, physical
agility tests, written examinations, credit history investigations,
polygraph tests, and personality inventories. These vary in differ-
ent agencies and are depicted in Figures 6.5 and 6.6. Criminal
background checks are the common ones for each, and personal-
ity inventories are the less utilized method.
Police Personnel
149

Tables 6.14 and 6.15 show the educational requirements for
police and deputy recruits. For most police departments and
sheriff’s offices, only a high school diploma is required for em-
ployment. The departments, both police and sheriffs’ offices that
serve a population of 500,000–999,999, are more likely to require
a four-year college degree than departments  serving a larger or
smaller population.
The training requirements for police and deputy recruits are
shown in Figures 6.7 and 6.8, which contrast the years 2000 and
2003. Departments that serve larger areas tend to require more
training hours, and police departments require more training
than sheriffs’ offices.
Police academies provide training for a number of positions
in the criminal justice field. Figure 6.9 provides a breakdown of
these positions. Officers in municipal departments are the posi-
tions most engaged by the academies.
Figures 6.10 and 6.11 and Table 6.16 show the types of train-
ing provided at police academies. In-service training is the most
widely used and the identification of community problems, re-
flecting the influence of community policing and problem-
oriented policing models.
Police officers receive training in racially based policing. Fig-
ure 6.12 shows the method of instruction of this subject to the 
police. The most common approach to providing this training is
through academic, or classroom, training rather than practical
skills or field training.
Types of basic instruction involving terrorism and response
to terrorist incidents are shown in Figure 6.13. The most common
type of instruction in this area involves response tactics to
weapons of mass destruction.
The types of facilities utilized by the training academies are
shown in Table 6.17. Facilities that promote practical training are
utilized much more often than other methods, such as mail cor-
respondence courses.
Most of the funding for police academies is provided by
state governments; however, other sources are used and are in-
cluded in Figure 6.14.
A breakdown of police recruits by race and gender is pro-
vided in Figure 6.15. White males are the largest category; how-
ever, the numbers are close with other races and both genders.
Salaries for police officers and sheriffs’ deputies are shown
in Tables 6.18 and 6.19. Although the figures vary by the size of
150
Facts and Data

the populations served, salaries for both groups are relatively
consistent.
The various duties of police officers and sheriffs’ deputies are
shown in Tables 6.20–6.33. These duties involve a variety of activ-
ities such as patrol duties, court-related functions, detention du-
ties, special public safety functions, traffic-related duties, and
special operations activities. Sheriff’s offices are more likely than
police to be involved with serving civil processes and criminal
warrants, courtroom protection, inmate transport, and the opera-
tion of local jails; police departments are more likely to be involved
with temporary lockup facilities, animal control, school crossing
services, crime prevention education, and civil defense duties.
Community policing is an important component in both po-
lice departments and sheriffs’ offices. Tables 6.34 and 6.35 show
how mission statements of both groups reflect the community
policing philosophy. Tables 6.36 and 6.37 depict how community-
policing methods are actually utilized in both types of agencies.
Municipal departments tend to contain the community-oriented
philosophy and to use more activities; however, community-
policing efforts are obviously important to both groups. 
Figures 6.16 and 6.17 show the percentage of officers in both
municipal departments and sheriff’s offices that use full-time
community policing officers. It is evident that the municipal po-
lice departments use more full-time officers.
Tables 6.38 and 6.39 show how different types of nonlethal
weapons are used in police departments and sheriffs’ offices.
Pepper spray, collapsible batons, soft projectiles, and electrical
devices are commonly used in both types of agencies.
Figures 6.18 and 6.19 show the use of video cameras in po-
lice vehicles, as used by both police departments and sheriffs’ of-
fices in 2000 and 2003. In both types of agencies, video cameras
increased in use over the three-year period.
Other special technological advancements are shown in the
Tables 6.40 and 6.41. Mug shots, fingerprints, tire deflation
spikes, infrared imagers, and suspect composite drawings are the
most common in both types of agencies.
How the police handle citizen complaints is a vital role in
police work and directly affects police–community relations. Fig-
ure 6.20 gives information about numbers of complaints against
different agencies, with the municipal police receiving the largest
number. Tables 6.42, 6.43, 6.44, and 6.45 represent the disposi-
tions of citizen complaints broken down by types of agencies.
Police Personnel
151

The job of a police officer carries the inherent risk of being
killed in the line of duty. The number of police killed on the job
has dropped, however, since the early 1970s, as Figure 6.21
shows.
The additional information from government data, taken
from the U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics,
Law Enforcement Officers Killed, 2006, regarding the conditions in-
volving the officers’ deaths, follows.
Between 1995 and 2004, of the 636 officers killed: 
• 26 percent were in arrest situations
• 18 percent were in ambush situations
• 16 percent were on disturbance calls
• 16 percent were making traffic pursuits or stops
• 13 were investigating suspicious persons or circum-
stances
• 10 percent were in other situations
Of the 696 assailants identified in the killing of law enforce-
ment officers from 1995 to 2004:
• More than half had a prior conviction
• Two-fifths were on probation or parole at the time
Regarding the weapons used in the deaths of police, hand-
guns were the most prevalent type, as shown in Figure 6.22.
152
Facts and Data

Police Personnel
153
Function
Number of full-time federal officers*
Criminal investigation/enforcement
40,408
Police response and patrol
22,278
Inspections
17,280
Corrections/detention
16,530
Court operations
5,158
Security/protection
4,524
Other
176
Total
106,354
*Nonmilitary federal officers authorized to carry firearms and make arrests; excludes officers in foreign countries.
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Federal Law Enforcement Statistics.
TABLE 6.1
As of September 2004, Federal Agencies Employed about 106,000 Full-Time 
Personnel Authorized to Make Arrests and Carry Firearms
Full-time employees
Total
Sworn personnel
Responding to calls
State
Number
of
agencies
Number
Per
100,000
residents
Number
Per
100,000
residents
Number
Per
100,000
residents
Alabama
424
16,062
361
10,655
240
7,287
164
Alaska
95
2,151
343
1,348
215
1,031
164
Arizona
135
20,595
401
11,533
225
6,889
134
Arkansas
356
9,207
344
6,157
230
4,066
152
California
517
115,906
342
73,662
217
40,349
119
Colorado
248
15,237
354
10,309
240
5,815
135
Connecticut
125
10,277
302
8,327
245
5,143
151
Delaware
43
2,257
288
1,774
226
1,151
147
District of
Columbia
3
4,914
859
3,96
693
2,041
357
Florida
383
68,165
427
39,452
247
24,264
152
TABLE 6.2
State and Local Law Enforcement Agencies and Employees 
Based on June 2000 Figures
continues

154
Facts and Data
Full-time employees
Total
Sworn personnel
Responding to calls
State
Number
of
agencies
Number
Per
100,000
residents
Number
Per
100,000
residents
Number
Per
100,000
residents
Georgia
561
31,282
382
21,173
259
12,393
151
Hawaii
7
3,731
308
2,914
241
1,722
142
Idaho
122
4,522
349
2,749
212
1,732
134
Illinois
886
52,769
425
39,847
321
23,728
191
Indiana
495
17,969
296
11,900
196
7,249
119
Iowa
400
7,600
260
5,333
182
3,769
129
Kansas
353
10,343
385
6,563
244
4,265
159
Kentucky
382
9,589
237
7,144
177
4,800
119
Louisiana
343
23,573
527
18,548
415
7,639
171
Maine
139
3,638
285
2,367
186
1,721
135
Maryland
146
20,272
383
15,221
287
9,024
170
Massachusetts
351
23,593
372
18,082
285
11,784
186
Michigan
565
29,654
298
21,673
218
13,456
135
Minnesota
460
12,677
258
8,606
175
5,748
117
Mississippi
333
10,163
357
6,562
231
4,415
155
Missouri
586
20,459
366
13,630
244
8,949
156
Montana
126
2,958
328
1,760
195
1,344
149
Nebraska
237
4,776
279
3,486
204
2,296
134
Nevada
62
7,918
396
5,252
263
2,959
148
New
Hampshire
195
3,268
264
2,542
206
1,736
140
New Jersey
551
37,387
444
29,062
345
16,343
194
New Mexico
135
6,324
348
4,456
245
2,792
153
New York
517
94,863
500
72,853
384
45,462
240
North
Carolina
491
26,101
324
18,903
235
11,070
138
North Dakota
129
1,755
273
1,293
201
944
147
Ohio
845
36,863
325
25,082
221
15,689
138
TABLE 6.2
Continued
continues

Police Personnel
155
TABLE 6.2
Continued
Full-time employees
Total
Sworn personnel
Responding to calls
State
Number
of
agencies
Number
Per
100,000
residents
Number
Per
100,000
residents
Number
Per
100,000
residents
Oklahoma
449
11,376
330
7,622
221
5,129
149
Oregon
178
10,683
312
6,496
190
3,573
104
Pennsylvania
1,166
33,427
272
26,373
215
17,648
144
Rhode Island
51
3,390
323
2,688
256
1,636
156
South
Carolina
258
13,046
325
9,741
243
5,973
149
South Dakota
170
2,468
327
1,708
226
1,201
159
Tennessee
367
22,148
389
14,494
255
9,296
163
Texas
1,800
80,535
386
51,478
247
28,831
138
Utah
129
6,346
284
4,179
187
2,545
114
Vermont
65
1,459
240
1,034
170
796
131
Virginia
327
25,842
365
20,254
286
9,900
140
Washington
256
15,513
263
9,910
168
6,367
108
West Virginia
229
4,148
229
3,150
174
2,387
132
Wisconsin
512
18,010
336
13,237
247
8,290
155
Wyoming
81
2,287
463
1,477
299
989
200
Total
17,784
1,019,496
362
708,022
252
425,427
151
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Census of State and Local Law Enforcement Agencies,
2000.

156
Facts and Data
State and local law enforcement employees
Full-time
Part-time
Number of
employees
Total
Sworn
Nonsworn
Total
Sworn
Nonsworn
Total
1,019,496
708,022
311,474
99,731
42,803
56,928
Local police
565,915
440,920
124,995
62,110
27,323
34,787
Sheriff
293,823
164,711
129,112
22,737
10,300
12,437
Primary state
87,028
56,348
30,680
817
95
722
Special jurisdiction
69,650
43,413
26,237
13,583
4,667
8,916
Texas constable
3,080
2,630
450
484
418
66
Percentage
of employees
Total
100
69.4
31.6
100
42.1
57.8
Local police
100
77.9
22.1
100
44.0
56.0
Sheriff
100
56.1
43.9
100
45.3
54.7
Primary state
100
64.7
35.3
100
11.6
88.4
Special jurisdiction
100
62.3
37.7
100
34.4
65.6
Texas constable
100
85.4
14.6
100
86.4
13.6
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Census of State and Local Law Enforcement Agencies,
2000.
TABLE 6.3
The Types of Agencies That Employ Police Personnel 
(Sworn and Nonsworn Employees)

Police Personnel
157
Number of full-time employees
600,000
500,000
400,000
300,000
200,000
100,000
           0
 1987      1990       1993       1997       2000       2003
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police Departments, 2003.
Sworn 
officers
Total
FIGURE 6.1
Full-Time Employment by Local Police Departments, 1987–2003
400,000
300,000
200,000
100,000
           0
 1987      1990       1993       1997       2000       2003
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sheriffs’ Offices, 2003.
Sworn 
officers
Total
Number of full-time employees
FIGURE 6.2
Full-Time Employment by Sheriffs’ Offices, 1987–2003

158
Facts and Data
Agencies 
Full-time sworn 
personnel 
Full-time civilian 
personnel 
Number of  
sworn 
personnel* 
Number 
Percentage 
Number 
Percentage 
Number 
Percentage 
1,000 or more 
50 
0.4 
153,903 
34.1 
45,737 
35.5 
500–999 
39 
0.3 
27,370 
6.1 
9,183 
7.1 
250–499 
105 
0.8 
36,330 
8.0 
11,581 
9.0 
100–249 
400 
3.2 
57,767 
12.8 
17,877 
13.9 
50–99 
845 
6.7 
56,367 
12.5 
16,643 
12.9 
25–49 
1,661 
13.1 
53,287 
11.8 
13,958 
10.8 
10–24 
3,798 
30.0 
46,218 
10.2 
10,985 
8.5 
5–9 
3,272 
25.9 
15,717 
3.5 
2,451 
1.9 
2–4 
1,924 
15.2 
4,237 
0.9 
561 
0.4 
1 
561 
4.4 
540 
0.1 
41 
— 
Total 
12,656 
100 
451,737 
100 
129,013 
100 
*Includes both full-time and part-time employees.
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police Departments, 2003. 
TABLE 6.4
Local Police Departments and Full-Time Personnel, 
by Number of Sworn Personnel, 2003

Police Personnel
159
Agencies 
Full-time sworn 
personnel 
Full-time civilian 
personnel 
Number of  
sworn 
personnel* 
Number 
Percentage 
Number 
Percentage 
Number 
Percentage 
1,000 or more 
13 
0.4 
32,734 
18.8 
25,432 
16.3 
500–999 
24 
0.8 
16,822 
9.7 
13,400 
8.6 
250–499 
87 
1.9 
30,483 
17.5 
27,473 
17.6 
100–249 
230 
7.5 
33,438 
19.2 
26,831 
17.2 
50–99 
363 
11.8 
23,385 
13.4 
26,043 
16.7 
25–49 
656 
21.4 
20,656 
11.9 
20,052 
12.9 
10–24 
955 
31.2 
12,894 
7.4 
13,068 
8.4 
5–9 
490 
16.0 
3,102 
1.8 
3,267 
2.1 
2–4 
233 
7.3 
717 
0.4 
446 
0.3 
1 
19 
0.6 
19 
– 
10
– 
Total 
87 
1.9 
30,483 
17.5 
27,473 
17.6 
*Includes both full-time and part-time employees.
– = Less than 0.05% 
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sheriffs’ Offices, 2003. 
TABLE 6.5
Sheriffs’ Offices and Full-Time Personnel, by Number of Sworn Personnel, 2003
Full-time sworn personnel
Jurisdiction
Total number
Number per
10,000
residentsa
Percentage
responding to
callsb
New York (NY)
35,973
45
57
Chicago (IL)
13,469
47
72
Los Angeles (CA)
9,307
24
51
Philadelphia (PA)
6,853
46
59
Houston (TX)
5,350
27
70
Detroit (MI)
3,837
42
26
TABLE 6.6
The 50 Largest Local Police Departments by Total Number of 
Full-Time Sworn Personnel, Number of Full-Time Sworn Personnel 
per 100,000 Residents, and Percentage of Full-Time Sworn Personnel 
Regularly Assigned to Respond to Calls for Service, 2003
continues

160
Facts and Data
Full-time sworn personnel
Jurisdiction
Total number
Number per
10,000
residentsa
Percentage
responding to
callsb
Washington (DC)
3,632
65
44
Baltimore (MD)
3,258
52
61
Miami–Dade Co. (FL)
3,178
14
73
Dallas (TX)
2,948
24
63
Suffolk Co. (NY)
2,808
19
46
Phoenix (AZ)
2,763
20
36
Las Vegas–Clark Co. (NV)
2,640
17
49
Nassau Co. (NY)
2,497
19
54
San Francisco (CA)
2,216
30
49
Boston (MA)
2,109
36
66
San Diego (CA)
2,103
17
48
San Antonio (TX)
2,056
17
67
Milwaukee (WI)
1,989
34
68
Memphis (TN)
1,939
30
52
Honolulu (HI)
1,916
21
59
Cleveland (OH)
1,846
40
43
Columbus (OH)
1,797
25
57
Baltimore Co. (MD)
1,788
23
68
Jacksonville–Duval Co. (FL)
1,624
21
61
New Orleans (LA)
1,622
35
75
St. Louis (MO)
1,507
45
62
Charlotte–Mecklenberg Co. (NC)
1,499
22
45
Atlanta (GA)
1,462
35
76
Denver (CO)
1,429
26
42
San Jose (CA)
1,408
16
55
Newark (NJ)
1,332
48
55
Prince George’s Co. (MD)
1,328
16
40
Fairfax Co. (VA)
1,317
13
69
Nashville (TN)
1,312
24
53
TABLE 6.6
Continued
continues

Police Personnel
161
Full-time sworn personnel
Jurisdiction
Total number
Number per
10,000
residentsa
Percentage
responding to
callsb
Kansas City (MO)
1,299
29
61
Fort Worth (TX)
1,249
21
44
Seattle (WA)
1,238
22
53
Austin (TX)
1,198
18
46
Louisville (KY)
1,195
17
78
Indianapolis (IN)
1,170
15
49
El Paso (TX)
1,137
20
56
Montgomery Co. (MD)
1,089
12
69
Cincinnati (OH)
1,047
33
48
Miami (FL)
1,038
28
53
Pittsburg (PA)
1,030
32
48
Oklahoma City (OK)
1,007
19
67
Portland (OR)
1,005
19
44
Tampa (FL)
962
30
65
Tucson (AZ)
960
19
52
Note: Sworn employees are those with general arrest powers. Officers not assigned to respond to calls for service
typically were assigned to other areas of duty related to administration, investigations, technical support, jail
operations, or court operations.
aIn some cases populations were adjusted to more accurately reflect the population for which an agency provided
law enforcement services.
bIncludes all full-time sworn personnel with general arrest powers who were uniformed officers with regularly
assigned duties that included responding to calls for service.
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police Departments, 2003.
TABLE 6.6
Continued

162
Facts and Data
Percentage of officers by area of duty 
County or equivalent
Full-time 
sworn 
personnel 
Patrol 
Investi- 
gative 
Jail 
operations 
Court 
Security 
Process 
serving 
Los Angeles Co. (CA) 
8,622 
42 
6 
25 
15 
1 
Cook Co. (IL)
a
5,555 
10 
1 
61 
27 
2 
Clark Co. (NV)
b
2,640 
48 
18 
25 
0 
–
Harris Co. (TX) 
2,517 
30 
6 
27 
5 
1 
Orange Co. (CA) 
1,755 
29 
7 
40 
12 
1 
Jacksonville-Duval Co. (FL)
b
1,624 
61 
12 
0 
5 
1 
Broward Co. (FL) 
1,605 
84 
13 
0 
2 
1 
Riverside Co. (CA) 
1,542 
69 
9 
13 
9 
0 
San Bernardino Co. (CA) 
1,541 
32 
12 
22 
11 
0 
Sacramento Co. (CA) 
1,525 
36 
11 
26 
6 
–
San Diego Co. (CA) 
1,320 
35 
22 
4 
14 
3 
Orange Co. (FL) 
1,294 
62 
15 
0 
10 
4 
Palm Beach Co. (FL) 
1,177 
65 
9 
0 
9 
3 
Hillsborough Co. (FL) 
1,126 
65 
13 
0 
–
2 
Alameda Co. (CA)
c
974 
15 
2 
48 
16 
1 
Wayne Co. (MI) 
893 
11 
3 
45 
6 
1 
East Baton Rouge Parish (LA) 
875 
14 
9 
36 
3 
5 
Pinellas Co. (FL) 
868 
48 
16 
0 
16 
3 
Oakland Co. (MI)
a,c
840 
41 
8 
48 
3 
1 
San Francisco Co. (CA) 
824 
0 
1 
67 
9 
2 
Erie Co. (NY) 
813 
18 
4 
62 
16 
1 
TABLE 6.7
Twenty-Five Largest Sheriffs’ Offices, by Number and Function of 
Full-Time Sworn Personnel, 2003
continues

Police Personnel
163
Percentage of officers by area of duty 
County or equivalent
Full-time 
sworn 
personnel 
Patrol 
Investi- 
gative 
Jail 
operations 
Court 
Security 
Process 
serving 
TABLE 6.7
Continued
Ventura Co. (CA) 
760 
30 
12 
15 
10 
1 
Jefferson Parish (LA) 
747 
42 
27 
26 
0 
1 
Contra Costa Co. (CA) 
707 
37 
6 
36 
9 
1 
King Co. (WA) 
705 
38 
22 
0 
4 
2 
Note: Sworn employees are those with general arrest powers. 
– = Less than 0.05% 
aEmployment data are based on the 2004 Census of State and Local Law Enforcement Agencies. 
bThe Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department, the result of a merger of the Clark County Sheriff’s Office and the  
Las Vegas Police Department in 1973, serves as the local police department for the City of Las Vegas. The  
Jacksonville Sheriff’s Office serves as the local police department for the City of Jacksonville, which is consolidated  
with Duval County. These two agencies, although headed by sheriffs, are classified as local police departments in 
LEMAS for data analysis purposes.
cDuty area percentages are based on the 2000 LEMAS survey. 
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sheriffs’ Offices, 2003. 

164
Facts and Data
Full-time sworn 
Part-time sworn 
Population 
served 
Percentage 
of 
agencies 
using 
Total 
number 
Average 
number* 
Percentage 
of 
agencies 
using 
Total 
number 
Average 
number* 
All sizes 
7 
5,376 
6 
35 
26,625 
6 
1,000,000 or more 
0 
0 
0 
44 
947 
131 
500,000–999,999 
5 
69 
34 
35 
739 
55 
250,000–499,999 
17 
454 
63 
37 
472 
30 
100,000–249,999 
7 
114 
9 
43 
1,137 
15 
50,000–99,999 
4 
225 
13 
42 
2,101 
12 
25,000–49,999 
5 
206 
6 
33 
2,590 
10 
10,000–24,999 
5 
467 
5 
28 
3,845 
7 
2,500–9,999 
7 
1,953 
6 
34 
7,648 
6 
Under 2,500 
8 
1,888 
5 
37 
7,146 
4 
Note: Detail may not add to total because of rounding.
*Excludes agencies not using sworn reserve or auxiliary officers.
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police Departments, 2003. 
TABLE 6.8
Use of Sworn Reserve or Auxiliary Officers in Local Police Departments, 
by Size of Population Served, 2003

Police Personnel
165
Full-time sworn 
Part-time sworn 
Population 
served 
Percentage 
of 
agencies 
using 
Total 
number 
Average 
number* 
Percentage 
of 
agencies 
using 
Total 
number 
Average 
number* 
All sizes 
13 
5,209 
13 
44 
20,844 
16 
1,000,000 or more 
27 
335 
43 
58 
2,601 
157 
500,000–999,999 
14 
560 
63 
40 
1,639 
62 
250,000–499,999 
15 
366 
20 
51 
1,834 
30 
100,000–249,999 
12 
659 
18 
50 
3,353 
21 
50,000–99,999 
21 
1,138 
15 
51 
3,523 
19 
25,000–49,999 
15 
1,196 
12 
49 
4,375 
13 
10,000–24,999 
12 
674 
7 
43 
2,734 
8 
2,500–9,999 
8 
281 
6 
30 
785 
4 
Under 2,500 
27 
335 
43 
58 
2,601 
157 
Note: Detail may not add to total because of rounding.
*Excludes agencies not using sworn reserve or auxiliary officers.
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sheriffs’ Offices, 2003. 
TABLE 6.9
Use of Sworn Reserve or Auxiliary Officers in Sheriffs’ Offices, 
by Size of Population Served, 2003

166
Facts and Data
Full-time nonsworn
Part-time nonsworn
Population 
served 
Percentage 
of 
agencies 
using 
Total 
number 
Average 
number* 
Percentage 
of 
agencies 
using 
Total 
number 
Average 
number* 
All sizes 
1 
585 
6 
11 
13,589 
10 
1,000,000 or more 
0 
0 
0 
19 
4,677 
1,507 
500,000–999,999 
0 
0 
0 
13 
637 
123 
250,000–499,999 
2 
1 
1 
7 
51 
16 
100,000–249,999 
2 
22 
5 
9 
273 
18 
50,000–99,999 
2 
69 
9 
12 
814 
16 
25,000–49,999 
–
29 
13 
14 
1,300 
12 
10,000–24,999 
2 
280 
9 
15 
2,625 
9 
2,500–9,999 
1 
103 
4 
10 
1,841 
5 
Under 2,500 
–
81 
4 
9 
1,372 
3 
Note: Detail may not add to total because of rounding.
*Excludes agencies not using sworn reserve or auxiliary officers.
– = Less than 0.05%
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police Departments, 2003. 
TABLE 6.10
Use of Nonsworn Reserve or Auxiliary Officers in Local Police Departments, 
by Size of Population Served, 2003

Police Personnel
167
Full-time nonsworn
Part-time nonsworn
Population 
served 
Percentage 
of 
agencies 
using 
Total 
number 
Average 
number* 
Percentage 
of 
agencies 
using 
Total 
number 
Average 
number* 
All sizes 
2 
1,058 
14 
13 
10,683 
26 
1,000,000 or more 
4 
1 
1 
39 
4,700 
425 
500,000–999,999 
2 
111 
100 
14 
627 
71 
250,000–499,999 
2 
75 
34 
11 
114 
9 
100,000–249,999 
5 
356 
25 
25 
2,326 
30 
50,000–99,999 
2 
147 
21 
14 
692 
14 
25,000–49,999 
1 
199 
21 
15 
1,133 
11 
10,000–24,999 
2 
97 
5 
10 
470 
6 
2,500–9,999 
3 
73 
4 
9 
620 
11 
Under 2,500 
4 
1 
1 
39 
4,700 
425 
Note: Detail may not add to total because of rounding.
*Excludes agencies not using sworn reserve or auxiliary officers.
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sheriffs’; Offices, 2003. 
TABLE 6.11
Use of Nonsworn Reserve or Auxiliary Officers in Sheriffs’ Offices, 
by Size of Population Served, 2003

168
Facts and Data
Percentage of full-time sworn employees who were
Total
White
Black/African American
Hispanic/Latino
Other*
Population served
Total
Male
Female
Total
Male
Female
Total
Male
Female
Total
Male
Female
Total
Male
Female
1,000,000 or more
100
82.7
17.3
61.1
53.2
7.9
16.7
11.3
5.4
19.3
15.7
3.6%
2.8
2.6
0.2
500,000–999,999
100
84.4
15.6
61.9
54.1
7.8
24.4
18.0
6.4
7.8
6.8
1.0
6.0
5.4
0.6
250,000–499,999
100
85.4
14.6
66.6
57.7
8.9
19.4
15.3
4.1
11.3
10.0
1.3
2.7
2.4
0.3
100,000–249,999
100
89.0
11.0
76.0
68.2
7.8
11.9
9.8
2.1
9.1
8.2
0.9
3.0
2.8
0.2
50,000–99,999
100
91.2
8.8
83.3
76.6
6.7
7.4
6.3
1.1
7.0
6.2
0.8
2.3
2.2
0.1
25,000–49,999
100
91.8
8.2
87.5
80.8
6.7
5.8
4.9
0.9
5.5
5.0
0.5
1.2
1.0
0.2
10,000–24,999
100
93.3
6.8
90.4
84.6
5.8
4.4
4.0
0.4
3.0
2.8
0.2
2.1
1.9
0.2
2,500–9,999
100
93.8
6.2
89.8
84.5
5.3
4.2
3.7
0.5
3.4
3.2
0.2
2.6
2.3
0.3
Under 2,500
100
94.3
5.7
88.5
83.8
4.7
5.7
5.1
0.6
3.4
3.2
0.2
2.5
2.2
0.3
All sizes
100
88.7
11.3
76.4
69.4
7.0
11.7
9.0
2.7
9.1
7.8
1.3
2.8
2.5
0.3
Note: Detail may not add to total because of rounding.
*Includes Asians, Native Hawaiians or other Pacific Islanders, American Indians, Alaska Natives, and any other race.
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police Departments, 2003.
TABLE 6.12
Gender and Race of Full-Time Sworn Personnel in Local Police Departments, by Size of Population Served, 2003

Police Personnel
169
Percentage of full-time sworn employees who were
Total
White
Black/African American
Hispanic/Latino
Other*
Population served
Total
Male
Female
Total
Male
Female
Total
Male
Female
Total
Male
Female
Total
Male
Female
1,000,000 or more
100
85.2
14.8
69.0
59.6
9.4
11.8
9.0
2.7
15.8
13.5
2.3
3.5
3.1
0.4
500,000–999,999
100
84.9
15.1
73.9
64.3
9.7
14.2
10.1
4.1
9.2
8.1
1.1
2.7
2.4
0.3
250,000–499,999
100
86.0
14.0
82.8
72.8
9.9
10.5
7.5
3.1
5.4
4.7
0.8
1.3
1.1
0.2
100,000–249,999
100
87.2
12.8
85.8
76.2
9.6
9.7
7.0
2.7
3.2
2.7
0.4
1.3
1.2
0.1
50,000–99,999
100
87.7
12.3
91.3
80.7
10.6
6.0
4.6
1.4
1.8
1.6
0.1
0.9
0.8
0.1
25,000–49,999
100
90.9
9.1
89.6
82.2
7.4
6.2
5.0
1.2
3.3
2.9
0.4
0.9
0.8
0.1
10,000–24,999
100
90.6
9.4
86.2
79.2
7.0
10.9
8.7
2.2
1.9
1.7
0.2
1.0
1.0
–
Under 10,000
100
95.0
5.0
93.9
89.1
4.8
2.9
2.8
0.1
2.4
2.3
0.1
0.9
0.9
0.0
All sizes
100
87.1
12.9
81.2
72.0
9.2
10.0
7.5
2.6
6.9
6.0
0.9
1.9
1.7
0.2
Note: Detail may not add to total because of rounding.
*Includes Asians, Native Hawaiians or other Pacific Islanders, American Indians, Alaska Natives, and any other race.
– = Less than 0.05%
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sheriffs’ Offices, 2003.
TABLE 6.13
Gender and Race of Full-Time Sworn Personnel in Sheriffs’ Offices, by Size of Population Served, 2003

170
Facts and Data
Percentage of full-time 
sworn personnel
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police Departments, 2003.
1987  1990  1993  1997  2000  2003       1987  1990  1993  1997  2000  2003
Female
Minority*
*Includes blacks or African Americans, Hispanics or Latinos, Asians, Native Hawaiians or other Pacific Islanders, 
American Indians, Alaska Natives, and any other racial or ethnic minority.
30
25
20
15
10
  5
  0
FIGURE 6.3
Female and Minority Local Police Officers, 1987–2003
Percentage of full-time
sworn personnel
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sheriffs’ Offices, 2003.
30
25
20
15
10
  5
  0
Female
Minority*
*Includes blacks or African Americans, Hispanics or Latinos, Asians, Native Hawaiians or other Pacific Islanders, 
American Indians, Alaska Natives, and any other racial or ethnic minority.
1987  1990  1993  1997  2000  2003       1987  1990  1993  1997  2000  2003
FIGURE 6.4
Female and Minority Personnel in Sheriffs’ Offices, 1987–2003

Police Personnel
171
Screening methods
Criminal record check
Background investigation
Driving record check
Medical exam
Personal interview
Psychological evaluation
Drug test
Physical agility test
Written aptitude test
Credit history check
Polygraph exam
Personality inventory
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police Departments, 2003.
0             20              40              60            80           100
Percentage of local police officers employed
FIGURE 6.5
Local Police Officers Employed by Departments 
Using Various Recruit Screening Methods, 2003
Screening methods
Criminal record check
Personal interview
Background investigation
Driving record check
Medical exam
Drug test
Psychological evaluation
Credit history check
Written aptitude test
Physical agility test
Polygraph exam
Personality inventory
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sheriffs’ Offices, 2003.
0             20              40              60            80          100
Percentage of officers employed
FIGURE 6.6
Sworn Personnel Employed by Sheriffs’ Offices 
Using Various Recruit Screening Methods, 2003

172
Facts and Data
Percentage of agencies requiring a minimum of
Population 
served
Total with 
requirement
High school
diploma
Some
college*
2-year
college
degree
4-year
college
degree
1,000,000 or
more
98
72
18
7
1
500,000–
999,999
99
72
13
9
5
250,000–
499,999
99
84
8
4
3
100,000–
249,999
98
81
13
3
2
50,000–
99,999
100
76
17
6
1
25,000–
49,999
99
77
10
11
1
10,000–
24,999
99
82
7
9
1
2,500–9,999
99
83
7
9
—
Under 2,500
97
82
6
9
0
All sizes
98
81
8
9
1
Note: Detail may not add to total because of rounding.
*Non-degree requirements.
— = Less than 0.5%
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police Departments, 2003.
TABLE 6.14
Minimum Educational Requirements for New Officers in Local Police Departments, 
by Size of Population Service, 2003

Police Personnel
173
Percentage of agencies requiring a minimum of
Population 
served
Total with 
requirement
High school
diploma
Some
college*
2-year
college
degree
4-year
college
degree
1,000,000 or
more
100
85
4
12
0
500,000–
999,999
98
74
7
10
7
250,000–
499,999
99
91
4
3
2
100,000–
249,999
98
88
10
1
0
50,000–
99,999
100
86
12
2
0
25,000–
49,999
99
89
4
6
0
10,000–
24,999
98
89
2
7
0
Under 10,000
98
93
0
5
0
All sizes
99
89
4
5
—
Note: Detail may not add to total because of rounding.
*Non-degree requirements.
— = Less than 0.5%
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sherriff’s Offices, 2003.
TABLE 6.15
Minimum Educational Requirements for New Officers in Sheriffs’ Offices, 
by Size of Population Service, 2003

174
Facts and Data
Population served
250,000 or more
50,000–249,999
10,000–49,999
Under 10,000
0              400                   800               1,200            1,600
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police, 2003.
2003
2000
Average number of training hours required
FIGURE 6.7
Training Requirements for New Officer Recruits 
in Local Police Departments, 2000 and 2003
Population served
500,000 or more
100,000–499,999
25,000–99,999
Under 25,000
0              400                   800               1,200            1,600
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sheriffs’ Offices, 2003.
2003
2000
Average number of training hours required
FIGURE 6.8
Training Requirements for New Deputy Recruits 
in Sheriffs’ Offices, 2000 and 2003

Police Personnel
175
0             20              40               60              80         100
Source:  Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, State and Local Law Enforcement Training Academies, 2002.
Type of position
Local police officer
Sheriffs’ deputy
Campus police officer
Corrections officer
School resource officer
State police/patrol
Parole/probation officer
Firefighter
Private security officer
Tribal officer
Emergency medical
technician
Percentage of academies providing training 
and/or certification
FIGURE 6.9
Positions for which Academies Provided Training and/or Certification, 2002
Type of training
In-Service
Specialized
0   
  20 
       40 
           60                80            100
Percentage of academies providing training jobs
Source: Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, State and Local Law Enforcement Training Academies, 2002.
Supervisors
Field training
instructors
Field training
for recruits
Persons not
sponsored by a
law enforcement
agency
FIGURE 6.10
Types of Training Provided by Academies, 
in Addition to Basic Recruit Training, 2002

176
Facts and Data
Source: Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, State and Local Law Enforcement Training Academies, 2002.
Percentage of academies
 
Identifying community problems
Environmental causes of crime
History of community policing
Using problem-solving models
Prioritizing problems
Organizing/mobilizing community
Assessing effectiveness
Creating problem-solving teams
Analyzing call for service
Using crime mapping
Applying research methods
0        10        20        30        40        50        60
Community policing topic
FIGURE 6.11
Academies Providing In-Service Training on Community Policing Topics, 2002

Police Personnel
177
Training topic 
Percentage of academies 
providing training in topic area 
Median number of hours of 
instruction required 
Firearms skills 
99 
60  
Basic first-aid/CPR 
99 
24 
Emergency vehicle operations 
99 
36 
Self-defense 
99 
44 
Criminal law 
98 
40 
Domestic violence 
98 
12  
Ethics and integrity 
98 
8 
Investigations 
98 
45 
Patrol procedures/techniques 
98 
40 
Juvenile law and procedures 
98 
8 
Constitutional law 
96
11
Cultural diversity 
95 
8 
Health and fitness 
95 
50 
Officer civil/criminal liability 
93 
6 
Human relations 
92 
11 
Use of non-lethal weapons 
91 
12  
Community policing 
90 
8 
Stress prevention/management 
86 
6 
Hate crimes/bias crimes 
85 
4 
Mediation skills/conflict 
management
83 
8 
Domestic preparedness 
78 
8  
Problem solving (for example,
SARA, CAPRA) 
64 
6 
Computers/information systems 
59 
8 
Basic foreign language (such as, 
survival Spanish) 
35 
16 
Note: SARA stands for scanning, analysis, response, assessment; CAPRA stands for clients, acquiring and analyzing  
information, partnerships, response, assessment.
Source: Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, State and Local Law Enforcement Training Academies,
2002. 
TABLE 6.16
Academies Providing Basic Instruction on Various Topics and 
Number of Hours of Instruction Required, 2002

178
Facts and Data
Source: Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, State and local Law Enforcement Training Academies, 2002.
Method of instruction
Percentage of academies providing instruction 
on racially-biased policing
0           20             40             60            80            100
Not addressed
Field training
Practical skills training
Academic training
FIGURE 6.12
Training Related to Racially-Biased Policing, by Methods of Instruction, 2002
Type of training
Response to weapons of mass destruction
Understanding the nature of terrorism
Relevant federal, state, and local agencies
Interagency information sharing
Intelligence gathering
Overview of related technology/equipment
Role of anti-terrorist task forces
Post-incident stabilization of community
Intelligence analysis
Other terrorism training
0     10     20    30     40     50   60  
Percentage of academies 
providing training in listed area
Source: Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, State and Local Law Enforcement Training Academies, 2002.
FIGURE 6.13
Basic Instruction Related to Terrorism and 
Responding to Terrorist Incidents, 2002

Police Personnel
179
Percentage that have access 
Total 
Part of 
academy 
facility 
Not part of 
academy 
facility 
No access 
Outdoor firearms range 
96 
47 
49 
4 
Vehicle operation range 
95 
41 
54 
5 
Weight room
93 
60 
33 
7 
Defensive tactics room
92 
68 
23 
8 
Desktop computers 
89 
61 
28 
11 
Library 
88 
48 
40 
12 
Gymnasium 
87 
44 
43 
14 
Scenario training facility
79 
43 
36 
21 
Firearms training simulator 
77 
58 
19 
23 
Media lab/video production 
   facility 
71 
34 
38 
29 
Obstacle course 
68 
42 
26 
32 
Mock courtroom
66 
14 
52 
34 
Laptop computers 
65 
45 
20 
35 
Internet/online classes 
53 
25 
27 
48 
Mobile data terminals/computers 
50 
18 
31 
51 
Swimming pool 
44 
7 
37 
56 
Video conferencing classes 
43 
14 
29 
57 
Subscription to satellite downlink 
Information service*
37 
18 
20 
63 
Indoor firearms range 
35 
17 
18 
65 
Dormitory/residential facilities 
31 
18 
12 
69 
Driving simulator 
22 
13 
9 
78 
Mail correspondence courses 
16 
4 
13 
84 
*For example, LETN.
Source: Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, State and Local Law Enforcement Training Academies,
2002. 
TABLE 6.17
Law Enforcement Training Academy Facilities, 2002

180
Facts and Data
Source of funds, training and/or equipment, 2002
State funding
Tuition
Percentage of academies receiving 
funds or equipment
   0              20               40               60                80            100
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, State and Local Law Enforcement Training Academies, 2002.
 
City/county funding
Sponsoring agencies
Student fees 
(other than tuition)
Federal funding
Donation from
private entities
Surplus government
equipment
Other funding sources
FIGURE 6.14
Sources of Training Funds or Equipment, 2002
Recruits completing training, by race and gender, 2002
White
Hispanic/Latino
Black/African American
Other*
Source: Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, State and Local Law Enforcement Training Academies, 2002.
*Includes American Indian/Alaska Native, Asian, Hawaiian or Pacific Islander, and any other race.
0            20               40              60             80           100
Percentage of recruits
Male
Female
FIGURE 6.15
Recruits Completing Training, by Race and Gender, 2002

Police Personnel
181
Average base annual salary, 2003 (U.S. dollars)
Entry-level officer
Sergeant or equivalent
Chief
Population served
Minimum
Maximum
Minimum
Maximum
Minimum
Maximum
1,000,000 or more
37,700
57,800
60,200
73,500
113,000
157,100
500,000–999,999
36,600
54,900
58,000
69,600
109,700
143,200
250,000–499,999
38,300
53,500
54,600
66,900
94,400
129,200
100,000–249,999
39,600
54,000
56,000
68,000
95,000
123,100
50,000–99,999
37,400
51,200
54,500
65,300
85,500
106,900
25,000–49,999
35,900
48,600
53,400
62,400
77,700
94,500
10,000–24,999
33,000
45,000
47,400
55,200
65,900
77,800
2,500–9,999
29,000
36,200
37,400
43,600
48,900
56,200
Under 2,500
23,400
26,800
27,100
30,800
32,700
36,500
All sizes
28,200
35,300
36,600
42,400
48,800
56,900
Note: Salary figures have been rounded to the nearest $100. Computation of average salary excludes departments
with no full-time employee in that position.
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police Departments, 2003.
TABLE 6.18
Average Base Annual Salary for Selected Positions in 
Local Police Departments, by Size of Population Served, 2003

182
Facts and Data
Average base annual salary, 2003 (U.S. dollars)
Entry-level deputy
Sergeant or equivalent
Chief
Population
served
Minimum
Maximum
Minimum
Maximum
Minimum
Maximum
1,000,000 or
more
38,800
54,500
56,200
70,000
119,300
135,100
500,000–
999,999
35,000
51,200
51,000
62,900
96,700
111,000
250,000–
499,999
32,000
44,400
43,700
55,500
84,200
96,700
100,000–
249,999
30,000
39,800
39,600
50,200
71,600
81,200
50,000–
99,999
28,400
36,100
35,100
43,700
62,000
68,500
25,000–
49,999
25,800
30,700
31,400
36,000
53,500
57,800
10,000–
24,999
24,900
29,400
30,200
34,200
49,300
52,800
Under 10,000
23,300
26,200
28,000
30,900
37,000
40,000
Note: Salary figures have been rounded to the nearest $100. Computation of average salary excludes sheriff’s
offices with no full-time employee in that position.
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sheriffs’ Offices, 2003.
TABLE 6.19
Average Base Annual Salary for Selected Positions in Sheriffs’ Offices, 
by Size of Population Served, 2003

Police Personnel
183
Percentage of agencies using each type of patrol on a routine basis 
Population served 
Foot 
Bicycle 
Motorcycle 
Marine 
Horse 
1,000,000 or more 
75 
100 
81 
63 
63 
500,000–999,999 
79 
95 
100 
41 
63 
250,000–499,999 
76 
83 
93 
32 
59 
100,000–249,999 
57 
83 
89 
14 
18 
50,000–99,999 
54 
64 
63 
14 
7 
25,000–49,999 
47 
60 
49 
8 
2 
10,000–24,999 
53 
58 
21 
5 
2 
2,500–9,999 
61 
43 
8 
3 
—
Under 2,500 
61 
18 
3 
2 
—
All sizes 
59 
38 
14 
4 
2 
— = Less than 0.05 
Source:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police Departments, 2003. 
TABLE 6.20
Types of Routine Patrol Other Than Automobile Used 
by Local Police Departments, by Size of Population Served
Percentage of agencies using each type of patrol on a routine basis
Population served
Foot
Marine
Motorcycle
Foot
Horse
1,000,000 or more
56
56
72
64
32
500,000–999,999
34
41
54
40
20
250,000–499,999
27
45
36
33
15
100,000–249,999
21
36
23
21
14
50,000–99,999
24
34
16
16
6
25,000–49,999
21
18
7
6
1
10,000–24,999
25
15
6
4
3
Under 10,000
29
9
2
3
2
All sizes
25
21
11
10
5
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sheriffs’ Offices, 2003.
TABLE 6.21
Types of Routine Patrol Other Than Automobile Used by Sheriffs’ Offices, 
by Size of Population Served

184
Facts and Data
Percentage of agencies 
Population 
served 
Executing 
arrest 
warrants 
Enforcing 
protection 
orders 
Providing 
court security 
Serving 
civil 
process 
Enforcing 
child 
support 
orders 
Serving 
eviction 
notices 
1,000,000  
or more 
81 
69 
25 
13 
25 
13 
500,000–
999,999 
79 
65 
13 
13 
13 
5 
250,000–
499,999 
81 
71 
10 
5 
10 
0 
100,000–
249,999 
82 
71 
15 
9 
11 
3 
50,000–
99,999 
91 
81 
27 
8 
12 
4 
25,000–
49,999 
95 
87 
29 
13 
11 
2 
10,000–
24,999 
92 
85 
27 
11 
12 
3 
2,500–
9,999 
93 
87 
28 
14 
15 
8 
Under 
2,500 
89 
81 
27 
26 
20 
16 
All sizes 
91 
84 
27 
18 
16 
10 
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police Departments, 2003. 
TABLE 6.22
Court-Related Functions of Local Police Departments, 
by Size of Population Served, 2003

Police Personnel
185
Percentage of agencies 
Population 
served 
Serving 
civil 
processes 
Enforcing 
arrest 
warrants 
Enforcing 
protection 
orders 
Providing 
court 
security 
Servicing 
eviction 
notices 
Enforcing 
child 
support 
orders 
1,000,000 
or more 
85 
92 
92 
96 
73 
65 
500,000–
999,999 
93 
93 
95 
93 
87 
76 
250,000–
499,999 
95 
97 
93 
92 
85 
80 
100,000–
249,999 
97 
97 
93 
93 
87 
83 
50,000–
99,999 
99 
98 
98 
92 
96 
77 
25,000–
49,999 
99 
99 
97 
94 
92 
74 
10,000–
24,999 
98 
98 
96 
98 
95 
82 
Under 
10,000 
97 
96 
96 
93 
87 
64 
All sizes 
98 
97 
96 
94 
91 
76 
Source:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sheriffs’ Offices, 2003. 
TABLE 6.23
Court-Related Functions of Sheriffs’ Offices, 
by Size of Population Served, 2003

186
Facts and Data
Percentage of agencies 
Population served 
Providing 
inmate 
transport 
Operating a 
temporary 
holding cell* 
Operating 
one or more  
jails 
1,000,000 or more 
50 
69 
19 
500,000–999,999 
25 
54 
5 
250,000–499,999 
44 
46 
15 
100,000–249,999 
40 
44 
23 
50,000–99,999 
46 
46 
19 
25,000–49,999 
54 
47 
15 
10,000–24,999 
41 
40 
13 
2,500–9,999 
33 
26 
9 
Under 2,500 
24 
10 
6 
All sizes 
32 
24 
9 
*Not for overnight detention. 
Source:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police Departments, 2003. 
TABLE 6.24
Detention Functions of Local Police Departments, 
by Size of Population Served, 2003
Percentage of agencies 
Population 
Served 
Providing 
inmate 
transport 
Operating a 
temporary 
holding cell* 
Operating 
one or more  
jails 
1,000,000 or more 
89 
69 
85 
500,000–999,999 
97 
60 
71 
250,000–499,999 
91 
53 
65 
100,000–249,999 
86 
34 
79 
50,000–99,999 
90 
21 
82 
25,000–49,999 
95 
35 
82 
10,000–24,999 
88 
29 
77 
Under 10,000 
84 
23 
65 
All sizes 
89 
31 
76 
*Not for overnight detention. 
Source:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sheriffs’ Offices, 2003. 
TABLE 6.25
Detention Functions of Sheriffs’ Offices, by Size of Population Served, 2003

Police Personnel
187
Agencies operating temporary holding (lockup) facilities* 
Adult 
Juvenile 
Population 
served 
Percentage with
lockup 
Median total 
capacity 
Percentage 
with 
lockup 
Median total 
capacity 
1,000,000 or more 
31 
79 
19 
40 
500,000–999,999 
25 
67 
25 
12 
250,000–499,999 
32 
58 
12 
5 
100,000–249,999 
43 
32 
28 
4 
50,000–99,999 
51 
12 
34 
3 
25,000–49,999 
52 
8 
33 
2 
10,000–24,999 
48 
5 
29 
2 
2,500–9,999 
26 
4 
12 
2 
Under 2,500 
8 
4 
3 
1 
All sizes 
25 
4 
13 
2 
Note: Median capacity is based on total for all lockups, and excludes departments not
operating a facility. 
*For overnight detention and physically separate from a jail.
Source:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police Departments, 2003. 
TABLE 6.26
Temporary Holding (Lockup) Facilities Operated by Local Police Departments, 
by Size of Population Served, 2003

188
Facts and Data
Agencies operating temporary holding (lockup) facilities* 
Adult 
Juvenile 
Population 
served 
Percentage 
with 
lockup 
Median total 
capacity 
Percentage with
lockup 
Median total 
capacity 
1,000,000 or 
more 
31 
175 
15 
7 
500,000–
999,999 
19 
196 
3 
23 
250,000–
499,999 
23 
27 
13 
10 
100,000–
249,999 
17 
24 
8 
4 
50,000–
99,999 
12 
30 
1 
15 
25,000–
49,999 
22 
12 
8 
4 
10,000–4,999 
26 
20 
8 
2 
Under 10,000 
26 
10 
2 
1 
All sizes 
23 
16 
6 
4 
Note: Median capacity is based on total for all lockups, and excludes sheriffs’ offices not operating a facility. 
*For overnight detention and physically separate from a jail.
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sheriffs’ Offices, 2003. 
TABLE 6.27
Temporary Holding (Lockup) Facilities Operated by Sheriffs’ Offices, 
by Size of Population Served, 2003

Police Personnel
189
Percentage of agencies responsible for 
Population 
served 
Crime 
prevention 
education 
Animal 
control 
School 
crossing 
services 
Emergency 
medical 
services 
Civil 
defense 
Fire 
services 
1,000,000 or 
more 
94 
25 
50 
19 
31 
0 
500,000–
999,999 
87 
25 
59 
8 
17 
3 
250,000–
499,999 
90 
32 
46 
7 
17 
5 
100,000–
249,999 
94 
35 
56 
9 
18 
2 
50,000–99,999 
95 
49 
54 
13 
16 
3 
25,000–49,999 
95 
57 
51 
19 
18 
4 
10,000–24,999 
92 
61 
49 
21 
21 
7 
2,500–9,999 
79 
68 
47 
27 
18 
8 
Under 2,500 
58 
70 
33 
30 
20 
14 
All sizes 
74 
65 
42 
26 
19 
10 
Source:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police Departments, 2003. 
TABLE 6.28
Special Public Safety Functions of Local Police Departments, 
by Size of Population Service, 2003

190
Facts and Data
Percentage of agencies responsible for 
Population 
served 
Crime 
prevention 
education 
Animal 
control 
School 
crossing 
services 
Emergency 
medical 
defense 
Civil 
defense 
Fire 
services 
1,000,000 
or more 
92 
19 
19 
12 
23 
4 
500,000–
999,999 
69 
17 
14 
7 
17 
3 
250,000–
499,999 
66 
14 
19 
10 
16 
6 
100,000–
249,999 
77 
34 
26 
9 
22 
5 
50,000–
99,999 
79 
30 
15 
9 
11 
2 
25,000–
49,999 
77 
30 
15 
10 
14 
5 
10,000–
24,999 
70 
42 
14 
13 
19 
8 
Under 
10,000 
69 
46 
14 
29 
34 
28 
All sizes 
73 
36 
16 
15 
20 
10 
Source:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sheriffs’ Offices, 2003. 
TABLE 6.29
Special Public Safety Functions of Sheriffs’ Offices, 
by Size of Population Service, 2003

Police Personnel
191
Percentage of agencies responsible for 
Population 
served 
Traffic law 
enforcement 
Accident 
investigation 
Traffic direction 
and 
control 
Parking  
enforcement 
Commercial 
vehicle 
enforcement 
1,000,000 or 
more 
100 
100 
88 
88 
81 
500,000–
999,999 
100 
100 
97 
71 
57 
250,000–
499,999 
100 
100 
95 
73 
61 
100,000–
249,999 
100 
99 
94 
81 
56 
50,000–
99,999 
100 
99 
90 
88 
51 
25,000–
49,999 
100 
99 
91 
93 
52 
10,000–
24,999 
100 
99 
95 
92 
45 
2,500–9,999 
100 
98 
90 
89 
39 
Under 2,500 
100 
94 
86 
81 
32 
All sizes 
100 
97 
89 
86 
38 
Source:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police Departments, 2003. 
TABLE 6.30
Traffic and Vehicle-Related Functions of Local Police Departments, 
by Size and Population Served, 2003

192
Facts and Data
Percentage of agencies responsible for 
Population 
served 
Traffic law 
enforcement 
Accident 
investigation 
Traffic 
direction and 
control 
Parking 
enforcement 
Commercial 
vehicle 
enforcement 
1,000,000 or 
more 
89 
81 
81 
77 
65 
500,000–
999,999 
80 
66 
75 
58 
36 
250,000–
499,999 
73 
61 
65 
41 
26 
100,000–
249,999 
84 
62 
65 
36 
18 
50,000–99,999 
88 
67 
66 
38 
23 
25,000–49,999 
92 
74 
72 
30 
14 
10,000–24,999 
92 
77 
76 
33 
19 
Under 10,000 
94 
82 
72 
38 
14 
All sizes 
90 
74 
71 
36 
18 
Source:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sheriffs’ Offices, 2003. 
TABLE 6.31
Traffic and Vehicle-Related Functions of Sheriffs’ Offices, 
by Size and Population Served, 2003

Police Personnel
193
Percentage of agencies responsible for 
Population 
served 
Tactical 
operations 
(SWAT) 
Search 
and 
rescue 
Underwater 
recovery 
Bomb/ 
explosives 
disposal 
1,000,000 or more 
100 
63 
56 
88 
500,000–999,999 
97 
49 
44 
87 
250,000–499,999 
100 
29 
27 
76 
100,000–249,999 
93 
26 
17 
42 
50,000–99,999 
86 
19 
16 
18 
25,000–49,999 
68 
20 
8 
6 
10,000–24,999 
43 
19 
6 
3 
2,500–9,999 
20 
20 
2 
1 
Under 2,500 
8 
22 
2 
—
All sizes 
25 
21 
4 
3 
— = Less than 0.5%
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police Departments, 2003. 
TABLE 6.32
Special Operations Functions of Local Police Departments, 
by Size of Population Served, 2003

194
Facts and Data
Percentage of agencies responsible for 
Population 
served 
Search 
and 
rescue 
Tactical 
operations 
(SWAT) 
Underwater 
recovery 
Bomb/ 
explosives 
disposal 
1,000,000 or more 
69 
77 
65 
58 
500,000–999,999 
63 
85 
46 
46 
250,000–499,999 
54 
72 
52 
55 
100,000–249,999 
51 
72 
44 
19 
50,000–99,999 
53 
80 
47 
16 
25,000–49,999 
52 
47 
26 
4 
10,000–24,999 
60 
27 
21 
4 
Under 10,000 
57 
13 
6 
4 
All sizes 
56 
43 
27 
10 
Source:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sheriffs’ Offices, 2003. 
TABLE 6.33
Special Operations Functions of Sheriffs’ Offices, 
by Size of Population Served, 2003
Percentage of agencies with a mission statement 
Population 
served
Total 
With a community 
policing component 
No community 
policing component 
1,000,000 or more 
100 
88 
13 
500,000–999,999 
100 
61 
39 
250,000–499,999 
98 
83 
15 
100,000–249,999 
99 
87 
12 
50,000–99,999 
97 
76 
21 
25,000–49,999 
95 
76 
19 
10,000–24,999 
87 
65 
23 
2,500–9,999 
71 
47 
24 
Under 2,500 
50 
32 
18 
All sizes 
67 
47 
20 
Source:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police Departments, 2003. 
TABLE 6.34
Local Police Departments with a Mission Statement That 
Includes Community Policing, by Size of Population Served, 2003

Police Personnel
195
Percentage of agencies with a mission statement 
Population 
served
Total 
With a community 
policing component 
No community 
policing component 
1,000,000 or more 
92 
69 
23 
 500,000–999,999 
93 
56 
38 
250,000–499,999 
94 
52 
42 
100,000–249,999 
93 
45 
48 
50,000–99,999 
75 
35 
39 
25,000–49,999 
64 
31 
34 
10,000–24,999 
57 
19 
39 
Under 10,000 
44 
17 
27 
All sizes 
64 
28 
36 
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sheriffs’ Offices, 2003. 
TABLE 6.35
Sheriffs’ Offices with a Mission Statement That Includes Community Policing, 
by Size of Population Served, 2003

196
Facts and Data
Activities in year ending June 30, 2003 
Population 
served 
Problem- 
solving 
partnerships 
or written 
agreements 
Partnered 
with citizen 
groups to 
elicit 
feedback 
Upgraded 
technology 
for analysis 
of community 
problems 
Trained 
citizens in 
community
policing
Conducted 
citizen police 
academy 
1,000,000 
or more 
88 
94 
69 
75 
81 
500,000–
999,999 
92 
81 
70 
65 
78 
250,000–
499,999 
95 
85 
73 
71 
78 
100,000–
249,999 
91 
86 
67 
65 
78 
50,000–
99,999 
86 
73 
54 
51 
65 
25,000–
49,999 
82 
67 
44 
38 
54 
10,000–
24,999 
70 
54 
29 
28 
32 
2,500–
9,999 
59 
33 
22 
13 
12 
Under 
2,500 
50 
23 
10 
10 
2 
All sizes 
60 
37 
21 
18 
17 
Source:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police Departments, 2003. 
TABLE 6.36
Community Policing Activities of Local Police Departments, 
by Percentage of Population Served, 2003

Police Personnel
197
Activities in year ending June 30, 2003 
Population 
served
Problem- 
solving 
partnerships 
or written 
agreements 
Partnered 
with citizen 
groups to 
elicit 
feedback 
Trained 
citizens in 
community
policing
Upgraded 
technology 
for analysis 
of community 
problems 
Conducted 
citizen 
police 
academy 
1,000,000 or 
more 
81 
65 
58 
46 
62 
500,000–
999,999 
78 
62 
41 
45 
45 
250,000–
499,999 
79 
41 
30 
44 
38 
100,000–
249,999 
74 
55 
33 
23 
36 
50,000–
99,999 
64 
48 
32 
23 
20 
25,000–
49,999 
60 
41 
19 
13 
7 
10,000–
24,999 
58 
29 
12 
15 
4 
Under 10,000 
44 
20 
6 
10 
2 
All sizes 
59 
36 
19 
17 
12 
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sheriffs’ Offices, 2003. 
TABLE 6.37
Community Policing Activities of Sheriffs’ Offices, 
by Percentage of Population Served, 2003

198
Facts and Data
Population served
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police Departments, 2003.
250,000 or more
50,000–249,999
10,000–49,999
Under 10,000
0            20              40                60                80           100
                      Percentage of agencies
2003
1997
2000
FIGURE 6.16
Percentage of Local Police Departments Using Full-Time 
Community-Policing Officers, 1997, 2000, 2003
 
500,000 or more
100,000–499,999
25,000–99,999
Under 25,000
0            20              40                60                80           100
                       Percentage of agencies
2003
1997
2000
Source:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sheriffs’ Offices, 2003.
Population served
FIGURE 6.17
Percentage of Sheriffs’ Offices Using Full-Time 
Community-Policing Officers, 1997, 2000, 2003

Police Personnel
199
Percentage of agencies authorizing 
Chemical agents (personal use) 
Batons 
Other weapons/actions 
Population 
served 
Any 
type in
survey 
Pepper 
spray 
Tear 
gas 
CS 
Any 
type in
survey 
Collap-
sible 
Tradi-
tional 
PR-
24 
Soft 
project-
tile 
Electrical 
devices 
Holds/neck 
restraints* 
Rubber 
bullet 
Black 
jack 
High-
intensity 
light 
1,000,000 or 
more
94 
94 
19 
19 
100 
88 
56 
44 
69 
75 
31 
25 
6 
0 
500,000–
999,999 
97 
97 
19 
22 
100 
89 
60 
38 
48 
43 
16 
16 
3 
0 
250,000–
499,999 
98 
95 
24 
22 
100 
83 
54 
44 
59 
56 
39 
22 
7 
2 
100,000–
249,999 
99 
99 
22 
24 
99 
93 
56 
44 
66 
50 
36 
22 
2 
2 
50,000–
99,999 
99 
97 
25 
27 
99 
92 
45 
39 
72 
46 
30 
22 
3 
2 
25,000–
49,999 
100 
100 
24 
21 
99 
93 
44 
39 
57 
39 
12 
19 
3 
1 
10,000–
24,999 
99 
98 
22 
17 
97 
91 
47 
45 
42 
31 
12 
10 
3 
—
2,500–
9,999 
98 
98 
13 
14 
94 
88 
47 
41 
28 
21 
9 
6 
4 
0 
Under 2,500 
99 
98 
14 
12 
93 
86 
52 
42 
13 
15 
13 
6 
6 
1 
All sizes 
99 
98 
16 
14 
95 
88 
49 
42 
28 
23 
13 
8 
5 
1 
*Includes handheld direct contact devices (such as stun gun) and handheld standoff devices (such as taser); — = Less than <0.5%;  
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police Departments, 2003. 
TABLE 6.38
Types of Nonlethal Weapons Authorized for Personal Use by Sworn Personnel in Local Police Departments, by Percentage of Population Served, 2003

200
Facts and Data
Percentage of agencies authorizing 
Chemical agents (personal use) 
Batons 
Other weapons/actions 
Population 
served 
Any 
type in
survey 
Pepper 
spray 
Tear 
gas 
CS 
Any 
type in
survey 
Collap-
sible 
Tradi-
tional 
PR-
24 
Soft 
project-
tile 
Electri- 
cal 
devices 
Rubber 
bullet 
Holds, 
neck
restraints* 
Black 
jack 
High- 
Intensity 
light 
1,000,000 
or more 
100 
100 
23 
27 
100 
100 
69 
31 
73 
46 
31 
39 
15 
0 
500,000–
999,999 
100 
100 
20 
19 
98 
92 
48 
38 
51 
58 
20 
17 
0 
0 
250,000–
499,999 
100 
100 
27 
16 
98 
90 
50 
44 
46 
41 
16 
14 
3 
1 
100,000–
249,999 
99 
98 
21 
22 
94 
92 
43 
27 
48 
43 
16 
9 
0 
0 
50,000–
99,999 
98 
98 
32 
25 
93 
92 
56 
36 
55 
49 
22 
8 
1 
0 
25,000–
49,999 
98 
98 
18 
19 
91 
86 
43 
35 
31 
23 
12 
10 
2 
1 
10,000–
24,999 
97 
97 
19 
18 
91 
87 
40 
32 
22 
24 
9 
14 
4 
2 
Under 
   10,000 
90 
90 
17 
14 
88 
80 
41 
34 
17 
23 
6 
10 
7 
2 
All sizes 
96 
9 
21 
19 
92 
87 
44 
34 
32 
30 
12 
11 
3 
1 
*Includes handheld direct contact devices (such as stun gun) and handheld standoff devices (such as taser).
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sheriffs’ Offices, 2003. 
TABLE 6.39
Types of Nonlethal Weapons Authorized for Personal Use by Sworn Personnel in Sheriffs’ Offices, by Percentage of Population Served, 2003

Police Personnel
201
Population served
250,000 or more
50,000–249,999
10,000–49,999
Under 10,000
0                 20                  40                   60                  80  
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police Departments, 2003.
2003
2000
Percentage of agencies
FIGURE 6.18
Local Police Departments Using Video Cameras in Patrol Cars, 2000 and 2003
Population served
500,000 or more
100,000–499,999
25,000–99,999
Under 25,000
0                 20                  40                   60                  80  
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sheriffs’ Offices, 2003.
2003
2000
Percentage of agencies
FIGURE 6.19
Sheriffs’ Offices Using Video Cameras in Patrol Cars, 2000 and 2003

202
Facts and Data
Percentage of agencies using 
Night vision/electro-optic 
Vehicle stopping/tracking 
Digital imaging 
Population 
served 
Infrared 
(thermal) 
imagers 
Image 
intensifiers 
Laser 
range 
finders 
Tire 
deflation
spikes 
Stolen
vehicle 
tracking 
Electrical/ 
engine 
disruption
Mug 
shots 
Finger 
prints 
Suspect 
composites 
Facial
recognition 
1,000,000 or 
more
69 
25 
44 
50 
69 
6 
88 
81 
44 
19 
500,000–
999,999 
76 
30 
24 
54 
68 
8 
87 
67 
59 
5 
250,000–
499,999 
54 
17 
17 
66 
56 
7 
88 
85 
59 
10 
100,000–
249,999 
53 
25 
26 
60 
42 
5 
85 
81 
62 
6 
50,000–99,999 
55 
19 
31 
57 
31 
–
83 
71 
55 
9 
25,000–49,999 
43 
18 
21 
61 
21 
1 
80 
55 
55 
9 
10,000–24,999 
34 
16 
12 
43 
10 
1 
73 
29 
37 
7 
2,500–9,999 
20 
10 
7 
33 
4 
0 
55 
22 
17 
3 
Under 2,500 
13 
5 
1 
16 
1 
–
24 
18 
6 
2 
All sizes 
23 
10 
8 
31 
7 
–
48 
26 
20 
4 
— = Less than <0.5%
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Local Police Departments, 2003.
TABLE 6.40
Special Technologies Used by Local Police Departments, by Size of Population Served, 2003

Police Personnel
203
Percentage of agencies using
Night vision/electro-optic
Vehicle stopping/tracking
Digital imaging
Population
served
Infrared
(thermal)
imagers
Image
intensi-
fiers
Laser
range
finders
Tire
deflation
spikes
Stolen
vehicle
tracking
Electrical/
engine
disruption
Mug
shots
Finger
prints
Suspect
composites
Facial
recog-
nition
1,000,000 or more
57
27
35
65
62
12
96
89
58
27
500,000–999,999
46
20
27
56
25
0
88
90
48
8
250,000–499,999
43
18
23
58
24
0
90
79
49
9
100,000–249,999
48
18
16
66
10
2
84
82
48
9
50,000–99,999
53
16
19
66
5
1
90
67
48
12
25,000–49,999
35
11
12
52
4
0
77
49
24
6
10,000–24,999
30
9
8
40
3
0
72
36
14
5
Under 10,000
21
14
4
29
1
0
55
23
6
2
All sizes
35
13
11
48
5
1
74
4
25
6
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sheriffs’ Offices, 2003.
TABLE 6.41
Special Technologies Used by Sheriffs’ Offices, by Size of Population Served, 2003

204
Facts and Data
All large agencies
Municipal police
Sheriffs’ offices
County police
Primary state
agencies
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Citizen Complaints about Police Use of Force, 2002.
0   
  2 
       4 
           6 
             8             10
Force complaints per 100 full-time sworn officers
FIGURE 6.20
Citizen Complaints about Police Use of Force per 100 
Full-Time Sworn Officers, by Type of Agency, 2002
Percentage of complaint dispositions
Type of agency
Total with
disposition
Not
sustained
Unfounded
Exonerated
Sustained
Other
disposition
All large agencies
94
34
25
23
8
9
Local agencies
94
35
26
23
8
9
Municipal police
94
37
25
21
8
9
Sheriffs’ offices
95
20
30
32
12
6
County police
93
25
17
35
6
17
Primary state
agencies
95
16
19
52
9
4
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Citizen Complaints about Police Use of Force, 2006.
TABLE 6.42
Complaint Dispositions in Large Law Enforcement Agencies, 
by Type of Agency, 2002

Police Personnel
205
Complaint dispositions
Full-time
sworn
Total with
disposition
Not
sustained
Unfounded
Exonerated
Sustained
Other
disposition
1,000 or
more
93
42
23
19
6
10
500–999
96
21
26
28
14
12
250–499
95
19
33
29
12
6
100–249
97
22
31
34
10
3
Total
94
3
25
23
8
9
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Citizen Complaints about Police Use of Force, 2006.
TABLE 6.43
Complaint Dispositions in Large Law Enforcement Agencies, 
by Percentage of Full-Time Sworn Officers, 2002

206
Facts and Data
Force complaints received 
Per 
agency 
Per 100 
full-time 
sworn 
Per 100 full-time 
sworn responding 
to calls for service 
Per 
10,000 
population
Civilian complaint review board 
(CCRB) 
 Jurisdictions with CCRB 
158 
11.9 
19.6 
3.70 
 Jurisdictions without CCRB 
18 
6.6 
10.6 
1.35 
Internal affairs capacity 
 Specialized unit
54 
9.8 
16.0 
2.51 
 No specialized unit
5 
3.7 
5.5 
0.68 
Personnel monitoring system 
 Jurisdictions with system
69 
9.0 
14.6 
2.33 
 Jurisdictions without system
33 
10.1 
16.5 
2.45 
Policy requiring external 
investigation 
 Jurisdictions with policy 
67 
10.0 
16.3 
2.80 
 Jurisdictions without policy 
21 
8.0 
13.0 
1.55 
Right to administrative appeal 
 Citizen may appeal 
29 
8.8 
14.3 
1.96 
 Citizen may not appeal 
54 
9.7 
15.8 
2.56 
Collective bargaining
 Authorized for officers 
53 
9.9 
16.4 
2.58 
 Not authorized for officers 
23 
7.3 
11.3 
1.60 
Total 
45 
9.5 
15.4 
2.38 
Source:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Citizen Complaints about Police Use of Force, 2006.
TABLE 6.44
Citizen Complaints About Police Use of Force in Large Municipal Departments, 
by Selected Agency Administrative Characteristics, 2002

Police Personnel
207
Complaint dispositions 
Total with 
dispo-
sition 
Not 
sustained 
Un- 
founded 
Exon- 
erated 
Sus-
tained 
Other 
dispo-
sition 
Civilian complaint review 
board (CCRB) 
 Jurisdictions with CCRB 
93 
42 
23 
18 
6 
10 
 Jurisdictions without CCRB 
95 
25 
31 
26 
11 
7 
Internal affairs capacity 
 Specialized unit
94 
37 
25 
20 
8 
9 
 No specialized unit
99 
16 
28 
47 
9 
1 
Personnel monitoring system 
 Jurisdictions with system
95 
30 
28 
23 
8 
11 
 Jurisdictions without system
93 
44 
22 
18 
8 
8 
Policy requiring external 
investigation 
 Jurisdictions with policy 
93 
39 
25 
20 
7 
9 
 Jurisdictions without policy 
97 
28 
27 
24 
12 
9 
Right to administrative 
appeal 
 Citizen may appeal 
97 
33 
21 
24 
14 
8 
 Citizen may not appeal 
93 
38 
27 
20 
6 
10 
Collective bargaining
 Authorized for officers 
94 
39 
25 
20 
7 
10 
 Not authorized for officers 
95 
24 
30 
26 
15 
6 
Total 
94 
37 
25 
21 
8 
9 
Source:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Citizen Complaints about Police Use of Force, 2006.
TABLE 6.45
Complaint Dispositions in Large Municipal Police Departments, 
by Selected Agency Administrative Characteristics, 2002

208
Facts and Data
Number killed
150
100
50
0
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Law Enforcement Officers Killed, 2006.
 1975    1980    1985     1990    1995    2000
FIGURE 6.21
Law Enforcement Officers Killed in the Line of Duty, 1973–2004
Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Law Enforcement Officers Killed, 2006.
Number killed
100
75
50
25
0
1975    1980    1985    1990    1995    2000
Handguns
Other guns
Other methods
FIGURE 6.22
Law Enforcement Officers Killed in the Line of Duty by Weapon Type, 1973–2004

7
Directory of Organizations
T
here are numerous agencies and organizations in policing.
The following list offers a few of these, along with contact in-
formation and a brief description of their purpose, missions,
stated goals, and emphases. Some of these are privately run or-
ganizations, whereas others have governmental or business affil-
iations. Some are labor organizations or components to larger
parent groups. All of them make up the vast number of organi-
zations associated with policing in the United States. (The com-
pleteness of contact information may vary depending on its
availability.)
Academy of Behavioral Profiling (ABP)
336 Lincoln Street
P.O. Box 6406
Sitka, AK 99835
Email: bturvey@profiling.org
Internet: http://www.profiling.org
A professional association whose function is to promote evi-
dence-based techniques in criminal profiling to the application of
legal system processes, the ABP is an international organization
with over one hundred members around the globe. The use of
scientific psychological methods in the solving and prediction of
criminal activity is a key focus of the association. The ABP has a
journal called The Journal of Behavioral Profiling that is published
quarterly and sponsors an annual conference. In addition, the or-
ganization has a recommended reading link on its website for
works on behavioral profiling.
209

Academy of Criminal Justice Sciences (ACJS)
P.O. Box 960
Greenbelt, MD 20768-0960
Phone: (800) 757-ACJS (2257)
Fax: (301) 446-2819
Email: ExecDir@acjs.org
Internet: http://www.acjs.org
An international society created in 1963, the ACJS has as its mis-
sion the fostering of professional and academic activity in the
criminal justice field. Members of ACJS include criminal justice
practitioners, scholars, and students from a variety of different
areas. The provision of criminal justice education, research, and
policy analysis is a key component of the organization’s pur-
pose. The ACJS has an annual meeting and publishes two jour-
nals: Justice Quarterly and Journal of Criminal Justice Education.
Both journals are offered online as well as in hard copy format.
The organization also produces a newsletter called ACJS Today,
which is published four times per year and has a circulation of
nearly 2,000. In addition, the ACJS has a certification process for
academic institutions that has evolved from a peer review pro-
cedure to certification of institutions that meet the standards set
out by the organization. The organization’s web page also in-
cludes an employment bulletin for job openings in the criminal
justice field.
Airborne Law Enforcement Association (ALEA)
411 Aviation Way
Suite 200
Frederick, MD 21701
Phone: (301) 631-2406
Fax: (301) 631-2466
Email: singley@alea.org
Internet: http://www.alea.org
With a membership of over 3,500 members, the ALEA has as its
mission the support, promotion, and advancement of the safe
and effective use of aircraft in the field of policing throughout
the nation and abroad. The agency provides training through
seminars, promotes networking opportunities, and presents
valuable information on advancements in the field through prod-
uct expositions.
210
Directory of Organizations

American Academy of Forensic Sciences (AAFS)
410 N. 21st Street
Colorado Springs, CO 80904
Phone: (719) 636-1100
Fax: (719) 636-1993
Email: awarren@aafs.org
Internet: http://www.aafs.org
Organized in 1948, the AAFS is a nonprofit professional society
devoted to improving the criminal justice system by applying
science to the processes of law. Its membership of nearly 6,000
consists of physicians, lawyers, dentists, criminalists, physical
anthropologists, and people of other occupations from all fifty
states in the United States, as well as from fifty-five countries
around the globe. The organization has a journal, the Journal of
Forensic Sciences, an annual meeting, and newsletters, and it hosts
seminars and meetings to address concerns in the field of foren-
sic science. Billing itself as the “world’s most prestigious forensic
science organization,” the AAFS has ten organizational sections
in different subfields that provide opportunities for professional
advancement, networking, awards, and other forms of recom-
mendation, and some publish newsletters to keep section mem-
bers updated on activities and developments in their field.
American Association of State Troopers, Inc. (AAST)
1949 Raymond Diehl Road
Tallahassee, FL
Phone: (800) 765-5456
Fax: (850) 385-8697
Email: scott@statetroopers.org
Internet: http://www.statetroopers.org
The AAST is a fraternal association of retired and active duty
state troopers and state law enforcement officers. The group’s
stated goals are the promotion of esprit de corps among the offi-
cers and their families, professional development through train-
ing programs, acquisition of financial support for scholarship
programs for dependants, and participation in campaigns for
safety and consumer education.
American Board of Criminalistics (ABC)
No address, phone number, or fax is provided on the website.
Internet: http://www.criminalistics.com
Directory of Organizations
211

The ABC is comprised of regional and national forensic science
professionals that oversee certification to the forensic science
community. Members are able to attain three levels of certifica-
tion: diplomate, fellow, and technical specialist. Individuals with
affiliate status are those who pass the general knowledge exami-
nation and become eligible for certification after two years. The
ABC’s newsletter is called the Certification News.
American College of Forensic Examiners Institute (ACFEI)
2750 East Sunshine Street
Springfield. MO 65804
Phone: (800) 423-9737
Fax: (417) 881-4702
Internet: http://www.acfei.com
The ACFEI is an independent professional society dedicated to ad-
vancing the field of forensics examination and consultation, and it
purports to be the largest organization of its kind in the nation. The
organization has a certification process for consultants, medical in-
vestigators, forensic accountants, and forensic nurses, and it offers
fellow and diplomate credentials. The ACFEI hosts lectures, semi-
nars, conferences, and continuing education programs, and it has
an official journal known as The Forensic Examiner.
American Criminal Justice Association 
(Lambda Alpha Epsilon)
P.O. Box 601047
Sacramento, CA 95860-1047
Phone: (916) 484-6553
Fax: (916) 488-2227
Email: acjalea@aol.com
Internet: http://www.acjalea.org
The ACJA was formed in 1937 in Hayward, California, after a se-
ries of summer law enforcement training sessions were provided
for a selected group of police officers. Realizing a need for a fra-
ternity of graduates and instructors in criminal justice, Lambda
Alpha Epsilon (LAE) was formed and held its first convention in
1938 in Lodi, California. In the first meeting, honorary member-
ships were provided to the key luminaries in the field: J. Edgar
Hoover, August Vollmer, and Earl Warren. The fraternal organi-
zation rapidly expanded from its base in California to a national
scope in the 1950s, and several states in the United States adopted
212
Directory of Organizations

LAE fraternities. Presently there are over 145 chapters of the
American Criminal Justice Association/Lambda Alpha Epsilon,
comprised of over 4,500 members.
American Deputy Sheriff’s Association (ADSA)
3001 Armand Street 
Suite B
Monroe, LA 71201
Phone: (800) 937-7940
Fax: (318) 398-9980
Internet: http://www.deputysheriff.org
The ADSAis a nonprofit organization whose purpose is to provide
support, advocacy, and enhanced communication to the nation’s
county law enforcement agencies. The association has several ben-
efits to its members, including member and nonmember line-of-
duty death benefits, alternative pricing programs for body armor,
communications and technical equipment, training utilizing a mo-
bile training unit, assistance to communities, a scholarship pro-
gram, and a newsletter called The Enforcement, among others.
American Jail Association (AJA)
1135 Professional Court
Hagerstown, MD 21740-5853
Phone: (301) 790-3930
Email: gwyn@aja.org
Internet: http://www.corrections.com/aja
The AJA is a nonprofit association that seeks to provide support
for personnel who work in the nation’s jails. It is a certifying
agency for the certified jail manager designation and provides
national and regional training to people in the field. It also boasts
an award-winning magazine called American Jails. This organiza-
tion claims to be the only national association dedicated solely to
the concerns of those who operate the jails in the United States.
American Polygraph Association
P.O. Box 8037
Chattanooga, TN 37414-0037
Phone: (800) APA-8037 or (423) 892-3992
Fax: (423) 894-5435
Email: manager@polygraph.org
Internet: http://www.polygraph.org
Directory of Organizations
213

The APA reports that it is the primary association of polygraph
professionals in the world. The organization boasts over 3,200
members, comprised of practitioners from law enforcement,
government, and private industry. The association establishes
professional standards for the field, promotes technological ad-
vancements, supports instrumentation and research, and pro-
vides advanced techniques and continuing education programs.
The APA provides standards of professional conduct and ac-
creditation to educational programs. The organization’s website
provides much information on the profession that is useful to
practitioners and the lay public.
American Police Veterans
P.O. Box 2623
Attleborough Falls, MA 02763
Email: Info@Policevets.Org
Internet: http://www.policevets.net
American Police Veterans is a “community of former law enforce-
ment officers” dedicated to finding resources to benefit police vet-
erans, promoting partnerships with like-minded individuals and
groups, and providing networking opportunities for its members.
Its principal mission is to create a support group for retired and
disabled former police officers through peer encouragement and
support, advocacy, and fellowship. Efforts with the community
are encouraged to achieve the aims of the organization. The orga-
nization has a journal called Beyond the Shield, and its website lists
several resources for retired police officers, including legislative
updates.
American Society of Criminology (ASC)
1314 Kinnear Road
Suite 212
Columbus, OH 43212-1156
Phone: (614) 292-9207
Fax: (614) 292-6767
Email: asc@osu.edu
Internet: http://www.asc41.com
An international association, the ASC represents criminologists
around the globe. The primary focus of the organization is the
promotion of scholarly, scientific, and professional advancement
214
Directory of Organizations

of criminology (the scientific body of knowledge concerned with
the causes of, prevention of, control of, and response to criminal
behavior). The ASC promotes a multidisciplinary approach to
understanding crime, and the membership is comprised of crim-
inal justice (and other social science) faculty, practitioners, and
students with an involvement in the profession. The association
has five specialized divisions: corrections and sentencing, critical
criminology, women and crime, international criminology, and
people of color and crime. The organization has an annual meet-
ing and publishes the journals Criminology and Criminology &
Public Policy and the newsletter, The Criminologist.
Americans for Effective Law Enforcement (AELE)
841 W. Touly Avenue
Park Ridge, IL 60068-3351
Phone: (847) 685-0700
Fax: (847) 685-9700
Email: info@aele.org
Internet: http://www.aele.org
Created in 1966, this nonprofit organization provides research-
driven education and legal information through training semi-
nars via electronic media as well as classroom instruction. Its
motto is “building integrity and confidence through research and
education,” and many national, state, and local organizations
and individuals join AELE briefs, which are reported to reflect
the views of police administrators throughout the nation. In ad-
dition, the organization publishes a number of legal publications
such as the Law Enforcement Liability Reporter, Jail and Prisoner Law
Bulletin, and Fire and Police Personnel Reporter. AELE also issues
position papers regarding national criminal justice issues.
American Society of Canine Trainers (ASCT)
20726 Syndenham Farm Lane
Remington, VA 22736
Phone: (540) 937-3871
Email: asctpresident@aol.com
Internet: http://www.asct-nationalk9.com
This association is dedicated to the professional development of
“elite” canine handlers in law enforcement. The ASCT offers 
research supported training, certification, and college academic
Directory of Organizations
215

degrees in the police specialty of canine handling. The training
not only provides canine handlers with technical training but
also classroom instruction in issues of criminal law involving ca-
nine units.
Associated Humane Services, Inc./Vested Interest Fund
124 Evergreen Avenue
Newark, New Jersey 07114
Phone: (973) 824-7080
Email: www.ahcares.org
Internet: http://www.vestadog.com
This animal advocacy organization has a program called Vest-a-
Dog that seeks to provide police dogs with protective vests. The
program has been in operation since 1999 when the organizer
heard the story of a police dog that was killed in the line of duty.
Donations for the program are sought by the organization.
Association of Certified Fraud Specialists, Inc. (ACFS)
P.O. Box 348777
Sacramento, CA 95834-8777
Phone: (866) 439-2327
Fax (916) 419-6318
Internet: http://www.acfsnet.org
The ACFS is a nonprofit educational organization comprised of
certified fraud investigators of different disciplines who seek to
better the profession through training, accreditation, and foster-
ing best practices in the field. They have an association called the
Order of the Shield that seeks to protect the public from white-
collar crimes.
Association for Crime Scene Reconstruction (ACSR)
P.O. Box 51376
6332 South Cedar Place
Broken Arrow, OK  74011
Internet: http://www.acsr.org
The ASCR is an association whose members are police investiga-
tors, forensic scientists, and scholars from around the world.
Formed in 1991, this organization has 555 members and seeks to
promote professionalism in the field of crime scene reconstruc-
tion through training conferences, networking opportunities,
216
Directory of Organizations

promoting research, cooperation and collaboration among mem-
bers, and consultation opportunities. The association also has a
newsletter called The Scene on its website.
Association of Firearm and Tool Mark Examiners (AFTE)
No address, telephone, or fax information provided on website.
Email: Lsugarman@fss.orange.ca.us
Internet: http://www.afte.org
Formed in 1969 in recognition of the potential of the new field of
criminalistics, the AFTE seeks to improve the professionalism of
the specific field of firearm and tool mark examination. The or-
ganization offers certification to qualified members in the exam-
ination and evidence of firearms, tool marks, and gunshot
residue.
Association of Public Safety Communications Officials
(APCO)
351 N. Williamson Boulevard
Daytona Beach, FL 32114-1112
Phone: (888) 272-6911
Fax: (386) 322-2501
Email: apco@apcointl.org
Internet: http://www.apcointl.org
APCO is an association of communications professionals that has
as its mission the provision of professional leadership, influence
on governmental and industrial communications decisions, the
promotion of professional development, and advocacy for tech-
nological advancements in the communications field. The orga-
nization facilitates meetings and conferences in the field of public
safety communications.
Borderpol
80 Fieldrow Avenue
Ottawa, ON, Canada
K1C 7G6
Phone: (416) 352-6501
Internet: http://www.borderpol.org
This organization is the only international association that seeks
to provide a feasible institutional framework for enforcing the
world’s border control initiatives. It supports the management of
Directory of Organizations
217

the border control agencies of the various countries in the spirit
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The organization
hosts a World Border Security Symposium as well as regional
meetings.
Boy Scout’s Crime Prevention Program
P.O. Box 152079
Irving, TX 75015-2079
Phone: (972) 580-2241
Internet: http://www.usscouts.org
The Boy Scouts of America, with support from the National
Crime Prevention Council, began a program in 1996 to teach
crime prevention to the scouts. By using an initiative that pro-
motes parent–child communication skills, that collaborates with
law enforcement organizations from federal, state, and local lev-
els, and that coordinates with grassroots groups, the program al-
lows the boy scouts to earn a merit badge for their efforts in
planning and executing a home or community crime prevention
project, usually guided by a police officer.
Clandestine Laboratory Investigators Association (CLIA)
P.O. Box 22074
Honolulu, HA 96823
Fax: (808) 356-1524
Email: clialabs.com
Internet: http://www.clialabs.com.
CLIA is a nonprofit organization whose mission is to provide sup-
port, training, legislative advocacy, and expert testimony to police
agencies, prosecutors, and emergency service providers. Its mis-
sion is to provide professional training to police regarding the
dangers of clandestine drug laboratory investigation such as ex-
plosions, fires, and respiratory hazards. It has an annual confer-
ence that provides information on this dangerous aspect of police
work.
Commission of the Accreditation of Law Enforcement
Agencies (CALEA)
10302 Eaton Place
Suite 100
Fairfax, VA 22030
218
Directory of Organizations

Phone: (800) 368-3757
Fax:  (703) 591-2206
Email: calea@calea.org
Internet: http://www.calea.org
CALEA is a nonprofit corporation that provides accreditation for
police agencies through the cooperation of other associations
such as the International Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP),
the National Sheriff’s Association, the National Organization of
Black Law Enforcement Officers (NOBLE), and the Police Execu-
tive Research Forum (PERF). Using a successful model of ad-
ministration, CALEA provides police administrators from the
various police agencies involved in the accreditation process
with a plan for providing effective law enforcement services in
their departments. CALEA requires involved agencies to prepare
an organizational plan with sound standard operating proce-
dures and a preparedness plan in case of natural or human-made
disasters. The reported benefits of a CALEA accreditation is a
strengthening of departments’ accountability and reputation and
a corresponding improvement with the communities they serve.
It can also limit liability and risk vulnerability to the many dif-
ferent complaints made of police agencies. In addition to national
accreditation, the organization provides training, maintains a
profession website, and produces a newsletter called CALEA
Today for its members.
Community Policing Consortium
1726 Main Street N.W.
Suite 801
Washington, D.C. 20036
The Community Policing Consortium is an association adminis-
tered and funded by the Office of Community Oriented Policing
Services (COPS), a division of the U.S. Department of Justice. It
consists of a partnership of five police associations: the Interna-
tional Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP), the National Orga-
nization of Black Law Enforcement Executives (NOBLE), the
National Sheriff’s Association (NSA), Police Executive Research
Forum (PERF), and the Police Foundation. All of these play an in-
tegral role in developing social science research in the area of
community policing as well as training and technical assistance
in this area.
Directory of Organizations
219

Concerns of Police Survivors, Inc. (COPS)
P.O. Box 3199
3096 S. State Highway 5
Camdenton, MO 65020
Phone: (573) 346-4911
Fax: (573) 346-1414
Email: cops@nationalcops.org
Internet: http://www.nationalcops.org
This nonprofit association provides support and resources for sur-
vivors of officers killed in the line of duty. It also provides sur-
vivor victimization education and training to law enforcement
agencies and to the public. COPS, formed in 1984, has seen a large
increase in membership since its inception and provides scholar-
ships, counseling programs, a summer camp, retreats, an annual
Survivors’ Conference, and other assistance resources.
Crime Stoppers International
P.O. Box 614
Arlington, TX 76004-0614
Phone: (800) 850-7574
Email: rpage@kmts.org
Internet: http://www.c-s-i.org
Crime Stoppers International is a partnership of the community,
the media, and the police that uses citizens sending tips on
crimes involving homicides, sexual assaults, drug trafficking,
robberies, and many others. Started in Albuquerque, New Mex-
ico, in 1976, Crime Stoppers now has programs in approximately
1,200 communities in the United States and several other coun-
tries. The organization is a not-for-profit, and citizens who pro-
vide tips that help solve crimes are often rewarded. According to
the organization’s web page, around 600,000 arrests have been
made based on citizens reporting crimes through the program
and nearly $7 billion in recovered property and drugs has been
seized.
Disabled Public Safety Employee’s Association (DPSEA)
Email: dpsea_prez@yahoo.com
Internet: http://www.dpsea.org
This organization represents sworn police officers, corrections of-
ficials, and other public agents who are disabled, and it offers
220
Directory of Organizations

emotional support, guidance, and fellowship. The members of
the organization are all disabled public servants who wish to
make life better for their “fallen brothers and sisters.”
Drug Abuse Resistance Education (DARE)
DARE America
P.O. Box 512090
Los Angeles, CA 90051-0090
Phone: (800) 223-DARE
Fax: (310) 215-0180
Internet: http://www.dare-america.com
The DARE (Drug Abuse Resistance Education) program is a
school program that endeavors to keep kids from using illicit
drugs. The program began in 1983 in Los Angeles and has grown
to being implemented in approximately 75 percent of schools na-
tionwide and is now used in over forty-three countries around the
world. The educational program is led by police officers who
reach children from kindergarten through high school. The model
offers a supplement to the community policing philosophy and
now has international recognition, supported by the U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice. The organization’s website has numerous re-
sources for educators, policy makers, and others interested in
promoting drug resistance education.
Family Badge
P.O. Box 5396
Galveston, TX 77554
Phone: (888) 788-8967
Internet: http://www.familybadge.org
The Family Badge is a national support network for law enforce-
ment officers and their families. Comprised of peace officers from
various jurisdictions, the organization disseminates information
on member activities, legislative issues, grants and programs,
scholarships, and benefits for disabled officers or the families of
those killed in the line of duty. The organization also operates a
police news site on the Internet.
Federal Law Enforcement Officers Association (FLEOA)
P.O. Box 326
Lewisberry, PA 17339
Phone: (717) 938-2300
Directory of Organizations
221

Fax:  (717) 932-2262
Email: fleoa@fleoa.org
Internet: http://www.fleoa.org
The FLEOA claims over 20,000 members, constituting the largest
membership of federal law enforcement officers in a nonpartisan,
voluntary, professional association. Its members come from over
fifty federal agencies and are all active duty agents. The goal of
the organization, which was formed in 1977, is to provide mem-
bers with a legislative voice in many areas including wages, dis-
ability, and retirees’ carry authority.
Fight Crime: Invest in Kids
1212 New York Avenue NW
Suite 300
Washington, DC 20005
Phone: (202) 776-0027
Internet: http://www.fightcrime.com
This organization is a national, nonprofit, anticrime collective
consisting of over 3,000 police chiefs, sheriffs, state attorneys,
other law enforcement officials, and survivors of violent crime.
Crime prevention is key component of this organization and Fight
Crime: Invest in Kids facilitates educational and after-school pro-
grams, child abuse initiatives, and interventions for at-risk youth.
The organization promotes these programs but does not provide
funding or direct supervision of them.
Hellenic American Police Association (HAPA)
P.O. Box 59401
Chicago, IL 60659-0401
Internet: http://www.members.aol.com/chicagohapa.org
Founded in 1993, this organization is a nonprofit association rep-
resenting police officers of Hellenic origin. The majority of the
membership is located in Illinois, but there are members in other
states as well. The purpose of the organization is to unite officers
of Hellenic ancestry to promote their heritage. Membership is
open to officers with such a heritage or by adoption.
High Tech Crime Consortium
1506 North Stevens Street
Tacoma, WA 98406-3826
222
Directory of Organizations

Phone: (253) 752-2427
Fax: (253) 752-2430
Email: President@HighTechCrimeCops.org
Internet: http://www.hightechcrimecops.org
The motto for this organization is “using high-tech tools to fight
high-tech crime.” The consortium seeks to educate and train po-
lice agencies in the detection, investigation, and analysis of high-
tech crime. The organization incorporates a pool of experts in
intelligence analysis, investigation supervision, computer foren-
sics, crime analysis, crime research, and computer technology to
assist agencies in these areas.
Hispanic American Police Command Officers Association
(HAPCOA)
HAPCOA National
6450 N.W. Loop 410, PMB 1546
San Antonio, TX 78238
Phone: (210) 431-7349
Fax: (210) 434-8744
Email: info@hapcoa.org
Internet: http://www.hapcoa.org
Formed in 1973, HAPCOA reports that it is the oldest association
of Hispanic American law enforcement command officers. It also
claims to be the largest, having members and chapters in many po-
lice agencies throughout the United States and Puerto Rico. The or-
ganization is comprised of police administrators from municipal,
county, state, and federal police agencies. Its purpose is to advance
the selection, promotion, and retention of Hispanic Americans in
law enforcement and to address the concerns and needs of their
communities, especially in regard to police–community relations.
One of the initiatives of the organization is a partnership with the
National Highway Transportation Administration to provide pub-
lic safety materials in Spanish. The association has a national train-
ing conference and a newsletter.
International Association for the Study of Organized Crime
(IASOC)
IASOC Executive Director
Department of Criminal Justice, Indiana University
302 Sycamore Hall
Bloomington, IN 47405
Directory of Organizations
223

Phone: (812) 855-0889
Fax:  (812) 855-5522
Email: iasoc_office@yahoo.com
Internet: http://www.iasoc.net
The IASOC is a professional association founded in 1984 and com-
prised of criminologists, criminal justice researches, practitioners,
educators, and students. Its purpose is to promote increased
awareness and research about organized crime and its manifesta-
tions. The organization has an annual meeting, held in conjunction
with the American Society of Criminology in which information
about organized crime is disseminated to participants. As a bene-
fit of membership the peer-reviewed journal, Trends in Organized
Crime, is published quarterly. The organization’s web page also
provides a link to websites whose focus is organized crime.
International Association of Campus Law Enforcement
Administrators (IACLEA)
342 North Main Street
West Hartford, CT 06117-2507
Phone: (860) 586-7517
Fax: (860) 586-7550
Email: info@iaclea.org
Internet: http://www.iaclea.org
The IACLEA is an organization representing more than a thou-
sand colleges and universities in twenty countries whose purpose
is to provide educational resources, advocacy, and opportunities
for professional development for campus police personnel.
Formed in 1958 on the campus of Arizona State University, this
organization’s membership is over 1,600 and consists of campus
public safety staff members, criminal justice faculty, and munici-
pal chiefs of police. The organization has an annual meeting and
a bimonthly journal called Campus Law Enforcement Journal, with a
readership of more than 1,700. In addition, the IACLEA has an ac-
creditation program for college and university law enforcement,
public safety, and security departments. This program, started in
1995, promotes greater consistency and higher standards for cam-
pus departments who receive the accreditations.
International Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP)
515 North Washington Street
Alexandria, VA 22314
224
Directory of Organizations

Phone: (703) 836-6767; (800) THE IACP
Fax: (703) 836-4543 
Email: information@theiacp.org
Internet: http://www.theiacp.org
The IACP is a not-for-profit international organization of police
chiefs whose aims are to advance both the art and science of police
work, to provide improvements in administrative, technical, and
operational procedures, to promote collegiality; increase profes-
sionalism through improved training and recruitment methods;
and to promote high professional and ethical standards. Begun in
1863, the organization was the impetus behind many important
law enforcement projects, including the Uniform Crime Records
(UCR) system and the FBI’s Identification Division, among others.
The slogan “Global Leadership in Policing” reflects its interna-
tional scope. The organization’s web page has numerous resources
and a link to several publications produced by the organization
such as the Police Chief magazine.
International Association of Directors of Law Enforcement
Standards and Training (IADLEST)
2521 Country Club Way
Albion, MI 49224
Phone: (517) 857-3828
Fax: (517) 857-3826
Email: PJudge@worldnet.att.net
Internet: http://www.iadlest.org
Serving as the national forum of Peace Officer Standards and
Training (POST) agencies, the IADLEST is an international associ-
ation of managers and executives involved in police training and
certification. Its mission is to facilitate research in the field in order
to produce and disseminate vital information, ideas, and ad-
vancements to law enforcement agencies throughout the United
States. The association has several projects underway including a
driver training reference guide, an organizational sourcebook, a
reciprocity handbook that consolidates employment issues for po-
lice officers in all fifty states, terrorism response training for police
officers, among others.
International Association of Law Enforcement Intelligence
Analysts (IALEIA)
IALEIA, Inc.
Directory of Organizations
225

P.O. Box 13857
Richmond, VA 23225
Fax: (804) 565-2059
Internet: http://www.ialeia.org
Founded in 1981, this organization has as its primary function the
advancement of professional standards in law enforcement intelli-
gence analysis operating at the local, state or provincial, national,
and international levels. The IALEIA promotes the profession of
law enforcement intelligence and competence by encouraging re-
search and training standards; acts in an advisory capacity to gov-
ernments; provides and shares technological advancements in the
field; and generally improves the profession. Started in the United
States, this organization presently has members in many countries
and facilitates training to law enforcement agencies.
International Association of Law Enforcement Planners
(IALEP)
P.O. Box 11437
Torrance, CA 90510-1437
Phone: (310) 225-5148
Email: ialep@ialep.org
Internet: http://www.ialep.org
Representing nearly a thousand police professionals in fifteen na-
tions around the globe, the IALEP is an association for people
working in planning and research for criminal justice agencies.
Formed in 1991 from a merger of the Association of Police Plan-
ning and Research Officers (APPRO) and the National Associa-
tion of Police Planners (NAPP), the organization has many useful
features for its members, including a list serve that provides
rapid access of answers to pertinent questions, a quality newslet-
ter (The Exchange), and a certification program for people who
seek the Professional and Advanced Certification designation.
International Association of Undercover Officers (IAUO)
Phone: (800) 876-5943
Fax: (800) 876-5912
Email: Charlie@undercover.org
Internet: http://www.undercover.org
The promotion of safety and professionalism among its member-
ship of undercover police officers is the aim of the IAUO. It de-
226
Directory of Organizations

sires to promote communication and cooperation among its inter-
national memberships and maintains a confidential database that
provides information on techniques, trends, information on crim-
inal establishments, promising products to aid undercover work-
ers, and potential funding sources. The association IAUO
provides start-up assistance to newly forming units as well as for
the management of established ones.
International Association of Women Police (IAWP)
1417 Derby County Crescent
Oakville, ON, Canada
L6M 318
Email: amy.ramsay@jus.gov.on.ca
Internet: http://www.iawp.org
The IAWP’s stated mission is to provide unity and support for fe-
male peace officers and to elevate the status of women officers on
an international level. To accomplish this mission, the association
supports efforts to increase professional development and train-
ing, mentoring initiatives, networking opportunities, peer assis-
tance, and recognition for the contributions of female police
officers.
International Center for Criminal Law Reform and Criminal
Justice Policy
1822 East Mall
Vancouver, BC, Canada
V6T 121
Phone: (604) 822-9875
Fax: (604) 822-9317
Email: icclr@law.ubc.ca
Internet: http://www.icclr.law.ubc.ca
This not-for-profit center based in Vancouver, Canada, was
founded in 1991 and is a component of the United Nations Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice Program. Its mission is to pro-
mote a better quality of justice through the use of democratic
principles to reform criminal law and criminal justice policy and
practice; it aims to do this by utilizing humane principles that
promote respect and dignity. The center’s primary function is
providing expert consultation and information, promoting re-
search projects, and getting involved in policy formulation and
legislation in a host of areas of the criminal justice system.
Directory of Organizations
227

International Crime Scene Investigators Association (ISCIA)
PMB 385
15774 S. LaGrange Road
Orland Park, IL 60462
Phone: (708) 460-8082
Internet: http://www.iscia.org
The ISCIA is an international association created to assist police
in the processing of crime scenes. The organization desires to
promote crime scene processing as a unique subfield in forensic
law enforcement. The ISCIA is totally web-based and communi-
cates information in the field to members via its website. It in-
tends to keep these communications clear and simple for the
correct and rapid dissemination of the information.
International Criminal Police Organization (Interpol)
General Secretariat
200, quai Charles de gaulle
69006 Lyon, France
Fax: (33) 4 72 44 71 63
Internet: http://www.interpol.int
Interpol is the largest international police organization in the
world with 186 member nations. It was created in 1923 with the
purpose of facilitating cross-border cooperation among policing
agencies. It seeks to facilitate issues of transnational criminality
with all countries, even those with whom there are no diplomatic
relations. Interpol’s three core functions consist of the security of
global police communication services, the operationalization of
crime databases, and the operationalization of police support
services.
International Footprint Association (IFU)
P.O. Box 1652
Walnut, CA 91788-1652
Phone: (877) 432-3668
Email: footprint@footprinter.org
Internet: http://www.footprinter.org
Originally consisting of members from the law enforcement
fields, the IFU now has approximately 4,000 members of people
from all occupational backgrounds who support law enforce-
228
Directory of Organizations

ment activities. Its slogan is “Bigger and Better Footprints.” Its
symbol—Robinson Crusoe discovering Friday’s footprints in the
island sand, beginning a relationship of mutual concern and co-
operation—is a reference to the cooperation needed between the
police and those they serve. The organization is involved with
charities, scholarships, and Boys and Girls Clubs.
International High Technology Crime Investigation
Association (HTCIA)
HTCIA, Inc.
4021 Woodcreek Oaks Boulevard
Suite 156 #209
Roseville, CA 95747
Phone: (916) 408-1751
Fax: (916) 408-7543
Email: exec_secty@htcia.org
Internet: http://www.htcia.org
The HTCIA is an organization whose function is to encourage in-
creased knowledge and information among its members about the
methods, processes, and techniques vital to the investigation of
crime as well as security issues. The association has regional chap-
ters and facilitates training in the use of technology in criminal 
investigation. The HTCIA has a website with a forensic tool kit
link that allows the viewer to access other websites with a focus on
issues of technology and forensic science.
International Organization of Asian Crime Investigators and
Specialists (IOACIS)
P.O. Box 612
North Scituate, MA 02060-0612
Email: ioacisdirector@ioacis.com
Internet: http://www.ioacis.com
With the motto “leading change in the twenty-first century
through communication, cooperation, and collaboration,” this
organization seeks to provide support to members through an
exchange of professional ideas and good will in the United States
and abroad. It also seeks to foster global communication through
educational training, outreach, and networking opportunities,
and to reward and develop the contributions of Asian criminal
investigators and specialists.
Directory of Organizations
229

International Police Association (IPA) (United States Section)
100 Chase Avenue
Yonkers, NY 10703
Email: info@ipa-usa.edu
Internet: http://www.ipa-usa.org
The IPA is an international organization whose motto is “Service
through Friendship.” Its membership consists of active duty and
retired peace officers, and its primary focus is extending friendship
and comradeship among offices in member nations. The associa-
tion was formed in 1950 by a police sergeant from England, Arthur
Troup. The United States Section was created in 1962 in Toledo,
Ohio. Travel abroad to meet members is a focal point of the orga-
nization, and an exchange vacation is coordinated through the
IPA. There is also an International Children’s Exchange Program
that gives the children of the members an opportunity to spend
time with a host family in another country.
International Police Executive Symposium (IPES)
No mailing address on website.
Phone: (318) 274-2526
Fax: (318) 274-3101
Email: dilipkd@aol.com
Internet: http://www.ipes.info
This organization, founded in 1994 by criminal justice scholar
Dilip Das is a not-for-profit educational corporation. Its purpose
is to bring together police researchers and practitioners from dif-
ferent cultures for the sharing of ideas to facilitate the betterment
of the police profession. Its primary initiative consists of a four-
day annual meeting held in different countries throughout the
world to discuss specific topics in policing. Scholars, high-level
governmental ministers, police administrators, and many other
involved persons from sixty countries attend the annual meet-
ings and present academic papers on the theme from their own
country’s perspective. A core belief of the IPES is that policing is
one of the fundamental means of promoting quality of life and
justice in all nations.
International Police Mountain Bike Association (IPMBA)
583 Frederick Road
Suite 5B
230
Directory of Organizations

Baltimore, MD 21228
Phone: (410) 744-2400
Fax: (410) 744-5504
Email: info@ipmba.org
Internet: http://www.ipmba.org
This organization is a nonprofit educational that provides train-
ing, educational services, resources, and networking opportuni-
ties for police bicyclists. There are over 3,000 members of this
association in over forty-three states and four countries. There is
an organization newsletter and an annual conference, and they
sponsor a police cyclist course for police bikers around the nation.
International Society of Crime Prevention Practitioners
(ISCPP)
P.O. Box 476
Simpsonville, SC 29681
Phone: (864) 884-8466
Internet: http://www.iscpp.org
Calling itself the “crime prevention people,” this organization
serves its members through the dissemination of information re-
lated to crime prevention. Membership in the ISCPP allows mem-
bers to receive the organizational newsletter, The Practitioner,
which is also available online, to attend the society’s annual sym-
posium, and to receive crime prevention–related training.
International Union of Police Association (IUPA)
1549 Ringling Boulevard
Suite 600
Sarasota, FL 34236
Phone: (941) 487-2560
Fax: (941) 487-2570
Email: iupa@iupa.org
Internet: http://www.iupa.org
With the motto “speaking with one voice, moving with one pur-
pose,” the IUPA is the only AFL-CIO–affiliated police union. It re-
ports that its connection with the AFL-CIO provides its
membership, comprised of both active and retired law enforce-
ment officers, with greater strength in legislative matters directed
toward greater police protection and support, and meeting the
Directory of Organizations
231

specific needs of law enforcement personnel with regard to wages,
staffing, and equipment.
Law Enforcement Legal Defense Fund
1611 North Kent Street
Suite 901
Arlington, VA 22209
Internet: http://www.leldf.org
This organization’s mission is to provide legal assistance to police
personnel who take action in the line of duty deemed necessary to
enforce the law. It performs this mission by providing financial
support, legal advocacy, and public service education on various
aspects of the policing profession and the criminal justice system.
Metropolitan Alliance of Police (MAP)
684 Boughton Road
Suite 204
Bolingbrook, IL 60440
Phone: (630) 759-4925
Fax: (630) 759-1902
Email: mapunion@msn.org
Internet: http://www.mapunion.org
MAP is a labor organization of peace officers and others involved
with law enforcement in any municipal, county, or state agency.
Its goal is to use collective bargaining and legal strategies to set-
tle grievances and administrative actions, improve occupational
conditions, promote positive relationships between members
and line personnel and management, and increase educational
and occupational knowledge in police work.
Multijurisdictional Counterdrug Task Force Training
(MCTFT)
P.O. Box 13489
St. Petersburg, FL 33733
Phone: (800) 243-5550
Fax: (800) 346-4412
Email: information@mctft.com
Internet: http://www.mctft.com
The MCTFT provides training of various aspects of counter–drug
law enforcement. It is federally funded though the Department
232
Directory of Organizations

of Defense, the Florida National Guard, and St. Petersburg Col-
lege. It operates at St. Petersburg College’s Southeastern Public
Safety Training Institute state-of-the-art training academy.
National Asian Peace Officers Association (NAPOA)
P.O. Box 50973
Washington, D.C. 20091-0973
Phone: (202) 431-2175
Email: info@napoaonline.org
Internet: http://www.napoaonline.org
The NAPOA’s goal is to promote the interests of Asian-American
law enforcement officers. Through advocacy for equal opportu-
nity in the selection, training, and promotion of Asians in police
work as well as ensuring the rights of its members. The organi-
zation, founded in San Francisco in 1980, seeks to foster relation-
ships with its counterparts in other nations.
National Association of Police Organizations (NAPO)
750 First Street, N.E.
Suite 90
Washington, D.C. 20002
Phone: (202) 842-4420
Fax: (202) 842-4396
Email: info@napo.org
Internet: http://www.napo.org
NAPO is a collection of association and unions in the United
States that are related to law enforcement. The organization was
founded in 1978 and has as its mission advocacy for police offi-
cers through legislation and legal means, educational provision,
and political activism. NAPO represents over 2,000 unions and
associations, 236,000 active peace officers, 11,000 retired officers,
and over 100,000 citizens concerned with various aspects of
policing.
National Association of Property Recovery Investigators, Inc.
(NAPRI)
5715 Will Clayton #1503
Humble, TX 77338
Phone: (386) 479-5329
Fax: (309) 422-2112
Directory of Organizations
233

Email: info@napri.org
Internet: http://www.napri.org
This organization reports to be the premier association of prop-
erty crime investigation in North America. It supports the efforts
of criminal investigators and provides resources, training, publi-
cations, and intelligence exchanges on all matters involving
thefts, larcenies, burglaries, cyber theft, counterfeiting, and other
types of property crimes. The association has a national confer-
ence, and membership is free for property crime investigators.
National Association of Town Watch (NATW)
P.O. Box 303
Wynnewood, PA 19096
Phone: (610) 649-7055
Email: info@natw.org
Internet: http://www.nationaltownwatch.org
A national, nonprofit association, the NATW has as its primary
mission the development and promotion of crime and drug pre-
vention programs that operate with the assistance of various polic-
ing agencies. A collaborative effort is made between the police
agencies and other groups such as neighborhood and community
groups, regional crime prevention programs, civic groups, and
community businesses to prevent criminal activity and make com-
munities safer. The association supports a program called National
Night Out: America’s Night Out Against Crime, which is held
each August and draws support from community and police agen-
cies to control the crime problem. The organization has a newslet-
ter called New Spirit and updates members on crime and drug
news. The group also sponsors an award for member areas with
high levels of achievement.
National Association of Women in Law Enforcement
Executive (NAWLEE)
3 Dunham Street
Carver, MA 02330
Phone: (781) 789-9500
Fax: (508) 866-8707
Email: info@nawlee.com
Internet: http://www.nawlee.com
234
Directory of Organizations

NAWLEE is a nonprofit organization devoted to addressing the
specific issues of women administrators in law enforcement
fields. The association was developed to promote the ideals of
female police executives, to provide professionalism through
training—especially in the areas of leadership, management, and
police administrations—and to create an environment of informa-
tion exchange with regard to effective law enforcement proce-
dures. The organization also has mentoring programs for
mid-level and new senior-level female administrators and a
newsletter called the NAWLEE News.
National Center for Missing and Exploited Children
Charles B. Wang International Children’s Building
699 Prince Street
Alexandria, VA 22314-3175
Phone: (703) 274-3900
Fax: (703) 274-2200
Internet: http://www.missingkids.com
The mission of this nonprofit organization is to prevent the ab-
duction and sexual exploitation of children, to assist in finding
missing children, and to assist the victims of child abuse and their
families and caregivers. It has an extensive clearinghouse of in-
formation on the subject, a cyber tip line to report the Internet ex-
ploitation of children, technical assistance to police, and other
public service agencies. It also offers training and public service
education, provides exchange and networking with child service
agencies, assists with federal initiatives, and distributes pho-
tographs of missing children worldwide.
National Coalition of Italian American Law Enforcement
Associations
92 Sheffield Avenue
Babylon, New York 11704
Internet: http://www.ncoialea.com
This organization is an ethnic collective of police officers whose
stated mission is the provision of national membership to pre-
serve the heritage of law enforcement officers of Italian ancestry.
The coalition aims to be a voice for the concerns of Italian-Amer-
ican police officers in the nation’s capital and in the rest of the
county. On the association website, it is “emphatically stated”
Directory of Organizations
235

that ethic policies promoted by the coalition will not affect mu-
nicipal negotiations.
National Conference of Law Enforcement Emerald Societies,
Inc. (NCLEES)
8 Zaleski
Sayreville, NJ 08872-1858
Internet: http://www.nclees.org
The NCLEES is a registered nonprofit organization that repre-
sents police officers from Irish and Gaelic descent. Founded in
1995, this group has many chapters throughout the nation and
several objectives, including the promotion of fraternity among
the members, the preservation of the Irish culture, the recogni-
tion of the contributions of Irish-American police officers, the dis-
semination of information among members of the organization,
the promotion of a strong and unified voice in policy matters,
and collaboration with civic groups and public safety organiza-
tions. The association has an annual meeting and produces a
newsletter called An Leargas.
National Drug Enforcement Officers Association (NDEOA)
FBI Academy
Quantico, VA 22134-1475
Phone: (202) 298-9653
Internet: http://www.ndeoa.org
An arm of the National Drug Enforcement Administration, this
organization for officers with drug enforcement duties has as its
purpose the cooperation, education, and information exchange
among police agencies involved in the enforcement of drug laws.
National Institute of Ethics
100 Maple Cove
Long Beach, MS 39560
Phone: (800) 273-2559
Fax: (228) 864-0125
Email: ethicsinstitute@cableone.net
Internet: http://www.ethicsinstitute.com
This nonprofit organization, according to its website, is the
largest provider of ethics training in the nation. It also provides
certification in the area of ethics to police officers at different lev-
236
Directory of Organizations

els of government. It conducts customized seminars to request-
ing police agencies that focus on the specific needs and concerns
of these agencies.
National Internal Affairs Investigators Association (NIAIA)
P.O. Box 28571
Raleigh, NC 27611-8511
Phone: (919) 861-3125
Fax: (919) 733-0126
Email: ia@niaia.org
Internet: http://www.niaia.org
Formed in 1985, this organization was founded by a group of po-
lice internal affairs officers who desired to form a professional or-
ganization to develop and establish standards of performance
and ethics for internal affairs officers. It exists to perform these
functions as well as to provide training, discussion, and exchange,
as well as a forum to better the field of internal investigation in
police organizations.
National Latino Peace Officers Association (NLPOA)
P.O. Box 1717
Las Vegas, NV 89125
Phone: (702) 355-8704
Fax: (702) 388-6082
Internet: http://www.nlpoa.org
Founded in 1974 in California to improve the representation of
Latino law enforcement officers, the NLPOA purports to be the
largest organization of Latino police and other criminal justice
practitioners in the United States. The membership is comprised of
police chiefs, sheriffs and deputies, police officers, probation and
parole officers, and federal agents at all levels of government. The
association is a nonprofit organization whose primary mission is
to remove prejudice and discrimination in the field of law enforce-
ment, to lower the incidence of juvenile crime, and to alleviate 
police–citizen conflict in predominantly Latino communities.
National Law Enforcement and Corrections Technology
Center (NLECTC)
Address: 2277 Research Boulevard, M/S 8J
Rockville, MD  20850
Phone:  (800) 248-2742
Directory of Organizations
237

Fax: (301) 519-5149
Email: asknlectc@nlectc.org
Internet: http://www.nlectc.org
This center is an organizational component of the National Insti-
tute of Justice’s Office of Science and Technology and provides
support services, research findings, and technical assistance to
police departments across the nation for them to function more
effectively with the increasing demands for knowledge of tech-
nology in the criminal justice system. The system has regional
centers that support this mission.
National Narcotic Detector Dog Association (NNDDA)
379 CR 105
Carthage, TX 75633
Phone: (888) 289-0070
Email: thenndda@yahoo.com
Internet: http://www.nndda.org
This nonprofit organization, founded in 1978, provides certifica-
tion to police scent detector dogs in a variety of areas, including
police service dog certification, narcotics certification, cadaver
search certification, and explosive detection certification. It hosts
a national training conference as well as regional conferences.
National Organization of Black Law Enforcement Executives
(NOBLE)
Hubart T. Bell Jr. Office Complex
Alexandria, VA 22312-1442
Phone: (703) 658-1529
Fax: (703) 658-9479
Internet: http://www.noblenatl.org
The NOBLE mission is to make sure that the justice system is fair
and equitable for those who provide administration in the law
enforcement field. Founded in 1976 when sixty African-
American police executives in Washington, D.C., met during a
symposium and decided an organization was needed to address
concerns such as the high rates of black urban crime, socioeco-
nomic conditions related to race, fairness in the criminal justice
system, the relationships between the police and the communi-
ties they serve, equality for minority officers, and the unique
238
Directory of Organizations

challenges of African-American police administrators. It has an
electronic newsletter called NOBLE News Online.
National Police Bloodhound Association (NPBA)
67120 Ovante Road
Cathedral City, CA 92234
Internet: http://www.npba.com
This organization is a nonprofit association dedicated to the pro-
fessional advancement of training bloodhounds for police duty.
The association provides training to police bloodhounds and
their trainers in seminars.
National Police Defense Foundation (NPDF)
21 Kilmer Drive
Building 2, Suite F
Morganville, NJ 07751
Phone: (888) SAFE-COP
Fax: (732) 446-3360
Email: NPDF1@optionline.com
Internet: http://www.npdf.org
This association is a nonprofit foundation comprising over 80,000
members and supporters in the United States and twelve coun-
tries abroad. Membership is available to active and retired police
personnel, and the organization has recently adopted a civilian
component through associate and honorary membership. The
NPDF is an advocacy organization to “protect and serve” the in-
terest of federal agents, chiefs of police, state police officers cor-
rectional officers, and police personnel from municipal, county,
state, and federal levels of law enforcement.
National Sheriff’s Association (NSA)
1450 Duke Street
Alexandria, VA 22314-3490
Phone: (703) 836-7827
Internet: http://www.sheriffs.org
The NSA is a nonprofit organization for sheriffs’ departments and
other law enforcement officials in its sixty-fifth year of operation.
Its primary purpose is to elevate the level of professionalism of
criminal justice practitioners. The organization hosts numerous
Directory of Organizations
239

training and professional assistance programs to assist sheriffs
and deputies and others in law enforcement occupations to better
serve the needs of their jurisdictions. Its web page has a large
number of resources for county law enforcement personnel, in-
cluding the Sheriff magazine and a clearinghouse of information
called the Ultimate Guide for Sheriffs.
National Tactical Officers Association (NTOA)
P.O. Box 797
Doylestown, PA 18901
Phone: (800) 279-9127
Fax: (215) 230-7552
Internet: http://www.ntoa.org
Established in Los Angeles in 1983, the NTOA is a primary
training organization for special weapons and tactical (SWAT)
units, patrol units, crisis negotiation programs, and other agen-
cies that deal with critical incidents situations. In addition to its
training functions, the association coordinates a week-long train-
ing seminar and operates a national policing library, offering re-
search support and two journals: The Tactical Edge and The Crisis
Negotiator.
National Troopers Coalition (NTC)
Phone: (800) 232-1392
Email: chairman@ntctroopers.com
Internet: http://www.ntctroopers.com
An organization that purports to be the only coalition represent-
ing solely the interests of state troopers and other state highway
officials, NTC is a nonprofit organization formed in 1977. This is
a 30,000-member organization that advocates for employees of
state policing agencies.
Park Law Enforcement Association (PLEA)
Email: webmaster@parkranger.com
Internet: http://www.parkranger.com
PLEA is an affiliate of the National Recreation and Park Associa-
tion and has as its mission the improvement of safety and secu-
rity issues in federal, state, and local parks and recreation areas.
Formed in 1984, PLEA is comprised of a variety of park law en-
forcement personnel and provides education and other informa-
240
Directory of Organizations

tional services regarding park enforcement and park safety to
park visitors and to other police officials. In addition, it strives for
better communication between recreational and park enforce-
ment and other policing agencies.
Police Executive Research Forum (PERF)
1120 Connecticut Avenue, N.W.
Suite 930
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (202) 466-7820
Fax: (202) 466-7826
Internet: http://www.policeforum.org
PERF is a national organization comprised of progressive police
administrators from the largest urban police departments in the
United States. Begun in 1977, the forum is concerned with the im-
provement of the police profession by advancing research and
public policy debates on matters of policing. PERF desires to take
a leadership role in discussions on crime and broader issues of
fear of crime and the fair and humane treatment of all citizens.
Two current initiatives are (1) a response to citizen concern over
traffic stop fairness and racial profiling and (2) collaboration be-
tween police and religious leaders to explore antiviolence mea-
sures in urban communities.
Police Foundation
1201 Connecticut Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036-2636
Phone: (202) 833-1460
Fax: (202) 659-9142
Email: pfinfo@policefoundation.org
Internet: http://www.policefoundation.org
The purpose of the Police Foundation is to promote innovations
and improvements in law enforcement. Founded in 1970, it is an
independent, not-for-profit organization that conducts research
on many areas of policing, including law enforcement policies
and procedures and police behavior. It also seeks to disseminate
appropriate empirically based information to local agencies. The
Police Foundation has an academic series of works called Ideas
in American Policing and sponsors regular lectures on a variety
of policing issues.
Directory of Organizations
241

Reserve Police Officers Association (RPOA)
105 Fullerton Avenue
Yonkers, NY 10704
Phone: (800) 326-9416
Fax: (212) 555-1234
Internet: http://www.reservepolice.org
The RPOA represents law enforcement officials who are volunteer
police or part-time citizen peace officers. Reserve officers go by a
variety of other names, such as auxiliary, special part-time, super-
numerary, or seasonal officers, and they are generally recognized
as being differentiated from “regular” or “career” officers who
provide police services as a primary source of income and who re-
ceive insurance and pension benefits. The association seeks to fos-
ter public awareness of reserve officers and their function to
policing, provide financial assistance to disabled reservists or their
families to those who died in the line of duty, support agencies
through the donation of equipment, provide training, serve as a
clearinghouse of information or reserve duties, and promote the
sharing of ideas in the profession. The organization’s website in-
cludes an interesting history of the use of reserve police officers.
Society of Certified Criminal Analysts (SCCA)
201 E. Washington Street
Suite 940
Phoenix, AZ 85004
Phone: (602) 776-5498
Fax: (602) 776-5519
Email: Edward.Feingold@atf.gov
Internet: http://www.certifiedanalysts.net
Formed in 1989 to augment the International Law Enforcement
Intelligence Analysts (IALEIA), the SCCA became the certifica-
tion arm of the parent organization in 1996 and reaffirmed this
role in 2003. Its purpose is to promote high standards and in-
creasing professionalism by certifying intelligence analysts, of
which there are over two hundred in the world in ten nations: Ar-
gentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, France, the Nether-
lands, South Africa, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
Society of Police and Criminal Psychology (SPCP)
Department of Criminal Justice
Texas State University
242
Directory of Organizations

San Marcos, TX 78666
Email: msurrett@spfdcol.edu
Internet: http://psychweb.cisat.jmu.edu/spcp/
SPCP bills itself as an eclectic association that supports the scien-
tific study of crime and the practical application of that knowledge
to problems existing in the criminal justice system, the organiza-
tion’s members’ study of crime and its causation, criminal victim-
ization, and influences from criminal justice organizations. The
association has an annual meeting and offers a diplomate in police
psychology designation. In addition, the SPCP has two journals:
The Journal of Police and Criminal Psychology.
Southern Poverty Law Center
400 Washington Avenue
Montgomery, AL 36104
Phone: (334) 956-8200
Email: Internet: http://www.splcenter.org
Founded as a small civil rights firm in 1971 by two Montgomery at-
torneys to protect racial minorities from inadequate treatment in the
justice system, the Southern Poverty Law Center has grown into an
internationally known nonprofit organization that promotes toler-
ance and battles hate activity. Headquartered appropriately in the
home of the civil rights movement, the center initially represented
clients in racially based legal cases that few other local attorneys
would accept. In the 1980s, the center moved from protecting indi-
vidual rights to investigating and reporting the activities of hate or-
ganizations and has achieved several legal victories in this area,
including prominent Supreme Court decisions. The center’s Intelli-
gence Project provides information to police agencies, the media,
and the public on the activities of extremist organizations and pub-
lishes a quarterly magazine called The Intelligence Report that pro-
vides updated information on these groups. The center also
produces and maintains an educational program called Teaching
Tolerance and a community-based program (Tolerance.org). In ad-
dition, the center provides training and support to police agencies,
schools, and community groups in the area of civil rights issues.
United States Border Patrol Supervisor’s Association (BPSA)
539 Telegraph Canyon Road PMB. #656
Chula Vista, CA 91910-6497
Email: Internet: http://www.bpsups.org
Directory of Organizations
243

This nonprofit professional association seeks to advance the pro-
fession of border patrol through leadership directives, professional
standards, and excellence. It offers training and networking with
other law enforcement agencies and provides legal defense fund-
ing to its members in Arizona and California but plans to offer this
service to members nationally. The BPSA is an association member
with the National Association of Police Organizations (NAPO),
Federal Manager’s Association (FMA), Peace Officers Research
Association of California (PORAC), and the Combined Law En-
forcement Associations of Texas (CLEAT).
United States Canine Police Association (USPCA)
P.O. Box 80
Springboro, OH 45066
Phone: (800) 531-1614
Email: Internet: http://www.uspcak9.com
The USPCA is a nonprofit organization that purports to be the
largest and oldest organization of canine law enforcement han-
dlers. It offers training in the areas of patrol, tracking, and detec-
tion of different types on contraband, including drugs, explosives,
accelerants, as well as animals and cadavers. It offers certification
in a number of areas including patrol, tracking, detection, and cer-
tification of trainers and judges.
Volunteers in Police Service (VIPS)
International Association of Chiefs of Police
515 N. Washington Street
Alexandria, VA 22314
Phone: (800) THE IACP
Internet: http://www.policevolunteers.org
This is one of the five Citizen Corps partnership programs oper-
ated through the USA Freedom Corps program, started by Pres-
ident George W. Bush in 2002. The VIPS program is administered
by the International Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP) in con-
junction with the White House Office of the USA Freedom Corps
and the Bureau of Justice Assistance, Office of Justice Programs,
U.S. Department of Justice. The program provides support and
resources to agencies that wish to learn about the use of volun-
teers in their agencies, start a volunteer program in their depart-
ments, increase the number of volunteer officers, and assist
citizens involved in volunteer police programs in their commu-
244
Directory of Organizations

nities. The primary resource is the organization web page, which
provides information and assistance to police agencies either that
have or that have requested volunteer personnel. It has an infor-
mative newsletter called VIPS in Focus.
Women in Federal Law Enforcement (WIFLE)
2200 Wilson Boulevard
Suite 102 PMB-204
Arlington, VA 22201
Phone: (703) 548-9211 / (866) 399-4353
Fax: (410) 451-7373
Email: WIFLE@Comcast.net
Internet: http://www.wifle.org
WIFLE was formed in 1999 from an Interagency Committee on
Women in Federal Law Enforcement that was established in 1977
to bring more women into the criminal justice field and retain
them. The organization’s mission is to promote equality with re-
gard to women in law enforcement; it seeks to assist police agen-
cies in recruiting and retaining female officers, emphasizes police
management practices, promotes a positive image of the police,
and sponsors research projects in issues regarding gender in
policing. The organization’s website provides a number of re-
sources for practitioners and scholars and has an electronic news
link called WIFLE-Enews.
Federal Government Agencies 
Related to Policing
The following list represents a partial listing of the federal agen-
cies associated with policing and their websites. The list is cer-
tainly not all-inclusive, but the websites provide useful
information to people wanting to know more about federal po-
lice agencies.
Bureau of Alcohol Tobacco and Firearms (ATF)
http://www.atf.gov
Bureau of Diplomatic Security Rewards for Justice
http://www.rewardsforjustice.net/index.htm
Federal Government Agencies Related to Policing
245

Bureau of Indian Affairs
http://www.doi.gov/bureau-indian-affairs.html
Bureau of Justice Assistance (BJA)
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/BJA
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS)
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)
http://www.cia.gov
Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS)
http://www.cops.usdog.gov
Customs Service
http://www.customs.ustreas.gov/
Defense Security Service
http://www.dss.mil
Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
http://www.dhs.gov/dhspublic/
Directory of Federal Agencies
http://www.fedworld.gov
Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA)
http://www.usdoj.gov/dea/
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
http://www.fbi.gov/
Federal Bureau of Prisons (FBP)
http://www.bop.gov/
Federal Protective Service (FPS)
http://www.ice.gov/graphics/fps/index.htm
Federal Trade Commission (FTC)
http://www.ftc.gov/
246
Directory of Organizations

Internal Revenue Service (IRS)–Compliance and Enforcement
http://www.irs.gov/compliance/enforcement/
National Crime Reference Service (NCRS)
http://www.ncjrs.org
National Drug Intelligence Center (NDIC)
http://www.usdoj.gov/ndic
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA)
http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov/
National Institute of Justice (NIJ)
http://www.ojp.usodj.gov/hjj
National Park Service (NPS)
http://www.nps.gov/morningreport/
National Security Agency (NSA)
http://www.nsa.gov/
Office of Legislative Affairs (OLA)
http://www.usdoj.gov/ola
Office of Police Corps and Law Enforcement Education
(OPCLEE)
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/opclee
Postal Inspection Service
http://www.usps.gov/websites/depart/inspect/
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
Office of Inspector General
http://www.hud.gov/offices/oig/
U.S. Department of Justice (USDOJ)
http://www.usdoj.gov
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS)
http://www.fws.gov/
Federal Government Agencies Related to Policing
247

U.S. Marshalls Service
http://www.usdoj.gov/marshals
U.S. Park Police (USPP)
http://www.nps.gov/uspp/
U.S. Secret Service
http://www.treas.gov/usss/index.shtml
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
http://www.sec.gov/
State Departments of Public Safety
The following is a list of state departments of public safety for the
fifty states and their websites. For a complete overview of these
agencies, the reader is directed to an inclusive directory found at
http://www.statetroopersdirectory.com. The states vary in their
use of state police. Some have clearly defined roles involving
highway patrol, capital security, protection of the governor, train-
ing, criminal investigation, or some combination of these. All of
the states have state policing systems that give certain agencies
statewide jurisdiction of crime control, and these are adminis-
tered in some fashion by the state departments of public safety.
Alabama
http://www.dps.state.al.us/
Alaska
http://www.dps.state.ak.us/
Arizona
http://www.dps.state.az.us/default.asp
Arkansas
http://www.dps.state.az.us/default.asp
California
http://www.chp.ca.gov/index.html
248
Directory of Organizations

Colorado
http://csp.state.co.us/
Connecticut
http://www.ct.gov/dps/site/default.asp
Delaware
http://www.state.de.us/dsp/
Florida
http://www.fhp.state.fl.us/
Georgia
http://www.fhp.state.fl.us/
Hawaii
http://www.hawaii.gov/psd/psd_home.php
Idaho
http://www.isp.state.id.us/
Illinois
http://www.isp.state.il.us/
Indiana
http://www.ai.org/isp/index.html
Iowa
http://www.dps.state.ia.us/ISP/index.shtml
Kansas
http://www.kansashighwaypatrol.org/
Kentucky
http://www.kentuckystatepolice.org/
Louisiana
http://www.lsp.org/index.html
Maine
http://www.maine.gov/dps/msp/index.shtml
State Departments of Public Safety
249

Maryland
http://www.mdsp.org/
Massachusetts
http://www.mass.gov/?pageID=eopsagencylanding&L=3&L0=
Home&L1=Public+Safety+Agencies&L2=Massachusetts+State+
Police&sid=Eeops
Michigan
http://www.michigan.gov/msp
Minnesota
http://www.dps.state.mn.us/patrol/index.htm
Mississippi
http://www.dps.state.ms.us/dps/dps.nsf/main?OpenForm
Missouri
http://www.mshp.dps.missouri.gov/MSHPWeb/Root/index
.html
Montana
http://www.doj.mt.gov/enforcement/highwaypatrol.asp
Nebraska
http://www.nsp.state.ne.us/
Nevada
http://nhp.nv.gov/
New Hampshire
http://www.nh.gov/safety/divisions/nhsp/
New Jersey
http://www.state.nj.us/lps/njsp/index.html
New Mexico
http://www.nmsp.com/
New York
http://www.troopers.state.ny.us/
250
Directory of Organizations

North Carolina
http://www.nccrimecontrol.org/Index2.cfm?a=000003,000014
North Dakota
http://www.nd.gov/ndhp/
Ohio
http://statepatrol.ohio.gov/
Oklahoma
http://www.dps.state.ok.us/ohp/
Oregon
http://egov.oregon.gov/OSP/
Pennsylvania
http://www.psp.state.pa.us/psp/site/default.asp
Rhode Island
http://www.risp.state.ri.us/
South Carolina
http://www.schp.org/
South Dakota
http://hp.state.sd.us/greeting.htm
Tennessee
http://www.state.tn.us/safety/
Texas
http://www.txdps.state.tx.us/
Utah
http://highwaypatrol.utah.gov/
Vermont
http://www.dps.state.vt.us/vtsp/
Virginia
http://www.vsp.state.va.us/
State Departments of Public Safety
251

Washington
http://www.wsp.wa.gov/
West Virginia
http://www.wsp.wa.gov/
Wisconsin
http://www.dot.state.wi.us/statepatrol/
Wyoming
http://dot.state.wy.us/Default.jsp?sCode=whp
252
Directory of Organizations

8
Resources
T
his chapter contains a list of print resources including books,
journal articles, and core periodicals that deal with issues in
policing. It also includes nonprint resources such as video/
DVD documentaries, and police-related Internet sites. Also in-
cluded is a list of legal cases that affect the daily functioning of
the police.
Print Resources
Books
The following books have all made an important contribution to
the field of policing and law enforcement. The list is certainly not
all-inclusive but provides a mix of scholarly texts (both classics
and more recent volumes) and popular works that shed light on
the field.
Alex, Nicholas. 1969. Black in Blue: A Study of the Negro Police-
man. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
This work is an ethnographic study of African American police
officers in an urban American police department. The study, con-
ducted in 1964 and 1965, describes the special problems experi-
enced by black police officers in that period. Case studies provide
a backdrop for the analysis of racial prejudice and discrimination
that took place at the time. Although the sample size was quite
small, the analysis was in-depth and helped usher in more dis-
cussion on race and police work.
253

Bittner, Egon. 1990. Aspects of Police Work. Boston: Northeast-
ern University Press.
This work provides a scholarly analysis of the police by a police
scholar who spent years performing ethnographic and quantita-
tive studies of the police and consulting with agencies on law en-
forcement issues. In this work he explores in detail the functions
of the police, examines the role of the urban police, and looks at
specialty functions such as police work with the mentally ill and
juveniles. He also describes the role of research and proposes a
theory of policing.
Bordua, David J., ed. 1967. The Police: Six Sociological Essays.
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons.
This collection of six essays on the police offers contributions
from such key police experts as Albert J. Reiss Jr., Jerome Skol-
nick, and James Q. Wilson, with the essays addressing such im-
portant issues in law enforcement as crime and riots, gangs,
police morale, police recruitment, and organizational issues. Al-
though written decades ago, it deserves a new review in light of
current policing models and philosophies.
Cannon, Lou. 1999. Official Negligence: How Rodney King and
the Riots Changed Los Angeles and the LAPD. Boulder, CO:
Westview Press.
This work, written by a political reporter, chronicles the 1991
Rodney King beating by four officers of the Los Angeles Police
Department and the resulting explosion of violence that occurred
with the 1992 acquittal of the officers. The book uses a historical
framework for the incident including the “legacy of Dragnet”—
the LAPD’s aggressive tactics under Chief William Parker and
others. It takes an in-depth look at the intersection of race, class,
politics, and policing strategies in American’s second-largest city.
At 706 pages, it is a comprehensive social analysis of the Rodney
King story that goes much deeper than this one incident.
Carte, Gene E., and Elaine M. Carte. 1975. Police Reform in the
United States: The Era of August Vollmer, 1905–1932. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
This is an interesting and complete biography of August Vollmer,
America’s premier police reformer whose ideas transformed po-
254
Resources

lice philosophy in the early twentieth century. It also provides a
vivid description of the beginning of police professionalism in
the country and the cultural milieu in which the reforms were
implemented.
Critchley, T. A. 1967. A History of Police in England and Wales.
Montclair, NJ: Patterson Smith.
The definitive work on early policing in England and Wales,
Critchley’s book should be required reading for those interested
in the earliest forms of law enforcement. This oft cited reference
provides a strong historical foundation for the analysis of con-
temporary police systems throughout the world.
Delattre, Edwin J. 2002. Character and Cops: Ethics in Policing,
4th ed. Washington, DC: AEI Press.
This fourth edition of a popular book on police ethics is written
by a professor of philosophy and education, and it uses a philo-
sophical perspective to discuss many issues of police work such
as the changing police mission, discretion, corruption, and bru-
tality. An entire chapter is devoted to the O. J. Simpson case, re-
inforcing the importance of this case to the field. This edition
includes a chapter on ethics and the future of policing including
the growing role of terrorism in policing.
Denziger, Steven R., ed. 1996. The Real War on Crime: The Report
of the National Criminal Justice Commission. New York:
HarperCollins.
This report provides the findings of a group of citizens concerned
with crime rates and the response to crime in the United States.
Concerned that there had been no presidential commission es-
tablished to deal with the issue of crime since 1969, the group,
calling itself the National Criminal Justice Commission, set out to
determine some of the problems with the system in the hope of
providing some suggestions for improvement. The recommenda-
tions for the police sector included greater community involve-
ment (“neighborhood-oriented policing” and external review
boards), better training and incentives for prevention-oriented
officers, and recruitment of officers based on racial and ethnic
similarities to the communities they serve.
Print Resources
255

Domanick, Joe. 1994. To Protect and to Serve: The LAPD’s Cen-
tury of War in the City of Dreams. New York: Pocket Books.
The author, a journalist, provides an account of the LAPD. It is a
candid work drawing on key historical events in the force’s his-
tory. The book includes commentaries on race relations and other
social factors that shaped and molded the city’s police. Pre-
dictably, William Parker is featured prominently, as is the Rodney
King beating.
Douglas, John, and Mark Olshaker. 1995. Mind Hunter: Inside the
FBI’s Serial Crime Unit. New York: Scribner’s.
This is an autobiography of John Douglas, one of the FBI’s earli-
est criminal profilers. In addition to its autobiographical section,
the book provides information on psychological profiling
through Douglas’s recollection of a series of cases in which he
used profiling to determine the identity of offenders.
Fletcher, Connie. 1990. What Cops Know: Cops Talk About What
They Do, How They Do it, and What It Does to Them. New York:
Villard Books.
This is a popular book using interviews with police officers to ex-
plain that police officers have a special “knowledge” of human
behavior not possessed by most people. This knowledge comes
from the fact that the officers’ experiences allow them greater in-
sight into certain aspects of the human condition not normally
encountered by others. Though not an academic work, the book
is a compilation of very candid responses from the officers and
gives an interesting look “behind the shades.”
Friedman, Lawrence. 1993. Crime and Punishment in American
History. New York: Basic Books.
A detailed historical account of crime and the system of correc-
tion throughout the stages of American history, this work is com-
prehensive and provides a cultural context for the control of
crime in America. The book covers policing, the courts, and cor-
rections in three stages: the colonial period, the period from the
Revolutionary War to the end of the nineteenth century, and the
twentieth century. 
256
Resources

Goldstein, Herman. 1977. Policing a Free Society. Cambridge,
MA: Ballinger.
In this landmark work, Goldstein attempts to explore the core
problems of police in American society such as corruption, inef-
fective training, and poor police–community relations; he also of-
fers his views on how effective police administration can negate
many of these problems. Goldstein recommends higher standards
from police managers, more effective recruitment and training of
line staff, increasing minority applicants, more educational op-
portunities for officers, and many other progressive reforms.
Heidensohn, France. 1992. Women in Control? The Role of
Women in Law Enforcement. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
An analysis of the role of women in police work, this volume pro-
vides a sociohistorical assessment of the social control measures
that have traditionally been used in society and of the role of
women in these measures. It provides an examination of the en-
trance of women into policing in the United States and Britain
and is an excellent comparative study of the law enforcement
systems in these two countries.
Hibbert, Christopher. 2003. The Roots of Evil: A Social History of
Crime and Punishment. Phoenix Mill, UK: Sutton Publishing.
A British work originally published in 1963, this appropriately
subtitled social history of crime and punishment provides a good
deal of information on the history of policing throughout the
world. The section on policing in the “New World” covers the pe-
riod of the G-men and gangsters in the early twentieth century.
Jenkins, Herbert. 1970. Keeping the Peace: A Police Chief Looks
at His Job. New York: Harper and Row.
This work is an autobiography of Jenkins, who served as police
chief of the Atlanta, Georgia, Police Department in the 1930s and
1940s. The book is a historical account of law enforcement and es-
pecially of race relations in the city. Jenkins was a progressive re-
former and when the President’s Commission on Law Enforcement
and Administration of Justice released its report recommending the
hiring of more black police officers, Atlanta already had a higher
percentage of minority officers than most major cities.
Print Resources
257

Jones, Mark. 2005. Criminal Justice Pioneers in U.S. History.
Boston: Pearson.
An informative work on some of the key figures in criminal jus-
tice, the book is divided into the primary theorists in the field, pi-
oneers in policing, key legal scholars and practitioners, and
prominent names in the criminal justice system. Its section on
policing has the largest bibliography of all the sections in the
book and is recommended reading for those with an interest in
the contributions of the major pioneers.
Kappeler, Victor E., Richard D. Sluder, and Geoffrey P. Alpert.
1998. Forces of Deviance: Understanding the Dark Side of Polic-
ing, 2nd ed. Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press.
A scholarly work often used in college classrooms, Forces of De-
viance is an examination of the police throughout American his-
tory from the colonial era to the present. Concise but detailed,
this is an informative introduction to police deviance and should
be read by people interested in understanding the darker history
of policing in America.
Kelling, George, Tony Pate,  Duane Dieckman, and Charles E.
Brown. 1974. The Kansas City Preventive Patrol Experiment: A
Technical Report. Washington, DC: Police Foundation.
This detailed, data-filled report describes the groundbreaking
study in Kansas City conducted during 1972 and 1973 regarding
the effects of three different patrol levels. The study found that the
patrol practices did not have a statistically significant effect on
criminal behavior, law enforcement service delivery, or citizens’
feelings of safety and protection. This book provides the data
from the study, replete with statistical analyses in numerous
charts, graphs, and tables. Not a recommended read for nonacad-
emics, this report provided information on police patrol that has
affected police organizations throughout the country.
Kelling, George L., and Catherine M. Coles. 1997. Fixing Broken
Windows: Restoring Order and Reducing Crime in Our Commu-
nities. New York: Touchstone.
One of the most influential books on policing published during
the late twentieth century, this revolutionary text begins with a
258
Resources

quote by none other than Robert Peel that “the police are the pub-
lic and the public are the police” and with a foreword by another
police visionary, James Q. Wilson. In this work, Kelling and Coles
provide the framework for the broken windows theory of com-
munity disorganization as well as the prevention-oriented bro-
ken windows policing model that was introduced earlier by
Kelling and Wilson in an article in the Atlantic. Using contempo-
rary data from a variety of sources, the work sets out a model of
policing that provides a nice fit with community-oriented mod-
els that are continuing to gain in popularity in departments
across the nation. The book and its theoretical perspective have
been challenged by several authors, opening up a beneficial dia-
logue on policing that continues to the present.
Kerik, Bernard B. 2001. The Lost Son: A Life in Pursuit of Justice.
New York: Regan Books.
This book is a chronicle of the experiences of Kerik, the fortieth
police commissioner of New York City, during whose tenure the
September 11, 2001 attacks of the World Trade Center took place.
This work is especially interesting in that it is an autobiography
of America’s top cop who describes his rise to that position and
at the same time juxtaposes his unrelenting desire to find justice
on a personal level. Kerik is driven by the fact that he was aban-
doned by his mother, who was herself the victim of murder in a
case that was never solved. The book is also noteworthy in that it
provides insight into the events of September 11, 2001 from a law
enforcement perspective.
Klockars, Carl B. 1985. The Idea of Police. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage
Publications.
This work, the third volume of the Law and Criminal Justice 
Series by Sage, is a sociological study of the police profession. Ex-
plored in this book are adequate definitions for the police, the
reasons we have police, the patrol and detective roles of the po-
lice, the issue of selective enforcement, and measures of good
policing. In a chapter entitled “Varieties of Avocational Policing,”
Klockars (in the vein of Wilson’s Varieties of Police Behavior) differ-
entiates between types of policing in which citizens fulfill some
of the functions of the police as an avocation, in part-time, ama-
teur, often unpaid positions.
Print Resources
259

Leiner, Stephen. 1984. Black Police, White Society. New York:
New York University Press.
A sociologist and former New York Police Department police of-
ficer describes the working world of African-American officers
through a series of interviews, observations, and personal expe-
rience. Leiner attempts to provide an update of the classic work
Black in Blue, which explored the problem of black police officers
in the 1960s.
Martin, Susan Ehrlich. 1980. Breaking and Entering: Police-
women on Patrol. Berkeley: University of California Press.
A groundbreaking study of gender in policing, the work was a
Ph.D. dissertation in which the author completed a study on
women who “broke into” the traditionally male dominated oc-
cupational field of police patrol. In the mid-1970s, Martin was a
police reserve officer in Washington, D.C., who completed a field
study examining the different worlds of the male and female of-
ficers. The study was a seminal work in the beginning field of
scholarly feminist criminology.
Middleton, Michael L. 2000. Cop: A True Story. New York: MJF
Books.
This is a collection of true stories written by a police officer of the
Los Angeles Police Department for over twenty-one years. The
work, a popular book written for laypersons, gives the reader a
feeling of being a police officer in an urban area. Dealing with the
harsh realities of gangs, drug-related crimes, and grisly violence
and deaths; the book also looks at the more heroic side of police
work. He also describes the effects of racism and sexism in the po-
lice force and makes a candid exploration of police misconduct.
Miller, William R. 1977. Cops and Bobbies: Police Authority in
New York and London, 1830–1870. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
This work provides a historical account of the police practices of
five decades of the mid-nineteenth century in both New York and
London. The book compares and contrasts the “cops” of the New
York Municipal Police with the “bobbies” of the London Metro-
politan Police. The time frame covers what many police scholars
consider to be the advent of the “new police” in both cities.
260
Resources

Monkkonen, Eric H. 1981. Police in Urban America, 1860–1920.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Police historian Monkkonen’s often cited history of the urban po-
lice in the United States includes chapters on the development of
the urban police, arrest rates, and the changing role of the police
from being a welfare agent to a crime fighter.
New York Knapp Commission. 1973. Knapp Commission Report
on Police Corruption. New York: George Braziller.
This report, issued in 1972 and published in book form a year
later, was submitted to the mayor of New York City by Whitman
Knapp, chairman of the Commission to Investigate Alleged Po-
lice Corruption that was established two years earlier. The report
detailed the “widespread corruption” in the New York Police De-
partment made famous by the allegations of plainclothes officer
Frank Serpico. The report called for an immediate “rooting out”
of police corruption by agency commanders, reorganization of
internal inspections, and a host of other recommendations.
Niederhoffer, Arthur. 1967. Behind the Shield: The Police in
Urban Society. New York: Doubleday.
A classic in the study of police misconduct, this book examines
the existence of an authoritarian police personality, in which a
strict and unyielding police personality is formed through in-
tense socialization in the occupation. Other areas of police social-
ization, such as prevalent cynicism, are examined.
Niederhoffer, Arthur, and Elaine Niederhoffer. 1978. The Police
Family: From Station House to Ranch House. Lanham, MD: Lex-
ington Books.
This is one of the earliest works to focus on the families of police
officers, which are labeled by the authors the blue circle. It includes
police concerns such as occupational stress as it affects the family,
relationship problems, and issues involving the children of police.
Philbin, Tom. 1996. Copspeak: The Lingo of Law Enforcement
and Crime. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons.
Billing itself “part dictionary, part encyclopedia, part etymologi-
cal tract, and hopefully all entertaining,” this is a small reference
Print Resources
261

book to terms used by the police and the “perps.” This introduc-
tion to police argot is beneficial to anyone studying the police or
considering a career in policing.
President’s Commission on Law Enforcement and Administra-
tion of Justice. 1967. The Challenge of Crime in a Free Society.
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. 
This report is the culmination of data gathering and recommen-
dations on the three arms of the criminal justice system by a large
staff of commissioners, members, staff, and advisors on the issue
of crime in America during a specially disconcerting period in
American policing—the 1960s. The fourth chapter of the book
provides a discussion of the functions of the police sector of the
criminal justice system. The work analyzes the state of the police
and makes a number of recommendations, including increased
positive involvement with the community, the efficient use of po-
lice personnel, the advocacy from legal council, specialized police
duties, a bureaucratic structure, policies for police integrity, a
team policing approach, among many others. A truly ground-
breaking report, the work helped bring about a series of progres-
sive changes in American policing.
Reiss, Albert J., Jr. 1971. The Police and the Public. New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press.
This is a landmark study of police officers and their relationships
with the communities they serve. Starting as an observational
study by Reiss and graduate students doing ride-alongs with po-
lice patrol officers in the mid-1960s, the efforts were discovered
by the National Crime Commission who sought to better under-
stand police–community relations, which were strained at the
time. Field studies were conducted in Boston, Chicago, and
Washington, D.C.
Reynolds, Elaine A. 1988. Before the Bobbies: The Night Watch
and Police Reform in Metropolitan London, 1720–1830. Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press.
This account of policing in early London is derived from the au-
thor’s doctoral dissertation and posits that pre-1829 policing in
London was probably not as unprofessional as is often thought.
Reynolds traces the earliest form of professional policing to 1735
262
Resources

in the West End parishes. Reynolds also argues that the London
officials did not resist the idea of policing itself: The sticking
point was the idea of centralized policing. The author spent much
time reviewing official London documents to come to her con-
clusions and developed an interesting thesis: There was more
continuity between the pre-Peelian era and the era of profes-
sional policing than is normally explored in the literature.
Richmond. 1976. Scenes in the Life of a Bow Street Runner. In-
troduction by E. F. Bleiler. New York: Dover Publications.
Written in 1827, this work is considered to be “the first collection
of detective stories in English” by an unknown writer using the
pen name Richmond. The work has an introduction by E. F.
Bleiler that provides an excellent description of London’s famed
Bow Street Runners, who are often considered the world’s first
detective squad.
Rousey, Dennis C. 1996. Policing the Southern City: New Orleans
1805–1889. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University.
Rousey argues in this compelling work that the earliest form of
policing in the United States occurred in the southern part of the
country, especially in New Orleans, in the form of the slave pa-
trols. He also describes the unique racial and cultural makeup of
the city and provides contrasts to other cities in the South.
Schneider, John C. 1980. Detroit and the Problem in Order,
1830–1880: A Geography of Crime Riot, and Policing. Lincoln:
University of Nebraska Press.
A historical account of policing in Detroit from the beginning of
the police until 1880, this work examines the specific crime prob-
lem and racial strife occurring in the city and the measures taken
by the police to control them.
Schulz, Dorothy Moses. 1995. From Social Worker to Crime-
fighter: Women in United States Municipal Policing. Westport,
CT: Praeger.
This is a historical account of women in policing in the United
States. A chronicle of female police from the days of the police
matrons to the present day, Schulz covers the periods of the
women’s bureaus, the Depression and World War II, and the
Print Resources
263

1950s, which she argues, opened the doors for the entrance of
women into the field in the late 1960s and early 1970s.
Schulz, Dorothy Moses. 2004. Breaking the Brass Ceiling: Women
Police Chiefs and Their Paths to the Top. Westport, CT: Praeger.
The pioneering female law enforcement administrators give their
stories of breaking into the top ranks of the traditionally male-
dominated field of police work. Using questionnaires, Schulz re-
ceived information from the women police chiefs and sheriffs
throughout the nation regarding their climb to the top of the po-
lice ladder. In addition to the surveys, the author used phone and
e-mail messages and reviewed conference and publication data
from the subjects.
Silverman, Charles E. 1978. Criminal Violence, Criminal Justice.
New York: Random House.
At 540 pages, this work is a comprehensive exploration of crime
and violence in America. It investigates crime and criminal vio-
lence in all areas of the criminal justice system. One chapter is
wholly devoted to the police entitled, “The Wisdom of What the
Police Do—and Don’t Do.” This chapter uses individual case
studies to examine the role of the police.
Skolnick, Jerome H. 1966. Justice Without Trial: Law Enforce-
ment in Democratic Society. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons.
This landmark work started an in-depth description of the police
subculture. Using the term “working personality,” Skolnick de-
scribed the often cited elements of the police personality: danger
and authority. The additional element of social isolation is a key
characteristic of this social psychological analysis. These three
components create the unique behavioral traits of police officers.
Skolnick also analyzes other aspects of police work such as police
discretion and the code of secrecy.
Skolnick, Jerome H., and James J. Fyfe. 1993. Above the Law: Po-
lice and the Excessive Use of Force. New York: Free Press.
A major analysis of police misconduct through the use of exces-
sive force, Above the Law is a book that is easily accessible to both
police scholars and laypersons interested in policing. The com-
mon thread throughout the work is the Rodney King beating,
264
Resources

and this theme is present from the first to the last page; this is un-
derstandable since the book was written shortly after this incred-
ible event unfolded. The book takes a historical perspective to
view the issue of police aggression and is candid in its presenta-
tion of the material. All students of policing should read this
work.
Stark, Rodney. 1972. Police Riots. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
This is a seminal work on police violence written at the height of
controversy surrounding police behavior and misbehavior and at
the apex of the “hippie era,” when many aspects of society, espe-
cially social control measures, were questioned. Stark, a sociolo-
gist who had originally planned to complete a study on a
particular disturbance in 1968 ended up examining a phenome-
non in which police, when engaged in efforts to control disorder,
actually contribute to increased disorder by reacting violently to-
ward the citizenry. Candid and controversial, thus work exem-
plified the growing chasm between the police and community
during the late 1960s and early 1970s.
Stead, Philip John, ed. 1977. Pioneers in Policing. Montclair, NJ:
Patterson Smith.
One of the finest collections of minibiography in the field of
policing, this work is an edited volume with contributions on
several key figures in the field, including the Fielding brothers,
Robert Peel, Alphonse Bertillon, August Vollmer, O. W. Wilson,
and several others. This work is a must read for those interested
in the subject.
Walker, Samuel. 1977. A Critical History of Police Reform: The
Emergence of Professionalism. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
This is a major contribution to the history of the American police.
With the expressed motivation to explain that the American
policing system is static and resistant to change, Walker begins
his analysis with the mid-nineteenth century policing systems
and continues through the end of the 1930s. He states that the
problems that erupted in the 1960s in law enforcement were due
to a policing structure that had changed little since the 1940s.
Prior to that time, however, many changes had taken place as
new ideas surfaced to deal with the various social changes of the
Print Resources
265

time. This is an often quoted reference to many books on police
history and police reform.
Wambaugh, Joseph. 1989. The Blooding. New York: William Mor-
row and Co.
Breaking from his usual police fiction, former Los Angeles Police
Department officer and novelist Joseph Wambaugh wrote this
book about the first case in which DNA evidence was used to
convict the murderer/rapist of two teenage girls. The offenses
took place in Britain three years apart, and it was because a ge-
neticist at a nearby university was experimenting with DNA
analysis that a “bloodprint” was analyzed and the offender was
brought to justice.
Whitehead, Don. 1956. The FBI Story: A Report to the People.
New York: Random House.
This book is an interesting historical and philosophical account
of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, primarily under the long
directorship of J. Edgar Hoover. Hoover, in fact, contributed the
foreword to the work and congratulated the author for “his ac-
curate portrayal of the record of the FBI.” Many critics have dis-
missed the work as simply one of Hoover’s methods of
propaganda, and it certainly does its share of embellishment.
Nevertheless, it provides a detailed history of the organization as
well as a framework for the zeitgeist of Cold War–era policy.
Readers with a taste for a more critical examination of the FBI
should look elsewhere.
Williams, Kristian. 2004. Our Enemies in Blue: Police and Power
in America. Brooklyn, NY: Soft Skull Press.
This work is an analysis of police power and authority from a
critical perspective. It provides a historical framework for polic-
ing in regard to the abuse of power and overt social control. Con-
troversial in its radical treatment of the subject, the book
nevertheless provides a well researched, if slanted, analysis of
police and community relations in America.
Wilson, James Q. 1968. Varieties of Police Behavior: The Man-
agement of Law and Order in Eight Communities. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
266
Resources

Derived from a study of patrol officers in eight American cities
that took place in the mid-1960s, this is one of the most notable
works on the police in the United States. The text introduces the
now famous three styles of policing: the watchman, legalistic,
and service styles.
Wilson, O. W. 1950. Police Administration. New York: McGraw-
Hill.
The gold standard among early works on police management,
this work by one of the era’s top cops provides a series of guide-
lines for police administrators. The text went through several
editions and covered areas such as police department organiza-
tion, planning and research in policing, personnel management,
police tasks, communications in law enforcement, and buildings
and equipment. Police Administration was the standard college
text and a great reference for historical analysis of policing dur-
ing the days when crime fighting was a major police focus.
Journal Articles
Adler, Jeffrey S. 2006. “‘It Is His First Offense. We Might as Well
Let Him Go’: Homicide and Criminal Justice in Chicago,
1875–1920.” Journal of Social History 40 (1): 5–24.
This is a historical essay on the state of the criminal justice sys-
tem in Chicago from 1875 to 1920, with an emphasis on convic-
tion rates in the city, which were incredibly low during the
period. At the time, Chicago was a center of progressive reform
in criminal justice: It was the first city to create a juvenile court
system and was at the vanguard of progressive policing; it insti-
tuted such measures as a homicide squad and other specialized
units; it introduced the Bertillon criminal identification system
(which was cutting-edge technology for the time), used finger-
print analysis, produced a psychological testing lab, and in-
creased profession training for police officers. Chicago was, after
all, a “natural laboratory” for the nation’s first sociologists and
criminologists who were studying the effects of rapid immigra-
tion and urbanization.
Adler notes that juries were hesitant to convict defendants in
spite of the city’s progressive ideals. Only four groups were
likely to receive convictions: wife beaters, robbers, African 
Americans, and killers of police. A comparative study provides
Print Resources
267

information that other cities in the United States and even other
countries had low conviction rates. The inference is that, even
though there were many institutional and legal changes in place
during the late nineteenth to early twentieth centuries, tradi-
tional notions of justice, manliness, and honor overrode progres-
sive reforms.
Bartels, Elizabeth C., and Eli B. Silverman. 2005. “An Exploratory
Study of the New York City Civilian Complaint Review Board
Mediation Program.” Policing 28 (4): 619–630.
The article describes an exploratory study of citizens’ and police
officers’ satisfaction levels of a mediation program currently 
operated by the New York Police Department. Sixteen police
complaint mediation centers in the United States seek to find
remedies for complaints against officers rather than proceeding
to a formalized process. Mediation in this format involves a face-
to-face meeting with the arresting officer and citizen complainant
to facilitate dialog and a better understanding of the situation
that brought them together. It also reviews any actions arising
from the incident to assist in finding a mutually agreed-upon dis-
position, if possible.
The researchers used a survey to gather data from both the
police officers and the civilian complainants regarding their expe-
riences with the program. The study found higher levels of satis-
faction with both police and citizens in the mediation process than
with the full investigation procedure. The primary motivation for
the mediation program of both parties was providing them with
the chance to meet with the other person and seek resolution of
the matter. The study had a very low response rate (18.2 percent),
a major concern for the researchers, and used a cross-sectional
survey design rather than a pre-post design. However, the au-
thors report this study to be the first of its kind to provide a seri-
ous look at this interesting police–community oriented program,
which is a fine starting point for replication studies.
Beckett, Katherine, Kris Ngrop, and Lori Pfingst. 2006. “Race,
Drugs, and Policing: Understanding Disparities in Drug Deliv-
ery Arrests.” Criminology, 44 (1): 105–137.
This study examined the disparities in drug arrests rates related
to race in Seattle, Washington, a city with a high level of drug ac-
tivity. It uses primary data from a needle exchange program op-
268
Resources

erated by the city as well as ethnographic observations of people
buying and selling drugs in active outdoor drug markets. In ad-
dition, interviews with police officers provided additional infor-
mation on the law enforcement perception of the sellers of drugs.
The findings of this study were that black drug dealers were
more likely to be involved with the sale of one drug—crack co-
caine. Whites, on the other hand, were more likely to sell metham-
phetamine, ecstasy, powder cocaine, and heroin; however, blacks
accounted for 64 percent of those arrested for these drugs.
Three factors are believed to account for these finding. First,
the focus on crack dealers, which began in the 1980s, places more
emphasis on observing African Americans. Second, police officers
tend to pay more attention to outdoor markets, which are racially
disparate. Lastly, the outdoor markets in communities of color are
patrolled more aggressively than those in white communities.
Cope, Nina. 2004. “Intelligence-led Policing or Policing-led In-
telligence?” British Journal of Criminology 44 (2): 188–203.
This article describes a qualitative study of a law enforcement
model known as intelligence-led policing. The study takes place
over a two-month period in England (the locations were not dis-
closed), and it follows two police forces, one an urban force and
the other rural. Both have begun using the intelligence-led phi-
losophy, which employs the use of intelligence in police work to
be proactive to dealing with crime. Although the study takes
place in England, its findings can be useful in America or in other
countries that are considering the adoption of the model.
The study used participant observation and interviews to
describe how in both police forces, the intelligence-led model is
not effectively utilized because there is a general lack of under-
standing of, and appreciation for, the differences between crime
analysts and the street-level officers. One of the key reasons for
this chasm is the difference in orientation between the two
groups. The officers tend to be contextual and experiential, bas-
ing their understanding of crime on their own experiences,
whereas the analysts are analytical, basing their understanding
on volume crime data from empirical sources.
An additional problem in this “clash of cultures” is the reluc-
tance of the police to take advice or suggestions from civilians
(most of the analysts were nonpolice personnel). Termed the “cop
culture” (more often dubbed the “police subculture” in America),
Print Resources
269

this concept—with its salient characteristics of a sense of mission,
masculinity, isolation, cohesion, and a suspicion of nonpolice—
often interferes with the intelligence-led process and sometimes
causes the police to use intuition and experiences on the street,
losing the potential proactive benefit of the model.
The author of the study recommends that both groups must
be adequately trained in the use of the intelligence-led policing
model and each must understand the other’s role in the process.
In this way, a mutual respect can develop and the model will
have a chance as a successful approach to police work. It would
be highly beneficial to see a similar study conducted in America
or other nations to provide comparative information on this
emerging model of policing.
Engel, Robin S., and Jennifer M. Calnon. 2004. “Examining the
Influence of Driver’s Characteristics During Traffic Stops with
Police: Results from a National Study.” Justice Quarterly 21 (1):
49–90.
This study examines the factors that influence police decision
making after traffic stops. The backdrop for this study is the effect
of the nation’s war on drug policies, particularly the incidence of
racial profiling in America—a potential effect of aggressive police
strategies that often emphasizes the differential treatment of mi-
nority suspects. Data was obtained for the Police–Public Contact
Survey in 1999, a national survey sponsored by the Bureau of Jus-
tice Statistics.
The findings of the study suggest that, even after legal and
extralegal factors are controlled, minority males have the highest
incidence of police involvement such as citations, searches, ar-
rest, and the use of force. This is in spite of the fact that minori-
ties are less likely to have illegal contraband in their possession.
The researchers offer a call for reform in the present tactics that
reinforce the legitimacy of racial profiling.
Felson, Richard B., Jeffrey M. Ackerman, and Catherine A. Gal-
lagher. 2005. “Police Intervention and the Repeat of Domestic
Violence.” Criminology 43 (3): 563–588.
This study, headed by noted criminal justice scholar, Richard Fel-
son, examines whether the reporting of incidents of domestic vi-
olence to the police and the arrest of the batterers have a
deterrent effect on subsequent episodes of such violence. The re-
270
Resources

searchers used a longitudinal analysis of the National Crime Vic-
timization Study covering the years 1992–2002. The “retaliation
hypothesis” was tested to see if the retaliation occurred when the
victim reported violence and if the perpetrator was arrested.
The study’s findings suggest that arrest after a domestic vi-
olence situation does not have a pronounced deterrent effect on
future offending; there might be a small effect but it is statistically
insignificant. Reporting the incident to the police, however, does
have a deterrent effect, according to this research. Some potential
reasons are posited for this finding: Perhaps batterers who are
likely to be affected by an arrest are already deterred by police in-
volvement; it is also possible that the punishment resulting from
the domestic violence arrest is not adequately severe to have a
deterrent effect.
The authors also posit some reasons that reporting appears
to reduce recidivism. Perhaps a visit from the police lets abusers
realize that their actions are indeed a criminal act, forcing them
to change their minds about their behavior. It could cause them
to realize the personal costs of continuing their aggressive be-
havior. The stigma of being recognized as an abusive partner is
also a possibility. The authors also note that it is possible that
couples involved in intimate partner abuse may seek counseling
as a result of the police intervention, thereby reducing the effects.
The researchers also provide some policy suggestions based
on this and earlier studies regarding the reporting of domestic vi-
olence to the police. Although it is obviously easier to change
local arrest policy than reporting behavior, some changes are rec-
ommended. Informing the public about the deterrent effect of re-
porting domestic violence is one suggestion. Also, since some
people do not report incidents of domestic violence due to the
stigma of having a uniformed officer come to their residence,
having a plainclothes officer respond to domestic violence calls
might be a less visible way to handle such a complaint.
Maguire, Edward R., and Charles M. Katz. 2002. “Community
Policing, Loose Coupling, and Sensemaking in American Po-
lice Agencies.” Justice Quarterly 19 (3): 503–536.
This study examines the utility of community policing by con-
necting the philosophy with two major concepts borrowed from
organizational theory: loose coupling and sensemaking. The au-
thors begin the article by discussing how community policing
Print Resources
271

can be seen as the bright and shining new philosophy in policing
or simply as an old idea with a lot of media and organizational
hype.
The researchers explain that loose coupling in organizational
theory seeks to explain the interconnectedness of different ele-
ments in an organization. The concept not only provides an or-
ganizational model to understand the linkage but also a
cognitive model to assist in understanding and analyzing how
police departments react to and interpret structural changes and
reforms.
The concept of sensemaking is a by-product of loose cou-
pling and refers to how organizations are presented with new
and often ambiguous philosophical changes and how they at-
tempt to understand them. The perspective views the construc-
tion of reality on the part of the actors and therefore bases a social
psychology framework on these interpretations.
The study uses data from a national Police Foundation sur-
vey that was conducted in March 1993 of 2,314 police depart-
ments and sheriff’s offices. The agencies were asked about their
level of involvement in community policing practices. The study’s
findings suggest that moderate coupling exists at some levels and
that patrol officers and organization level activities are more pos-
itively correlated with the ideals of community policing, followed
by citizen activities. Recommendations were made to reeducate
communities as to their role in the community policing process to
garner more involvement from citizens.
This study used a survey from 1993, which occurred prior to
the passage of the 1994 Crime Act, which provided funding and
other means of support to police agencies that accepted the com-
munity policing philosophy. Using more current data, produced
after the 1994 Crime Act was promulgated, would provide an in-
teresting follow-up to this study.
Ratcliffe, Jerry H. 2004. “Crime Mapping and the Training
Needs of Law Enforcement.” European Journal of Criminal Policy
and Research 10 (1): 65–83.
This essay on crime mapping and training needs of police officers
in this regard explain the development of the three areas of spa-
tial investigation and analysis (crime mapping) currently used by
the police: hotspot crime mapping, CompStat mapping, and ge-
ographic profiling. Hotspot crime mapping dates back to the
272
Resources

“pushpin” method in police substation houses when pins were
placed on maps of the city (or other geographic areas) to deter-
mine where resources were most needed; computerized crime
mapping has brought this outdated method into the present.
CompStat (a shortened version of computer-assisted statis-
tics) is the management system started by administrators in the
New York City Police Department in the 1990s. Its use of crime
mapping is primarily a management tool intended to force area
commanders to bring crime rates down in their areas. The model
has been quite popular and modified for use in other cities in the
United States as well as other nations.
Geographic profiling is the spatial equivalent to the psycho-
logical profiling of offenders. It seeks to determine patterns that
give clues as to where an offender lives or works, or possibly to
movement patterns that could help locate victims, contraband,
etc. According to the author, this field is part of the branch of
criminology called environmental criminology.
A key concern of the essay’s writer is that police agencies, es-
pecially those in the United States, will not use crime mapping or
the broader police philosophy known as intelligence-led polic-
ing, instead focusing organizational training objectives in other
areas such as tactical responses and police administration. A con-
tent analysis of the International Association of Police Chiefs’
training catalog is discussed to validate this concern.
Roh, Sunghoon, and William M. Oliver. 2005. “Effects of Com-
munity Policing upon Fear of Crime: Understanding the
Causal Linkage.” Policing: An International Journal of Police Strate-
gies and Management 28 (4): 670–683.
This study seeks to explain conflicting findings of earlier studies
regarding the relationship between community policing initia-
tives and the fear of crime. Recent studies suggest that police
presence produces a reduction in fear among citizens but does
not have a positive impact on public satisfaction with police;
other studies have suggested that citizen perception of commu-
nity policing has a strong positive relationship with satisfaction
with police but not on levels of fear. The present study seeks to
determine if other factors, such as demographic characteristics,
perception of community disorganization, and concern over
community safety helped account for the relationship between
community policing and fear of crime.
Print Resources
273

Reducing the level of fear of crime is one of the primary goals
of community policing, along with crime prevention, the reduc-
tion of social disorder, and the improvement of the overall quality
of life for citizens. The fear of crime should be diminished due to
the ideals promoted by community policing for four reasons:
• Increased police presence will alleviate fear.
• Engagement with the public will increase satisfaction
and reduce fear.
• Partnerships and collaboration will assist in lowering
levels of fear.
• The strategies of community policing themselves will
lower crime and the resulting fear of criminal activity in
neighborhoods.
Three models were used to form a theoretical framework: (1)
the indirect victimization model, which posits that citizens with
awareness of their vulnerability characteristics (the demographic
variables of age, gender, education, and race that are perceived as
risk factors) are more likely to fear crime; (2) the perceived disor-
der model, which states that the fear of crime increases with citi-
zen experiences of physical or social incivility; and (3) the
common concern model, which explains that fear is closely cor-
related with citizen concerns of community decline.
The data used in this study was derived from the 1998 re-
search project, Criminal Victimization and Perception of Com-
munity Safety in Twelve United States Cities, conducted by the
Office of Community Policing and the Bureau of Justice Statistics.
The findings of the study reveal that vulnerability variables are
not positively correlated with community policing and the fear of
crime, as described in the indirect victim model, but with the per-
ception of incivilities and concerns of quality of neighborhood
life in the perceived disorder model, respectively.
Ruf, Jamie. 2006. “Expanding Protective Sweeps Within the
Home.” American Criminal Law Review 43 (1): 143–163.
This legal essay on protective sweeps as employed by the police
reviews the constitutional framework of the Fourth Amendment
protection from illegal searches and seizures in the home. The au-
thor believes that this protection is eroding during this “era of
274
Resources

preemptive strikes,” referring to the abandonment of individual
protections for the sake of investigating terrorist-related activity.
The constitutional basis for protective sweeps employed by
the police is appropriately provided in this essay through a his-
torical review of precedent cases such as Terry v. Ohio, Ker v. Cal-
ifornia, and Katz v. United States to explain the growing chasm
between civil liberties and social protection in the newer cases of
Maryland v. Buie, which established the protective sweep doc-
trine, and United States v. Gould, which indicated that the “Buie
sweep” need not always happen incident to an arrest.
The author states that the home, long held as a bastion of pri-
vacy, is now being increasingly open to searches and seizures,
very much in contradiction to the ideas of the framers of the Con-
stitution who feared that government intrusion into citizens’
home will damage democratic ideals.
Schaefer, Joseph A. 2005. “Negotiating Order in the Policing of
Youth Drinking.” Policing 28 (2): 279–300.
In this study the researcher sought to understand the use of ne-
gotiated order by police officers who use discretionary leniency
in prominent crimes in their communities. Police–citizen rela-
tions in a medium Midwestern college community provided the
venue for studying this concept. Though the use of a field study
combined with interviews, the research project utilized inter-
views with general patrol officers, patrol managers, and members
of a specialized alcohol enforcement unit involving questions
centering on perspectives on policing, interactions with the com-
munity’s younger citizens (primarily from a local state univer-
sity), alcohol regulations, views on police–community relations,
agency and administrative relationships and perceptions, and
comparative and contrasting views of their agency and other po-
lice departments.
The police in this agency commonly dealt with alcohol vio-
lations by young offenders, because theirs is a college environ-
ment; therefore in many of their contacts with young people,
alcohol was the direct or indirect reason for police intervention.
The officers’ primary methods for dealing with the alcohol-abus-
ing young people involved more leniency than many other agen-
cies. One of the key factors involved in a more lenient response
by officers was the variable of citizen demeanor. The agency
Print Resources
275

adopted a “firm but friendly” approach to these calls, and, al-
though informal controls were often used, formal controls in-
cluding arrest were common in situations in which:
• Students were contemptuous toward the police (“con-
tempt of cop”).
• Students were involved in vandalism, assault, violations
of liquor laws in cars, possession of alcohol by an un-
derage person, the use of fake identification, or the ille-
gal sale of alcohol to others.
• Businesses sold alcohol to minors.
The study focuses on what has been termed the “attitude test,”
a determination of whether the citizen offender appropriately de-
fers to the police. The outcomes of future studies that determine
whether such a concept is valid should consider if the use of def-
erential displays is an adequate criterion for officer discretion.
Slansky, David Alan. 2006. “Private Police and Democracy.”
American Criminal Law Review, 43 (1): 89–105.
In this essay, the author provides an exploration of the privatiza-
tion of police work that is missing in the current literature on
policing. The emphasis of this piece is on the potential effect of
private policing on the ideals of a democratic society. The author
seeks to develop two points: First, police privatization is a com-
plex issue, complicated by the facts that private police work can
take on various and overlapping forms; that policing is a multi-
farious political philosophy with different meanings for different
people; and that private policing can easily transmute from an
augmentation to public policing into a structure like itself—a
movement that is clearly discernible in several police organiza-
tions already.
The second major point made in this article is that two
threats exist and should be evaluated more carefully by law en-
forcement administrators and policy makers. The first is the fact
that privatization can make policing less egalitarian by forcing
the poorer citizens to have the reactive public police and the
richer citizens to receive the services of the more proactive pri-
vate police at their disposal. This scenario also removes political
pressure from the public agencies to conform to due process con-
cerns and the basic ideals of human dignity. The second threat
276
Resources

concerns the possibility of public police agencies adopting a busi-
ness-oriented managerial logic approach to a social control
agency whose primary responsibility in a democratic society is
the protection of all citizens. It is recommended by the author
that police administrators and policy makers carefully examine
the direction of privatization to ensure that democratic values are
not lost in the process.
Tyler, Tom T. 2006. “Viewing CSI and the Threshold of Guilt:
Managing Truth and Justice in Reality and Fiction.” The Yale
Law Journal 115 (5): 1050–1085.
This essay examines the so-called CSI effect. This recently coined
term describes the possibility that jurors in a criminal trial are so
influenced by the forensic television show CSI: Crime Scene Inves-
tigation, and its spin-offs, CSI: Miami and CSI: New York, along
with other forensic-oriented shows, that they are more likely to
acquit defendants unless there is significant forensic science evi-
dence to prove their guilt. Newspapers and magazines have re-
cently claimed that such an effect exists and have used some
high-profile cases to support the claim, such as the well publi-
cized acquittal of actor Robert Blake in the murder of his wife
and the acquittal of eccentric millionaire Robert Durst, who had
been accused of murder and dismemberment.
The author notes that no scientific studies have found evi-
dence of the CSI effect, and many scholars think that viewing
forensic crime shows might make some jurors actually less likely
to acquit. The reason is that many jurors feel the need to see the
case have a successful closure, as they do on most TV shows; this
helps to satisfy a psychological need for justice for victims of
crime. The cases in CSI and other shows of this genre always have
a rapid conclusion, and this might prompt jurors in real court
cases to work toward the same end. In addition, when jurors are
motivated by a desire to punish an offender, they can easily men-
tally exaggerate scientific evidence presented at trial to confirm
their suspicions of guilt.
The article also presents three other possible motivations for
juror reluctance to convict defendants: (1) identification and sym-
pathy with the defendants, (2) a natural reluctance to convict that
is underestimated by people with legal training, and (3) suspicion
and distrust of the courts and the criminal justice system that
makes it less likely for them to defer to the legal professionals’
Print Resources
277

knowledge. The source of these motivations is unclear, as well as
what empirical support, if any, supports the conclusions. The CSI
effect is certainly an area deserving of empirically based studies to
give prosecutors and police officers in criminal trials a better un-
derstanding of the social psychology of juror behavior and the
role of the media.
Xie, Min, Greg Pogarsky, James P. Lynch, and David McDowall.
2006. “Prior Police Contact and Subsequent Victim Reporting:
Results for the NCVS.” Justice Quarterly 23 (4): 481–501.
The authors of this study seek to fill a void in the crime victim-
ization literature. They provide a study designed to  how police
response to prior cases of victimization of the present victim and
household members influences future reporting by the victim.
The researchers used longitudinal data from the National
Crime Victimization Survey for the years 1998–2000. The study
presents two major findings. The first two findings are that the
prior investigation of victimization by the police affected subse-
quent reports but that prior arrests involving the victimization
did not. The third finding is that direct reporting of the crime to
the police by the victim, rather than by a third party, had an ef-
fect on subsequent reporting. The fourth finding is that victim re-
porting was not correlated with prior police response to a prior
family member’s victimization, even if the events were similar in
nature and regardless of the closeness in relation to the family
member.
Scholarly Journals
Criminology
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
9600 Garsington Road
Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK
Internet: http://www.blackwellpublishing.com/journal.asp?
ref=0011–1384
Although presenting a somewhat broader scope in the criminal
justice field than just policing, this journal is published on behalf
of the American Society of Criminology. It is a prominent journal
in the field and includes many articles about policing. The jour-
nal is peer reviewed, places emphasis on empirical research, and
publishes scholarly studies on a variety of criminal justice issues.
278
Resources

Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, The
JSTOR User Services 
301 East Liberty, Suite 250
Ann Arbor, MI 48104-2262
Internet: http://www.jstor.org/journals/00914169.html
Describing itself as one of the nation’s most widely read and
cited legal-oriented journals, this journal, formerly known as the
Journal of Criminal Law, Criminology, and Police Science, publishes
criminal law research that is of benefit to practitioners in all sec-
tors of the criminal justice field. It encourages intellectual debate
in the belief that this is the best means of bettering the profession.
Police Practice and Research
Taylor and Francis Group
UK Head Office: T and F Informa Academic (Journals)
Building 4, Milton Park
Abingdon, Oxfordshire OX14 4RN, UK
Internet: http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/titles/15614263.asp
This peer-reviewed journal focuses on new and innovative police
practices from around the world. The journal seeks to connect
current academic research with modern law enforcement prac-
tices. Special issues are published that explore police practices in
different counties or continents.
Police Quarterly
Sage Publications
2455 Teller Road
Thousand Oaks, CA 91320
Internet: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsProdDesc.nav?
prodId=Journal201421
Published in association with the Police Executive Research
Forum and the Police Section of the Academy of Criminal Justice
Sciences, this journal emphasizes policy-oriented research and
covers many areas of interest of policing to scholars and practi-
tioners. The peer-reviewed journal publishes qualitative and
quantitative studies, essays, book reviews, and other submissions.
Policing and Society
Taylor and Francis
4 Park Square Milton Park
Print Resources
279

Abingdon, Oxfordshire OX14 4RN, UK
Internet: http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/titles/10439463
The focus of Policing and Society is social scientific investigations
of three areas: police policy, legal analysis of police powers and
constitutionality, and research into police administration; how-
ever, other areas of concern are considered, such as police func-
tions, police decision making, and private policing agencies. It
also takes up the issue of the political economy of policing. The
journal is international in orientation and scope, and it is com-
mitted to high levels of scholarship and policy debate.
Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies and
Management
Emerald Group Publishing Limited
60–62 Toller Lane
Bradford, BD8 9BY, UK
Internet: http://www.emeraldinsight.com/info/journals/
pijpsm/pijpsm.jsp
This stated mission of this journal is to provide discourse in po-
lice and law enforcement practice and administration that seeks
to add professionalism to the field. This peer-reviewed journal
publishes research and case studies with an international and
comparative police focus.
The Police Journal
Vathek Publishing
Bridge House
Dalby, Isle of Man, IM5 3BP, UK
Internet: http://www.vathek.com/pj/index.shtml
The Police Journal offers expert advice on some of the most pressing
issues in the field. Subjects such as police procedure, technology,
statistical data, new ideas in police practice, and laws affecting the
police are all addressed using evidence-based research.
Magazines
American Police Beat
One Battle Square, 4th Floor
Cambridge, MA 02138
280
Resources

This newsmagazine has many articles on relevant topics in polic-
ing, including current police news, training information, person-
nel information, product information, and the like. It has an
online version as well. The subscription rate is $16.95 per year. 
Subscription information: http://www.apbweb.com/
subscribe.htm
FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin
U.S. Department of Justice
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Washington, D.C. 20535-0001
Published monthly, this FBI-sponsored magazine provides practi-
cal and current information on the policing profession. It includes
ViCAP (Violent Criminal Apprehensive Program) Alerts, Bulletin
Reports (an edited compilation of reports related to criminal jus-
tice), Legal Digests, Bulletin Notes (acknowledgments and recog-
nition of police who perform notable and dangerous acts), as well
as a host of speeches, practice recommendations, and commen-
taries. The subscription rate is $38 per year. 
Subscription information:  http://www.fbi.gov/publications/
leb/leborder.htm
Law and Order
Hendon Publications
130 N. Waukegan Road
Suite 202
Deerfield, IL 60015-5652
Law and Order is a widely read publication and has a readership of
36,000 police administrators. It offers a number of articles perti-
nent to policing, including information on personnel management,
training resources, community relations, technical innovations,
and other issues. It has a large number of advertisers for various
police products. Its website gives the reader a chance to rate and
comment on many of the articles, which is true of the other Hen-
don publications. 
Subscription information: http://www.subforms.com/lao
Police Chief
International Association of Chiefs of Police
515 N. Washington Street
Alexandria, VA 22314-2357
Print Resources
281

This, the official magazine of the IACP, has information of con-
cern to police administrators, on personnel management, current
events, legislation, products and services, among other areas. The
subscription rate is $25 a year to non-IACP members. 
Subscription information: http://www.policechiefmagazine
.com/subscribe/
Police Fleet Manager
Hendon Publications
130 N. Waukegan Road
Suite 202
Deerfield, IL 60015-5652
This magazine, for police personnel involved with transporta-
tion, provides information on police automobiles and parts. It
has a number of relevant articles, including vehicle tests, police
packages for automobiles, and other items of interest. 
Subscription information: http://www.subforms.com/pfm
Police Magazine
3520 Challenger Street
Torrance, CA 90503
Offering articles written by police, firearms, and legal experts, as
well as special issue contributions from other law enforcement
journalists, Police Magazine is concerned with providing police of-
ficers with information that will benefit them in the profession. 
Subscription information: Send an email message to info@
policemag.com.
Police Times
American Federation of Police and Concerned Citizens
6359 Horizon drive
Titusville, FL 32780
The official magazine of the AFB & CC, this magazine is published
quarterly and contains information on police training, news, prod-
ucts and services, innovations in the field, and related subjects. 
Subscription information: http://www.aphf.org/ptsubscribe
.html
Tactical Response
Hendon Publications
282
Resources

130 N. Waukegan Road
Suite 202
Deerfield, IL 60015-5652
Specifically concerned with police special tactical units, this mag-
azine provides articles on weaponry, tactics, personnel manage-
ment, and new innovations. 
Subscription information: http://www.subforms.com/tac
Nonprint Resources
Videos and DVDs
Behind the Blue Wall
Date: Unknown
Type: DVD
Length: 50 minutes
Cost: $24.95
Source: Distributed by Arts and Entertainment Networks
Internet: http://www.aetv.com
This documentary, as part of A&E Channel’s Investigative Re-
ports series, uses different incidents of police misconduct in the
New York City Police Department and the friction that still exists
between the police and the citizens they serve.
Best Kept Secrets in Law Enforcement
Date: 2000
Type: DVD-R
Length: 50 minutes
Cost: $159.95
Source: Distributed by Insight Media
Internet: http://www.insight-media.com
This film is a police training film that uses recreations, crime
scene footage, and interviews to describe twenty-first-century
police innovations, such as Taser technology and a new com-
puter program that detects deception in facial expressions.
Best Kept Secrets in Law Enforcement
Date: 1999
Type: VHS
Length: 39 minutes each
Nonprint Resources
283

Cost: $159.95 (for each part)
Source: Distributed by Insight Media
Internet: http://www.insight-media.com
This documentary training film describes the collaboration be-
tween police agencies, school, communities, and business in
order to thwart violence in schools. The film is in two parts: The
Warning Signs and Response.
Beyond the Blue: Life as a Female Police Officer
Date: 1997
Type: DVD-R, VHS
Length: 25 minutes
Cost: $129.95
Source: Distributed by Films for the Humanities and Sciences
Internet: http://www.films.com
This documentary describes the story of a woman who is a wife,
mother, and member of a SWAT team. It shows the conflicts that
come with the additional stressor in family life that comes with
having a very high-stress occupation.
Body Detectives: Forensic Anthropology and the Body Farm
Date: 2000
Type: DVD-R, VHS
Length: 52 minutes
Cost: $129.95
Source: Films for the Humanities and Sciences
Internet: http://www.films.com
This film takes a close-up look at the University of Tennessee’s
open-air forensic crime lab, dubbed the body farm, where de-
composing human bodies give investigators insight that will
hopefully help them solve crimes. This broadcast was initially re-
leased as Body Detectives.
Cop World, Parts 1 and 2
Date: Unknown
Type: DVD
Length: 50 minutes
Cost: $24.95
Source: Distributed by Arts and Entertainment Networks
Internet: http://www.aetv.com
284
Resources

This video, part of the A&E Channel’s Investigative Reports se-
ries, depicts police work around the globe—in Moscow, Rio,
South Africa, and the United States. It gives a glimpse into the
complicated world of comparative policing and explains how
undercover sting operations and gun battles are a common com-
ponent of police work in many nations, including our own.
G-Man: The Making of an FBI Agent
Date: 2001
Type: DVD-R, VHS
Length: 52 minutes
Cost: $129.95
Source: Films for the Humanities and Sciences
Internet: http://www.films.com
This film describes the intensive sixteen-week training and in-
struction undertaken by the select candidates accepted into the
FBI academy at Quantico, Virginia. Candidates are interviewed
in the film and express their feeling of the rigor of the training,
which includes firearms, forensics, surveillance, and terrorism
control tactics. This is a Discovery Channel production.
Inside the Interrogation Room
Date: 2003
Type: DVD-R, VHS
Length: 19 minutes
Cost: $69.95
Source: Films for the Humanities and Sciences
Internet: http://www.films.com
Showcasing the different interrogation procedures used by the
police, this documentary features the Reid technique and de-
scribes both the positive and negative aspects of the method. Po-
lice scholars, lawyers, and people who have been interrogated
and confessed to crimes, only later to be exonerated of guilt, pro-
vide commentary in this film.
New York City Police Academy
Date: 2000
Type: DVD-R, VHS
Length: 46 minutes
Cost: $129.95
Nonprint Resources
285

Source: Films for the Humanities and Sciences
Internet: http://www.films.com
This documentary follows new recruits in the country’s largest
police agency through seven months of intensive training. The
recruits are trained in a number of areas including police tactics,
communication skills, firearms use, defense measures, hostage
negotiation, crowd control, and courtroom testimony. This is a
Discovery Channel production.
Patrolling the Border: National Security and Immigration
Reform
Date: 2004
Type: DVD-R, VHS
Length: 22 minutes
Cost: $69.95
Source: Films for the Humanities and Sciences
Internet: http://www.films.com
This documentary explores the continuing controversy over con-
trolling the nation’s southern border and examines the relation-
ship between the undocumented people who enter America, the
terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, and the nation’s economy.
Border patrol agents in Arizona are interviewed in the film.
Police
Date: 1997
Type: DVD
Length: 100 minutes
Cost: $29.95
Source: Distributed by Arts and Entertainment Networks
Internet: http://www.aetv.com
This is a highly informative exploration of the police in America
narrated by Bill Kurtis. It intersperses current police concerns,
such as community policing, with historical information about
policing, including its British antecedents and the effect of Robert
Peel’s innovations on modern policing. Interviews with police of-
ficials highlight this investigation into law enforcement practices.
Police Pursuit
Date: Unknown
Type: DVD
286
Resources

Length: 50 minutes
Cost: $24.95
Source: Distributed by Arts and Entertainment Networks
Internet: http://www.aetv.com
This film describes one of the most controversial areas of police
work: high-speed chases. In hot pursuit situations, many people
can get injured or killed; therefore some departments have poli-
cies to abort chases unless there is an overriding reason to con-
tinue pursuit. However, if pursuits are aborted, dangerous
offenders are free to continue committing crimes. This video
shows the latest technological advancements in automobiles and
boats.
Protect and Serve? De-policing in Urban Neighborhoods
Date: 2001
Type: DVD-R, VHS
Length: 23 minutes
Cost: $69.95
Source: Distributed by Films for the Humanities and Sciences
Internet: http://www.films.com
This video looks at how police work in some departments has
been transformed from an active and engaged process into new
forms of passive involvement with citizens. New police lingo,
such as “selective disengagement,” “tactical detachment,” and
“NC/NC” (code for no contact, no complaints) demonstrates this
new philosophy.
Racial Profiling and Law Enforcement: America in Black 
and White
Date: 1998
Type: DVD-R, VHS
Length: 41 minutes
Cost: $129.95
Source: Distributed by Films for the Humanities and Sciences
Internet: http://www.films.com
This film explains the phenomenon of DWB: driving while black
(or brown). The issue of racial profiling is a major one in police
work and is explored in this two-part documentary narrated by
ABC news anchor Ted Koppel.
Nonprint Resources
287

Suicide and the Police Officer
Date: Unknown
Type: DVD-R, VHS
Length: 39 minutes
Cost: $149.95
Source: Films for the Humanities and Sciences
Internet: http://www.films.com
Funded by the New York City Police Foundation, this film de-
scribes the very real incidence of suicide by police officers. It also
examines some underlying and related problems such as sub-
stance abuse, relationship problems, and violence. This documen-
tary received Honorable Mention at the American Correctional
Association Film Festival.
Tales of the Gun: Police Guns
Date: Unknown
Type: DVD
Length: 50 minutes
Cost: $24.95
Source: Distributed by Arts and Entertainment Networks
Internet: http://www.aetv.com
This documentary takes a look at police weapons from early
times to the present. The Massachusetts State Troopers are high-
lighted in this film, and interviews with the officers are shown.
Viewers also visit the New York Police Department Museum,
which displays weapons almost two centuries old. Interviews
with police handgun trainers are also included in the video.
The Life of a Black Cop
Date: 1999
Type: DVD-R, VHS
Length: 22 minutes
Cost: $89.95
Source: Distributed by Films for the Humanities and Sciences
Internet: http://www.films.com
This film, narrated by ABC news correspondent David Ture-
camo, describes the price that minority officers often pay when
they report incidents of police brutality and racism. It tells the
story of one minority officer who did just that and explains the
consequences of taking such a stand.
288
Resources

The Thin Blue Line
Date: 1988
Type: DVD
Length: 103 minutes
Cost: Varies by distributor
Internet: Source: Metro Goldwin Meyer.
This is a reenactment documentary of a 1976 incident in which a
drifter was given a ride by a teenage sociopath who had run away
from home. When a police officer was killed, the drifter was
charged with his murder. This award-winning documentary re-
portedly helped free the drifter from prison after it was broadcast.
Websites
http://www.amw.com
This is the website for the popular television series America’s
Most Wanted and keeps observers up-to-date on unsolved crimes
in which the police seek the viewers’ help. It has sections on fugi-
tives, missing persons, and updates on captures.
http://www.apbweb.com
Self-billed as “the online voice of the nation’s law enforcement
community,” this site is maintained by American Police Beat and
offers news involving the police, a job search link, law enforce-
ment events, a merchandise link, and other information.
http://www.copnet.org
This is a general directory of law enforcement items and infor-
mation with links to events, merchandise, and a newsletter called
CopNet Chronicles.
http://www.crime.org
This site gives much information about crime and its control. It
has news updates, a web log, and a newsletter called Grassroots
News.
http://www.officer.com
Officer.com is a comprehensive site for people involved with
policing. It has an extensive up-to-date police news section, free
Nonprint Resources
289

training webcasts, product information, articles, a job list link,
magazines called Law Enforcement Technology and Law Enforce-
ment Product News, discussion forums, and links to many other
criminal justice concerns.
http://www.policeone.com
This is a site with extensive information on a large number of
policing issues. Calling itself the “one complete resource for law
enforcement,” the site includes current police news stories in a
format called PoliceOne roll call, video feeds, product informa-
tion, articles, columns, alerts, chat rooms, job postings, training
courses, and others.
http://www.policing.com
This site, the self-reported “headquarters for community polic-
ing,” is dedicated to providing information relevant to police
through advice and discussion. With community policing as its
focal point, the site has a free newsletter, online training capabil-
ities, and a host of links to other police-related resources. 
http://www.popcenter.org
This is the website for the Center for Problem-oriented Policing.
It contains a variety of different types of information based on
Goldstein’s model of policing and has guides such as problem-
specific guides, response guides, and problem-solving tool
guides to assist police practitioners with the different problems
they face. It also contains a library, a forum, conference informa-
tion, and a host of technical and analytical tools related to the
problem-oriented policing model.
http://www.talkjustice.com
Described on its web page as “the world’s criminal justice
forum,” this site seeks to involve students, scholars, practition-
ers, crime victims, and interested citizens in ongoing discussions
about issues in criminal justice. It has message boards, chat
rooms, a large cybrary, and links to many other related sites.
290
Resources

Court Cases
Bond v. United States, 529 U.S. (2000)
On a bus bound for Little Rock, Arkansas, from California, a rou-
tine border stop occurred in Sierra Blanca, Texas. A border patrol
agent squeezed a soft piece of luggage in an overhead storage
compartment as he was exiting the bus and felt a “brick-like ob-
ject” inside it. The agent checked the bag and found a “brick” of
methamphetamine wrapped in duct tape and rolled in a pair of
pants. The defendant, Bond, was indicted for conspiracy to pos-
sess and possession with the intent to distribute methampheta-
mine, and he was found guilty on both counts. He appealed on
the grounds that the examination of the luggage violated his
Fourth Amendment protection from unreasonable searches. The
Court of Appeals affirmed the conviction, and the case was sent
to the U.S. Supreme Court, who reversed the judgment stating
that people are guaranteed rights that prohibit physically inva-
sive inspections by police.
Brown v. Texas, 443 U.S. 47 (1979)
Two police officers in El Paso, Texas, were patrolling an area of
high drug activity when they observed two people in an alley
walking away from each other. When they stopped one of the sub-
jects, Brown, they asked him for his name and what he was doing
in the alley. The subject refused to identify himself and stated the
officers had no right to stop him. He was arrested on a state statute
for failing to follow a lawful order to disclose information to the
police. He was searched, but nothing illegal was found on his per-
son. He was charged and convicted in a municipal court. He exer-
cised his right to have a trial de novo in county court and moved
to set aside the information in the first trial for violating his First,
Fourth, and Fifth Amendment rights. The county court maintained
the lower court sentence and imposed a fine. The defendant ap-
pealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, who reversed the decision due
to the fact that the officers in the case lacked reasonable suspicion
in detaining the defendant prior to arrest.
California v. Ciraolo, 476 U.S. 207 (1986)
In Santa Clara, California, the police received a tip from an anony-
mous caller that Ciraolo was growing marijuana in his backyard
behind a high fence. Being unable to see the items behind the
Nonprint Resources
291

fence, the police used a plane to fly over the suspect’s house at
about 1,000 feet where they spotted seventy-three marijuana
plants. The plants were seized, and Ciraolo pleaded guilty to the
cultivation of marijuana. Upon appeal to the state court of ap-
peals, the conviction was reversed because it was found that the
aerial observation by police was illegal. The case was appealed to
the Supreme Court, which determined by a divided court that fly-
ing over the suspect’s home was not intrusive and took place in
public airspace; other people flying overhead could have easily
viewed the marijuana.
Carroll v. United States, 267 U.S. 132 (1925)
In the bootleg era of the 1920s, federal agents heard that some sus-
pects were transporting illegal alcohol from Detroit to Grand
Rapids, Michigan. When stopped, George Carroll and John Kiro
were driving a 1921 Oldsmobile Roadster with a rumble seat. No
alcohol was visible in the front of the car, and the rumble seat was
closed. When it was opened, no alcohol was visible in the rumble
seat area either, but, when the back seats were checked, the uphol-
stery seemed unusual to one of the officers, who cut the seats and
found sixty-nine quarts of illegal gin and whiskey. George Carroll
attempted to bribe the agents but they refused. Carroll was found
guilty, but appealed to the Supreme Court because no warrant was
used in the search. The Supreme Court ruled that, due to the fact
that the vehicle could easily drive away prior to a warrant being
obtained, the search was allowed. This ruling is often called the au-
tomobile exception to the Fourth Amendment search warrant rule.
It is less formally referred to as the Carroll doctrine.
Escobedo v. Illinois, 378 U.S. 478 (1964)
The prior case of Gideon v. Wainwright (1963) determined that all
defendants have the right to an attorney, even those who are in-
digent. The case of Escobedo occurred a year later, after the de-
fendant was being questioned for a murder charge. During
questioning, Escobedo was not informed of his right to remain
silent or given the opportunity to speak with an attorney. One of
the officers explained that Escobedo would be allowed to leave if
he confessed to the crime. He confessed and was later convicted
for the murder, but the case was reversed in the Supreme Court.
The ruling made clear that questioning is investigatory until the
focus moves to eliciting a confession from a suspect.
292
Resources

Illinois v. Wardlaw, 528 U.S. 119 (2000)
Officers in four cars were patrolling a high-crime area where a
suspect was standing alone holding a small bag. The suspect,
Wardlaw, noticed one of the officers and fled, being chased by
police. When given a Terry (frisk) search, a handgun was found.
The case found its way to the Supreme Court, where it was de-
termined that officers have a reasonable suspicion when flight by
a suspect is accompanied by other factors such as time of day,
how crowded the area is, if it occurs in a high-crime area, suspi-
cious actions by the suspect, and the like. In other words, the
flight of a suspect in tandem with other conditions is required to
form a basis of reasonable suspicion.
Jacobson v. United States, 503 U.S. 540 (1992)
In this case, the Supreme Court reviewed what has been termed
“entrapment” by the police in which police actions contribute to
the criminal activity. Jacobson was under observation by the
United States postal inspectors as receiving pornographic materi-
als depicting preteen sexuality. The inspectors sent a number of
false advertisements for child pornography over a two-and-a-half-
year period, and Jacobson eventually responded by ordering a
magazine. The Court determined that the government used exces-
sive influence on the suspect to entice him to purchase the illegal
materials.
Mallory v. United States, 354 U.S. 449 (1957)
A nineteen-year-old man with mental deficiencies was arrested
and charged with rape. Officers did not explain to Mallory his
rights to remain silent, have an attorney, or appear before a mag-
istrate. The defendant was questioned for hours, and, obtaining
no confession, officers placed him on a polygraph (lie detection)
test and interrogated him further before having him arraigned.
Mallory was found guilty, but the Supreme Court reversed the
decision due to the delay of arraigning the defendant.
Mapp v. Ohio, 367 U.S. 643 (1961)
Mapp was a woman suspected by police of concealing gambling
paraphernalia and hiding a person who was implicated in a
bombing incident. Officers approached her residence, but Mapp
refused to let them enter without a search warrant. The officers
Nonprint Resources
293

returned and forcibly entered her house. When she asked for a
search warrant, the officers produced a piece of paper they re-
ported to be a warrant, which she grabbed and placed in her
blouse. The officers struggled with the suspect and retrieved the
paper, which was in fact not a legal search warrant. They then
searched the house and found some pornographic materials.
Mapp was convicted for possession of the obscene materials and
the case was appealed to the Supreme Court, who determined
that illegally seized materials could not be used as evidence; the
decision was therefore overturned. This rule applied to both state
and federal laws, and Mapp is a landmark case in the search and
seizure issue.
Maryland v. Buie, 494 U.S. 325 (1990)
Following an armed robbery that was committed by two men in
Maryland, police were looking for a man in a red running suit, as
reported by an observer. When officers approached Buie’s home
with an arrest warrant, the suspect was returning from his base-
ment when arrested by one officer, and another officer went to
his basement in case someone else was there. In the basement,
the officer found the red running suit. Buie sought to suppress
the evidence found at his home, but the trial court denied the re-
quest and the defendant was found guilty of armed robbery and
a weapons violation. On appeal, the conviction was affirmed by
an intermediate appellate court but reversed by the state court of
appeals. The United States Supreme Court heard the case and
found that officers are able to conduct a “protective sweep” of an
offender’s home if it is reasonable to think that there is a poten-
tial for danger in it.
Miller v. United States, 357 U.S. 301 (1958)
In response to a narcotics offense, federal officers with no search
warrant approached the home of the defendant. When the offi-
cers knocked on the door, officers responded in a low voice, “Po-
lice.” Miller opened the door (which had a door chain attached)
and asked the officers what they wanted, but, before they re-
sponded, he attempted to close the door. The officers put their
hands inside the door before it closed, ripped off the chain, and
entered the home, where they found and seized contraband. The
case found its way to the United States Supreme Court where the
Court held that the officers were acting in an unlawful manner
294
Resources

by breaking into his home without appropriate notice; the evi-
dence seized was therefore not admissible. This case was the be-
ginning of a series of court cases that dealt with the knock and
announce rule.
Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966)
This landmark case involved a young man who was arrested for
rape and questioned by officers who failed to advise Miranda of
his rights to have an attorney present. He was found guilty and
convicted, and he appealed to the state supreme court, where the
sentence was confirmed. An appeal to the superior court, how-
ever, reversed the decision, stating that the defendant was not
given proper notice of his constitutional rights even though he
signed a sworn confession. Miranda established that, before an in-
terrogation into a criminal matter can be conducted of a person
in custody, four warnings must be given: (1) that the suspect has
the right to remain silent during questioning; (2) that anything
the suspect says during questioning may be used as evidence
against him or her; (3) that the suspect has the right to speak with
an attorney and have that attorney present during questioning;
and (4) that, if the suspect does not have the means to obtain an
attorney, one will be provided. Police often give this warning ver-
batim to avoid any departure from the original intent of the lan-
guage. The purpose of the Miranda warning is to ensure that the
constitutional rights of the accused are protected. The reading of
the Miranda warnings has now become a standard part of Amer-
ican police practice.
New York v. Quarles, 467 U.S. 649 (1984)
This is the “public safety exception” to the use of the Miranda
warning. Quarles was suspected of rape. When he was ques-
tioned by police, an empty gun shoulder holster was found on
him. The officers asked for the location of the firearm without Mi-
randizing the suspect, who informed them of the gun’s location.
The case was appealed through the New York state judicial sys-
tem, and the United States Supreme Court determined that,
where there is a significant concern for public safety (in this case
a gun whose whereabouts were unknown to police), the Miranda
rights are not required. The gun and Quarles’s statements in
court about the weapon’s location were deemed admissible, a
point of contention with many jurists.
Nonprint Resources
295

Pennsylvania v. Labron, 518 U.S. 938 (1996)
In this case, the defendant Labron was observed by police to be
participating in several drug transactions from his automobile.
The police, having probable cause but no search warrant,
searched the vehicle and found an amount of cocaine. The search
was determined to be unconstitutional by the state supreme
court on the grounds that such an automobile search requires
both exigent circumstances and probable cause if a search war-
rant is not used. A parallel case, Pennsylvania v. Kilgore was also
overturned in the state supreme court on the same grounds.
Pennsylvania v. Labron was appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court,
where the Court found that if a vehicle is potentially mobile, it
could be searched without a warrant if probable cause exists; ex-
igent circumstances need not be present.
Rhode Island v. Innis, 446 U.S. 291 (1980)
A suspect in a robbery was identified by a victim and was subse-
quently arrested for the offense. After the arrest, the officers read
the Miranda rights to the suspect Innis, who stated he wanted to
speak with his attorney. While being transported in the patrol car,
three of the officers began discussing the case and one of them
explained that a school for handicapped children was located
near the crime scene and that if one of the students came across
the weapon used in the robbery, a shotgun, the child could easily
be injured or killed. Innis interrupted the conversation and told
the officers he would take them to where the shotgun was dis-
carded, which he did. The case was appealed to the U.S. Supreme
Court on the grounds that the discussion in this case amounted
to an interrogation during the car ride. It was determined that the
officers did not violate the suspect’s constitutional rights in this
case as the conversation did not constitute an interrogation.
Spano v. New York, 360 U.S. 315 (1959)
The defendant Spano was indicted for a retaliatory killing of an-
other man. He turned himself in to authorities but refused to talk
with officers on advice of his attorney. Six police interrogated
Spano for a long period but obtained no confession. An officer
named Bruno who was on a probationary period with the police
department told Spano, whom he knew before the incident, that
296
Resources

unless he confessed, Bruno’s job was in jeopardy. Spano relented
and confessed to the crime for which he received a death sen-
tence. The case was appealed to the United States Superior,
where the conviction was reversed due to the fact that, although
no physical coercion was used to obtain the confession, psycho-
logical pressure and fatigue were used; therefore the confession
was not made voluntarily.
Tennessee v. Gardner, 471 U.S. 1 (1985)
This case modified the fleeing felon rule that had been in effect
for many years and that allowed officers to shoot a person who
fled from the police after committing a felony. The court ruled
that people who do not appear to pose an immediate threat to
others should not have deadly force used against them. How-
ever, officers still are able to exercise the right to use deadly force
if the fleeing person is thought to be dangerous to the officer or
others.
Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968)
This landmark case established the ability of the police to perform
a stop-and-frisk, or Terry search (named after the defendant in the
case) of suspects. The Terry search is a brief pat-down of a sus-
pect’s outer garments with the purpose of finding weapons that
can be used against an officer who will be questioning the sus-
pect. In this case, two people were observed by a plainclothes of-
ficer to be “casing” a store (observing it carefully to determine the
best method of breaking into the store to steal items). The two
were joined by a third person, who appeared to be helping them
plan the robbery. The officer intervened and commenced to per-
form a cursory search of their clothing. The frisk produced
weapons on two of the suspects. One of them, Terry, received a
sentence of two years’ confinement. During the trial, the defense
attorney moved to suppress the evidence but the motion was de-
nied. On appeal to the U. S. Supreme Court for violation of Fourth
Amendment rights through the performance of an unlawful
search, the Court determined that the search was indeed constitu-
tional and that the frisk was appropriate to ensure the officer’s
safety. In this case, the Court differentiated between an investiga-
tive stop and an arrest, and a cursory pat-down (or frisk) and a
full search for evidence.
Nonprint Resources
297

United States v. Banks, 540 U.S. 31 (2003)
In this case, the issue of the reasonable amount of time between
the police knocking on a suspect’s door and actually entering the
residence was considered. A search warrant for the offender was
being executed to enter the residence and search for cocaine. The
police announced their presence and waited fifteen to twenty sec-
onds before forcing open the door. The United States Supreme
Court ruled that this was enough time before entering the resi-
dence and that providing more time gives offenders more oppor-
tunity to destroy evidence. This circumstance overrides privacy
protections of individuals.
United States v. Leon, 468 U.S. 897 (1984)
This case invoked the good faith exception to the exclusionary
role of searches and seizures. Information regarding two drug
dealers was provided to police, who then put the suspects under
surveillance. Two additional subjects, including Leon, were
placed under observation and subsequently arrested. At the trial
the defense argued that the officers involved did not have a valid
search warrant because they acted on a tip from an unknown
person. The magistrate who issued the warrant should not have
done so, according to the defense, due to the lack of probable
cause, regarding an unknown informant. The case was appealed
and the U.S. Supreme Court found that the exclusionary rule (as
developed in Mapp, which states that illegally obtained evidence
cannot be admitted into evidence at the trial) does not apply if
the officers act in good faith in the execution of the warrant. It
also confirmed that the exclusionary role was meant to curtail
unlawful searches by the police, not punish magistrates for their
actions.
298
Resources

Glossary
Beat
A geographic area assigned to an officer for patrol duties.
Blending operation
A police operation in which an officer goes un-
dercover, posing as a member of a criminal group (a gang, an organized
criminal group, and the like) to gather intelligence.
Blue curtain
A code of silence in police agencies by which officers pro-
tect other each other, even those in involved in corruption.
Blue-ribbon commissions
Panels of people knowledgeable about law
enforcement practices and procedures who come together to investigate
police misconduct. The commissions normally have a formal name as
well as an informal one that reflects the name of the lead investigator.
Bobbies
The nickname for the police officers of the London Metropol-
itan Police, a reference to the first name of the agency’s founder, Robert
Peel.
Bow Street Runners
Also called the Bow Street Flying Squad or Bow
Street Flyers, this group, founded by Henry Fielding, was a precursor to
professional police detectives.
Broken windows theory
A theory that disorganization in communi-
ties (typified by the broken windows metaphor) creates situations that
invite crime. Therefore, communities and police should pay attention to
crimes of disorder, help clean up neighborhoods, and work toward re-
ducing levels of fear in communities.
Civilianization
The replacement of sworn police officers with private
citizens for certain law enforcement occupations.
Civil service
A major movement in law enforcement to eliminate or re-
duce the influence of powerful political figures over the police.
Clearance rate
A measure of accomplishment in law enforcement
whereby a suspect has been identified, investigated, and arrested, com-
pleting the cycle; it is the ratio of solved to reported crimes in a certain
area.
299

Cold case files
Files of unsolved crimes that have been reopened for
investigation after a significant period of time. Many cold cases are cur-
rently under reinvestigation due to new technological advances in in-
vestigation techniques.
Community policing
A model of policing that encourages a symbiotic
relationship between the police and the community. In this model of
policing, the police are more engaged with their communities and the
citizens are more cognizant of their roles to assist the police.
CompStat (computer-assisted statistics)
A model of policing intro-
duced by the New York City Police Department (NYPD) in 1994 whose
function is to use intelligence, provide effective law enforcement meth-
ods, assist in the rapid response to crime, and evaluate the effectiveness
of police methods.
Constable
A law enforcement position that is primarily responsible for
the service of warrants and units. This position with a lengthy history,
which normally occupied a status just below that of sheriff, is still in use
today in the United States.
Contempt of cop
The disrespectful conduct and attitude of some citi-
zens toward the police.
Crime mapping
The police practice of visually displaying crime
trends on a geographical map to determine where and what type of po-
lice resources are most needed.
Criminalistics
The science of analyzing physical evidence that is in-
volved with criminal activity. Examples of evidence studied by crimi-
nalists are DNA, fingerprints, firearm evidence, fibers, soil, and shoe
and tire prints.
Critical incident stress debriefing
A systematic process to immedi-
ately assist officers or other emergency personnel after a critical incident,
or crisis situation: for example, a shooting, a hostage event, a violent riot
situation, a response to a gruesome crime scene, or any event that in-
volves the actual threat of death or injury to the officer or others.
Deadly force
The legal right held by law enforcement officers to kill a
person if necessary to protect themselves or others.
Decentralization
In law enforcement, this refers to the relocation of
decision-making responsibilities to community precincts rather than po-
lice headquarters.
Decoy operations
When law enforcement officers pose as potential
victims (elderly, cab drivers, and the like) where criminal victimization
of these types is taking place.
Demand reduction groups
Strategies used by law enforcement agen-
cies to reduce the demand of drugs by users (such as the DARE program
and Just Say No campaign).
300
Glossary

Differential response
A proactive police measure in which calls sent
in to dispatch are screened and prioritized. Nonemergency calls, often
handled by nonsworn personnel, are reported over the phone, fax, or In-
ternet.
Directed patrol
The practice, sometimes called aggressive patrol, of
patrolling an area with increased attention to certain types of offenders,
crimes, or geographical areas. 
Entrapment
When an officer incites a person to commit a criminal act
that he or she would normally not commit.
Exclusionary rule
The rule that all evidence illegally obtained by the
police is inadmissible in court.
Field training officer (FTO)
An experienced police officer responsible
for field training new officers.
Fleeing-felon rule
A right formerly held by officers to use deadly force
to stop a fleeing victim.
Forensic science
The use of scientific investigation procedures in mat-
ters that will be brought into the legal system.
Good cop–bad cop
An interrogation tool in which one officer re-
sponds to a suspect in a demeaning and threatening manner while an-
other pretends to be sympathetic and comforting. The plan is to create
an environment where the suspect confesses, usually to the “good cop.”
HAZMAT situation
An incident that involves hazardous materials
and requires special police knowledge and training.
High-speed pursuit
A chase at high speeds involving a fleeing mo-
torist and the police.
Hot spots
Areas in cities or counties with high crime rates that are often
given special attention by the police operating under a proactive model.
Internal affairs bureau
An investigative body inside a police agency
that inquires into allegations of police misconduct.
Miranda rights
The rights verbalized to criminal suspects that they
have the right to remain silent, that anything they say may be used
against them in a court of law, that they have the right to have a lawyer
present, and that they have the right to a court-appointed attorney, if
they’re indigent. These warnings are meant to protect against unwitting
self-incrimination by suspects.
Peace officer
A status granted to certain occupations that have greater
control than ordinary citizens over others: for example, the police, pro-
bation and parole officers, and correctional officers.
Plain view doctrine
A rule stating that evidence that is easily seen by
officers can be seized.
Police brutality
Excessive physical force used by police officers.
Glossary
301

Police community relations
The establishment and maintenance of
mutually beneficial interactions between the police and the communities
they serve.
Police corruption
The abuse of authority by officers with the intent of
personal gain.
Police discretion
The degree of freedom by individual law enforce-
ment officers to make arrests, investigate crimes, and make other deci-
sions in the field.
Police interrogation
The interview of a suspect by the police in relation
to a criminal act. The police use a number of interview methods to deter-
mine what happened and to ascertain the suspect’s level of involvement.
Police misconduct
An action by a law enforcement officer that entails
a violation of his or her sworn duties and responsibilities.
Police subculture
The distinct social environment collectively experi-
enced by law enforcement officers due to the unique aspects of their oc-
cupation.
Proactive policing
The anticipation by police of criminal behavior be-
fore it occurs and the actions taken to prevent it.
Probable cause
The reasonable belief that a suspect has committed a
crime. This is the evidentiary standard required for police officers to ar-
rest and search suspects.
Problem-oriented policing
A model of policing in which officers de-
termine problems in their jurisdictions through detailed observation and
take measures to alleviate them.
Racial profiling
The practice by police officers of investigating sus-
pects primarily on the basis of race.
Reactive policing
The response of police to reports of criminal behav-
ior after a crime has been committed.
Response time
The time between the commission of a crime and the
arrival of the police.
Reverse sting operation
When officers pose as sellers of illegal goods
(such as drugs or weapons) or services (such as prostitution). See also
Sting operation.
Routine activities theory
A theoretical perspective that identifies three
elements necessary for a crime: a valued object, a motivated offender,
and lack of a capable guardian. When the police (or other appropriate
people or things) become involved, the valued object is protected and no
crime occurs.
Selective enforcement
The ability of police officers to use discretion in
deciding which laws to enforce.
302
Glossary

Sheriff
The chief law enforcement official of a county. The term is a
corruption of the two words from Middle English: shire (region or
county) and reeve (leader).
Special weapons and tactics (SWAT) teams
Teams of officers with ad-
vanced training in high-risk situations such as the apprehension of dan-
gerous suspects or hostage situations.
Stakeout
Surveillance of a person or an area by police officers or 
detectives.
Sting operation
When law enforcement officials pose as buyers of ille-
gal goods (such as drugs or weapons) or services (as from prostitutes).
See also Reverse sting operation.
Stop-and-frisk
A cursory search, also called a pat-down search, of a
suspect conducted to ensure that the person does not have a weapon. 
Suicide by cop
The death of a criminal suspect who purposefully puts
him- or herself in a situation that inevitably results in the use of deadly
force by police officers.
Supply reduction programs
Initiatives by law enforcement agencies
to reduce the supply of drugs in an area.
Target hardening
Various methods of making it more difficult for
crime to occur, such as access control, increased lighting, increased po-
lice presence, surveillance, and similar measures.
Thin blue line
The metaphor of police officers as representing the line
between order and chaos in society.
Third degree
The physical abuse of a suspect under interrogation by
police.
Tithing system
Also called the frankpledge system, an early form of
group policing in which groups of ten families called tithings, were re-
sponsible for maintaining social order.
Uniform Crime Reports (UCR)
Crime data maintained and published
by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Use of force continuum
A graduated system of force to be used by of-
ficers, according to the situation, ranging from the least needed to
deadly force.
Vice
Crimes, such as those involving narcotics, prostitution, and gam-
bling, that lack a complainant. Police departments often have a specific
unit to deal with these crimes.
Watch
In the early days of policing, a group of citizens who patrolled
their community; this was a prominent system during the colonial pe-
riod in America. Although a very early institution, it can still be found
in some forms, such as neighborhood watch programs.
Glossary
303

Zero-tolerance policing
A model of policing that focuses on increased
vigilance on crimes of disorder and on the punishment of these crimes.
It is believed that vigorous enforcement of smaller crimes will drive
more serious crimes from the area.
304
Glossary

abuse of authority, defined, 50
Academy of Behavioral Profiling
(ABP), 209
Academy of Criminal Justice
Sciences (ACJS), 210
ACJS Today, 210
Ackerman, Jeffrey M., 270
acquisition of information, in
intelligence-led policing, 64
actioning, in intelligence-led
policing, 64
Adams Express, 21
Adler, Jeffrey S., 267
Administrators (IACLEA), 224
African American police, 53 54,
253, 260, 289
African Americans, migration to
cities, 49
Airborne Law Enforcement
Association (ALEA), 210
aircraft, use of, in police work,
210
Al Qaeda hijacking, 119
Alabama department of public
safety, 248
Alaska department of public
safety, 248
Albanese, Jay, 51, 68
Albert J. Reiss Jr., 254
Alfred, reign of, 5
Alpert, Geoffrey, 47, 48, 68, 70,
258
Amendment to the Civil Rights
Act (1972), 55
American Academy of Forensic
Sciences (AAFS), 211
American Association of State
Troopers, Inc. (AAST), 211
American Board of Criminalistics
(ABC), 211 212
American College of Forensic
Examiners Institute
(ACFEI), 212
American colonies, policing in,
10 14
American Criminal Justice
Association (Lambda
Alpha Epsilon), 212 213
American Deputy Sheriff’s
Association (ADSA), 212
American Jail Association (AJA),
213
American Jails, 213
American Justice, 33
American Police Veterans, 214
American policing, roots of, 4 10
American Polygraph Association,
213 214
American Society of Canine
Trainers (ASCT), 215 216
American Society of Criminology
(ASC), 214 215
Americans for Effective Law
Enforcement (AELE), 215
305
Index

America’s Most Wanted, 135
analysis, in intelligence-led
policing, 64
animal advocacy organization,
216
An Leargas, 236
Anslinger, Harry, 121 122
anthropometry, 19
Archives for Criminal Anthropology
and Criminalistics (Gross),
131
Arkansas department of public
safety, 248
arrests, as order maintenance
function, 35 36
Asian crime investigators and
specialists association, 229
Asian peace officers association,
233
Asian-American police, 55, 229,
233
Associated Humane Services,
Inc./Vested Interest Fund,
216
Association for Crime Scene
Reconstruction (ACSR),
216 217
Association of Certified Fraud
Specialists, Inc. (ACFS),
216
Association of Firearm and Tool
Mark Examiners (AFTE),
217
Association of Police Planning
and Research Officers
(APPRO), 226
Association of Public Safety
Communications Officials
(APCO), 217
Augustus, 104
Australian Federal Force, 80
Australian policing system, 80 81
automobiles
impact of, on state police work,
25
in patrol work, 38
introduction to police work, by
Vollmer, 23
use of, in Detroit, 22
autonomy, in police subculture,
46
badge, as shield, 44
“bad guys,” 45
Baldwin, Lola Greene, 122
Baldwin-Felts Detective Agency,
21
Barlow, David E., 54, 68
Barlow, Melissa Hickman, 54, 68
Bartels, Elizabeth C., 268
batons, use of, 36, 37
Battle, Samuel, 122 123
Bayley, David, 51, 57, 68, 75, 76,
100
beanbag, 37
Becker, Harold K., 3, 30
Beckett, Katherine, 268
behavioral profiling organization,
210
Bertillon, Alphonse, 19, 265, 267
biography, 123 124
identification of first repeat
offender, 109
Beyond the Shield, 214
Bichler, Gisela, 60, 68
bicycles, introduction to police
work, by Vollmer, 23
“Bigger and Better Footprints,”
229
Biles, David, 80, 81, 101
Billy the Kid, killed, 128
Black Codes, 53
Bleiler, E. F., 7, 8, 30
Blind Beak, The, 127
blood spatters, analysis of, in
investigating crime, 40
blue curtain, in police subculture,
46
Blumberg, Mark, 47, 48, 68
“bobbies,” 9
306
Index

border patrol supervisor’s
association, 243 244
Borderpol, 217 218
Bordua, David J., 254
borsholder, 5
Boston Police Strike, 111
Bouza, Anthony V., 34, 42, 45, 68
Bow Street Court, 7
Bow Street Flying Squad, 106
Bow Street Runners/Flyers, 106
creation of, 7
Boy Scout’s Crime Prevention
Program, 218
Boy Scouts of America, 218
Branch Davidian compound, 118
Bratton, William, 61
bravery, in police subculture, 46
broken windows policing, 60 61
“Broken Windows: The Police
and Neighborhood
Safety,” 134, 144
bullets, analysis of, in
investigating crime, 40
Bureau of Alcohol Tobacco and
Firearms (ATF), 116, 245
Bureau of Diplomatic Security
Rewards for Justice, 245
Bureau of Indian Affairs, 246
Bureau of Investigation, 25, 110
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS),
100, 246
Bureau of Justice, 101
Burns, William, 28, 124 125
burst stress, defined, 48
Bush, George W., USA Freedom
Corps program, 244
business model of management,
in future of policing, 67
CALEA Today, 219
California department of public
safety, 248
Calnon, Jennifer M., 270
Cameron, Margaret, 81, 100
Campbell, Rex R., 49, 69
campus law enforcement
association, 224
Campus Law Enforcement Journal,
224
Canadian policing system, 82 83
Canadian Security Intelligence
Service, 82
canine police association, 244
canine trainers society, 214 216
canines, use of
in order maintenance function,
41
on patrol, 38
Cannon, Lou, 254
Capone, Al, 135
and organized crime, 22
Carter, David L., 64, 66, 68
Census of State and Local Law
Enforcement Agencies, 2000,
155, 156
Central Intelligence Agency
(CIA), 246
centralization of policing systems,
99 100
Certification News, 212
Challenge of Crime in a Free Society
(Pres. Comm.), 41
Champion, D., 47, 48, 50, 59, 61,
69
Cheka, 96
chemical agents, use of, 36
Chicago, as a criminal justice
laboratory, 267 268
Chinese policing system, 83 84
Choir Boys, The (Wambaugh),
142 143
church, as agent of social control,
2
citizen complaints
handling of, facts and data, 151
in police departments, 204
(figure), 205 207 (tables)
in sheriffs’ offices, 204 (table)
Citizen Complaints about Police Use
of Force, 2002, 204 207
Index
307

Citizen Corps, partnership with
VIPS, 244
citizen review boards, 50
City Confidential, 33
clandestine drug laboratory
investigation association,
218
Clandestine Laboratory
Investigators Association
(CLIA), 218
Cleveland, Grover, 20
closed-circuit television cameras
(CCTV), use of, 62
Code of Hammurabi, 4
Cold Case Files, 33
Coles, Catherine M., 61, 70, 258
collapsible batons
in police departments,
199(table)
in sheriffs’ offices, 200(table)
use of, facts and data, 151
“collar,” 45
“college cops,” 23
Colorado department of public
safety, 249
“colored police,” 54
Colquoun, Patrick, 8, 106, 125
Combined Law Enforcement
Associations of Texas
(CLEAT), association with
BPSA, 244
comes stabuli, 5
Commission of the Accreditation
of Law Enforcement
Agencies (CALEA),
218 219
Committee for State Security, 96
common concern model, 274
community model of policing,
use of, in 1970s, 30
Community Oriented Policing
Services (COPS), 246
Community Policing Consortium,
219
community policing training,
facts and data, 151, 176
(figure)
in police departments, 194
(table), 196 (table)
in sheriffs’ offices, 195 (table),
197 (table)
Community Policing Unit (CPU),
92
community service, as role of
police, 34 35, 41 42
community-oriented policing
defined, 57 58
origins of, 24 25
comparative criminal justice,
defined, 73, 74, 75 76
CompStat, use of, in New York,
61, 66, 272 273
computer software, in future of
policing, 67
computerized databases, in future
of policing, 67
computers, analysis of, in
investigating crime, 40
Concerns of Police Survivors, Inc.
(COPS), 220
Connecticut department of public
safety, 249
Conner, T. Eugene “Bull,” 51
Conser, James A., 39, 68, 69
constables, 5, 6
Covent Garden Gazette, 127
cop, origin of term, 44
Cope, Nina, 65, 269
copper, origin of term, 44
copspeak, as part of police
subculture, 45
corruption (graft)
defined, 50
in early policing, 17
county police
evolution of, 14 19
in twentieth century, 21 25
Cramer, James, 2, 30
Crank, John, 67, 69
308
Index

crime investigation association,
229
crime lab, creation of, in
Cincinnati, 23
crime mapping, research on,
272 273
crime prevention association, 231
crime prevention program in
Sweden, 98
crime scene investigators
association, 228
crime scene reconstruction
association, 216 217
crime scene units (CSUs), 40
Crime Stoppers, 135
Crime Stoppers International, 220
crimes against cultural heritage,
75
CRIMESTAC, 62, 66
criminal analysts society, 242
Criminal Investigation (Gross), 19
criminal law reform and criminal
justice policy, center for,
227
Criminal Minds, 33
criminologists association, 214 215
Criminologist, The, 215
Criminology, 215
Criminology & Public Policy, 215
Crisis Negotiator, 240
Crisis Support Group, 77
Critchey, T. A., 5, 6, 30, 255
Cronin, John J., 19, 30
CSI, 33
CSI effect, research on, 277 278
“cuff ’em and stuff ’em”
technique, 46
customization, in future of
policing, 67
Customs Service, 246
dactyloscopia, 18 19
Dactyloscopia Comporada
(Vucetich), 142
daguerreotypes, use of, 18
Dai, Yisheng, 100
danger, as part of police
subculture, 44 45, 47 48
“dangerous classes,” control of,
15
Dantzker, M. L., 36, 38, 41, 69
Darrow, Clarence, 124
Das, Dilip, 99, 101
and founding of IPES, 230
Day, Frank D., 9, 31
daytime police force,
establishment of, 15
deadly force
defined, 47
use of, 36
deaths in line of duty, facts and
data, 152, 208 (figure)
weapons used in killing of law
enforcement officers, facts
and data, 152 153, 208
(figure)
decentralization of policing
systems, 99
decentralization, in community-
oriented policing, 58
Defense Security Service, 246
deformalization, in community-
oriented policing, 58
Delattre, Edwin J., 46, 69
Delaware department of public
safety, 249
delayerization, in community-
oriented policing, 58
Department of Defense, funding
of MCTFT, 233
Department of Homeland
Security (DHS), 246
Depression, effect of, on private
police, 29
despecialization, in community-
oriented policing, 58
detective squads, initiation of,
17 18
deVeil, Sir Thomas, 7
Dieckman, Duane, 258
Index
309

digital documentation, in future
of policing, 67
Dillinger, John, 25
directors of law enforcement
standards association, 225
Directory of Federal Agencies, 246
Disabled Public Safety
Employee’s Association
(DPSEA), 220 221
“disorderlies,” 45
distraction devices, use of, 36
diversity in policing, 51 56
diversity of people in West, as
factor in policing, 13 14
Dixon, Samuel, 9, 31
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid)
testing, 40, 117
“DOAs” (dead on arrival of
police), 45
document, analysis of, in
investigating crime, 40
domestic terrorism, 28
Dragnet, 136
driving while black/brown
(DWB), 53
Drug Abuse Resistance Education
(DARE), 221
Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA),
246
Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA),
117
drug trafficking, as international
crime, 74
drugs, analysis of, in
investigating crime, 40
dueling, in South, 12 13
Dulaney, W. Marvin, 53, 69
duties of police officers and
sheriffs, facts and data,
151
in police departments, 183
(table), 184 (table), 186
(table), 187 (table), 189
(table), 191 (table), 193
(table)
in sheriffs’ offices 183 (table),
185 (table), 186 (table), 188
(table), 191 (table) (table),
194 (table)
Earp, Wyatt, 125 126
“eating your thirty-eight,” 45
Ebbe, Obi N. Ignatius, 73, 100
economic crime, as international
crime, 74 75
educational requirements for
police personnel, facts and
data, 150
in police departments, 172
(figure)
in sheriffs’ offices, 173 (figure)
educational requirements of
police, 15
Edwards, Griffith, 22, 30
Eighteenth Amendment, 22
Eisenberg, Terry, 59, 69
electrical devices, use of as
nonlethal weapons, facts
and data, 151
in police departments, 199
(table)
in sheriffs’ offices, 200 (table)
employment of police, facts and
data, 147 148
Enforcement, The, 213
Enquiry into the Cause of the Late
Increase of Robbers, An
(Fielding), 127
Engel, Robin S., 270
English policing system, 85 87
environmental crimes, 75
espionage rings, and FBI, 26
ethos of police subculture, 46 
Europol, 76, 77 78, 100
evaluation, in intelligence-led
policing, 64
evidential intelligence, defined, 64
evolution of policing, 56 57
310
Index

Exchange, The, 226
Family Badge, 221
family, as agent of social control,
2
Fargo, William, and formation of
Wells Fargo, 107
Farmer, Richard E., 48, 69
Fauld, Henry, 128, 133
and fingerprinting, 18
Fay, Michael, caning of, 73
FBI, see Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI)
Federal Agency of Investigation
(Agencia Federal de
Investigaciones), 96
Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI), 30, 69, 110, 112, 246
as employer of federal officers,
148
history of, 25
statistics on sworn police
officers, 99
Federal Bureau of Prisons (FBP),
246
as employer of federal officers,
148
Federal Judical Police (Policia
Judicial Federal), 95
federal law enforcement agency,
first, 106
Federal Law Enforcement Officers
Association (FLEOA),
221 222
Federal Law Enforcement Statistics,
153
Federal Law Enforcement
Training Center (FLETC),
116
Federal Manager’s Association
(FMA), association with
BPSA, 244 
federal police agencies, facts and
data, 147, 148 149, 153
federal police
evolution of, 20
in twentieth century, 25 28
Federal Preventative Police
(Policia Federal
Preventiva), 96
Federal Protective Service (FPS),
246
Federal Trade Commission (FTC),
246
Felson, Richard B., 270
Fielding, Henry, 7, 106, 126 127
Fielding, John, 8, 127
Fight Crime: Invest in Kids, 222
fingerprint bureau, first, 23
fingerprinting, start of, 18
Finger Prints, 128
fingerprints, use of, facts and
data, 151
in police departments, 202
(table)
in sheriffs’ offices, 203 (table)
Fire and Police Personnel Reporter,
215
firearm and tool mark examiners
association, 217
firearm, as part of police
subculture, 44
Fischer, John F., 18, 19, 23, 24, 31
flashbang, use of, 37
Fletcher, Connie, 256
Florida department of public
safety, 249
Florida National Guard, funding
of MCTFT, 233
Floyd, Pretty Boy, 25
foam, use of, 37
Folley, Vern L., 10, 12, 13, 22, 31
foot patrol, 38
Forensic Examiner, The, 212
Forensic Files, 33
forensic science 
advances in twentieth century,
23 24
certification organization,
211 212
Index
311

forensic science, cont.
organization, 211, 212
start of, 18
Fosdick, Raymond B., 11, 14, 15, 31
Fox, Vicente, 96
Frank, Leo, 124
frankpledge system, 5, 104
Fraternal Order of Police, creation
of, 111
fraud specialists association, 216
French policing system, 87 88
Fridell, Lorie A., 47, 68
Friedman, Lawrence M., 12, 13,
15, 16, 22, 23, 26, 31
Friedmann, Robert R., 67, 69
full-time state and local policy
personnel, use of, facts
and data, 147 148, 151,
153 155 (tables)
by local police departments,
157 (figure), 158 (table), 198
(figure)
rise in number of, 149
by sheriffs’ offices, 157 (figure),
159 (table), 198 (figure)
Gaines, Larry, 60, 68
Galton, Sir Francis, 128, 132
and fingerprinting, 18
gangs, in early America, 14
Gangs of New York, 14
Garda Siochana (Guardians of the
Peace), 90
Garrett, Pat, 128
Gates, Daryl, 129
gay and lesbian police, 55 56
Gendarmerie, origin of, 104
gender and race of police
personnel, facts and data,
149
in police departments, 168
(table), 170 (figure)
in sheriffs’ offices, 169 (table),
170 (figure)
General Intelligence Division, 25
Geoghegan, Susan, 69
geographic profiling, 272
Georgia department of public
safety, 249
Germann, A. C., 9, 31
glass, analysis of, in investigating
crime, 40
Glasscock, Bruce, 59, 69
global positioning system (GPS),
use of, 62
Global Program for Trafficking in
Human Beings, 79
G-men, 26
“Global Leadership in Policing,”
225
Gobal Program against
Corruption, 79
Gobal Program against Terrorism,
79
Goldstein, Herman, 46, 59, 69, 130
Goodwin, Isabella, 110 111
government, as agent of social
control, 3
Gross, Hans, 19, 130 131
Haberfeld, Maria, 91, 92, 101
hair, analysis of, in investigating
crime, 40
Hamilton, Mary, 54
Hammurabi, 103
Hannigan, Garry, 80, 81, 101
Harper, Hill, 99, 100
Harvard, Beverly J., 131 132
Hatley, Allen G., 25, 31
Hauptman, Bruno, 25
Hawaii department of public
safety, 249
Haymarket Riots, 109
headborough, 5
Heidensohn, France, 257
Hellenic American Police
Association (HAPA), 222
Henry, Edward Richard, 128, 132
Henry, Sir Edward Richard, and
fingerprinting, 18
312
Index

Herschel, Sir William James, and
fingerprinting, 18
Hershel, William James, 132 133
Hershel, William, 128
Herzog, Sergio, 91, 92, 101
Hess, Karen M., 37, 38, 39, 41, 69,
71
Hibbert, Christopher, 6, 31, 257
High Tech Crime Consortium,
222 223
high-speed chases, video, 286 287
high-speed pursuit, dangers of,
47 48
highway patrol, origin of, 25
Hispanic American Police
Command Officers
Association (HAPCOA),
223
Holmes, Sherlock, 18
Home Secretary, 86
Homeland Security Act of 2002,
120
Hooper, Michael K., 47, 48, 50, 59,
61, 69
Hoover, J. Edgar, 212, 266
biography, 133
contemporary of Anslinger, 121
as head of FBI, 25 26, 112
and paramilitary, bureaucratic
structure of policing, 29
Horne, Peter, 54, 69
hue and cry, 5, 6
Hur Moheb, 103
Hur Moheb, 4
Idaho department of public
safety, 249
Ideas in American Policing, 241
Illinois department of public
safety, 249
IMAP, 62, 66
Immigration and Naturalization
Service (INS), foundation
of, 109
impact, as factor in 3i model, 64
Indian policing system, 89 90
Indiana department of public
safety, 249
indirect victimization model, 274
Industrial Revolution, effect of,
on policing, 8
influence, as factor in 3i model, 64
informers, 6
infrared imagers, use of, facts and
data, 151
in police departments, 202
(table)
in sheriffs’ offices, 203 (table)
Innes, Martin, 62, 70
intelligence analysts, 64 65
intelligence-led policing, 62 66
Intelligence Report, The, 243
Interagency Committee on
Women in Federal Law
Enforcement, 245
internal affairs investigators
association, 237
Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
Compliance and
Enforcement, 247
International Association for the
Study of Organized Crime
(IASOC), 223 224
International Association of
Chiefs of Police (IACP),
109, 224 225
administration of VIPS, 244
collaboration with CALEA, 219
collaboration with Community
Policing Consortium, 219
International Association of
Directors of Law
Enforcement Standards
and Training (IADLEST),
225
International Association of Law
Enforcement Intelligence
Analysts (IALEIA), 63,
225 226
and SCCA, 242
Index
313

International Association of Law
Enforcement Planners
(IALEP), 226
International Association of
Undercover Officers
(IAUO), 226 227
International Association of
Women Police (IAWP), 227
International Association of Police
Women, 143
International Center for Criminal
Law Reform and Criminal
Justice Policy, 227
International Crime Scene
Investigators Association
(ISCIA), 228
international criminal justice,
defined, 73, 74, 75 76
International Criminal Police
Commission (ICPC), 76 77
International Criminal Police
Organization (Interpol),
76 77, 100, 228
creation of, 111 112
International Footprint
Association (IFU), 228 229
International High Technology
Crime Investigation
Association (HTCIA), 229
International Organization of
Asian Crime Investigators
and Specialists (IOACIS),
229
International Police Association
(IPA), 230
International Police Executive
Symposium (IPES), 230
International Police Mountain
Bike Association (IPMBA),
230 231
international policing, 75
International Society of Crime
Prevention Practitioners
(ISCPP), 231
International Union of Police
Association (IUPA), 231
Interpol, see International
Criminal Police
Organization (Interpol)
interpretation, as factor in 3i
model, 64
investigation, in order
maintenance function,
39 41
Iowa department of public safety,
249
Irish policing system, 90 91
Israeli National Police (INP),
91 92
Ivan the Terrible, 96
Jail and Prisoner Law Bulletin, 215
jail association, 213
Japanese policing system, 93 94
Jenkins, Herbert, 257
jet backpacks, in future of
policing, 67
Johnson, Daniel M., 49, 69
Johnson, David R., 12, 14, 16, 19,
20 25, 26, 31
Johnson, Lyndon B., declaration
of war on crime, 114
Jones, Mark, 258
Journal of Behavioral Profiling, The,
209
Journal of Criminal Justice
Education, 210
Journal of Forensic Sciences, 211
Journal of Police and Criminal
Psychology, The, 243
Justice of the Peace, establishment
of, 105
Justice Quarterly, 210
Justinian Code, 104
juvenile delinquency, 24
juvenile units, use of, in order
maintenance function, 41
K-9, see canines, use of, on patrol
314
Index

Kansas department of public
safety, 249
Kappeler, Victor E., 46, 70, 258
Katrina, 120
Katz, Charles M., 58, 71, 271
Kefauver Commission, 113
Kelling, G. L., 56, 61, 70, 144, 258
Kelling, George B., biography, 134
Kent Constabulary, 63
Kent Policing Model, 63 64
Kent State University, 116
Kentucky department of public
safety, 249
Kerik, Bernard B., 259
Kerner Commission, 106
Keystone Kops, 111
KGB, 96
“kill switches,” in future of
policing, 67
kin policing, 3
Kincaid, Nikki L., 60, 70
King John, 105
King, Martin Luther Jr., death of,
115 116
King, Rodney, 118
incident description, 52 53
Knapp Commission, 139
Kowalewski, Victor A., 48, 69
Ku Klux Klan, 20
and FBI, 26
Kurian, George Thomas, 82, 83,
90, 91, 92, 95, 100
Lab, Steven P., 99, 100
Lambda Alpha Epsilon (LAE),
212
Lamford, T. G., 100
Lane, Brian, 70
Langworthy, Robert H., 4, 7, 8, 9,
11, 12, 13, 22, 23, 24, 25, 31
latent fingerprints, 40
Latin-American police, 55
Latino peace officers association,
237
Law and Order, 33
law enforcement
changes in, 57
as order maintenance function,
35
Law Enforcement Assistance
Administration, 116
law enforcement intelligence
analysts association,
225 226
Law Enforcement Legal Defense
Fund, 232
Law Enforcement Liability Reporter,
215
law enforcement officers and
families, support
organization, 221
Law Enforcement Officers Killed,
2006, 152, 208
law enforcement organization,
215
law enforcement planners
association, 226
“lawyering up,” 45
Laycock, Gloria, 81, 100
Legal Advisory Program, 79
legalistic style of police
personality, 43
Leiner, Stephen, 260
Lexow Commission, 17
Lieutenant General, 87
Lipson, Martin, 21, 29, 31
Local Police Departments, 2003, 157,
158, 161, 164, 166, 168, 170,
171, 172, 174, 181, 183, 184,
186, 187, 189, 191, 193, 194,
196, 198, 199, 201, 202, 204
London Charter of 1606, 10
London Metropolitan Force, 16,
85 86, 137
establishment of, 106
Los Angeles County, California,
as largest sheriff’s
department in country,
149
Index
315

Louisiana department of public
safety, 249
Lu, Hong, 85, 100
Maastricht Treaty, 78
MacAleese, Greg, 134 135
Magna Carta, 105
Maine department of public
safety, 249
malfeasance, defined, 51
Manual for the Examining
Magistrate: A System of
Criminalistics (Gross), 131
Mao Zedang, 84
Mapp v. Ohio, 367 U.S. 643 (1961),
35
Maroney, Al, 62, 70
Martin, Susan Ehrlich, 55, 70
Maryland department of public
safety, 250
Mass Line, 84
Massachusetts department of
public safety, 250
Masters of Deceit (Hoover), 26
Mayne, Richard, 9
McDowall, David, 278
McKenzie, Ian K., 100
McVeigh, Timothy, 118
medals, as identification, 15
Metropolitan Alliance of Police
(MAP), 232
Metropolitan Police Act of 1829, 9
Mexican policing system, 94 96
Michigan department of public
safety, 250
Middleton, Michael L., 260
Miethe, Terance E., 85, 100
militarily tested advancements, in
future of policing, 67
Miller, Wilbur R., 4, 31, 260
Ministry of Justice, 97
Minnesota department of public
safety, 250
Miranda v. Arizona, 114 115
misfeasance, defined, 51
missing children, center for, 235
Mississippi department of public
safety, 250
Missouri department of public
safety, 250
Monkkonen, Eric H., 1, 31, 261
Montana department of public
safety, 250
Moore, M. H., 56, 70
moralist crusaders, 17
motorcycle patrol, 38
motorcycles
introduction to police work, by
Vollmer, 23
use of, for patrol, 38
use of, in Philadelphia, 22
mug shots, use of, 18
mug shots, use of, facts and data,
151
in police departments, 202
(table)
in sheriffs’ offices, 203 (table)
Multijurisdictional Counterdrug
Task Force Training
(MCTFT), 232 233
municipal police
evolution of, 14 19
in twentieth century, 21 25
Murrah Federal Building
explosion, 118 119
narcotic detector dog association,
238
National Asian Peace Officers
Association (NAPOA),
233
National Association of Police
Organizations (NAPO),
233
association with BPSA, 244
National Association of Police
Planners (NAPP), merger
with APPRO, 226
316
Index

National Association of Property
Recovery Investigators,
Inc. (NAPRI), 233 234
National Association of Town
Watch (NATW), 234
National Association of Women
in Law Enforcement
Executive (NAWLEE),
234 235
National Bureau of Criminal
Identification, 110
National Center for Missing and
Exploited Children, 235
National Central Bureaus (NCB),
77
National Chiefs of Police union,
foundation of, 109
National Coalition of Italian
American Law
Enforcement Associations,
225 236
National Commission on Law
Observance and
Enforcement, 112
National Conference of Law
Enforcement Emerald
Societies, Inc. (NCLEES),
236
National Crime Information
Center (NCIC), creation
of, 115
National Crime Prevention
Council, support of Boy
Scouts of American, 218
National Crime Reference Service
(NCRS), 247
National Drug Enforcement
Administration, and
NDEOA, 236
National Drug Enforcement
Officers Association
(NDEOA), 236
National Drug Intelligence Center
(NDIC), 247
National Gendarmeie, 87, 88
National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration (NHTSA),
247
National Highway Transportation
Administration,
collaboration with
HAPCOA, 223
National Institute of Ethics,
236 237
National Institute of Justice (NIJ),
247
National Institute of Justice’s
Office of Science and
Technology, 238
National Institute of Police
Science, 93
National Intelligence Sharing
Plan (NCISP), 66
National Internal Affairs
Investigators Association
(NIAIA), 237
National Latino Peace Officers
Association (NLPOA), 237
National Law Enforcement and
Corrections Technology
Center (NLECTC),
237 238
National Narcotic Detector Dog
Association (NNDDA),
238
National Night Out: America’s
Night Out Against Crime,
234
National Organization of Black
Law Enforcement Officers
(NOBLE), 238 239:
collaboration with CALEA, 219
collaboration with Community
Policing Consortium, 219
National Park Service (NPS), 247
National Police Academy, 93
National Police Academy,
creation of, 25
National Police Academy,
opening of, 113
Index
317

National Police Bloodhound
Association (NPBA), 239
National Police Defense
Foundation (NPDF), 239
National Prison Association, 17
National Public Safety
Commission, 93
National Recreation and Park
Association, and PLEA,
240
National Security Agency (NSA),
247
National Sheriff’s Association
(NSA), 239 240
collaboration with Community
Policing Consortium, 219
National Tactical Officers
Association (NTOA), 240
National Training Academy,
opening of, 113
National Troopers Coalition
(NTC), 240
Nationalist Party (Kuomintang),
83
Native Americans, policing
among, 10
Native-American police, 55
Nature, 133
NAWLEE News, 235
NCIS (Naval Criminal
Investigative Service), 33
Nebraska department of public
safety, 250
“Negro substations,” 54
Ness, Eliot, 112, 135
netting, use of, 37
Nevada department of public
safety, 250
New Amsterdam, 105
New Centurions, The (Wambaugh),
142
New Hampshire department of
public safety, 250
New Jersey department of public
safety, 250
New Mexico department of
public safety, 250
New Orleans, and employment of
African American police,
53
New Spirit, 234
New York department of public
safety, 250
New York Police Department
connection by telegraph, 107
as largest police department in
country, 149
mediation program, 268
use of uniforms, 15
Nichols, Terry, 118
Nickell, Joe, 18, 19, 23, 24, 31
night patrol, 14 15
night watch, first, 105
nightsticks, use of, 15
Nixon, Richard, resignation of, 26
NOBLE News Online, 239
nonfeasance, defined, 51
nonlethal weapons, use of, facts
and data, 151
in police departments, 199
(table)
in sheriffs’ offices, 200 (table)
nonmotorized wheel patrol, 38
nonsworn reserve or auxiliary
personnel, use of, facts
and data, 149:
in police departments, 164 (table)
in sheriffs’ offices, 165 (table)
Norman Conquest, 5, 104
Norman, Paul, 78, 100
North Carolina department of
public safety, 251
North Dakota department of
public safety, 251
Northeast, policing in, 10 12
Nunn, Samuel, 60, 70
O’Mahoney, Paul Douglas, 90, 91,
100
318
Index

occupational deviance, defined,
50
Office of Community Oriented
Policing Services (COPS),
219
Office of Community Policing,
274
Office of Legislative Affairs
(OLA), 247
Office of Police Corps and Law
Enforcement Education
(OPCLEE), 247
Official Negligence: How Rodney
King and the Riots Changed
Los Angeles and the LAPD
(Cannon), 254
Ohio department of public safety,
251
Oklahoma City bombing, 28
Oklahoma department of public
safety, 251
Old and New Testaments,
criminal codes in, 4
Oldham, Scott, 37, 70
oleoresin capsicum (OC), 36
Olshaker, Mark, 256
open-hand tactics, 36
operational intelligence, defined,
64
Oprichnina, 96
order maintenance, as role of
police, 34, 35 41
order maintenance, in early
policing, 15
Oregon department of public
safety, 251
organizations, directory of,
209 252
organized crime, 22
and FBI, 28
fighting, association for, 223 224
origins of population in West, as
factor in policing, 13
Ortmeier, P. J., 36, 37, 59, 70
Overland Express, 21
“paddyrollers,” 12
paint, analysis of, in investigating
crime, 40
paramilitary, bureaucratic model
of policing, 24, 29
Park Law Enforcement
Association (PLEA),
240 241
Parker, William H., 136, 139
as Chief of Police of LAPD, 113
and paramilitary, bureaucratic
structure of policing, 29
Party Line, 84
“patrollers,” 12
patrol, in order maintenance
function, 38 39
Peace Officer Standards and
Training (POST), 225
Peace Officers Research
Association of California
(PORAC), association
with BPSA, 244 
Peak, Kenneth, 54, 70
Peel, Robert, 86, 136 137
creation of centralized police
force, 8 9
“peelers,” 9
Peelian Principles, 9
Pendleton Civil Service Reform
Act, 109
Pennsylvania department of
public safety, 251
Pennsylvania model of state
police, 25
Pennsylvania State Constabulary,
110
Pennsylvania State Police, 112
People’s Liberation Army, 84
pepper spray, use of, facts and
data, 151
in police departments, 199
(table)
in sheriffs’ offices, 200 (table)
See also oleoresin capsicum
(OC)
Index
319

Pepperball, use of, 37
“perps,” 45
Philbin, Tom, 45, 70
Pinkerton Detective Agency,
foundation of, 107
Pinkerton National Detective
Agency, 28
Pinkerton Protective Police Patrol,
21
Pinkerton, Allan, 18, 21, 124,
137 138
Pinkerton’s Protective Police
Patrol, 137
foundation, 107
plainclothes investigator, 39
police academies providing
training, facts and data,
150
facilities of, facts and data, 150,
179 (table)
funding for, 150, 180 (figure)
in police departments, 175
(figure)
positions trained for, 176
(figure)
in sheriffs’ offices, 175 (figure)
types of training provided, 176
(figure), 177 (table)
police academy, creation of, by
Vollmer, 23
Police Administration (Wilson), 23,
145
police and criminal psychology
society, 242 243
police bloodhound association,
239
Police Chief, 225
police commissioners, first, 106
police crime, defined, 50
police defense foundation, 239
Police Executive Research Forum
(PERF), 241:
collaboration with CALEA, 219
collaboration with Community
Policing Consortium, 219
Police Foundation, 241
Police Gazette, 127
police misconduct, 50 51
police mission, 35 35
police mountain bike association,
230 231
police mystique, 42 43
Police Ordinance of 1926, 91
police organizations association,
233
police personality, 43
police personnel, facts and data,
facts and data, 147 208
police philosophies, 57 61
police, selection of, 45 46
Police Story, 143
police subculture, 43 45
Police Systems in the United States
(Smith), 140
police training academy, first, 110
police veterans association, 214
police-community relations
movement, 48 50
beginning of, 114
defined, 48
policing systems, 80 100
policing
in American colonies, 10 14
context of changes, 29 30
in early societies, 3 4
future of, 66 68
as institution, 1
new approaches, 61 66
Policing a Free Society (Goldstein),
130
political control of police force,
16, 29
polygraph professionals
association, 213 214
first use of, 111
introduction to police work, by
Vollmer, 23
Posse Comitatus Act, 108
Post Office, as police agency, 20
Postal Inspection Service, 247
320
Index

Powers, Richard Gid, 26, 31
Practitioner, The, 231
Praetorian Guard, 104
Prassel, Frank Richard, 10, 31
Prenzler, Tim, 80, 81, 101
President’s Commission on Law
Enforcement and
Administration of Justice,
31, 50, 56, , 70, 257, 262
recommendations, 24 25
Prevention Line, 84
private police
evolution of, 20 21
in twentieth century, 28 29
problem-oriented policing, 59 60
professional model of policing,
failure of, in 1960s, 29 30
Progressive Movement, 17
Prohibition Era, 1, 22
property recovery investigators
association, 233 234
protective sweeps, essay on,
274 275
public safety communications
association, 217
Public Safety Office, 96
Purpura, Phillip, 44, 45, 67, 70
Quinet, Kenna, 60, 70
race relations and police, 51 52
race riots, 51 52
race riots, in Los Angeles, 114
racial profiling, video, 287
racially biased policing, training
in, facts and data, 150, 178
(figure)
Radelet, Louis, 49, 71
radio system, first use of, 112
Raghavan, R. K., 89, 90, 101
railroads, as sponsors of private
police, 21
railroads, nationalization of,
during World War II,
28 29
Rameses III, 4
Ratcliffe, Jerry H., 64, 66, 71, 272
ratelwatch (rattle watch), 11
Rawlings, Philip, 2, 3, 31
Reames, Benjamin, 101
recruits, breakdown by race and
gender, facts and data,
150, 180 (figure)
Red Scare, 26
Regional Information Sharing
Systems (RISS) Centers, 63
Reichel, Phillip L., 74, 78, 81, 82,
83, 95, 96, 101
Reiss, Albert J., Jr., 262
“rent-a-cop,” 45
Repetto, Thomas A., 16, 31
Report of the National Advisory
Commission on Civil
Disorders, 52, 71
Reserve Police Officers
Association (RPOA), 242
review, in intelligence-led
policing, 64
Rhode Island department of
public safety, 251
Richardson, James F., 14, 31, 49,
71 
Ridge, Tom, 66
Roosevelt, Theodore, 138
Roosevelt, Theodore, as police
commissioner of New
York City, 109
Rousey, Dennis C., 263
Rowan, Charles, 9
Royal Canadian Mounted Police,
82
Royal Irish Constabulary
creation of, 90
as model for Indian policing
system, 89
Ruby Ridge incident, 28
Rudolph, Eric, 119
Ruf, Jamie, 274
Rum Corp, 80
Russell, Gregory D., 36, 39, 69
Index
321

Russian policing system, 96 97
Saferstein, Richard, 40, 71
salaries for police officers and
sheriffs, facts and data,
150 151
in police departments, 181
(table)
in sheriffs’ offices 182 (table)
San Francisco Committee of
Vigilance, 107
Sankar, A. Shiva, 89, 90, 101
SARA process, defined, 59
Sarre, Rick, 80, 81, 101
satellite photography, in future of
policing, 67
Scene, The, 217
Schaefer, Joseph A., 275
Schengen Agreement, 76, 79 80
Schneider, John C., 263
scholarly analysis of police, 254
school shootings, 118
schout (nightwatchman) system,
11
Schulz, Dorothy Moses, 55, 71,
263, 264
Scotland Yard, formation of, 8
screening of police personnel,
facts and data, 149
in police departments, 171
(figure)
in sheriffs’ offices, 171 (figure)
searches, 35
secrecy, in police subculture, 46
seizures, 35
sensemaking, 271 272
September 11, 2001 terrorist
attacks, effects of, on
policing, 63
Serpico, Frank, 138 139
allegations of, 117
service style of police personality,
43
sexual exploitation of children,
center for, 235
Sheptycki, James, 66, 71
Sheriff, 240
sheriff, and policing in the West,
13
sheriff’s association, 213, 239 240
Sheriffs’ Offices, 2003, 157, 159, 163,
165, 167, 169, 170, 171, 173,
174, 182, 183, 184, 186, 188,
190, 192, 194, 195, 197, 198,
200, 201, 203, 204
sheriffs’ offices, 25 largest,
162 163
shire reeve, 5, 104
“shooflies,” 45
Silverman, Charles E., 264
Silverman, Eli B. Silverman, 268
Skolnick, Jerome H., 43, 71
Slansky, David Alan, 276
slave patrols, 105 106
slave patrols, 12, 263
Sluder, Richard D., 258
Smith, Bruce, 139 140
Smith, Ken, 101
social control, 2 3
social wars on drugs and poverty,
24
Society of Certified Criminal
Analysts (SCCA), 242
Society of Police and Criminal
Psychology (SPCP),
242 243
soft projectiles, use of, facts and
data, 151
in police departments, 199
(table)
in sheriffs’ offices, 200 (table)
soil, analysis of, in investigating
crime, 40
South Carolina department of
public safety, 251
South Carolina Regulators, 12
South Dakota department of
public safety, 251
South, policing in, 12 13
Southern Poverty Law Center, 243
322
Index

special weapons and tactical
(SWAT)
training organization for, 240
use of, in order maintenance
function, 41
specialized police squads, 22
St. Petersburg College, funding of
MCTFT, 233
Standen, David, 36, 71
Standing Committee of the
National Prison
Association, 108
Stark, Rodney, 265
State and Local Law Enforcement
Statistics, 148
State and Local Law Enforcement
Training Academies, 2002,
175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180
state and local police agencies,
facts and data, 147 148,
153
50 largest, 159 161
state departments of public safety,
248 252
state police agency, start of, in
Massachusetts, 19 20
state police
evolution of, 19 20
in twentieth century, 25
state troopers association, 211
Statute of Winchester, 5 6, 105
Stead, Philip John, 265
Stephens, Gene, 71
“stiffs,” 45
strategic intelligence, defined, 64
stress, in police work, 48
striking weapons, use of, 36
stunning devices, use of, 36
subculture, defined, 43
“suicide by cop,” 45
suicide, video, 288
Surete, 107
survivors of officers killed in line
of duty,  association for,
220
suspect composite drawings, use
of, facts and data, 151
in police departments, 202
(table)
in sheriffs’ offices, 203 (table)
Swager, Brent, 62, 71
Swanton, Bruce, 80, 81, 101
SWAT, see special weapons and
tactical (SWAT)
Swedish policing system, 97 98
sworn reserve or auxiliary
personnel, use of, facts
and data, 149: in police
departments, 166 (table)
in sheriffs’ offices, 167 (table)
3i model, 64
Tactical Edge, The, 240
tactical intelligence, defined, 64
tactical officers association, 240
Talboado, Walter Beller, 96, 101
Tanner, Murray Scott, 84, 101
Taser, 37
Teaching Tolerance, 243
Teapot Dome Scandal, 124
technological advancements, in
future of policing, 67
technology 
in policing, 56 57
use of, by FBI, 28
technology, use of, facts and data,
151
in police departments, 202
(table)
in sheriffs’ offices, 203 (table)
telegraph boxes, in use in New
York City, 108
telephone booths, established by
Chicago Police
Department, 108
telephone system, established in
Washington, D.C., 108
telephotography, 110
teletypewriter system, first use of,
112
Index
323

“tenderloin districts,” naming of,
16
Tennessee department of public
safety, 251
Tennessee v. Gardner, 47
Terrill, Richard J., 82, 83, 85, 86, 87,
88, 93, 94, 96, 97, 98, 101
terrorism response training, facts
and data, 150, 178 (figure)
terrorism, as international crime,
74
Texas department of public safety,
251
Texas Rangers
creation of, 19, 107
new roles of, 25
Thames Police Act of 1800, 125
thief-takers, 6, 7, 17
thin blue line, 33
Thinking About Crime (Wilson),
144
Thomas A. Swift Electric Rifle, see
Taser
tire deflation spikes, use of, facts
and data, 151
in police departments, 202
(table)
in sheriffs’ offices, 203 (table)
tire tracks, analysis of, in
investigating crime, 40
tithing system, 5, 104
Toch, Hans, 48, 71
traffic control devices,
employment of, 56
traffic stops, research on, 270
training needs of police officers,
272 273
training requirements for police
personnel, facts and data,
150
in police departments, 174
(figure)
in sheriffs’ offices, 174 (figure)
transnational crime, 74 75
Travis, Lawrence F., 4, 7, 8, 9, 11,
12, 13, 22, 23, 24, 25, 31
Treatise on the Police of the
Metropolis (Colquhoun),
8, 125
Trends in Organized Crime, 224
Trojanowicz, Robert C., 9, 31
truncheons, use of, by Bow Street
Runners, 7 8
Tweed, William “Boss,” 108
Twelve Tables, 4, 103
Tyler, Tom T., 277
types of agencies employing
police personnel, facts and
data, 149, 156 (table)
tythingman, 5
U.S. Customs and Border
Protection, as employer of
federal officers, 148
U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development
(HUD), Office of Inspector
General, 247
U.S. Department of Justice
(USDOJ), 247
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
(FWS), 247
U.S. Immigration and Customs
Enforcement, as employer
of federal officers, 148
U.S. Marshalls Service, 248
U.S. Park Police (USPP), 248
U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission, 248
Unabomber attacks, 28
undercover detectives, use of, in
order maintenance
function, 41
undercover officers association,
226 227
Uniform Crime Records (UCR),
and IACP, 225
Uniform Crime Reports, 113
uniforms
324
Index

adoption of, 15
se of in New York City, 107
United Kingdom’s National
Intelligence Model, 64
United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC), 76,
78 79, 101
United Nations, 79
United States Army, as police in
West, 13
United States Border Patrol
Supervisor’s Association
(BPSA), 243 244
United States Bureau of Justice
Assistance (BJA), 63, 64,
71, 246
United States Canine Police
Association (USPCA), 244
United States Custom Service,
creation of, 112
United States Postal Service,
establishment of, 106
United States Secret Service, 32
creation of, 20, 248
foundation of, 108
new roles of, 25
Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 218
Untoucheables, 112
Untouchables, The, 135, 136
Upson, Ash, 129
Urban Cohort, 104
USA Patriot Act, passage of,
119 120
use of force, as part of order
maintenance function, 36
Utah department of public safety,
251
Varieties of Police Behavior
(Wilson), 144
Velke, John, 21, 32
verbal commands, 36
Vermont department of public
safety, 251
Vest-a-Dog, 216
vice officers, use of, in order
maintenance function, 41
“vic,” 45
video cameras, use of, facts and
data, 151
in police departments, 201
(figure)
in sheriffs’ offices, 201 (figure)
Vidocq, Eugene François, 107,
140 141
vigilantes, 106
in West, 14
Vigiles, 104
Village Defense Parties, 89
Violent Crime Control and Law
Enforcement Act, passage
of, 119
VIPS in Focus, 245
Virginia department of public
safety, 251
vocal patterns, analysis of, in
investigating crime, 40
Vollmer, August, 139, 212, 265
contributions to police
professionalism, 23
as president of IACP, 111
biography, 141
Volunteers in Police Service
(VIPS), 244
Vucetich, Juan, 141 142
and fingerprinting, 18 19
Waco, Texas incident, 28
Walker, Samuel, 14, 18, 21, 32, 55,
58, 71, 265
Wambaugh, Joseph, 142 143
Warren, Earl, 212
Washington department of public
safety, 252
watch and ward system, 6
ineffectiveness of, 11
in Boston, 11
watchman style of police
personality, 43
Index
325

watchmen, as agent of social
control, 2 3
water vehicle patrol, 38
Webb, Jack, 136
Wells, Alice Stebbin, 54, 110, 143
Wells Fargo, formation of, 21, 107
West Virginia department of
public safety, 252
West, policing in, 13 14
white collar crime, and FBI, 28
Whitehead, Don, 266
Whitehouse, Jack E., 3, 30
Wichersham Crime Commission,
112
WIFLE-Enews, 245
Wild, Jonathan, 6 7
William J. Burns International
Detective Agency, 28
Williams, Alexander “Clubber,”
16, 138
Wilson, James Q., 71, 143 144
Wilson, O. W., 139, 144 145
contributions to police
professionalism, 23
and paramilitary, bureaucratic
structure of policing, 29
Wisconsin department of public
safety, 252
Women in Federal Law
Enforcement (WIFLE), 
245
women in policing, 45, 54 55
women police association, 227
Wong, Kam, 85, 101
World Border Security
Symposium, 218
World Trade Center bombing, 
28
wrist radios, in future of policing,
67
Wrobeski, Henry M., 37, 38, 39,
41, 69, 71
Wyoming department of public
safety, 252
Xie, Min, 278
youth drinking, research on,
275 276
Zedillo, Ernesto, 95 96
zero tolerance policing, 61 62
326
Index

About the Author
Leonard A. Steverson, Ph.D., is assistant professor of sociology at South
Georgia College in Douglas, Georgia. He teaches courses in sociology
and criminal justice. Prior to his teaching career, Dr. Steverson was a pro-
bation officer, correctional counselor, and director of a child and adoles-
cent social service program. He lives in Douglas, Georgia, with his wife,
Betty, and enjoys spending time with their children and grandchildren.
327

