
Circuit Modeling of 
Inductively-Coupled 
Pulsed Accelerators
This monograph describes lumped-element modeling techniques for induc-
tively-coupled pulsed accelerators, starting from the basic physical descrip-
tion of the various processes and then bringing all the pieces together into 
solutions. Coilguns, inductive pulsed plasma thrusters, and compact toroids 
have each been individually studied using the methods used in this mono-
graph. 
This monograph is of interest to researchers and graduate students in phys-
ics, engineering, and mathematics presently studying inductively-coupled 
pulsed accelerators.

Taylor & Francis 
Taylor & Francis Group 
http://taylorandfrancis.com 

Circuit Modeling of 
Inductively-Coupled 
Pulsed Accelerators 
Kurt A. Polzin
Ashley K. Hallock
Kamesh Sankaran
Justin M. Little

First edition published 2022 
by CRC Press
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
and by CRC Press
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300, Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2023 Kurt A. Polzin, Ashley K. Hallock, Kamesh Sankaran and Justin M. Little
CRC Press is an imprint of Informa UK Limited
The right of Kurt A. Polzin, Ashley K. Hallock, Kamesh Sankaran and Justin M. Little to 
be identified as author[/s] of this work has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 
and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in 
any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter 
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or re-
trieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access 
www.copyright.com or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For works that are not available 
on CCC please contact mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trade-
marks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN: 978-0-367-34900-4 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-37410-9 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-0-429-35197-6 (ebk)
DOI: 10.1201/9780429351976
Publisher’s note: This book has been prepared from camera-ready copy provided by 
the authors.
Typeset in Computer Modern 
by KnowledgeWorks Global Ltd.	

Contents
Author Biographies
ix
Acknowledgments
xi
Chapter 1 ■Introduction
1
1.1
TAXONOMY OF INDUCTIVE-COUPLED
ACCELERATORS
2
1.2
DOMAIN OF THE PRESENT WORK
8
1.3
APPLICABILITY OF THE MODELING
TECHNIQUE
9
Chapter 2 ■Fundamental Concepts for Inductively-
Coupled Pulsed Acceleration
11
2.1
RESISTANCE
11
2.2
CAPACITANCE AND STORED ELECTRI-
CAL ENERGY
12
2.3
INDUCTANCE AND MAGNETIC FIELD
ENERGY
12
2.4
VIRTUAL WORK AND ELECTROMAG-
NETIC FORCES
14
2.5
PERFORMANCE METRIC DEFINITIONS
15
v

vi
■Contents
Chapter 3 ■Electrical Circuits
17
3.1
GENERAL ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS FOR
INDUCTIVELY-COUPLED PULSED
ACCELERATORS
19
3.2
CALCULATING SELF AND MUTUAL
INDUCTANCE
23
3.2.1
One Coil, One Body Mutual
Inductance
26
3.2.1.1
Additional Simpliﬁcations
29
3.2.1.2
Example:
Comparison
of
Methods to Find Mutual
Inductance
31
3.2.2
Inductance of Radially-Compressed
Bodies
34
3.2.3
Numerical Eﬀorts of Note
34
Chapter 4 ■Equations of Motion
37
4.1
CONSERVATION EQUATIONS
37
4.1.1
Mass Conservation
38
4.1.2
Momentum Conservation
42
4.1.2.1
Solid Bodies
42
4.1.2.2
Plasmas
43
4.1.3
Energy Conservation
45
4.1.3.1
Solid Bodies
46
4.1.3.2
Plasmas
47
4.1.3.3
Additional Notes
50
4.2
MASS DISTRIBUTION AND
ENTRAINMENT
51
4.2.1
Slug Mass
51
4.2.2
Constant Mass Distribution
52
4.2.3
Linear Mass Distribution
52

Contents
■vii
4.3
TRANSITION FROM RADIAL TO AXIAL
MOTION
52
Chapter 5 ■Internal Models
59
5.1
LUMPED-CIRCUIT METHOD
59
5.1.1
Instabilities
61
5.1.2
Skin Eﬀect
63
5.2
STATE OF MATTER
64
5.2.1
Metallic Solids
64
5.2.2
Plasmas
65
5.3
EQUATIONS-OF-STATE AND CLOSURE
66
Chapter 6 ■Illustrative Results
69
6.1
SETS OF MODELING EQUATIONS
69
6.1.1
Solid Non-Collapsing Projectile
69
6.1.2
Axially-Accelerating Plasma
70
6.1.2.1
Simpliﬁcations of Section
3.2.1.1
71
6.1.3
Conical Theta-Pinch Plasma
72
6.1.4
Plasmoid Accelerator
73
6.2
SELECT RESULTS AND EXAMPLES
74
6.2.1
Comparison of Models from Section
6.1.2
74
6.2.2
Coilguns
76
6.2.3
Axial
Inductively-Coupled
Planar
Accelerators
78
6.2.3.1
Nondimensional Analysis
78
6.2.3.2
Comparison with Data
80
6.2.4
Conical Theta-Pinch Plasma
Accelerators
82

viii
■Contents
Chapter 7 ■Concluding Remarks
85
Bibliography
87
Index
91

Author Biographies
Kurt A. Polzin is Chief Engineer for Space Nuclear Propul-
sion at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center. He received
his Ph.D. in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering from
Princeton University in 2006. Dr. Polzin specializes in elec-
tric thrusters and space nuclear power and propulsion sys-
tems. He is a Senior Member of the Institute for Electrical
and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) and an Associate Fellow
of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
(AIAA).
Ashley K. Hallock is the Electric Propulsion Subsystems
Lead Engineer at OHB Sweden, working with teams to de-
velop electric and chemical propulsion subsystems for a wide
range of satellites. She received her Ph.D. in Mechanical and
Aerospace Engineering from Princeton University in 2012. Dr.
Hallock is a Senior Member of the American Institute of Aero-
nautics and Astronautics (AIAA) and serves on the Nuclear
& Future Flight Propulsion and Plasmadynamics & Lasers
Technical Committees.
Kamesh Sankaran is a Professor of Engineering & Physics
at Whitworth University. He received his Ph.D. in Mechan-
ical and Aerospace Engineering from Princeton University
in 2005. Prof. Sankaran has been on the faculty at Whit-
worth since 2004, where he specializes in spacecraft propul-
sion, plasma physics, computational physics, shock physics,
and public policy in science and technology. He is a Senior
Member of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astro-
nautics (AIAA).
ix

x
■Author Biographies
Justin M. Little is an Assistant Professor of Aeronautics &
Astronautics at the University of Washington. He received his
Ph.D. in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering from Prince-
ton University in 2014. His research interests focus on novel
electric propulsion concepts with applications to space ex-
ploration, telecommunications, and low-cost small satellites.
Prof. Little is a recipient of an AFOSR Young Investigator
Award and serves on the American Institute of Aeronau-
tics and Astronautics (AIAA) Electric Propulsion Technical
Committee.

Acknowledgments
The ideas presented in this monograph were years in the
making, and over that time the authors have beneﬁted from
numerous conversations with many colleagues. The authors
were extremely fortunate that they had the opportunity to
gain insights through discussions with luminaries of the ﬁeld,
the late Profs. Ralph Lovberg and Robert Jahn. The authors
have also beneﬁted from many extremely helpful conversa-
tions on this topic over the years with Dr. Adam Martin, Dr.
Michael LaPointe, Mr. J. Boise Pearson, Dr. David Kirtley,
Prof. Pavlos Mikellides, and Prof. Edgar Choueiri.
The authors would like to thank Mr. Curtis Promislow for
his aid in the generation of Fig. 4.1 and for capturing the
photograph on the cover of this monograph.
xi

Taylor & Francis 
Taylor & Francis Group 
http://taylorandfrancis.com 

C H A P T E R 1
Introduction
D
evices and machines that couple with and accelerate
objects through a magnetic ﬁeld have become ubiqui-
tous in our lives over the last century. Examples can be found
in a wide variety of applications, from everyday electric induc-
tion motors to high-tech maglev trains, from in-space plasma
thrusters to pumps for conducting ﬂuids, from particle accel-
erators to fusion reaction drivers.
In this monograph, we describe a modeling technique
and how it applies to speciﬁc types of accelerators that are
inductively-coupled to conducting media, driving currents
in the media through the application of time-varying mag-
netic ﬁelds. This interaction is governed by a combination of
Ampère’s law and Faraday’s law,
∇× B = µj,
(1.1a)
∇× E = −∂B
∂t ,
(1.1b)
where B and E are the magnetic and electric ﬁeld vectors,
respectively, j is the current density, and µ is the magnetic
permeability. Ampère’s law describes how electrical current
produces a magnetic ﬁeld. If the current is time-varying, it
will produce a time-varying magnetic ﬁeld that, in turn, pro-
duces an electric ﬁeld in accordance with Faraday’s law. The
electric ﬁeld induces a current in the body to be accelerated,
DOI: 10.1201/9780429351976-1
1

2
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
which subsequently interacts with the magnetic ﬁeld to yield
a j × B Lorentz body force that performs electromagnetic
work.
Inductively-coupled accelerators, while sharing many sim-
ilarities with directly-coupled accelerators, such as railguns or
pulsed plasma thrusters, are diﬀerent in distinct ways. While
the moving media complete the circuit in directly-coupled
accelerators, the external drive circuit in an inductive ac-
celerator is completed independent of the moving, acceler-
ated body. As such, current in the external drive circuit of
an inductive accelerator can ﬂow without any moving media
present. In addition, the current in the directly-coupled cir-
cuit is in line with and driven by the external power source,
while the current in the moving inductively-coupled media is
driven by time-varying ﬁelds in the manner described above.
This makes time variation of the current in the external drive
circuit necessary and essential to the inductively-coupled ac-
celeration process. Finally, if current in the external circuit is
ﬂowing without a movable, conducting media present, then
the energy driven in the external circuit will simply be resis-
tively dissipated without performing any useful work.
1.1
TAXONOMY OF INDUCTIVE-COUPLED
ACCELERATORS
The time-varying ﬁelds found in inductively-coupled acceler-
ators can be produced by one of two general means. While
there are variations and specializations on both, the typi-
cal means of production are either with a pulsed circuit or
through the application of a sinusoidal alternating current
(AC). A taxonomy of inductively-coupled accelerators and
how they subdivide into each mode of ﬁeld production is given
in Fig. 1.1.
The present monograph focuses on circuit modeling of the
pulsed accelerators enclosed in the dashed box. While there
are numerous electrical means to produce a fast current pulse
in the external driving circuit, the easiest means is to rapidly

Introduction
■3
Figure 1.1 Taxonomy of inductively-coupled accelerators with
the subject of this monograph in the dashed box.
discharge a capacitor through an inductive element, such as a
winding or coil, producing a time-varying ﬁeld that interacts
with the accelerated medium. The medium being accelerated
may be either a plasma or a conducting solid (though one
could envision instances where a conducting liquid could re-
place the solid, or where the material will begin as a solid
or liquid, and upon the application of a great current the
material melts, vaporizes, and ionizes to yield a conducting
gas).
Inductive pulsed plasma accelerators [1] are typically cat-
egorized by the nature of their magnetic ﬂux lines. While
all magnetic ﬂux lines close on themselves, the term “open”
magnetic ﬂux in this case refers to a conﬁguration where the
currents in the external driving circuit coil and the plasma

4
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
Figure 1.2 Schematics showing the basic operation of an open
magnetic ﬂux: a) axially-accelerating plasma sheet and b)
two-dimensional conical theta pinch accelerator, where the
Lorentz body force f arises from the interaction between the
azimuthal plasma current density j = −jpˆθ and the magnetic
ﬁeld, which generally has radial and axial components B =
Brˆr + Bzˆz (from [1]; licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license).
produce a concentrated axisymmetric r-z magnetic ﬁeld sand-
wiched between the two currents. This can be accomplished
either in the planar conﬁguration shown in Fig. 1.2a, pro-
ducing an axially-accelerating plasma sheet, or in the coni-
cal theta-pinch conﬁguration shown in Fig. 1.2b, yielding a
plasma sheet that is accelerated both in the radially-inward
and axial directions. In contrast to either of those devices, the
plasma in a third design permutation known as the theta-
pinch is inductively squeezed in a pure radially-inward di-
rection. In any of these conﬁgurations the concentrated ﬁeld
lines in the r-z plane, once leaving the space between the
external coil and the plasma, expand to ﬁll space until they
reconnect to themselves on the other side of the external coil
as illustrated in Fig.1.3.
In “closed” magnetic ﬂux accelerators, the induced current
produces a closed magnetic ﬁeld structure that is embedded

Introduction
■5
Figure 1.3 Calculated magnetic ﬂux contours for a coil with
six two-turn leads in parallel, a cone angle of 60◦, and a
plasma thickness of 1 cm (from [1]; licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution (CC BY) license).
in the plasma. These combined magnetic ﬁeld-plasma struc-
tures, known as plasmoids or compact toroids, isolate the
plasma from its surroundings and aid in plasma cohesion and
shape retention while under acceleration. Compact toroids
generally fall into two categories, as illustrated in Fig. 1.4:
spheromaks possessing both poloidal and toroidal magnetic
ﬁelds, and ﬁeld-reversed conﬁgurations (FRC) having only
poloidal ﬁelds.
The accelerated mass in an inductively-coupled acceler-
ator need not be a plasma. There are many other solids
(and liquids and gases) that will support currents induced
by an externally-applied time-varying magnetic ﬁeld. Solid
conducting bodies, for example, typically possess electrical

6
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
Figure 1.4 Schematic illustrations of conical coil sets contain-
ing a) a spheromak plasma and b) a ﬁeld-reversed conﬁgu-
ration (FRC) plasma, showing the directional sense of the
current in the coils, the azimuthal plasma current jp, and
poloidal magnetic ﬁeld Bpol, the magnetic ﬁeld external to
the plasma Bext, and the toroidal magnetic ﬁeld Btor in the
spheromak conﬁguration (from [1]; licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution (CC BY) license).
conductivity values that are several orders of magnitude
greater than a plasma; and beyond the skin depth, the in-
duced currents are extremely eﬀective at excluding the mag-
netic ﬁeld from the bulk of the material. The coilgun, shown
schematically in Fig. 1.5, involves an inductively-coupled pro-
jectile (sometimes called a macro-particle or macron) that is
axially accelerated as the magnetic ﬁeld preferentially col-
lapses radially-inward behind it. In the case of an imploding
liner, an initially-solid liner is forced to collapse radially in-
ward. This is accomplished either through the application of
electromagnetic forces or through the melting/vaporization
of the material. The solid accelerators are distinct from the
plasma accelerators in that the material structure of the for-
mer either maintains its shape (as in the case of a coilgun)
or must be overcome to radially implode the conductor (as in
the case of liners).

Introduction
■7
Figure 1.5 Schematic illustration of a multi-stage coilgun ac-
celerator.
The class of accelerators that establish a continuous-wave
(CW) or travelling wave magnetic ﬁeld structure to impart
momentum to conducting or magnetically-permeable bodies
is beyond the scope of this monograph, but for the sake of
completeness we take a moment here to describe their opera-
tion. CW/travelling wave systems are fundamentally diﬀerent
in operation relative to pulsed systems because of the typi-
cal timescales involved, with changes in the magnetic ﬁeld
of pulsed systems often occurring orders of magnitude more
rapidly. This disparity of timescales allows a greater degree
of magnetic ﬁeld diﬀusion into the accelerated medium in
CW/travelling wave systems. These systems typically pos-
sess one or more sets of coils that are driven by a sinu-
soidal AC current waveform (or several current waveforms
oﬀset in phase by some fraction of 2π radians). The magnetic
ﬁeld vector rotates about an axis or translates linearly down-
stream as the successive coils are sequentially energized and
de-energized, inducing currents in the conducting medium.
This process has been used to form and accelerate compact
toroid/FRC plasma structures. The process described is also

8
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
the basis for all heavy electric motors, and the inverse pro-
cess is representative of how an electrical power generator
operates. Induced currents in travelling wave systems can be
conﬁgured to continuously accelerate or pump a conducting
medium, as found in maglev trains, liquid metal pumps, and
various plasma accelerators. In all instances, the currents in
the medium interact with the magnetic ﬁeld to produce or
sustain motion.
1.2
DOMAIN OF THE PRESENT WORK
While the types of accelerators discussed and modeled
in this text are pulsed, inductively coupled units, there
are several other means to electromagnetically accelerate a
medium through its interaction with a time-varying magnetic
ﬁeld that are beyond the scope of the present work. The
CW/travelling wave accelerators, listed in the inductively-
coupled accelerator taxonomy and brieﬂy described above,
have an operating mode and commensurate analysis that are
fundamentally diﬀerent from the pulsed accelerators. Also
not covered in this text are pulsed directly-coupled acceler-
ators, including devices such as railguns and pulsed plasma
thrusters. Despite some similarities in the models, directly-
coupled and inductively-coupled accelerators have a funda-
mental diﬀerence. In the former the moving body (armature)
completes the primary circuit, while in the latter the external
circuit is completed irrespective of the presence of the moving
body, which can only couple to the external circuit through
the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld. Though we will not dis-
cuss magnetic nozzles explicitly, they can be analyzed within
the modeling framework when deployed in conjunction with
an inductively-coupled accelerator. Finally, there are devices
that use magnetic ﬁelds (both steady-state or time-varying)
to direct energy into a body or a ﬂow but where the accel-
eration mechanism does not arise due to an electromagnetic
Lorentz force. Examples of these include applications employ-
ing radio-frequency or microwave power deposition, magnetic

Introduction
■9
nozzles, or acceleration through a double-layer or pondero-
motive force.
1.3
APPLICABILITY OF THE MODELING
TECHNIQUE
A lumped-element circuit model coupled to the momen-
tum equation is used in this monograph to calculate the
time-history of the current ﬂowing in the various electrical
circuits and the resulting motion of the accelerated body.
Axisymmetry is assumed in the calculation of the one- or
two-dimensional motion of the body in the r-z plane. The
body itself is treated as a single element modeled in a La-
grangian reference frame. The physical and electrical connec-
tion between the moving body and any external circuits are
described by the mutual inductance between the various in-
ductive circuit elements.
It should be understood that while the modeling tech-
nique described in this monograph can be tailored to rep-
resent relatively sophisticated systems, it still assumes that
the body is a single highly-conductive element moving in
one- or two-dimensions in the r-z plane, and that the cir-
cuit elements can all be represented using lumped-element
equivalent models. The model is not intended to capture all
the phenomena that might be observed using more detailed
two- or three-dimensional ﬂuid or particle-in-cell (PIC) tech-
niques techniques. The simplicity of the model allows rela-
tively straightforward application to a wide variety of pulsed
inductively-coupled accelerators, facilitating interpretation of
trends in experimental data and the derivation of useful per-
formance scaling relations.The present work discusses the use
of the model in various situations, but it is noted that there
are only a handful of instances where suﬃcient data exist to
permit a discussion related to validation of the modeling tech-
niques. The only type of accelerator for which a large enough
data set exists to permit broad-based comparisons with

10
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
modeling results is the open magnetic ﬂux axially-accelerating
plasma sheet [2]. For this application, the model has exhib-
ited remarkable success in capturing performance scaling as
a function of controllable parameters, quantitatively match-
ing performance data, and uncovering insights that align with
those observed using more sophisticated modeling methods.
There has been some eﬀort on modeling acceleration
in conical theta pinch two-dimensional plasma accelerators
[3, 4]. For this application, there is minimal data for quanti-
tative high-ﬁdelity comparisons. The trends captured by the
model appear to qualitatively match the available data and
capture some of the same general trends, but there are still
signiﬁcant knowledge gaps that prevent more global valida-
tion of the modeling techniques for two-dimensional accel-
erators. A quantitative comparison to existing data is fur-
ther complicated by the fact that in experiments the plasma
may have only been partly ionized, violating the “highly-
conductive” assumption and allowing for excessive diﬀusion
of the magnetic ﬁeld through the plasma without performing
appreciable magnetic acceleration.
There has been signiﬁcant discussion on use of the
lumped-element modeling techniques for coilguns [5, 6], and
to a lesser extent various compact toroids and rotating mag-
netic ﬁeld conﬁgurations with and without applied static
background magnetic ﬁelds [7, 8, 9]. However, for these cases
experimental data that would permit modeling comparisons
are limited and validation of the modeling techniques for
these conﬁgurations remains an open area of research.

C H A P T E R 2
Fundamental
Concepts for
Inductively-Coupled
Pulsed Acceleration
P
rior to discussing the modeling techniques that are the
subject of this monograph, we ﬁrst introduce a number
of terms that will be useful in developing an understanding
of inductively-coupled pulsed accelerators. The remainder of
this chapter is dedicated to introducing and deﬁning funda-
mental terms and concepts that will arise in this text.
2.1
RESISTANCE
Electrical resistance R is probably the most familiar term in
circuit analysis. It is an intrinsic property of an object (or
more generally, a conduction pathway) that relates the elec-
trical potential or voltage V required to drive a particular
value of current I through the object (or pathway). A con-
ductor with a greater resistance will require a greater po-
tential to drive the same level of current through it. The
DOI: 10.1201/9780429351976-2
11

12
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
relationship between voltage, current, and resistance is given
by the simple and familiar equation
V = IR.
(2.1)
2.2
CAPACITANCE AND STORED ELECTRICAL
ENERGY
In the context of inductively-coupled pulsed accelerators,
electrical energy is typically stored in a capacitor charged
to high voltage. Equal and opposite amounts of charge are
located on the two conducting plates of the capacitor, with
electrical energy stored in the electric ﬁeld between the plates.
The capacitance C is an intrinsic property of the capacitor
that quantiﬁes the ability to store electrical energy within
the electric ﬁeld between the plates. It is a function of the
area of the plates, their separation distance, and the electri-
cal permittivity of the separating material. For a capacitor,
the stored energy is proportional to the capacitance and the
square of the voltage V0 between the two sides, and is written
as
EC = 1
2CV 2
0 ,
(2.2)
where EC is the stored energy. In the course of designing an
inductively-coupled pulsed accelerator, both C and V0 can
be varied. However, the values of these parameters aﬀect the
dynamics of the current pulse, which can in turn impact the
performance of the accelerator.
2.3
INDUCTANCE AND MAGNETIC FIELD
ENERGY
Inductance L is a property of any current-carrying material
that is solely related to the geometry of the path followed by
the current ﬂowing through the material and the magnetic
permeability of the space surrounding the material. As dis-
cussed in the previous chapter, ﬂowing currents will produce

Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Acceleration
■13
magnetic ﬁelds in the manner prescribed by Ampère’s law in
Eq. (1.1a). The amount of energy stored in the magnetic ﬁeld
EM owing to a current ﬂowing through an isolated conductor
is directly related to the self-inductance of the conductor L
and the square of the ﬂowing current. This “self” magnetic
ﬁeld energy is written as
EM self = 1
2LI2.
(2.3)
If there are multiple independent conductors, each will have
a self-inductance and associated “self” magnetic ﬁeld energy.
When multiple current loops have current ﬂowing in them at
the same time, the magnetic vector ﬁelds for each conductor
combine according to the principle of linear superposition,
giving rise to an additional magnetic ﬁeld energy compo-
nent associated with the pairwise mutual interaction be-
tween the conductors. This “mutual” magnetic ﬁeld energy is
written as
EM mutual = M12I1I2,
(2.4)
where M12 is the mutual inductance between conductors 1
and 2 (M12 = M21) and I1 and I2 are the respective currents
in each conductor.
Another way to think about inductance is in relation to
the level of magnetic ﬂux produced when current ﬂows
through the conductor. The magnetic ﬂux is the integral
of the magnetic ﬁeld perpendicular to the surface bounded
by the conducting path, and it can be written as
Φ =
Z
S
B · dS.
(2.5)
The inductance can then be deﬁned as in terms of the mag-
netic ﬂux as
L = Φ
I .
(2.6)
Changes in current will give rise to an electric ﬁeld
through Faraday’s law given in Eq. (1.1b), which will

14
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
produce an electromotive force in the conductor manifesting
as an additional voltage that opposes the change in current.
This inductive voltage VL can be written in terms of the self-
inductance and the rate of change of the current as
VL(t) = LdI
dt .
(2.7)
The mutual inductance quantiﬁes the reaction of an indepen-
dent current path (loop 1) to a time varying magnetic ﬂux
appearing inside loop 1 but created by a separate current
path (loop 2). This gives rise to an inductive voltage VM in
loop 1 that is a function of the mutual inductance and the
rate of change of the current in loop 2, and can be written as
(VM)1 (t) = M12
dI2
dt .
(2.8)
This response is the basis for transformers and other systems
where the responses of two conductors are coupled through a
time-varying magnetic ﬁeld.
2.4
VIRTUAL WORK AND ELECTROMAGNETIC
FORCES
Using the deﬁnitions of the magnetic ﬁeld energy written in
the previous section, we can employ the principle of virtual
work to connect the changing magnetic ﬁeld energy as a func-
tion of conductor motion to the axial and radial Lorentz body
forces on the conductor. Assume there are two conductors
(1 and 2) and conductor 2 can move in space, capable of
translation in z and variation of its radius r. The magnetic
ﬁeld energy of the system is
UB
=
(EM self)1 + (EM self)2 + (EM mutual)12,
=
1
2L1I2
1 + 1
2L2I2
2 + M12I1I2.
(2.9)

Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Acceleration
■15
For a diﬀerential displacement of conductor 2 in the r or z
direction, the corresponding diﬀerential change in the mag-
netic ﬁeld energy is
δUB =
1
2
∂L2
∂r I2
2 + ∂M12
∂r I1I2

δr + ∂M12
∂z I1I2δz.
(2.10)
By deﬁnition, a force applied in the direction of an in-
ﬁnitesimal displacement δx will perform work to change the
energy of the system as δU = Fx δx. Applying this relation
to Eq. (2.10) results in axial and radial Lorentz forces given
as
Fz
=
∂M12
∂z I1I2,
Fr
=
1
2
∂L2
∂r I2
2 + ∂M12
∂r I1I2.
(2.11)
2.5
PERFORMANCE METRIC DEFINITIONS
In any electrical accelerator, performance can be quantiﬁed
through a measure of the maximum velocity attained by the
body being accelerated and the eﬃciency of the process by
which the body arrived at that velocity. For any pulsed de-
vice, we can deﬁne a speciﬁc impulse (thrust per unit weight
ﬂow of ejected material) based upon the maximum achieved
exit velocity ue. Normally the exhaust velocity will be the
z-component of the velocity uz, as this value in an axisym-
metric system is tied to the amount of momentum transferred
during a pulse. This can also be set equal to a ratio contain-
ing the impulse bit Ibit or impulse per pulse and the mass bit
mbit or mass expended or ejected per pulse. Using customary
deﬁnitions, the speciﬁc impulse Isp can be written as
Isp = ue
g0
=
Ibit
mbitg0
,
(2.12)
where g0 is the gravitational acceleration constant for Earth.

16
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
The eﬃciency, deﬁned as the ratio of the ultimate kinetic
energy attained by the accelerated body divided by the ini-
tially stored electrical energy E0 or discharge energy per pulse
is written as
η = mbitu2
e
2E0
=
I2
bit
2mbitE0
.
(2.13)

C H A P T E R 3
Electrical Circuits
W
hen
applying
circuit
modeling
techniques
to
inductively-coupled pulsed accelerators it is important
to create an accurate representation of the accelerator as a
network of individual circuit elements, and to capture not
only the behavior of each individual circuit element but also
the manner in which those elements interact with each other
through the electromagnetic ﬁeld. The interaction can ap-
pear complex to model, since multiple individual circuits can
simultaneously interact with each other. This is in addition
to the fact that the motion of the accelerated body through
space always gives rise to a time-varying inductive element in
the formulation.
To introduce the manner in which such circuits can
be modeled, we initially consider the very simple resistive-
inductive-capacitive (RLC) circuit shown in Fig. 3.1. Ap-
plying Kirchoﬀ’s voltage law to the circuit and including a
statement for the conservation of charge on the capacitor, we
can write
d
dt (IL) + RI −VC = 0
(3.1a)
dVC
dt
= −I
C
(3.1b)
where I is the current in the circuit, L is the inductance, R
is the resistance, and VC is the time-varying voltage on a
DOI: 10.1201/9780429351976-3
17

18
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
capacitor with capacitance C. If L is constant, these
equations can be combined and reduced to a single second-
order ordinary diﬀerential equation for the current ﬂowing
through the system. The solution to this equation mirrors
the damped sinusoidal response of an oscillating spring-mass-
damper system, where energy is resistively dissipated as it os-
cillates between the capacitive (electric ﬁeld potential energy
storage) and inductive (magnetic ﬁeld potential energy stor-
age) elements. Most importantly, no useful work is performed
in this type of circuit where L is constant.
Figure 3.1 Circuit topology for a simple RLC circuit.
For the case where L is time-varying, Eq. (3.1a) can be
rearranged and multiplied by the current, resulting in an
equation stating how power delivered by the capacitor is sub-
divided between the resistive and inductive elements of the
circuit:
P = VCI = I2R + LI dI
dt + I2 dL
dt .
(3.2)
This can also be recast as
P = VCI = I2R + d
dt
LI2
2

+ I2
2
dL
dt ,
(3.3)
where the ﬁrst two terms on the right-hand side are com-
monly recognized as the resistive power dissipation and the
time rate of change of the energy stored in the inductor,

Electrical Circuits
■19
respectively. The third term represents the electromagnetic
work performed on the moving conductor, showing how the
time-varying inductance associated with the moving, accel-
erated body is critical in converting stored electrical energy
into useful work.
3.1
GENERAL ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS FOR
INDUCTIVELY-COUPLED PULSED
ACCELERATORS
Having introduced the idea that a time-varying inductive el-
ement is required to perform work in an RLC circuit, we
proceed with the modeling of a general pulsed accelerator
consisting of multiple independent external circuits that all
couple inductively to one another and to a moving conduc-
tor. The interacting circuits can be considered as axisymmet-
ric coils of wire while the moving body is an axisymmetric
conducting medium of any type that supports the ﬂow of an
azimuthal current. We assume that at a given time, current
ﬂows in coils l through m. The coils outside of this range
are assumed to be open circuits with inﬁnite impedance that,
consequently, do not interact with any conductors considered
in the problem. The terms l and m are used, as opposed to
1 through m, because at some point during the acceleration
event rapid turn-oﬀswitches or blocking diodes may be used
to interrupt the current ﬂow in some of the coils. In addition,
switches may be activated some time after t = 0, allowing cur-
rent to ﬂow in additional coils as their eﬀects are added to the
overall system. We recognize that as the coils are switched on
and oﬀ, the active coils may not necessarily be sequential in
number (for example, the active coils may be numbers 3, 4, 7,
and 9). The notation adopted is only to make the mathemati-
cal representation easier and more compact to write and is in
no way intended to exclude non-sequential coil combinations
from simultaneous operation.
Figure 3.2a shows a general lumped-element circuit rep-
resentation of the i-th external coil circuit (for l ≤i ≤m),

20
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
while the corresponding circuit representation of the moving
conductive body p is shown in Fig. 3.2b. The current arrows
indicate the direction of positive current ﬂow. This is done so
azimuthally ﬂowing currents in diﬀerent conductors will al-
ways have the same sign when moving in the same direction
in physical space.
Figure 3.2 a) General circuit schematic for interactions be-
tween the i-th external circuit, the moving body p, and all
other active external circuits. b) Circuit schematic showing
the interactions between the moving body p and all active,
external circuits.
The i-th external circuit is powered by a discharging ca-
pacitor having a time-varying voltage VCi. The circuit is
modeled as having a lumped element resistance Rei and a
self-inductance comprised of the circuit stray inductance L0i

Electrical Circuits
■21
and the inductance of the coil LCi. The circuit interacts with
the moving conductive body through the mutual inductance
Mip, which is a function of the relative positions of the two
conductors and varies in time due to the motion of the body.
It also interacts with the j-th external circuit through a mu-
tual inductance Mij, which is ﬁxed for the given geometry. It
is relatively straightforward to apply Kirchoﬀ’s voltage law
to the i-th circuit to compactly write its circuit equation and
a statement for the conservation of charge on the capacitor
as
VCi = ReiIi+(L0i + LCi) dIi
dt + d
dt (MipIp)+
m
X
j=l
j̸=i
Mij
dIj
dt , (3.4a)
dVCi
dt
= −Ii
Ci
. (3.4b)
The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of Eq. (3.4a) is the
resistive dissipation in the circuit, while the second term com-
bines the eﬀects of the stray and self-inductance of the i-th
circuit. The third term represents the interaction between the
i-th circuit and the moving body p while the ﬁnal term is a
summation of the interactions due to mutual inductance be-
tween the i-th circuit and all the other external circuits.
In addition to equations for all the external circuits, we
also require one to govern the ﬂow of current in the mov-
ing conductive body. Applying Kirchoﬀ’s voltage law, we can
write this equation as
RpIp + d
dt (LpIp) +
m
X
k=l
d
dt (MkpIk) = 0,
(3.5)
where the ﬁrst term represents resistive dissipation, the sec-
ond term represents the eﬀects of self-inductance, and the
ﬁnal term is the summation of the interactions due to mutual
inductance between the moving conductive body and all the
active external circuits. As with Eq. (3.3), it is essential to
understand how the time-varying self and mutual inductance
terms evolve since they are intimately connected to the level
of electromagnetic work performed on the moving body.

22
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
In this monograph, we assume that the conductors can be
represented by their lumped-element circuit values. The self
and mutual inductance terms in Eqs. (3.4a) and (3.5) are a
function of the geometry of the problem. More speciﬁcally,
these terms are a function of the distribution of current in
each conductor. Under the assumption of axisymmetry, the
self-inductance of the moving conductor can change as a func-
tion of time if the current path is compressed or expanded
in the radial direction. The mutual inductance between each
pairwise-interacting conductor is a function of the distribu-
tion of currents in each conductor and their relative positions.
For the interactions between the moving conductor and the
external circuits, it is important to recognize that the mutual
inductance between these circuits will vary as the conductor
moves in the axial and radial directions. The time deriva-
tives of the moving conductor self-inductance Lp(r) and the
mutual inductance Mkp(r, z) can be written as:
dLp
dt
=
∂Lp
∂r vr,
(3.6a)
dMkp
dt
=
∂Mkp
∂r
vr + ∂Mkp
∂z
vz,
(3.6b)
where vr is the radial rate of compression or expansion of the
moving body while vz is the axial velocity.1
While at least one external circuit must be time-varying
to induce a current in the moving body, it is interesting to
note that there will be electromagnetic interactions between
the body and the other external circuits even if the currents in
those external circuits are not time-varying. This interaction
1The inductance of the current path also changes as the current den-
sity conﬁguration changes (for example, as the current path widens in
the axial direction through resistive diﬀusion), but this variation is often
assumed to be small over the duration of an accelerating pulse. In this
monograph, the inductance as a function of current position and conﬁg-
uration is typically calculated a priori using a separate magnetic ﬁeld
solver. The introduction of a variable current density distribution, while
possible to include, adds to the computational diﬃculty of representing
the accelerating body as a lumped element.

Electrical Circuits
■23
arises from the time-varying mutual inductance term, which
will change according to Eq. (3.6b) due to the relative motion
between the moving body and each external circuit.
This text will primarily use Eqs. (3.4), which are written
for simple pulsed RLC circuits powered by discharging ca-
pacitors. However, it is possible to re-write and tailor this
set of equations to represent nearly any arbitrary current
source (DC, continuous-wave, programmable ramp, square-
wave, pulse-forming network, etc.) so long as the response
of that source to the time-varying impedance can be prop-
erly represented. Illustrations of some of these more complex
sources can be found in Refs. [1, 2] and the references therein.
The example of a constant DC current could be particularly
useful in instances where a coil of copper wire or supercon-
ducting material is used to generate an applied static mag-
netic ﬁeld, such as in the case of an applied DC magnetic bias
ﬁeld or magnetic nozzle. Another permutation not covered in
this text is the modeling of a system where there are mul-
tiple moving conductive bodies. This would necessitate the
addition of terms to Eq. (3.4a) to represent the interaction
between the i-th coil and these additional bodies, the inclu-
sion of additional instances of Eq. (3.5) to model the current
ﬂowing in those additional moving conductors, and the addi-
tion of terms in Eq. (3.5) to model the pairwise interactions
between moving conductors.
3.2
CALCULATING SELF AND MUTUAL
INDUCTANCE
Linear superposition of magnetic ﬁelds permits us to write
the overall magnetic ﬁeld conﬁguration for external circuits
l ≤j ≤m and moving conductor p as
B (r, z) =
m
X
j=l
Bj (r, z) + Bp (r, z) ,
(3.7)
where Bj is the magnetic ﬁeld arising from current ﬂowing in
the j-th external circuit and Bp is the magnetic ﬁeld produced

24
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
by the current in the moving body. As an illustrative example,
we can write the magnitude of the magnetic ﬁeld for a system
possessing three external circuits (l = 1, m = 3) as
|B|2
=
|B1|2 + |B2|2 + |B3|2 + |Bp|2
+
2B1 · B2 + 2B1 · B3 + 2B2 · B3
+
2B1 · Bp + 2B2 · Bp + 2B3 · Bp.
(3.8)
The commensurate magnetic ﬁeld energy associated with this
conﬁguration is
EM
=
L1I12
2
+ L2I22
2
+ L3I32
2
+ LpIp2
2
+
M12I1I2 + M13I1I3 + M23I2I3
+
M1pI1Ip + M2pI2Ip + M3pI3Ip.
(3.9)
The ﬁrst row of terms on the right-hand side of the
equation represents the magnetic ﬁeld energy contributions
owing to the self-inductance of each independent conductor,
while the second and third rows are the contributions owing
to the mutual inductance that arises through pairwise inter-
actions between independent conductors (note: Mxy = Myx).
The self-inductance terms can be measured or they can
be found using a ﬁnite element model to calculate the result-
ing magnetic ﬁeld that arises from current ﬂowing in each
conductor while in isolation. Using ﬁnite element analysis,
the magnetic ﬁeld energy (EM)j of the j-th conductor in iso-
lation is found by multiplying the magnetic energy density
εB = |B|2 / (2µ) of each cell by the cell volume and then
summing all contributions over the entire domain. The self-
inductance of the j-th conductor is then
Lj =
2 (EM)j
Ij2
.
(3.10)
The value of the magnetic ﬁeld linearly scales with the current
through Ampère’s law, so dividing by the square of current in
Eq. (3.10) removes from the self-inductance any dependence
on the current.

Electrical Circuits
■25
Once the self-inductance of each conducting element is
known, the mutual inductance terms can be determined for
each pairwise combination of conductors. Again using ﬁnite
element analysis, current is applied to the set of pairwise con-
ductors of interest and the magnetic ﬁeld energy is calculated
as before by summing the magnetic energy density contribu-
tions over the computational domain. For the example of el-
ements 1 and 2, this leads to a total magnetic ﬁeld energy
of
EM = L1I12
2
+ L2I22
2
+ M12I1I2.
(3.11)
The self-inductance values L1 and L2 were previously found
using Eq. (3.10) and the current values I1 and I2 are set by
the user, so this equation can be easily solved to ﬁnd the
value of M12. As noted in the previous section, the mutual
inductance is a function of the relative current distributions
in pairwise-interacting conductors, so the calculations must
be revisited if the geometry of the problem is altered. Also,
while the mutual inductance is ﬁxed for interactions between
external circuits, it varies for interactions between the indi-
vidual external circuits and the moving conductor. As such,
for a moving conductor the calculation must be performed
many times to assemble a tabulated set of mutual inductance
values as a function of conductor position. It is straightfor-
ward to use a table lookup method, interpolating values of
Mkp(r, z) and calculating the gradients in mutual inductance
using a ﬁnite diﬀerence method.
It should be noted that there are several assumptions
buried in the previous method of calculating inductance, and
it is not easy to calculate the “true” inductance for each ele-
ment in the system using simple magnetic ﬁeld ﬁnite element
solvers. The astute observer will note that the distribution
of current in one conductor will be aﬀected by the current
ﬂowing in every other conductor in the system. It can also be
aﬀected by the skin eﬀect in the various conductors, with the
current penetration depth in each conductor being a function
of the frequency of the current and the conductivity. Even if

26
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
the ﬁnite element solver being used allows the user to spec-
ify the current distributions in every conductor (as opposed
to the solver determining this for each isolated inductor and
pairwise-interacting set), the distribution is also aﬀected by
the position of the moving conductor in the system and the
relative magnitudes and frequencies of the currents in each
conductor, which are generally not known a priori. These fac-
tors will slightly alter the self and mutual inductance values.
While the form and magnitude of the calculated solution are
not greatly aﬀected, we shall show later in this monograph
that even small deviations in the inductance values owing to
variations in the current density distribution can lead to dif-
ferences in the computed current waveforms and the ultimate
velocity. The latter can vary in excess of 10% depending on
the assumed current distribution. Further reﬁnement of the
interactions between conductors and elimination of some of
the errors introduced by the assumptions in this section dip
into the realm of coupled 2- and 3-D analysis of the prob-
lem, moving away from the simpliﬁed but insightful lumped
element modeling framework that is the subject of this mono-
graph.
In instances where there is only one external coil and one
moving conductor, it is possible to make some additional
simplifying assumptions in writing the self and mutual in-
ductance terms. This adds an additional yet slight deviation
from the “true” values, but it further simpliﬁes the problem.
We proceed with a short discussion of how this has been done
in the past to simplify the problem.
3.2.1
One Coil, One Body Mutual Inductance
For a single external coil (1) coupled to a moving conduc-
tive body (p) with a circuit shown in Fig. 3.3a, the circuit

Electrical Circuits
■27
equations from Eqs. (3.4) and (3.5) are written as
VC1 = Re1I1 + (L01 + LC1) dI1
dt + d
dt (M1pIp),
(3.12a)
RpIp + d
dt (LpIp) + d
dt (M1pI1) = 0,
(3.12b)
dVC1
dt
= −I1
C1
.
(3.12c)
As before, the directions assumed for the currents are such
that in physical space currents moving in the same direction
will have the same sign.
Figure 3.3 a) General lumped-element circuit representation
and b) equivalent circuit for an inductively-coupled pulsed
accelerator consisting of a single external coil (1) coupled to
a moving conductive body (p).
We can redraw the circuit in the manner shown in Fig.
3.3b. If we assume the inductive reactance is much greater

28
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
than the plasma resistance, then we can combine the in-
ductive elements to the right of the dashed line to yield a
Thévenin-equivalent inductance Lth. This results in the fol-
lowing equation for the total inductance of the circuit (in-
cluding the stray inductance L01)
Ltot = L01 + Lth = L01 +
 
LC1 −
M2
1p
Lp
!
.
(3.13)
It is straightforward to isolate and measure the coil self-
inductance LC1 by connecting a meter that measures induc-
tance at the location of the dashed line in Fig. 3.3b. It is not
as simple to quantify the self-inductance of the moving body
Lp and if that body is collapsing inwardly, as one might ﬁnd
in the case illustrated in Fig. 1.2b, then the self-inductance
must be quantiﬁed as a function of the change in the radius of
the body (and that doesn’t account for the fact that the angle
between the conductor and the centerline may also change as
the body collapses). However, if that is known or can be deter-
mined, either through measurements or using ﬁnite element
magnetic ﬁeld modeling, then the mutual inductance M1p as
a function of body position can be found either through mea-
surement or modeling. Assuming that the size and shape of
the distributed current in the body is reasonably well known,
the mutual inductance can be measured by placing a simu-
lated body (a metallic sheet in the expected shape of current
distribution of the moving body) in proximity to the external
coil and then moving it in the axial direction to quantify the
functional relationship with z. Additional simulated bodies of
diﬀering radii can be used to quantify the functional relation-
ship with r. Doing this while using a meter again connected
at the dashed line, we can employ Eq. (3.13) to build a map
of M1p(r, z) at discrete points in the r-z plane.
Work by Martin et al. [10] showed good agreement be-
tween measurements of Lth and magnetic ﬁeld modeling of
a ﬂat, planar coil consisting of multiple axisymmetric rings
containing a time-varying current acting upon a annular disk

Electrical Circuits
■29
having a ﬁnite conductivity. Hallock [3], working with a con-
ical theta pinch geometry, showed that measurements of Lth
aligned well with magnetostatic ﬁeld simulations of the prob-
lem where the coil was again modeled as multiple axisym-
metric rings and the conductor was represented as a ﬁnite-
thickness edge of a frustum mirroring the coil angle and axial
length and having a zero magnetic ﬂux boundary condition.
Example comparisons between the experimentally measured
mutual inductance values and those found using modeling are
shown in Fig. 3.4 for a ﬂat, planar coil and a conical theta-
pinch coil. This method should capture with high precision
the inductance of a solid accelerated body that does not de-
form during the discharge. For a plasma, the method assumes
a particular shape and thickness of the current channel as a
function of position. Increasing deviations from the assumed
current channel conﬁguration will lead to similarly increas-
ing errors in the computed quantities. While this does not
invalidate the approach of this monograph, it does highlight
one of the limitations of the lumped-element approach, es-
pecially when performing quantitative comparisons between
experimental data and the results of the model.
3.2.1.1
Additional Simpliﬁcations
In work on axially-accelerating plasma sheets, Lovberg and
Dailey [11, 12] assumed that Lp was not a function of time (no
radial motion) and that it was equal to LC1. Several works
have been performed under this assumption, and it is useful
to determine how close the past models are to those that
use the more general formulation. Assuming LC1 = Lp, Eq.
(3.13) becomes
Ltot = L01 +
 
LC1 −M1p
2
LC1
!
,
(3.14)
where we have relabeled M1p as M1p to keep track of the fact
that the assumptions made could result in the values of the
the mutual inductance being diﬀerent from those found using

30
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
Figure 3.4 Measured and modeled proﬁles of Lth as a function
of axial separation for a) a ﬂat, planar coil and a conducting
body in the shape of an annular disk (after Ref. [10]); and
b) a conical theta pinch coil and a conducting surface in the
shape of a frustum having a half cone angle of 20◦, a height
in the axial direction of 50 mm, and minor radii rmin as in-
dicated in the ﬁgure (after Ref. [3]). The conical coil has the
same dimensions as the frustum with a ﬁxed minor radius of
39 mm.
the more general formulation. As in the previous discussion,
the terms in the parentheses again represent the Thévenin-
equivalent inductance Lth of the circuit. In this formulation,
it was further found that for the special case of an axially-
accelerating conductive sheet in an open magnetic ﬂux device,
measurements of the inductance represented by Eq. (3.14)
could be ﬁtted using the function
Ltot(z) = L01 + Lth|z=0 + LC1 [1 −exp (−z/z0)],
(3.15)
where z0 is the decoupling distance, which is a characteris-
tic length over which the moving conductor electromagnet-
ically decouples from the external coil. We denote the self-
inductance of the coil as LC1 because, unlike in the previous
formulations where the coil self-inductance was determined
through measurement or simulation of a coil in isolation, the
value here is determined using a curve ﬁt of the measured or

Electrical Circuits
■31
simulated inductance proﬁle. For the curve ﬁt to work prop-
erly, a constant Lth|z=0 was also included as a ﬁt parameter.
This is diﬀerent from the stray inductance in the circuit L01
and represents the inductance associated with the fact that
the coil and moving conductor are never perfectly coincident.
Setting Eq. (3.14) equal to Eq. (3.15) and solving for the
mutual inductance, we can write the function
M1p = LC1 exp (−z/ (2z0)).
(3.16)
Using this simpliﬁed method necessitates modiﬁcations of Eq.
(3.12) where L01 becomes L01 + Lth|z=0, LC1 goes to LC1,
and M1p is now M1p. Finally, using these substitutions in Eq.
(3.6b) allows us to obtain the function
d
 M1p

dt
= −LC1
2z0
exp (−z/ (2z0)) vz,
(3.17)
governing the time evolution of the mutual inductance.
3.2.1.2
Example: Comparison of Methods to Find Mutual
Inductance
As a means of comparing the mutual inductance values ob-
tained using the methods of Eqs. (3.11), (3.13), and (3.16),
we present results from a set of example magnetic ﬁeld simu-
lations. In this example, shown schematically in Fig. 3.5, the
coil consists of nine 2 mm diameter axisymmetric windings
connected in parallel. The center of each winding is given in
Table 3.1. A single-turn conducting sheet annulus was also
modeled, having an inner radius of 200 mm, and outer radius
of 500 mm, and a thickness of 2 mm. The current distri-
bution in the annular disk was assumed to vary with 1/r.
The axial position of the disk is taken as the z value of the
face closest to the coil. A magnetostatic solver was used for
all simulations, with the data produced for Eqs. (3.13) and
(3.16) calculated assuming the conducting disk boundary was
magnetically impermeable.

32
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
Figure 3.5 Schematic representation (not to scale) of the rela-
tive positions of the individual coil windings, for an example,
single planar external coil coupled to a moving conductive
body in the shape of an annular disk.
In isolation, the self-inductance of the coil was 908 nH
while that of the disk was 689 nH. The mutual inductance
values as a function of axial position calculated using Eqs.
(3.11), (3.13), and (3.16) are shown in Fig. 3.6. In addition,
the Thévenin-equivalent inductance Lth(z) of Eq. (3.13) is
also plotted in the ﬁgure. As previously noted, the value of
Lth|z=0 is not zero because the conducting paths have dif-
fering self-inductance values and there is a ﬁnite separation
distance between the paths when the disk is at z = 0. We
observe that the mutual inductance values calculated using
Eqs. (3.11) and (3.13) are nearly coincident, while there is a
slight growing oﬀset in the value calculated using Eq. (3.16)
at greater axial positions. We shall revisit this example later

Electrical Circuits
■33
Table 3.1 Coordinates for the coil windings in the planar ex-
ternal coil example of Fig. 3.5.
Coil Number
z [mm]
r [mm]
1
−6
202.5
2
−2.5
269.5
3
−9.5
269.5
4
−2.5
336.5
5
−9.5
336.5
6
−2.5
403.5
7
−9.5
403.5
8
−2.5
470.5
9
−9.5
470.5
Figure 3.6 Inductance proﬁles calculated using the equation
speciﬁed based upon magnetic ﬁeld simulations of a single
planar external coil coupled to a moving conductive body in
the shape of an annular disk.

34
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
in this monograph to compare the calculated acceleration pro-
ﬁles for each case.
3.2.2
Inductance of Radially-Compressed Bodies
The techniques to quantify the self and mutual inductance
of accelerated conductors as described in this section are
predicated on an assumption that we know the current distri-
butions within those conductors, their trajectories in space,
and how their shape may change with time. This is straight-
forward when the moving conductor is a solid body that main-
tains its shape and can only move in one dimension, or for
a conducting disk that is limited to acceleration in the ax-
ial direction. However, in the case of a compact toroid or a
collapsing plasma sheet, as one might ﬁnd in a conical theta
pinch, the situation is more complex. While there has been
some work performed on quantifying the self and mutual in-
ductance of radially-compressed plasmas [3, 13] and compact
toroids [7, 8], this method in general requires additional a
priori assumptions regarding the path the moving conductor
takes through space and the internal distribution of current
as it follows that path. It is certainly possible to do this, and
the results will likely be fruitful in that they will provide in-
sight into the acceleration process, but it should be noted
that for these more complex problems one should expect a
reduction in the absolute accuracy of the results owing to the
inherent shortcoming associated with reducing these complex
conducting bodies to lumped-element circuit values.
3.2.3
Numerical Eﬀorts of Note
Several approaches have been employed to estimate M(r, z)
on a discrete grid, and some are noteworthy for their distinc-
tiveness. Novac et al. [14] used a 2-D numerical model for the
magnetic ﬁeld and used the fraction of the current that ﬂows
on the surface to calculate the mutual inductance M(z) be-
tween a coil and a solid metallic projectile. Shoubao et al. [15]
improved the current ﬁlament method using a 3-D grid-based

Electrical Circuits
■35
calculation to predict the performance of a coilgun. Using a
2-D ﬁnite element model with AC magnetics and assuming
a uniform current density in a plasma, Martin [4] calculated
the eﬀective inductance of the system and the self-inductance
of an accelerated load and subsequently used those values to
calculate M(r, z) on a discrete r-z grid for conical plasma
accelerators possessing speciﬁc values of the conical coil an-
gle, θ. Using a ﬁlamentary model of current in the coils and
the accelerated load, and using Green’s functions to estimate
the interaction between ﬁlaments, Shimazu and Slough [16]
numerically calculated M(r, z) of a FRC plasmoid. Alterna-
tively, Woods et al. [8] sought to bridge empirical and numer-
ical approaches by developing coupled time-dependent ordi-
nary diﬀerential equations to calibrate a mutual inductance
model in terms of non-dimensional scaling parameters.

Taylor & Francis 
Taylor & Francis Group 
http://taylorandfrancis.com 

C H A P T E R 4
Equations of Motion
T
he equations of motion in the model are a description of
mass, momentum, and energy conservation in the accel-
erated conducting body, tailored to be compatible with and
coupled to the electrical circuit equations found in Chapter
3. These equations can be written to model either one- or
two-dimensional acceleration in the r-z plane. We proceed
with a description of the tailoring process that permits us to
reduce the mass, momentum, and energy conservation equa-
tions to the point where they describe the time-evolution of
these quantities for an accelerated body represented by an
equivalent lumped-element. The resulting equations include
representation of the inductive electromagnetic acceleration
forces on the accelerated body that arise through pairwise
interactions with an indeﬁnite number of external circuits
carrying either time-varying or steady-state currents.
4.1
CONSERVATION EQUATIONS
In this section, we write the general conservation equations
governing the evolution of the mass, momentum, and energy
in the accelerated body in diﬀerential form. We then inte-
grate over the volume of the body, collapsing it to a single
ﬁnite element moving in the r-z plane with volume-averaged,
lumped-element properties.
DOI: 10.1201/9780429351976-4
37

38
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
4.1.1
Mass Conservation
For solid moving conductors (such as macron projectiles or
collapsing liners), mass is conserved by simply holding it con-
stant. The problem is more complex for the situations illus-
trated in Fig. 4.1 where a moving plasma encounters and
potentially entrains gas (via ionizing or charge exchange col-
lisions), which in turn adds to the overall mass of the plasma
over time.
In diﬀerential form, the evolution of the mass density of
the plasma can be written using the (source-free) continuity
equation:
∂ρ
∂t + ∇· (ρv) = 0,
(4.1)
where the mass density ρ is in general a function of r and z
and v is the velocity vector. The ﬁrst term on the left-hand
side accounts for a change in the mass density in the control
volume under consideration while the second term on the left
represents a change in the mass density owing to a ﬂux of
mass into a control volume.
For the spatially-dependent density of any generic prop-
erty y, we can integrate over the volume of the plasma V to
transform the partial time derivative term yielding
Z
V
∂y
∂t dV = dY
dt ,
where Y is the lumped-element sum total of that property
contained within the entire plasma. For example, if y is the
mass density ρ, Y is the total mass in volume V. Applying
this to a volume integration of Eq. (4.1) results in
dmp
dt
=
−
Z
V
∇· (ρv)dV
=
−
Z
V
(v · ∇) ρ dV −
Z
V
ρ (∇· v) dV
(4.2)
where mp is the mass of the moving body (plasma in this
case). For mass accumulation, where the moving plasma

Equations of Motion
■39
Figure 4.1 Swept paths for a) motion of a ﬂat annular disk of
plasma moving in the axial direction, b) motion of a conical
plasma sheet moving in the r-z plane, and c) quasi-one di-
mensional axial motion of a plasmoid as it initially compresses
and then expands in radius while translating axially.

40
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
volume is plowing into and entraining encountered mass, it is
useful to move into a Lagrangian reference frame. This elimi-
nates the second integral on the right-hand side and changes
the sign of the ﬁrst integral to be positive, because the nor-
mal to the surface area of the plasma is in the direction of
motion. The integral is performed in cylindrical coordinates
over the extent of the plasma to yield
dmp
dt
=
Z Z Z
((v · ∇) ρ) rdr dθ dz.
(4.3)
This integral can be rewritten as
dmp
dt
=
α
Z Z Z
vr
∂ρA
∂r rdr dθ dz +
Z Z Z
vz
∂ρA
∂z rdr dθ dz

,
(4.4)
where the terms on the right-hand side represent mass ﬂux
into the the plasma element through its radial and axial mo-
tion, respectively, into the background (ambient) neutral gas.
Note that we have introduced subscript A to highlight the
fact that it is the ambient neutral gas distribution that exists
outside of the plasma. The coeﬃcient α is between 0 and 1
and represents the fraction of ambient gas that is entrained
by the plasma.
For the term in Eq. (4.4) representing mass accumulation
through axial motion (as in Fig. 4.1a), we can integrate to
yield
Z Z Z
vz
∂ρA
∂z rdr dθ dz = vz A1 (rin, rout) ρA (r, z)
= vz ρA,z (r, z),
(4.5)
where A1 is the cross-sectional area of a disk in the r-θ plane
having inner and outer radii rin and rout, respectively, and
advancing into the gas in the z-direction at the rate vz. If
the plasma is moving in both the radial and axial directions,

Equations of Motion
■41
then values of rin and rout can themselves be functions of the
time-changing plasma location (r, z). Similarly, the density
is evaluated at the location (r, z) of the plasma element for
that moment in time. Combining A1 and ρA (r, z) gives a
linear mass density distribution in the z-direction ρA,z (r, z)
(mass per unit length in the axial direction). In the special
case where the plasma is only advancing in the z-direction,
the values of rin and rout will be constant throughout the
problem and the density will only be a function of z.
For the term in Eq. (4.4) representing mass accumulation
through radial motion, we can integrate to yield
Z Z Z
vr
∂ρA
∂r rdrdθdz = |vr| A2 (r) ρA (r, z) = |vr| ρA,r (r, z),
(4.6)
where A2 is the surface area of a cylinder of radius r, which
can be written for a cylinder of axial length lz as 2πrlz. The
density is again evaluated at the location (r, z) of the cur-
rent sheet element for that moment in time. We take the
magnitude of the radial velocity in this case because, while
it is possible for the velocity to be negative (radially-inward
motion) or positive (radially-outward motion), the mass ac-
cumulation due to motion in either direction will be positive.
(Another way to explain this is that in the Lagrangian frame
of motion, the components of velocity are always positive.)
Combining A2 and ρA (r, z) gives a linear mass density dis-
tribution in the r-direction ρA,r (r, z) (mass per unit length
in the radial direction). In the special case where the plasma
is only advancing in the r-direction, the density will only be
a function of r and ρA,r (r, z) will only have r-dependence
through A2.
Putting it all together, the equation for mass accumula-
tion of a plasma moving in 2-D (as in Fig. 4.1b) is
dmp
dt
= α [(|vr| A2 (r) + vz A1 (rin, rout)) ρA (r, z)].
(4.7)
The case in Fig. 4.1c for a plasmoid is slightly diﬀerent.
The plasmoid geometry as shown is inclusive of the centerline

42
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
of the problem, so radial compression/collapse does not lead
to additional mass accumulation in the plasma. Only mass
entering the plasmoid through its axial motion needs to be
included, but the cross sectional area A1 presented to the gas
changes as a function of time, and this change is dependent
upon the velocity vr, which governs the compression or ex-
pansion of the plasmoid. As such, the mass accumulation for
this case is
dmp
dt
= α [vz A1 (rout (z)) ρA (z)].
(4.8)
4.1.2
Momentum Conservation
4.1.2.1
Solid Bodies
The momentum equation is a statement of Newton’s second
law, which written for a solid conducting body of mass m
results in
mdv
dt =
X
F
(4.9)
where the right-hand side represents the sum of the forces on
the control volume. Solid bodies that do not collapse are only
subject to the axial Lorentz body force given in Eq. (2.11).
The sum of all pairwise electromagnetic interactions between
external active circuits l through m and the moving body p
yields a net axial momentum equation
mp
dvz
dt =
m
X
k=l
∂Mkp
∂z
IkIp.
(4.10)
If the body is also collapsing, there will be some force Fstiﬀ(t)
associated with the stiﬀness of the body resisting collapse.
Writing the form of this force, while beyond the scope of
this monograph, requires a careful consideration of the struc-
tural dynamics of collapse when moving through the elastic
and plastic deformation regimes (see, for example, Ref. [16]).
Keeping the stiﬀness force in a general form, we can write the

Equations of Motion
■43
net radial momentum equation
mp
dvr
dt = 1
2
∂Lp
∂r I2
p +
m
X
k=l
∂Mkp
∂r
IkIp + Fstiﬀ(t).
(4.11)
In this equation, ﬁrst term on the right-hand side will always
be positive and resist radial motion of the body, the second
term is negative and drives compression if the currents Ik and
Ip are in opposing directions, and Fstiﬀ(t) resists compression.
4.1.2.2
Plasmas
The general equation for the momentum density ρv of a
plasma in the Lagrangian frame of reference is
∂(ρv)
∂t
+ v · ∇(ρv) = (ρi + ρe) E + j × B −∇p −fres, (4.12)
where ρe = −ene is the local electron charge density, ρi =
Zeni is the local ion charge density (with average charge Z), j
is the local current density, p is the thermodynamic pressure,
and fres is the net eﬀect of resistive forces. The resistive forces
generally arise from collisions that exchange momentum and
energy with particles outside the accelerated load. Moreover,
because the power loss at extremely high velocities due to
Bremsstrahlung radiation from Coulomb collisions scales as
γ6 (where γ is the relativistic Lorentz factor), radiation can
also function as “internal braking” on the system. Therefore,
adequate collisional-radiative models may be necessary to ob-
tain a useful estimate of the resistive forces on the accelerated
load.
A discussion of how to handle all the terms in Eq. (4.12)
can be found in Ref. [17]. If we only consider length scales
much larger than the Debye length (where the sum of the
charge densities ρe + ρi ≈0), and for the sake of brevity let
the resistive forces go to zero, then this equation simpliﬁes to
∂(ρv)
∂t
+ v · ∇(ρv) = j × B −∇p.
(4.13)

44
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of the equation repre-
sents the electromagnetic Lorentz body force applied to the
plasma. If we integrate this over the volume of the plasma,
we obtain
mp (t) dvz
dt + αρA,z (r, z) v2
z =
m
X
k=l
∂Mkp
∂z
IkIp −pAAcross cos θ,
mp (t) dvr
dt + αρA,r (r, z) v2
r = 1
2
∂Lp
∂r I2
p +
m
X
k=l
∂Mkp
∂r
IkIp
−pAAcross sin θ,
(4.14)
where the ﬁrst term on the left in each equation represents
acceleration of the plasma mass and the second term (with
ρz and ρr indicating mass per unit length in the axial and
radial directions, respectively) represents the momentum in-
vestment in entraining additional mass, which is accelerated
from rest to the speed of the plasma. On the right-hand side
we have replaced the Lorentz body force with the lumped-
element circuit-derived forces from Eq. (2.11) and have writ-
ten the sum of the pairwise electromagnetic interactions be-
tween external active circuits l through m and the moving
plasma p. We have also included the action of the ambient
gas pressure pA exerting a force on the cross-sectional area
perpendicular to the motion of the plasma Across. The angle
θ is deﬁned by the velocity components and equals
θ = tan−1
vr
vz

.
We can tailor Eqs. (4.14) for the plasmoid of Fig. 4.1. The
second term in the axial equation still involves entrainment
of gas in the manner described by Eq. (4.8). There will be
no entrainment owing to radial motion of the plasma. How-
ever, the radial equation of motion is still important. It is
critical that the location (r,z) of the moving lumped element
being tracked through the integration of the momentum equa-
tion aligns with the radial and axial locations used in deter-
mining the self and mutual inductance functions Lp (r) and

Equations of Motion
■45
Mkp (r, z), respectively. The ambient pressure term in the ra-
dial equation disappears, and the pressure term in the axial
equation acts upon the area A1 (rout (z)). This yields
mp (t) dvz
dt
+
αA1 (rout (z)) ρA (z) v2
z
=
m
X
k=l
∂Mkp
∂z
IkIp −pAA1 (rout (z)),
mp (t) dvr
dt
=
1
2
∂Lp
∂r I2
p +
m
X
k=l
∂Mkp
∂r
IkIp,
(4.15)
where the ﬁrst equation governs the evolution of the axial
velocity and the second governs the radial compression and
expansion of the plasmoid.
In Section 3.2.1.1 we discussed a simpler version of Eq.
(4.14) for a one-coil, one-body problem in one-dimension il-
lustrated in Fig. 4.1a where it was assumed that LC1 = Lp,
and that the total inductance Ltot (z) and mutual inductance
M1p could be written in the form of Eqs. (3.15) and (3.16), re-
spectively. Writing the impedances to the right of the dashed
line in Fig. 3.3b as a Thévenin-equivalent impedance reduces
the one-dimensional acceleration problem to that of a single
current I1 acting upon the inductor varying as Ltot (z). Ne-
glecting the eﬀects of the ambient gas pressure, this yields a
momentum equation
mp (t) dvz
dt + ρA,z (z) v2
z = 1
2
∂Ltot
∂z I2
1 = LC1
2z0
exp (−z/z0) I2
1.
(4.16)
4.1.3
Energy Conservation
One can stop at conservation of momentum, making assump-
tions about the pressure and conductivity of the moving con-
ductor and how each relates to the temperature. However, if
there is a desire to track the energy in a self-consistent man-
ner, one must write a statement governing the time rate of
change of energy in the moving conductor.

46
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
4.1.3.1
Solid Bodies
In general, a baseline estimate of the total energy of the ac-
celerated load is:
Etot = Ekin + Etherm + Emag,
(4.17)
where the terms on the right side are kinetic, thermal, and
magnetic ﬁeld energy, respectively.
For a solid conductor, the conservation of energy equation
for the conductor can be written as
dEtot
dt
= Pheat + Pwork + Pmag.
(4.18)
The terms on the left-hand side are the time rate of change
of Etot and the terms on the right-hand side are the power in
and out of the load associated with heating, electromagnetic
work, and change in magnetic ﬁeld energy, respectively.
All power deposited as magnetic ﬁeld energy is stored in
the ﬁeld and does no work on the conductor. This essentially
means
dEmag
dt
= Pmag.
Since the left-hand and right-hand sides of the equation are
equal, we can drop them in the remainder of this section.
(Note: this was more rigorously shown in Ref. [17].)
As a consequence, the problem reduces to one of properly
modeling the power inputs on the right-hand side of Eq. (4.18)
and determining how they are subdivided into the kinetic and
thermal energy of the conductor.
For the sake of simplicity, assume that the solid, mov-
ing conductor is not collapsing (vr = 0). The ﬁrst term on
the right-hand side of Eq. (4.18) is power deposited through
Ohmic heating, which is
Pheat = I2
pRp.
(4.19)
The term Pwork is the electromagnetic work performed on the
moving conductor by all other current-carrying conductors in

Equations of Motion
■47
the system. This can be found by taking the dot product of
the velocity vector v and the electromagnetic force vector, the
components of which are given in Eq. (2.11). For acceleration
of a non-collapsing solid conductor acted upon by external
active circuits l through m and using the deﬁnitions in Eq.
(3.6), this becomes
Pwork =
m
X
k=l
IkIp
dMkp
dt
.
(4.20)
The time derivatives of Eq. (4.17) for a lumped-element
moving solid conductor are
dEtot
dt
= mpcv
dT
dt + d
dt
1
2mpv2
z

,
(4.21)
where cv and T in the ﬁrst term on the right-hand side are
the speciﬁc heat and temperature of the conductor and the
second term is the change in kinetic energy. Substituting all
the terms into Eq. (4.18) yields
mpcv
dT
dt + d
dt
1
2mpv2
z

= I2
pRp +
m
X
k=l
IkIp
dMkp
dt
.
(4.22)
Finally, eliminating terms in the above equation using
Eq. (4.10) yields
mpcv
dT
dt = I2
pRp,
(4.23)
which is an equation for the time-evolution of the temperature
of the moving conductor. Here, we see explicitly how Ohmic
heating of the conductor leads to an increase in temperature.
4.1.3.2
Plasmas
Following Ref. [5] we can write an equation governing the
energy in a plasma moving through a gas as shown in Fig.
4.1b:
dEtot
dt
= Pheat + Pwork + Pﬂux + PA + Prad,
(4.24)

48
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
where we have gained a term for power ﬂux Pﬂux into the
plasma owing to its motion through the ambient gas, a term
PA for power directed from the ambient gas into the plasma,
and a radiative power Prad. Each of these terms will be dis-
cussed in more detail below.
The total volume-integrated energy in the plasma is writ-
ten as
Etot =
p
γ −1V + 1
2mpv2,
(4.25)
where p and γ are the pressure and ratio of speciﬁc heats of
the plasma, respectively. Note that the pressure p represents
the sum of the ion and electron pressures.
The Ohmic heating term Pheat is the same as Eq. (4.19).
The electromagnetic work term is again found by taking the
dot product of the electromagnetic force in Eq. (2.11) and
the velocity vector. Using the deﬁnitions in Eq. (3.6) allows
us to write
Pwork = I2
p
2
dLp
dt +
m
X
k=l
IkIp
dMkp
dt
.
(4.26)
The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side represents work per-
formed in changing the self-inductance of the conductor,
which is accomplished by altering the geometric conﬁguration
of current in the conductor (primarily by collapse, compres-
sion, or expansion). The second term represents the electro-
magnetic work performed by the external circuits in acceler-
ating the moving conductor.
The ﬂux and entrainment of ambient gas into the plasma
is a net power drain as that gas must be accelerated to the
plasma speed. This can be written as
Pﬂux = −α
1
2ρA,z (r, z) v3
z + 1
2ρA,r (r, z) v2
r |vr|

.
(4.27)
As illustrated by the last terms on the right-hand side of
Eqs. (4.14), plasma moving into an ambient gas experiences

Equations of Motion
■49
a pressure that acts on the cross-sectional area perpendicu-
lar to the motion of the plasma. In addition, there will be
a net ﬂux of thermal energy into the plasma owing entrain-
ment of gas. We can write these two eﬀects into a combined
term
PA =

α
γA −1 −1

pAAcross |v|,
(4.28)
where γA is the ratio of speciﬁc heats of the ambient gas. The
positive ﬁrst term in the parentheses corresponds to the en-
trained ambient gas thermal energy, while the negative term
represents the ambient gas pressure force that resists plasma
motion. Note that this formulation assumes negligible energy
is transferred from the plasma to the ambient gas via thermal
conduction and radiation.
Putting it all together, we have
dEtot
dt
=
I2
pRp + I2
p
2
dLp
dt +
m
X
k=l
IkIp
dMkp
dt
−α
1
2ρA,z (r, z) v3
z + 1
2ρA,r (r, z) v2
r |vr|

+

α
γA −1 −1

pAAcross |v| + Prad.
(4.29)
The sum of all the terms on the right-hand side of Eq.
(4.29) governs how the energy in Eq. (4.25) changes in time.
The kinetic energy at any time is calculable through the re-
sults of the momentum equation, allowing Eq. (4.29) to be
further simpliﬁed into the following form
d
dt
 pV
γ −1

= I2
pRp +
α
γA −1pAAcross |v| + Prad.
(4.30)
The problem becomes one of determining the internal energy
of the plasma, given as a function of the plasma pressure p
and the ratio of speciﬁc heats γ. Terms on the right hand

50
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
side of Eq. (4.30) represent contributions due to Ohmic heat-
ing of the plasma, entrainment of ambient gas internal en-
ergy, and radiation. Except for rare instances where plasma-
heating via wave deposition is present, Prad < 0 due to line
and Bremsstrahlung radiation.
Handling of Eq. (4.30) requires internal models and a
closure approximation that connect the macroscopic plasma
properties of pressure, temperature, and γ to the atomic pro-
cesses in the plasma. This is discussed in greater detail in
Section 5.3.
4.1.3.3
Additional Notes
A term that has not been explicitly deﬁned at this point is
the lumped-element resistance Rp, which is also dependent on
the temperature. The variation of the resistivity of a metal
as a function of temperature is typically a tabulated value.
For a plasma the resistivity can be calculated through ki-
netic theory and is a function of temperature, both through
the variation of the collision frequency with temperature and
through the variation in the Coulomb collision cross-section
with temperature and with ionization state, which is itself
a function of temperature. Once the temperature is known
and the resistivity calculated, it is a matter of integrating
over the current distribution in the moving conductor to ob-
tain the value of Rp. This was performed in Ref. [17].
One item not included in the formulation of the energy
equation for a plasma is the initial ionization energy. This
process occurs on a diﬀerent timescale than the acceleration
process, and in the present formulation the model assumes
that there is a conducting medium already present when the
external current pulse is initiated. Accurately modeling this
initial ionization process within the framework of the model
and quantifying the time-delay between external current
pulse initiation and plasma formation is an area of ongoing
research. This is also important in attempting to understand
the eﬀects of preionization (partial ionization of the working

Equations of Motion
■51
gas prior to the initiation of the external current pulse) on
the plasma formation process.
Though the naturally high conductivity of solid metal-
lic loads reduces the energy losses associated with propellant
ionization (compared to e.g. a gaseous propellant), the high
conductivity leads to low values of skin depth. This results in
strong gradients in Ohmic heating between the surface of the
metal and the interior, posing special challenges in estimat-
ing the time-dependent heating and thermal diﬀusion rates.
These eﬀects are compounded in a situation where multiple
external circuits are all interacting with the accelerated body
simultaneously and in a cyclical fashion.
4.2
MASS DISTRIBUTION AND ENTRAINMENT
Several diﬀerent functional forms of ambient mass distribu-
tion have been explored in the literature. Recall that ambient
mass distribution refers to the distribution of neutral gas mass
just before a discharge event, and it is generally expressed in
terms of a spatially-dependent density function. The losses
associated with entrainment and acceleration of an ambient
gas to the plasma velocity can vary greatly depending upon
the distribution employed [18]. In this section, we explore a
few of the more often used distributions.
4.2.1
Slug Mass
In this distribution, all the mass is initially contained in the
moving conductor. This is the case for a solid conducting
body, such as an imploding liner or coilgun projectile in vac-
uum. In this case, ρA (r, z) = 0 and there are no losses as-
sociated with mass entrainment. Also, since there is no gas
in front of the moving body, there is no resistance to mo-
tion from the ambient gas pressure acting on the face of the
conductive body.

52
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
4.2.2
Constant Mass Distribution
A constant ambient background gas density ρA (r, z) =
constant is relatively straightforward to implement. However,
it does result in high losses since the conducting plasma en-
counters signiﬁcant amounts of gas and expends power to
accelerate that gas to the plasma velocity even as the sus-
taining electromagnetic force applied by the external coil(s)
is decreasing with increasing separation distance.
4.2.3
Linear Mass Distribution
In Refs. [11, 12] a linear mass density distribution was em-
ployed for a ﬂat planar coil axial plasma accelerator. The in-
jected mass produced a distribution that was highest at the
coil face and decreased linearly with distance to a depth δm.
This is written as
ρA,z (z) =
(
ρ0A1 (rin, rout) (1 −z/δm) ,
z ≤δm,
0,
z > δm,
(4.31)
where ρ0 is the value of the density at the coil face. Most of the
gas is entrained while the plasma is still close to the coil face
of the external circuit. Consequently, while the entrainment
losses are greater than those of the slug mass loading, they
are much lower than the constant mass distribution since the
losses are a function of the square of the plasma velocity. This
allows the plasma moving through a linear mass distribution
to entrain most of the gas at lower velocities and undergo
signiﬁcant electromagnetic acceleration after most of the gas
has been entrained.
4.3
TRANSITION FROM RADIAL TO AXIAL
MOTION
In the literature, most notably for pulsed plasma thrusters,
there exists a signiﬁcant body of work contemplating the
mechanism by which radial motion of a plasma is somehow

Equations of Motion
■53
“converted” into directed axial motion. For thruster applica-
tions, this is important because only plasma propellant leav-
ing the thruster control volume in the axial direction gener-
ates thrust.
In this section, we say a few words on the mechanism that
drives this transition. We shall show that the two-dimensional
momentum equation formulation for lumped-element accel-
eration previously presented in this section self-consistently
handles this transition of plasma motion from the radial to
the axial direction.
We use as our example the case of two-dimensional induc-
tive acceleration that occurs in a conical theta pinch, where
the motion is initially in both the radial and axial directions,
but as the plasma collapses towards the centerline the radial
motion will eventually halt leaving only axial motion. Two as-
pects of this inductive acceleration process must be captured
in a model:
1. Ensuring the conservation of the momentum vector in
the radial and axial directions and
2. Accounting for the mechanisms that cause the change
in the direction of the plasma motion from radial to
axial.
The conservation of the momentum of this simple sys-
tem can be tracked by considering a system consisting of a
single external coil 1 and a plasma p, where the current in
coil 1, I1, creates a magnetic ﬁeld B1 and has a typical cur-
rent waveform as shown in Fig. 4.2. I1 > 0 (current density
vector j1 in the +ˆθ direction) between 0 < t < τrise (region
shaded in dark gray in Fig. 4.2). During the rise, dI1/dt > 0
and dB1/dt > 0 through Ampère’s law. This induces an op-
posing electric ﬁeld in the plasma (E in the −ˆθ direction)
through Faraday’s law. As a result, the induced voltage in the
plasma is
Vp = −
Z
E · dl > 0,

54
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
0
/2
3 /2
2
Normalized time
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized current
Figure 4.2 Schematic of a current trace in a conical theta
pinch, with τperiod = 2π with rising (dark gray region) and
decreasing (light gray region) current. Note that τrise < π/2
for an inductively-coupled accelerator.
between 0 < t < τrise, where the path integral is performed
in the direction of the azimuthal plasma current dl.
As the coil current decreases between τrise < t < τperiod/2
(region shaded in light gray in Fig. 4.2), dI1/dt < 0 and
dB1/dt < 0. This induces an opposing electric ﬁeld in the
plasma (E now in the +ˆθ direction). The induced voltage in
the plasma between τrise < t < τperiod/2 is
Vp = −
Z
E · dl < 0.
A circuit model that produces this self-consistent rela-
tionship between the time-varying current in the coil and the

Equations of Motion
■55
induced voltage in the plasma will also ensure conservation
of the momentum vector.
Consider the 1-D analogous mechanical model of two
blocks attached by an intermediate compressed spring. The
stored potential energy from the expanding spring (EM ﬁeld
here) becomes the kinetic energy of the moving blocks; the
spring imparts equal and opposite forces to the block on
the left (coil here) and the right (plasma here). Our focus
here is on the interaction between the expanding spring and
the block on the right. As the motion of the plasma transi-
tions from the radial to the axial direction, the force exerted
by the electromagnetic ﬁeld changes the momentum of the
plasma (P) with time,
Fﬁeld = dPplasma
dt
.
This can be re-written per unit volume as
fﬁeld = dpplasma
dt
.
(4.32)
The force per volume on the left hand side can be rewritten
[19] using the Ampère-Maxwell equation, the Maxwell stress
tensor, ¯¯MB, and the Poynting ﬂux, S = E × B/µ0 as
fﬁeld = j × B = ∇· ¯¯MB −ϵ0µ0
∂S
∂t .
(4.33)
Thus, the force per volume has a spatially varying com-
ponent and a time-varying component with the former be-
ing the dominant term. Combining Eqs. (4.33-4.32), the
result is
∇· ¯¯MB −ϵ0
∂(E × B)
∂t
= ∂pplasma
∂t
.
(4.34)
Note that the second term on the left hand side is the time
derivative of the momentum per volume in the electromag-
netic ﬁelds (pﬁeld = ϵ0E×B), which consists of contributions
from the electromagnetic ﬁelds created by the coil current I1
and inductively-driven current in the plasma. The right hand

56
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
side is the time derivative of the momentum per volume of
the plasma (pplasma = ρv). Because momentum is conserved
individually in both the radial and axial directions,

∇· ¯¯MB

r −∂pﬁeld,r
∂t
=
∂pplasma,r
∂t
,

∇· ¯¯MB

z −∂pﬁeld,z
∂t
=
∂pplasma,z
∂t
.
If E = Eθ ˆθ and B = Br ˆr + Bz ˆz, then

∇· ¯¯MB

r −∂(ϵ0EθBz)
∂t
= ∂(ρvr)
∂t
,
(4.35a)

∇· ¯¯MB

z −∂(−ϵ0EθBr)
∂t
= ∂(ρvz)
∂t
.
(4.35b)
The
initial
plasma
acceleration
in
a
conical
theta
pinch is radially inward and axially forward. To understand
the conversion of plasma momentum from the radial to the
axial direction, one must account for the opposite change
in the electromagnetic momentum. Plasma acceleration in
the radially-inward (negative) direction is consistent with
d(EθBz)/dt > 0 and axial acceleration in the forward (posi-
tive) direction aligns with d(−EθBr)/dt < 0.
The values Br and Bz represent components of the same
solenoidal magnetic ﬁeld produced by a ﬁxed external coil and
inductively-driven currents is the plasma. Consequently, the
signs of dBr/dt and dBz/dt are the same as that of dB1/dt.
Thus, d(EθB1z)/dt > 0 also implies −d(EθB1r)/dt < 0 for
any Eθ in the plasma, ensuring that an increase in the elec-
tromagnetic radial momentum also produces a decrease in
the electromagnetic axial momentum. Therefore, due to the
coupling between the electromagnetic momentum and the
plasma momentum in Eqs. (4.35), a decrease in the plasma
radial momentum is consistent with an increase in the plasma
axial momentum.
The dominant term in the left hand side of Eq. (4.34)
is the spatial variation of the magnetic ﬁeld and, therefore,

Equations of Motion
■57
Eq. (4.11) emphasizes only that part of it. In the lumped-
element circuit model formulation, this self-consistent conver-
sion process manifests in the inductance of the circuit-plasma
system. In any inductively-coupled pulsed accelerator where
the accelerated body is capable of motion in the r and z direc-
tions, the force on that body is given by Eq. (2.11), rewritten
here in vector form as for a single coil as
F(r, z) = I2
p
2 ∇Lp + I1Ip∇M1p.
(4.36)
Note that the coil inductance term does not appear in
the force equation. This is because the coil’s inductance is
only a function of the path of the current ﬂowing through it
(and the permeability of the surroundings). Therefore there
is no impact on the coil inductance when the plasma current
moves away from the coil, even though there is an impact on
the inductance presented to the coil’s driving circuit. If the
current path through the plasma were to not change shape
throughout the displacement of the plasma current from the
coil then the plasma inductance term would also be zero, leav-
ing only the changing mutual inductance term as the driv-
ing force on the plasma current as it moves away from the
coil.
Physically, the ﬁrst term on the right-hand side contain-
ing the gradient in the plasma self inductance resists com-
pression while the second term with the gradient in mutual
inductance leads to both compression and axial acceleration
of the body. As the body moves in the axial direction, the
time-evolution of a curl-free magnetic ﬁeld results in a mutual
inductance gradient that is more axial than radial. In addi-
tion, we observe from the example conical theta pinch mutual
inductance axial proﬁles shown in Fig. 3.4b that the axial gra-
dient in mutual inductance is much greater if the body has
a greater radius. The resistance to compression provided by
the self inductance term results in acceleration occurring at a
greater radial position than if the radial compression was un-
restrained. Accurate representations of the self inductance Lp

58
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
as function of r and the mutual inductance M1p as a function
of r and z will capture all these eﬀects related to converting
radial motion to axial acceleration in an inductively-coupled
pulsed accelerator.

C H A P T E R 5
Internal Models
M
odeling the pulsed-inductive acceleration process in
terms of circuit parameters such as resistance and in-
ductance requires lumped-sum estimates of internal proper-
ties of the accelerating ﬁeld as well as the accelerated load.
Speciﬁcally, those estimates are necessary because circuit val-
ues (like R) represent volume integrals of spatially varying
quantities (such as resistivity, η) and those diﬀerential quan-
tities, in turn, can depend upon other local values (like den-
sity and temperature). This chapter provides the link between
the “microscopic” physical processes that drive the behavior
of the system and the “macroscopic” circuit model view that
we use in this work to describe the system, estimating the
circuit parameters by appropriately accounting for relevant
internal processes.
5.1
LUMPED-CIRCUIT METHOD
There are three key aspects to the approach connecting
the internal mechanisms of the acceleration process to the
externally-observed behavior:
1. Start with the underlying physics in a diﬀerential ele-
ment and integrate to obtain the volume-averaged val-
ues of relevant properties that will be useful in a circuit
model.
DOI: 10.1201/9780429351976-5
59

60
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
2. Ensure consistency between the microscopic phenom-
ena within the diﬀerential element and the resulting
macroscopic properties calculated through volume in-
tegration over the domain.
3. Identify zeroth-order constant quantities and ﬁrst-order
change approximations.
Following item #1, when a diﬀerential element of an arbitrary
quantity varies in space and time, f(x, y, z, t), integrating this
function over a volume (e.g., the volume of the accelerated
body) transforms it as:
Z
V
f(x, y, z, t) dV = F(t).
(5.1)
Any partial derivative with respect to time of f in a physical
model will be transformed into an ordinary time derivative of
F in the circuit model. Since one of the beneﬁts of a circuit
model is the ability to analyze the acceleration process as only
a function of time, it is valuable to use the volume integral
approach to simplify the problem by removing the spatial
dependence through aggregation into lumped-sum values.
The main emphasis of this chapter is on item #2, ensur-
ing that the physical implications of the diﬀerential quanti-
ties, such as mass density ρ, current density j, electric ﬁeld E,
magnetic ﬁeld B, and resistivity η are preserved and appro-
priately translated into volume-integrated lumped-sum quan-
tities such as the mass of the accelerated load m, net current
in a conductor I, voltage V , inductance L, resistance R, and
so forth.
As implied by item #3, a lumped-sum model represents
an average that removes certain small-scale phenomena oc-
curring within the volume of the accelerated load. Let us con-
sider some noteworthy phenomena that are hidden when cal-
culating lumped-sum quantities for the circuit model.

Internal Models
■61
5.1.1
Instabilities
Acceleration of a plasma can give rise to local instabilities
of the Kelvin-Helmholtz (KH) and the Rayleigh-Taylor (RT)
types. Generally, such local instabilities can be detrimental
to the desired macroscopic behavior of the system and can
hinder a clean transition from the diﬀerential description to
an integral lumped-element circuit description of a plasma.
As noted by Polzin et al. [1], “the development of large scale
instabilities could lead to plasma ﬁlamentation, reducing the
inductive coupling and making the current sheet more perme-
able to both encountered gas and the magnetic ﬁeld driving
acceleration.”
In particular, it is important to consider the presence of
RT instabilities in inductive accelerators because the accel-
eration process often involves magnetic pressure of a lower-
density region pushing against a higher-density plasma. The
growth rate of RT instabilities, γ, can be calculated using
[20],
γ =
v
u
u
t

ag k
ρhigh −ρlow
ρhigh + ρlow

−
(
2 (k · Bapp)2
µ0 (ρhigh + ρlow)
)
,
(5.2)
where the region of high density ρhigh is pushed by a region of
low density ρlow, with an acceleration ag that eﬀectively acts
in the direction opposing motion. The resulting RT oscilla-
tion has a vector wave number k with magnitude k. While the
terms inside the ﬁrst set of brackets {. . .} cause the growth
of the instability, the terms inside the second set of brack-
ets {. . .} cause the instability to decay. Figure 5.1 shows the
growth rate of an instability of wavelength λ = 1 cm (where
λ = 1/k) for a range of applied magnetic ﬁeld values and
high-to-low density ratios ρratio. In this case, the magnetic
ﬁeld Bapp is applied parallel to k. These data illustrate how
a magnetic ﬁeld used in this manner can diminish the growth
rate of RT instabilities. For the case of an inductively-coupled
pulsed accelerator, if the growth rate γ is slow compared to

62
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
the time scale of acceleration τa, such that γ τa ≪1, then this
local phenomenon will not result in observable macroscopic
eﬀects or signiﬁcantly impact the acceleration process.
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
Parallel magnetic field (T)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Growth rate (#/s)
106
ratio=102
ratio=103
ratio=104
ratio=105
Figure 5.1 Growth rate of a Rayleigh-Taylor instability as a
function of a magnetic ﬁeld applied parallel to the direction
of the propagation vector k for various high-to-low density
ratios ρratio. (ag = 1010 m/s2, λ = 1 cm, ρlow = 10−9 kg/m3.)
Metallic solid liners accelerated (imploded) by pulsed elec-
tromagnetic ﬁelds can experience buckling. While this repre-
sents an instability from a structural mechanics perspective,
buckling may also have a beneﬁcial eﬀect in stiﬀening the ma-
terial to prevent radial distortion. It may even be structurally
advantageous to intentionally design liners with “pleats” to
reduce distortions during compression [21]. Furthermore, a
background applied magnetic ﬁeld can also serve to reduce
radial distortion during the compression of the liner [16].

Internal Models
■63
Despite the reality of instabilities in both solid metallic
conductors and plasmas, accelerator designs can incorporate
suitable techniques that suppress instability growth rates [21]
or shorten the acceleration timescale to prevent small-scale
instabilities from aﬀecting accelerator performance. Conse-
quently, to zeroth-order, such local instabilities do not aﬀect
the results obtained using a lumped-element circuit model of
the acceleration process.
5.1.2
Skin Eﬀect
Unlike in conductors carrying steady direct currents, the
charge carriers in situations where the current is time-varying
are not uniformly distributed throughout the conductor but
are instead concentrated near its surface. A time-dependent
current begins at the surface and diﬀuses into the material
until the current reverses direction. This phenomenon where
the current ﬂows mainly through the outer layer of the con-
ductor is known as the skin eﬀect, and it is related to the
ability of a conductor to shield against diﬀusion of the mag-
netic ﬁeld into a highly-conductive medium.
The diﬀusion equation describes this process by which the
current distribution is established in a conductor as a function
of time. The solution yields a simple solution of the form
j(δ) = jsurf exp(−δ/δskin),
(5.3)
where j(δ) is the current density as a function of penetra-
tion depth δ perpendicular to the conductor surface and
jsurf is the current density at the surface. The skin depth
δskin ≃
p
η/ (µ0ω) is the characteristic diﬀusion length scale,
where µ0 is the magnetic permeability of free space, ω is the
angular frequency of the current, and η is the resistivity of
the conductor.
The exponential decay of current density from the sur-
face into the bulk of the conductor has implications for the
volume integral. Furthermore, because the energy deposition
due to Ohmic heating varies as the square of the current

64
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
density, the skin eﬀect produces a strong gradient in the en-
ergy deposition proﬁle. In the previous chapter it was noted
that changes in the distribution of current in each conductor
can introduce variations in the self and mutual inductance
values that one obtains when performing volume integrals to
obtain these lumped-element parameters. While we have not
done so in this work, it is possible in principle to account for
these eﬀects depending upon the level of control a user has
in ﬁxing the current distribution in the magnetic ﬁeld solver
used to calculate inductance values.
5.2
STATE OF MATTER
The state of matter of the accelerated body aﬀects its in-
ductive response to a changing externally-imposed ﬁeld and,
consequently, to a circuit model of that process. Two states of
matter that have adequate electrical conductivity to support
the types of inductively-coupled pulsed acceleration consid-
ered in this work are discussed in this section.
5.2.1
Metallic Solids
When a metallic solid is inductively accelerated, as in a coil-
gun [6, 22], there are some internal phenomena that are rel-
evant to the formulation of the circuit model.
1. Some of the power transferred from the circuit to the
load is directed into heating, deformation, and melt-
ing of the conductor and not into the acceleration
process. Furthermore, as the temperature of the accel-
erated body increases, the already strong spatial gradi-
ent in the current proﬁle arising due to the skin eﬀect
described in Eq. (5.3) can further increase owing to re-
sistivity being a function of temperature. Because the
timescale of the acceleration is typically faster than the
timescale to reach thermal equilibrium, the resistivity
will not reach a uniform value during an acceleration
event, or pulse. Consequently, the value of resistance

Internal Models
■65
and the resistive power dissipation in the circuit model
are only volume-averaged quantities.
2. The skin eﬀect is more pronounced in metallic solids
owing to the low value of resistivity in comparison to
a plasma. This is not necessarily a detriment and is,
in fact, an inherent feature of a coilgun, where the ac-
celerated body is designed to be thick enough to act
as a ﬂux-excluding shell that minimizes Ohmic heating
inside the bulk of the volume [23].
3. In addition to conﬁning the electromagnetic force to
the skin, the strong non-uniformity in current density
(c.f. Eq. (5.3)) also aﬀects the calculation of mutual
inductance.
5.2.2
Plasmas
There are similarities and diﬀerences in the thermodynam-
ics and electromagnetic processes that aﬀect inductively-
accelerated plasmas when compared to metallic solids.
1. Unlike metallic solid accelerators, plasma accelerators
require signiﬁcant energy transfer from the external cir-
cuit into the load to ﬁrst ionize the working ﬂuid before
it will support an inductively-driven current. The frac-
tion of the input power directed into ionization and even
the fraction of the gas that is ionized are in general not
a constant with respect to time and both are dependent
upon the comparative timescales for gas ionization and
acceleration, the type of gas used, and whether any part
of the gas has been preionized (ionized prior to initia-
tion of the acceleration discharge in the circuit).
2. After creation of the plasma, some of the power from
the external circuit is deposited into further heating the
gas and increasing its internal energy, as in a metallic
solid. The partition function for the plasma governs the

66
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
ionization state of the plasma and the electronic exci-
tation levels populated by bound electrons in the ions.
The gas could also be in a non-equilibrium ionziation
state at any point in the discharge, further complicat-
ing matters. Energy directed into heating the gas or
increasing the internal energy of the ions is generally
not available for acceleration, limiting the overall eﬃ-
ciency in converting initially-stored energy into directed
kinetic energy of the exhaust [17].
3. The resistivity is much greater in a plasma than in a
metallic solid (by several orders of magnitude). While
this results in the skin depth being larger in a plasma,
it is still a signiﬁcant eﬀect resulting in spatial non-
uniformities in the Ohmic heating proﬁle and the ap-
plication of the Lorentz body force to the plasma. As
with the metallic solid, this non-uniform current dis-
tribution can also alter the mutual inductance between
the plasma and the external circuit.
5.3
EQUATIONS-OF-STATE AND CLOSURE
Due to the strong inﬂuence of the state of the matter on the
transfer of energy and momentum from an external driving
circuit into an inductively-accelerated load, it is necessary to
have equations-of-state (EOS) to reliably model the internal
conditions of the latter. Writing a set of equations that gov-
ern the electrodynamics, thermodynamics, and hydrodynam-
ics of the system results in a set of relationships with more
unknowns than equations. Thus, equations of state provide
the necessary closure to the system by relating several un-
known variables to each other and increasing the number of
equations to equal the number of unknowns.
Modeling the internal state of accelerated/collapsing
metallic liners may require appropriate relationships between
the external (electromagnetic) pressure and the volume of
the solid. General continuum models, such as the Birch-
Murnaghan EOS [24], the Mie-Grüneisen EOS [25], or other

Internal Models
■67
expressions speciﬁcally suited for these conditions are re-
quired to provide closure.
For inductively-accelerated plasmas, the thermodynamic
pressure and the ratio of speciﬁc heats must be related to the
density and temperature as p(ρ, T) and γ(ρ, T), respectively.
For an accelerated plasma in thermal equilibrium, the calcula-
tion of thermodynamic pressure could require the knowledge
of the variation of the total partition function with volume
Q(V ), from which one can obtain,
p = NkBT ∂ln Q
∂V
,
(5.4)
where N is the number of particles and kB is Boltzmann’s
constant. We note that estimating Q(V ) for interacting par-
ticles is a non-trivial task and it is the controlling factor in
determining how much the plasma behavior deviates from an
ideal gas EOS.
Knowledge of the pressure distribution in the domain can
be used to compute the net force on the accelerated plasma
per unit volume that arises due to a pressure gradient (−∇p)
and the thermal energy per unit volume of plasma (p/(γ−1)),
which includes contributions from both ions and electrons.
The high temperatures associated with pulsed plasmas can
make internal energy modes in the ions (such as electronic
excitation) available as intermediate sinks, altering the value
of γ as a function of temperature. A rigorous estimation of γ
requires a calculation of the plasma speciﬁc heats at constant
pressure cp and constant volume cv in this set of steps,
E
=
N
V kBT 2 ∂ln Q
∂T
,
(5.5)
h
=
E + p,
(5.6)
cp
=
∂h
∂T ,
(5.7)
cv
=
∂E
∂T ,
(5.8)
γ
=
cp
cv
,
(5.9)

68
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
where E is the internal energy of the ions in the gas and h
is the enthalpy. Though cumbersome, it is possible to incor-
porate these internals models into a circuit model of pulsed
inductive acceleration, as shown in Ref. [17]. To reduce com-
putational complexity, a ﬁrst-order estimate could assume a
single-ﬂuid approximation and treat ions and electrons to-
gether and employ an ideal gas model for p(ρ, T) to obtain a
less accurate but suitable value for γ.

C H A P T E R 6
Illustrative Results
I
n this monograph, we have spent considerable time
discussing the means of modeling diﬀerent types of
inductively-coupled pulsed accelerators using a lumped-
element circuit model approach. These modeling techniques
have been employed in investigations of diﬀerent accelerator
conﬁgurations, and in this section we present an overview of
the results from a select number of those studies.
6.1
SETS OF MODELING EQUATIONS
Before diving into a presentation of the data found in the liter-
ature, it is perhaps worthwhile to consolidate in this one place
complete sets of modeling equations for diﬀerent accelera-
tor types. In general, we shall see that, even neglecting some
terms and equations previously derived, the lumped-element
circuit modeling method represents a set of tightly-coupled
equations that can become quite expansive going from one-
dimensional to two-dimensional acceleration and modeling
multiple external circuits.
6.1.1
Solid Non-Collapsing Projectile
The solid non-collapsing projectile, or macron, is the basis for
the coilgun type accelerator. It moves only in the z-direction,
and when it is acted upon by multiple external coils the
DOI: 10.1201/9780429351976-6
69

70
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
following set of governing equations result:
VCi = ReiIi + (L0i + LCi) dIi
dt
+ d
dt (MipIp) +
m
X
j=l
j̸=i
Mij
dIj
dt , ∀i = [l, m],
(6.1a)
0 = RpIp + Lp
dIp
dt +
m
X
k=l
d
dt (MkpIk),
(6.1b)
dVCi
dt
= −Ii
Ci
, ∀i = [l, m],
(6.1c)
dMkp
dt
= ∂Mkp
∂z
vz,
∀k = [l, m],
(6.1d)
dz
dt = vz,
(6.1e)
mp
dvz
dt =
m
X
k=l
∂Mkp
∂z
IkIp.
(6.1f)
In this set, there are separate Eqs. (6.1a), (6.1d), (6.1d) for
every individual external conductor l through m.
6.1.2
Axially-Accelerating Plasma
Many studies using the lumped-element circuit model have
been performed on planar inductive pulsed plasma thrusters,
which act upon and accelerate propellant in the z-direction.
Typically in these thrusters there is only one coil acting upon
the plasma disk. If we neglect the ambient pressure forces
acting on the disk, we obtain the following set of equations:
VC1 = Re1I1 + (L01 + LC1) dI1
dt + d
dt (M1pIp),
(6.2a)
0 = RpIp + Lp
dIp
dt + d
dt (M1pI1),
(6.2b)
dVC1
dt
= −I1
C1
,
(6.2c)
dM1p
dt
= ∂M1p
∂z
vz,
(6.2d)

Illustrative Results
■71
dz
dt = vz,
(6.2e)
mp
dvz
dt = ∂M1p
∂z
I1Ip −αρA,z (z) v2
z,
(6.2f)
dmp
dt
= vz αρA,z (z),
(6.2g)
where ρA,z is the ambient gas mass per unit length in the
axial direction. Most studies have not employed the energy
equation formulation, but it can be included in the manner
described in Ref. [17].
6.1.2.1
Simpliﬁcations of Section 3.2.1.1
In Section, 3.2.1.1, it was noted that additional simpliﬁca-
tions have been made in past works where an axially acceler-
ating plasma disk was modeled. Those simpliﬁcations and the
observation that the terminal inductance could be ﬁt to an
analytical function of z resulted in, among other things, the
writing of the mutual inductance in a functional form, which
could be diﬀerentiated to yield statements for the spatial gra-
dient and time rate of change in that term. Those assumptions
resulted in the following simpliﬁed set of equations:
VC1
=
Re1I1 +
 L01 + Lth|z=0 + LC1
 dI1
dt
+ d
dt
 M1pIp

,
(6.3a)
0
=
RpIp + LC1
dIp
dt + d
dt
 M1pI1

,
(6.3b)
dVC1
dt
=
−I1
C1
,
(6.3c)
d
 M1p

dt
=
−LC1
2z0
exp (−z/ (2z0)) vz,
(6.3d)
dz
dt
=
vz,
(6.3e)
mp
dvz
dt
=
LC1
2z0
exp (−z/z0) I2
1 −αρA,z (z) v2
z, (6.3f)
dmp
dt
=
vz αρA,z (z).
(6.3g)

72
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
6.1.3
Conical Theta-Pinch Plasma
There have been a limited number of lumped-element cir-
cuit model studies on conical theta-pinch plasmas, where the
plasma moves in the r-z plane. If we neglect the ambient pres-
sure forces acting on the plasma and do not include the energy
equation formulation, we obtain for a system with multiple
external circuits:
VCi = ReiIi + (L0i + LCi) dIi
dt
+ d
dt (MipIp) +
m
X
j=l
j̸=i
Mij
dIj
dt ,
∀i = [l, m],
(6.4a)
0 = RpIp + d
dt (LpIp) +
m
X
k=l
d
dt (MkpIk),
(6.4b)
dVCi
dt
= −Ii
Ci
,
∀i = [l, m],
(6.4c)
dLp
dt = ∂Lp
∂r vr,
(6.4d)
dMkp
dt
= ∂Mkp
∂r
vr + ∂Mkp
∂z
vz,
∀k = [l, m],
(6.4e)
dz
dt = vz,
(6.4f)
dr
dt = vr,
(6.4g)
mp
dvz
dt =
m
X
k=l
∂Mkp
∂z
IkIp −αρA,z (r, z) v2
z
(6.4h)
mp
dvr
dt = 1
2
∂Lp
∂r I2
p +
m
X
k=l
∂Mkp
∂r
IkIp −αρA,r (r, z) v2
r, (6.4i)
dmp
dt
= α [(|vr| A2 (r) + vz A1 (rin, rout)) ρA (r, z)], (6.4j)
where ρ (r, z) is the ambient gas density and ρz and ρr are
the mass density multiplied by A1 and A2, respectively.

Illustrative Results
■73
6.1.4
Plasmoid Accelerator
There have been even fewer lumped-element circuit model
studies on plasmoid accelerators, though this technique ap-
pears to be gaining in popularity. Again neglecting the ambi-
ent pressure forces acting on the plasmoid and not including
the energy equation, we obtain:
VCi = ReiIi + (L0i + LCi) dIi
dt
+ d
dt (MipIp) +
m
X
j=l
j̸=i
Mij
dIj
dt ,
∀i = [l, m],
(6.5a)
0 = RpIp + d
dt (LpIp) +
m
X
k=l
d
dt (MkpIk),
(6.5b)
dVCi
dt
= −Ii
Ci
,
∀i = [l, m] ,
(6.5c)
dLp
dt = ∂Lp
∂r vr,
(6.5d)
dMkp
dt
= ∂Mkp
∂r
vr + ∂Mkp
∂z
vz,
∀k = [l, m],
(6.5e)
dz
dt = vz,
(6.5f)
dr
dt = vr,
(6.5g)
mp
dvz
dt =
m
X
k=l
∂Mkp
∂z
IkIp −αA1 (rout (z)) ρA (z) v2
z,
(6.5h)
mp
dvr
dt = 1
2
∂Lp
∂r I2
p +
m
X
k=l
∂Mkp
∂r
IkIp,
(6.5i)
dmp
dt
= α [vz A1 (rout (z)) ρA (z)].
(6.5j)
Note that the plasmoid model is identical to the conical theta-
pinch model with the exception that mass entrainment due to
radial compression/expansion no longer appears in the mass
conservation and radial momentum equations.

74
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
6.2
SELECT RESULTS AND EXAMPLES
We proceed with a presentation of select modeling results
from various studies, which illustrate the utility of the mod-
eling technique in studying various applications.
6.2.1
Comparison of Models from Section 6.1.2
Two models of axial plasma acceleration were presented in
Section 6.1.2. Equation set (6.2) represents a general-form
equation set, while equation set (6.3) employed additional
assumptions in the derivation. The latter equation set rep-
resents the one that has been employed more often to study
planar inductive pulsed plasma thrusters, so it is reasonable
to ask how well the results of the two models compare.
Using the inductance proﬁles presented in Fig. 3.6, specif-
ically that found using Eq. (3.11) for the general-form equa-
tion set and those representing Eqs. (3.15) and (3.16) for the
simpliﬁed equation set, we can solve the sets of coupled ﬁrst-
order ordinary diﬀerential equations numerically. Solutions
were generated for the parameters given in Table 6.1.
Table 6.1 Parameters used in the solution of equation sets
(6.2) and (6.3).
Parameter
Value
L01
0 nH
LC1
908 nH
Lp
689 nH
Lth|z=0
144 nH
LC1
744 nH
C1
4.5 µF
VC1|t=0
28 kV
Re
5.0 mΩ
Rp
0.5 mΩ
mp
3.0 mg
z(0)
0.5 mm
vz(0)
0 m/s

Illustrative Results
■75
To further simplify the comparison of the two sets of
equations, it was assumed that the ambient background gas
density was zero, meaning all the mass mp is in the plasma
starting at time t = 0. The resulting computed solutions for
these conditions and the data in Fig. 3.6 are presented in
Fig. 6.1. We shall note that for this example, the values of
initial voltage, capacitance, and plasma mass were selected
without much eﬀort expended on optimization. The results
should therefore not be considered indicative of the general
performance of inductive pulsed plasma thrusters.
While the general form of the solutions to equation sets
(6.2) and (6.3) are similar, we observe that there are diﬀer-
ences between the two sets, including a roughly 13% variance
between the two calculated terminal velocity values. Most
of this diﬀerence appears early in the acceleration process.
While the inductance functions in Fig. 3.6 appear close to
each other, we observe that the mutual inductance M1p starts
out higher than M1p before both collapse to approximately
the same curve. This diﬀerence is completely due to the man-
ner in which the inductance functions were generated using
the magnetic ﬁeld solver. The solutions that comprise the in-
ductance function from which M1p is derived were obtained
assuming that no external magnetic ﬁeld could penetrate the
accelerating annular disk. This is equivalent to stating that
the current in the disk was ﬂowing only on the surface of
the disk facing the coil windings. The inductance calculations
for M1p were performed assuming that the current in the
annular disk was uniformly distributed in the axial direc-
tion and varied as 1/r in the radial direction, leading to
an inherently-lower mutual inductance in comparison to the
concentrated surface current distribution. Collapsing the cur-
rent density into a thinner sheet approaching a delta-function
thickness pushes the mutual inductance M1p towards M1p.
This leads us to conclude that equation set (6.2) and equa-
tion set (6.3) yield roughly equivalent results, with any major
diﬀerences in the solutions owing to variations in the assumed
current density distribution used to calculate the inductance.

76
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
Figure 6.1 Computed solutions comparing results using the
general equation set (6.2) [solid lines] and the simpliﬁed equa-
tion set (6.3) [dashed lines]. a) Currents in the external circuit
(I1) and the accelerated load (Ip), b) velocities of the accel-
erated load, and c) time evolution of the mutual inductance
in each solution set.
6.2.2
Coilguns
The governing equation set (6.1) for a solid non-collapsing
projectile, or macron, has been applied by Polzin et al. [6]

Illustrative Results
■77
to the problem of modeling a coilgun. In the coilgun, illus-
trated schematically in Fig. 1.5, an annular metallic projectile
is accelerated by a series of multiple coils aligned along the
centerline. The projectile has a smaller diameter than the
coils, and as it is accelerated in the axial direction it passes
each coil in sequence. The switching of these coils is timed to
initiate current ﬂow as the projectile is passing through the
coil.
Solutions to this problem were generated for a set where
the mutual inductance terms between coils was handled in a
self-consistent manner as described in this document and the
reference. Presented in Fig. 6.2 are data from what Ref. [6]
calls “case 3” for a single-turn projectile. Case 3 is deﬁned as
a solution where the capacitance for each external circuit, or
stage, was varied so the projectile transit time between coils
equaled the nearest active coil’s ﬁrst half-cycle. However, the
Figure 6.2 Computed solutions from a coilgun simulation (af-
ter Ref. [6]) showing solid conducting projectile a) axial posi-
tion, b) axial velocity, c) current in each of the external coils,
and d) current in the projectile.

78
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
discharge energy per coil stage was held constant through-
out the problem, resulting in much higher initial capacitor
voltages for later stages.
We observe clearly in these data the eﬀect on the coil cur-
rent Ip as each sequential coil is activated. These data also
demonstrate the mutual inductance coupling between coils,
with the current in the coils deviating from their trajectory
as each nearby coil is activated. As an interesting aside, in
systems such as the one illustrated where there are multiple
independently-operating coils, the net force on the projectile
acts to accelerate it in the axial direction. However, we ob-
serve that the currents in some of the coils are ﬂowing in the
same direction as that in the projectile, resulting in the exer-
tion of a small but ﬁnite negative force on the projectile that
slightly reduces the overall net axial force.
6.2.3
Axial Inductively-Coupled Planar Accelerators
There have been several studies using the lumped-element
circuit model to capture the response of an axial inductively-
coupled planar plasma accelerator where a single coil acts
upon a ﬂat annular plasma disk. For examples of this work,
see Refs. [1, 2, 11, 12, 26] and the references therein. Almost
all of these studies have been performed using equation set
(6.3), which we previously showed was less accurate than the
general formulation presented in equation set (6.2). Fixing
those deﬁciencies in the literature data is beyond the scope of
the present monograph, and will be left to future researchers
in the ﬁeld. However, even with a less accurate model, we can
still show how various trends in data were captured by that
modeling, which has been incredibly insightful in building a
greater understanding of these accelerators.
6.2.3.1
Nondimensional Analysis
Polzin et al. [18, 27] have performed analyses of axial accel-
erators through nondimensionalization of equation set (6.3).
The outcome was a set of dimensionless scaling parameters

Illustrative Results
■79
that govern the overall response of the coupled system. The
parameters that emerged from that work were
L∗
=
L0
LC
,
(6.6a)
ψ1
=
Re
r
C
L0
,
(6.6b)
ψ2
=
Rp
r
C
L0
,
(6.6c)
α
=
C2 V 2
0 LC
2 mp z2
0
.
(6.6d)
The subscripts 1 have been dropped here for simplicity since
we are discussing a system with only one external coil and
one accelerated plasma sheet.
The ﬁrst term in Eq. (6.6) is the inverse of the ratio of the
potential change in external circuit inductance during an ac-
celeration pulse over the stray inductance in the external cir-
cuit. This ratio is a means to quantify the electrical eﬃciency
of the accelerator, corresponding roughly to the fraction of
energy that can be directed into electromagnetic acceleration.
The terms ψ1 and ψ2 control the oscillatory nature of
the current waveform in the external circuit and the plasma
sheet, respectively. The discharge current waveforms in RLC
circuits generally take the form of damped sinusoidal oscil-
lations, with values below unity representing underdamped
systems and values above unity representing overdamped sys-
tems.
The dynamic impedance parameter α (which is diﬀerent
from the parameter α found earlier in the equations governing
conservation of mass, momentum, and energy) is probably
the most important of the dimensionless parameters. It can
be recast as
α = C2 V 2
0 LC
2 mp z2
0
=
1
8π2
CV 2
0 /2
mpv2z/2L∗
2π√L0C
L0/ ˙L
2
(6.7)

80
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
Figure 6.3 Contours of calculated axial inductively-coupled
planar accelerator eﬃciencies (after Ref. [18]) for a slug mass
loading as a function of α and ψ1.
where V0 is the initial charge voltage on the capacitor and ˙L is
the dynamic impedance. The parameter α has been shown to
represent a ratio of the electromagnetic decoupling timescale
and the period of the external circuit.
Presented in Fig. 6.3 are contours of constant eﬃciency
(ratio of kinetic energy imparted to the accelerated plasma
to initial energy stored in the capacitor) as a function of α
and ψ1. We observe that for a given value of ψ1 there exists
a maximum eﬃciency. This maximum corresponds to a situ-
ation where the oscillatory timescale of the external circuit is
matched to the electromagnetic coupling timescale, permit-
ting the greatest transfer of stored electrical energy into the
kinetic energy of the gas. We also notice that for a ﬁxed α,
the eﬃciency increases with decreasing ψ1. This emphasizes
the importance of highly ringing external circuits with fast
current rise rates in inductively-coupled pulsed accelerators.
6.2.3.2
Comparison with Data
The axial inductively-coupled planar accelerator is the one
class of device for which suﬃcient data exist to perform real

Illustrative Results
■81
comparisons with modeling techniques. The largest data set
exists on the Pulsed Inductive Thruster (PIT) MK V and
MK Va [11]. The model of equation set (6.3) was applied
to these data in Refs. [2, 11] and exhibited good quantita-
tive agreement with the measured plasma exhaust velocity
and eﬃciency. To demonstrate this, experimentally measured
eﬃciencies, given as a function of α for the experimental con-
dition, are presented in Fig. 6.4 and compared to solutions to
the equation set generated for the design parameters of both
the PIT MK V and MK Va thrusters. At the operational level,
while the measured and simulated values of the discharge cur-
rent given in Fig. 6.5 do not exactly align owing to a lack of
ionization physics in the model and diﬀerences between the
actual current density distribution and that assumed when
calculating the inductance function, the current waveforms
in the ﬁrst half-cycle do show reasonably good agreement.
It is interesting to note that the MK Va was the only
accelerator in the PIT series of devices to reach the maximum
eﬃciency. One can see in the plots in Figs. 6.3 and 6.4 why
the MK Va was able to achieve this level of performance and
Figure 6.4 Comparisons of PIT MK V and MK Va perfor-
mance data with eﬃciencies computed using equation set
(6.3), displayed as a function of α (after Ref. [2]).

82
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
Figure 6.5 Comparisons of experimental (solid line, from [28])
and numerically-calculated current waveforms for a pulse in
one (of nine) sets of coils in the PIT MK Va (from [29]).
why thrusters like the PIT MkV were unable to reach this
maximized eﬃciency: the value of α was such that the ringing
electrical source and the accelerating plasma load were well
matched in the former but not in the latter.
6.2.4
Conical Theta-Pinch Plasma Accelerators
Martin [4] modeled a two-dimensional conical theta pinch
plasma accelerator where the angle of the theta pinch coil θc
was varied from 10 to 90 degrees (0◦being a straight theta-
pinch coil and 90◦being a planar coil). The plasma was the
same length as the accelerator coil and was held at the same
angle as the coil for the duration of a simulation run. In this
work a single external coil-plasma load system was modeled
using equation set (6.4) (with some minor modiﬁcations). A
slug loading of the plasma was assumed, eliminating any com-
plications associated with interactions between the moving
plasma and the ambient gas.
Computed results for the case of a 60◦cone angle are
shown in Fig. 6.6. The waveform for the external circuit

Illustrative Results
■83
Figure 6.6 Computed solutions for a conical theta-pinch
plasma accelerator with a coil angle θc of 60◦, showing time-
histories of: a) the external circuit and plasma load currents,
b) the radial and axial velocities, and c) a trajectory of the
plasma in two-dimensional r-z space (after Ref. [4]; c⃝IOP
Publishing. Reproduced with permission. All rights reserved.)

84
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
current I1 is observed to change in form after just 1-2 µs.
This elongation of the driving current in time is indicative of
the performance of inductively-driven electromagnetic work.
The axial velocity vz of the plasma peaks at about 4 µs and
after slightly decreasing it remains constant for the rest of
the pulse. The radial plasma velocity vr is interesting as it
initially decreases, but the eﬀect of its self inductance causes
it to begin expanding at about 4 µs. This leads to a computed
path for the plasma in the r-z plane that ﬁrst compresses and
then expands, looking very much like the notional conception
of this path previously shown in Fig. 4.1b.

C H A P T E R 7
Concluding Remarks
C
ircuit modeling techniques can be a very powerful set
of tools in the study of inductively-coupled pulsed ac-
celerators. While they are not as complex as ﬁnite element
ﬂuid solvers or particle-in-cell methods, lumped-element cir-
cuit modeling has proven to be quite insightful in the study
of these devices.
The assumed geometry of the problem and how the con-
ducting body is constrained to move in the r-z plane are very
important in deciding which terms must be included in the
circuit equations and the equations of motion for the system.
There are many diﬀerent types of inductively-coupled pulsed
accelerators, but through some tailoring to account for the
variations between accelerator types it is possible to model
all of these systems using lumped-element circuit modeling
techniques.
It was shown how diﬀerent assumptions resulted in slight
but ﬁnite diﬀerences in terms like the computed mutual in-
ductance between a stationary external circuit and a moving
conductor, and how those small diﬀerences could compound
into larger deviations in the course of numerically solving the
coupled set of equations.
Solutions from the literature were presented for various
inductively-coupled pulsed accelerator geometries and conﬁg-
urations. There exist a limited number of studies that have
employed this simulation and modeling method. For those
DOI: 10.1201/9780429351976-7
85

86
■Circuit Modeling of Inductively-Coupled Pulsed Accelerators
cases where experimental data exist, modeling results com-
pare quite favorably. For axially-accelerating plasma sheets,
the model (in non-dimensional form) not only explains the
observation of a maximum in measured accelerator eﬃciency,
but also why that maximum was only observed in PIT MK
Va data while data from other PIT designs did not achieve a
maximum.
In comparing solutions generated using the lumped-
element circuit model to experimental data, one issue that
arises is incompleteness of the experiment description. If the
description of a study is missing critical dimensions or values
of certain parameters, it can be nearly impossible to model
the system accurately. Moreover, even if the description is
complete, a comparison with modeling results is only possi-
ble if experimentally measured data that is comparable to the
outputs of the model exist. As described in this monograph
these data exist for the PIT series of devices, but for many of
the other inductive accelerator variants this is not the case.
Lumped-element circuit modeling has already proven to
be a useful and insightful tool in understanding inductively-
coupled pulsed accelerators, and as more data become avail-
able and more researchers apply these modeling methods to
a greater number of complex problems, the usefulness of the
technique can only increase.

Bibliography
[1] K Polzin, A Martin, J Little, C Promislow, B Jorns, and
J Woods. State-of-the-art and advancement paths for
inductive pulsed plasma thrusters. Aerospace, 7(8):105,
2020.
[2] K A Polzin. Comprehensive review of planar pulsed in-
ductive plasma thruster research and technology. Jour-
nal of Propulsion and Power, 27(3):513–531, 2011.
[3] A K Hallock. Eﬀect of Inductive Coil Geometry on the
Operating Characteristics of a Pulsed Inductive Plasma
Accelerator.
PhD thesis, Princeton University, 2012.
Thesis number 3252-T.
[4] A K Martin.
Performance scaling of inductive pulsed
plasma thrusters with coil angle and pulse rate. Journal
of Physics D: Applied Physics, 49(2):025201, 2016.
[5] K A Polzin, J E Adwar, and A K Hallock. Optimization
of electrodynamic energy transfer in coilguns with multi-
ple, uncoupled stages. IEEE Transactions on Magnetics,
49(4):1453–1460, 2013.
[6] K A Polzin, A B Cipriano, A K Martin, and C Y Liu.
Coilgun acceleration model containing multiple interact-
ing coils. In AIAA Scitech 2019 Forum, 2019. AIAA
paper 2019-1247.
[7] C S Hill. Translation Studies on an Annular Field Re-
versed Conﬁguration Device for Space Propulsion. PhD
thesis, Michigan Technological University, 2012.
87

88
■Bibliography
[8] J M Woods, C L Sercel, T M Gill, E Viges, and B A
Jorns. Data-driven approach to modeling and develop-
ment of a 30 kW ﬁeld-reversed conﬁguration thruster. In
36th International Electric Propulsion Conference, 2019.
IEPC paper 2019-717.
[9] J M Woods, C L Sercel, T M Gill, and B A Jorns.
Equivalent circuit model for a rotating magnetic ﬁeld
thruster. In AIAA Propulsion and Energy 2021 Forum,
2021. AIAA paper 2021-3400.
[10] A K Martin, A Dominguez, R H Eskridge, K A Polzin,
D P Riley, and K A Perdue. Design and testing of a small
inductive pulsed plasma thruster. In 34th International
Electric Propulsion Conference, 2015. IEPC paper 2015-
50.
[11] C L Dailey and R H Lovberg. The PIT MkV Pulsed
Inductive Thruster. Technical Report NASA CR 191155,
TRW Space & Technology Group, Redondo Beach, CA,
1993.
[12] R H Lovberg and C L Dailey. A PIT primer. Technical
Report TR 005, RLD Associates, Lebanon, PA, 1994.
[13] K A Polzin, A K Martin, R H Eskridge, A C Kimber-
lin, B M Addona, A P Devineni, N R Dugal-Whitehead,
and A K Hallock. Summary of the 2012 inductive pulsed
plasma thruster development and testing program. Tech-
nical Report NASA/TP-2013-217488, NASA-Marshall
Space Flight Center, Huntsville, AL, 2013.
[14] B M Novac, I R Smith, M C Enache, and P Se-
nior.
Studies of a very high eﬃciency electromag-
netic launcher. Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics,
35(12):1447–1457, 2002.
[15] L Shoubao, R Jiangjun, P Ying, Z Yujiao, and Z Yadong.
Improvement of current ﬁlament method and its applica-

Bibliography
■89
tion in performance analysis of induction coil gun. IEEE
Transactions on Plasma Science, 39(1):382–389, 2011.
[16] A Shimazu and J Slough. Simulation of electromagnetic
inductive drive for liner implosion fusion thruster sys-
tem using ﬁlamentary approaches. In 35th International
Electric Propulsion Conference, 2017. IEPC paper 2017-
506.
[17] K A Polzin, K Sankaran, A G Ritchie, and J P Re-
neau. Inductive pulsed plasma thruster model with time-
evolution of energy and state properties.
Journal of
Physics D: Applied Physics, 46(475201), 2013.
[18] K A Polzin and E Y Choueiri. Performance optimization
criteria for pulsed inductive plasma acceleration. IEEE
Transactions on Plasma Science, 34(3):945–953, 2006.
[19] D J Griﬃths. Introduction to Electrodynamics, 4th Edi-
tion. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2017.
[20] S. Chandrasekhar.
Hydrodynamic and Hydromagnetic
Stability. Dover, New York, 1981.
[21] J Slough, A Pancotti, and D Kirtley.
Analysis of in-
ductively driven liners for the generation of megagauss
magnetic ﬁelds.
In 14th International Conference on
Megagauss Magnetic Field Generation and Related Top-
ics (MEGAGAUSS), 2012.
[22] E C Cnare.
Magnetic ﬂux compression by magneti-
cally imploded metallic foils. Journal of Applied Physics,
37(10):3812–3816, 1966.
[23] D Kirtley, J Slough, J Schonig, and A Ketsdever. Pulsed
inductive macron propulsion. In 57th Joint Army-Navy-
NASA-Air Force (JANNAF) Spacecraft Propulsion Sub-
committee Meeting, 2010.

90
■Bibliography
[24] F D Murnaghan. The compressibility of media under
extreme pressures. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 30(9):244–247, 1944.
[25] A C Robinson. The Mie-Grüneisen power equation of
state.
Technical Report SAND2019-6025, Sandia Na-
tional Laboratory, 2019.
[26] R H Lovberg and C L Dailey. Large inductive thruster
performance measurement.
AIAA Journal, 20(7):971–
977, 1982.
[27] K A Polzin. Pulsed inductive plasma acceleration: Op-
timization. In J Shohet, editor, Encyclopedia of Plasma
Technology, pages 1191–1200. CRC Press, Boca Raton,
FL, 2016.
[28] I Hrbud, M LaPointe, R Vondra, C L Dailey, and
R Lovberg. Status of pulsed inductive thruster research.
AIP Conference Proceedings, 608:627–632, 2002.
[29] K A Polzin. Faraday Accelerator with Radio-Frequency
Assisted Discharge (FARAD).
PhD thesis, Princeton
University, 2006. Thesis number 3147-T.

Index
alternating current (AC), 2
Ampère, 1, 13, 24, 53
Ampère-Maxwell, 55
annulus, 28, 31, 78
area
disk, 12, 40
surface, 40, 41
Boltzmann, 67
Bremsstrahlung, 43, 50
capacitor, 3, 12, 17, 18, 21
charge density, 43
coil, 3, 7, 19, 26, 31, 35
coilgun, 6, 35, 51, 64, 69, 76
collision, 43
cross-section, 50
Coulomb, 43
frequency, 50
radiative, 43
compress, 34, 62, 84
conductivity, 6, 25
conservation, 37
charge, 17, 21
energy, 45
mass, 38
momentum, 42, 53, 56
continuous-wave, 7
current, 60
density, 1, 4, 60, 64
penetration depth, 25
damped oscillations, 18, 79
diﬀusion, 7, 10, 63
direct current (DC), 23
directly-coupled, 2
dissipation, 2, 18, 21, 65
eﬃciency, 16, 66, 80, 86
electrical permittivity, 12
enthalpy, 68
entrain, 38, 40, 44, 48, 51
equations-of-state (EOS), 66
excitation, 66, 67
Faraday, 1, 13, 53
ﬁeld-reversed conﬁgurations
(FRC), 5, 7, 35
ﬁnite element, 24, 35, 85
ﬂux, 65
energy, 49
magnetic, 3, 4, 10, 13,
14, 29, 30
mass, 38, 40
power, 48
fusion, 1
generator, 8
ideal gas model, 68
impedance, 19, 23, 80
inductance, 12, 17, 60
mutual, 9, 14, 23, 31, 44,
71
91

92
■Index
self, 24, 30
stray, 31, 79
terminal, 71
total, 45
inductive reactance, 27
inductor, 26, 45
instabilities, 61
Kelvin-Helmholtz, 61
Rayleigh-Taylor, 61
ionization, 50, 65
Kirchoﬀ, 17
Lagrangian, 9, 40, 41, 43
liner, 6, 38, 51, 62, 66
Lorentz, 2, 8, 14, 44
macron, 6, 38, 69
maglev, 1, 8
magnetic ﬁeld energy, 24, 25
magnetic nozzles, 9, 23
magnetic permeability, 1, 12,
63
magnetostatic, 29, 31
mass density, 38, 60
momentum density, 43, 55
motors, 1, 8
Ohmic heating, 46, 48, 63
particle-in-cell, 9, 85
partition function, 65
plasma sheet, 4, 10, 29, 34,
39, 79, 86
plasmoids, 5, 35, 41, 44
pressure
ambient, 45, 51, 70, 73
gradient, 67
magnetic, 61
thermodynamic, 43, 67
projectile, 6, 34, 51, 69, 77
pumps, 1, 8
radiation, 43
railguns, 2
ratio of speciﬁc heats, 48, 49,
67
reconnect, 4
resistance, 11, 28, 50, 60
resistivity, 50, 59
skin depth, 6, 63
solenoidal, 56
speciﬁc heat, 47
speciﬁc impulse, 15
spheromaks, 5
stored energy, 12, 66
taxonomy, 2
temperature, 47, 64, 67
Thévenin, 28, 30
theta-pinch, 4
conical, 10, 29, 34, 53,
72, 82
thrusters, 1, 2, 70, 74, 81
toroids, 5, 7, 10, 34
trajectory, 34
transformer, 14
voltage, 11, 17, 60, 75
work, 2, 15, 18, 19, 84
virtual, 14

