 
  
H O W 
Y O U R  W O R L D
W O R K S
THE JOHN McCAIN  
WAR STORY
YOU HAVEN’T
HEARD
Know Your Hammer • FOOTBALL • Grow 1,000 Pounds  
of Food in 100 Square Feet • MARS: GOOD IDEA? • Bigfoot*
SEAMANSHIP IN SMALL BOATS • 9/11 Myths • ALCATRAZ 
Climate Change • ROGUE SCIENTISTS • The New Millinery
*THE TRUCK
$4 99
Greatest
Hits
VO LU M E  1 

Learn everything from lawn-care secrets to the best way to hang a TV  
to the proper way to sear a steak. Also: On one episode, for reasons we now forget,  
Jacqueline and Kevin had an on-air push-up contest. (She won.)
Hosts Jacqueline Detwiler and 
Kevin Dupzyk explore ideas, 
products, hacks, tricks, projects, and 
techniques that are guaranteed to 
make your life easier. (Jacqueline is a 
neuroscientist! Kevin is a great guy!)
The Most Useful Podcast Ever is an 
entirely original, 25-minute, biweekly 
audio program that’s perfect to 
listen to while doing yardwork, 
driving, washing dishes, running, 
jogging, walking . . .
Every other Friday, be entertained and enlightened  
by the editors of your favorite magazine.
H E R E ’ S  H OW  T O  G E T  I T :
Go to the iTunes store 
or popularmechanics.
com/podcast
SUBSCRIBE
Subscribe to  
The Most  
Useful Podcast Ever
Get automatic 
downloads every time 
a new episode airs
Enjoy

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
42
Fire on the flight deck  • 1974
46
Good seamanship in small boats  • 1940
48
Hammer skills  • 1953
52
Rocket science • 1940
56
How to organize your home workshop  • 1981
58
A small-plot garden  • 1980
61
Roy’s first story • 1989
64
Our prospects of living on other planets • 1952
68
Debunking 9/11 conspiracies • 2005
70
Deconstructing Bigfoot • 1992
82
A kid’s easel  • 2005
40
The Greatest Hits: Vol. I 
04
From the Editor
06
PM Everywhere
09
The First Story: Kia 
went from being the 
butt of jokes to maker 
of reliable cars that can 
be driven right off the 
factory line. Which is 
exactly what we did.   
BY EZRA DYER
16
The Apple Diaspora: 
Along with revolutionary 
products, Apple has also 
produced great talent.
18
How do you get even 
more hops in beer? 
Science. 
22
Why you should surf 
this winter 
26
My First Kitchen
30
Ask Roy
33
Getting Started In: 
Cross-country skiing
36
Road Tested with 
Ezra Dyer: Heavy-duty 
trucks
38
The New Vintage: 1994 
Toyota Supra
74
The infamous Alcatraz 
prison break that 
relied on an issue of PM
88
Great Unknowns: 
Fallout shelters
003
J A N UA RY    F E B R UA RY
JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2018
0 03

rhdagostino Time to retire my old Yamaha. 
My pal @petefrancis3 took me to @mattu-
manovguitars on Bleecker Street. Got this 
sweet Sunburst Seagull. #amateur
rhdagostino The studio project is 
really coming along. #diy #backyard 
#tablesaw @hitachipowertoolsusa
rhdagostino A workbench at the black-
smith’s shop @mysticseaportmuseum in 
Connecticut, a pefect re-creation of a New 
England whaling village.
M E   O N   I N S TA G R A M
Volume I
RYAN D’AGOSTINO
Editor in Chief 
@rhdagostino
Editor in Chief Ryan D’Agostino • Design Director Michael Wilson • Executive Editor Peter Martin • Managing Editor Helene F. Rubinstein • Deputy 
Managing Editor Aimee E. Bartol • Associate Creative Director Allyson Torrisi • Articles Editor Jacqueline Detwiler • Senior Editors Matt Allyn, Roy 
Berendsohn • Automotive Editor Ezra Dyer • Technology Editor Alexander George • Senior Associate Editor Kevin Dupzyk • Associate Editor Lara 
Sorokanich • Field Editor James Lynch • Assistant to the Editor in Chief Eleanor Hildebrandt • Copy Chief Robin Tribble • Copy Editor Maude 
Campbell • Research Director David Cohen • Research Editor Henry Robertson • Art: Art Director Duane Bruton • Associate Art Director Zachary 
Gilyard • Contributing Editors: Tom Chiarella, Daniel Dubno, Wylie Dufresne, Kendall Hamilton, Francine Maroukian, David Owen, Joe Pappalardo, 
Richard Romanski, James Schadewald, Joseph Truini, Nicholas Wicks • Imaging: Digital Imaging Specialist Steve Fusco • PopularMechanics.com: Site 
Director Andrew Moseman • Deputy Editor Eric Limer • Senior Editor Darren Orf • DIY Editor Timothy Dahl • Web Video Editor Ryan Mazer • Assistant 
Editor Jay Bennett • Mobile Editions: Mobile Editions Editor Tom Losinski • Popular Mechanics Interactive: Producer Jeff Zinn • Popular Mechanics 
International Editions: Russia, South Africa • SVP/International Editorial Director Kim St. Clair Bodden • Published by Hearst Communications, Inc. President & Chief Executive Officer Steven R. Swartz • Chairman 
William R. Hearst III • Executive Vice Chairman Frank A. Bennack, Jr. • Hearst Magazines Division: President David Carey • President, Marketing & Publishing Director Michael Clinton • President, Digital Media Troy 
Young • Chief Content Officer Joanna Coles • Senior Vice President, Chief Financial Officer Debi Chirichella • Publishing Consultants Gilbert C. Maurer, Mark F. Miller
Publisher, Chief Revenue Officer Cameron Connors • Associate Publisher Adam C. Dub • Executive Director, Integrated Marketing Jason Graham • Advertising Sales Offices: NEW YORK: East Coast 
Automotive Director Joe Pennacchio • Integrated Account Director Sara Schiano • Vice President, Digital Sales, Lifestyle and Design Group Sue Katzen • LOS ANGELES: Integration Associate Michelle 
Nelson • SAN FRANCISCO: William G. Smith, Smith Media Sales, LLC • CHICAGO: Midwest Director Justin Harris • Integrated Midwest Manager, Auto Aftermarket Marc Gordon • Assistant Yvonne 
Villareal • DETROIT: Integrated Sales Director Mark Fikany • Midwest Account Manager Bryce Vredevoogd • Assistant Toni Starrs • DALLAS: Patty Rudolph PR 4.0 Media • Hearst Direct Media:
Sales Manager Brad Gettelfinger • Marketing Solutions: Director, Integrated Marketing William Upton • Director, Group Marketing Yasir Salem • Special Projects Director Karen Mendolia • Senior 
Manager, Integrated Marketing Amanda Kaye • Senior Director, Digital Marketing Samantha Gladis • Senior Digital Marketing Manager A’ngelique Tyree • Senior Digital Marketing Manager Lee Anne 
Murphy • Creative Solutions: Executive Creative Director, Group Marketing Jana Nesbitt Gale • Art Director Michael B. Sarpy • Administration: Advertising Services Director Regina Wall • Executive Assistant to 
the Publisher Amanda Bessim • Production/Operations Director Chuck Lodato • Operations Account Manager Jackie Beck • Premedia Account Manager Lauren Rosato • Circulation: Consumer Marketing Director 
William Carter • Research Manager Peter Davis • Group Vice President and Global Chief Licensing Director Steve Ross • Hearst Men’s Group: Senior Vice President & Publishing Director Jack Essig • General 
Manager Samantha Irwin • Executive Assistant to the Group Publishing Director & Business Coordinator Mary Jane Boscia
S I N C E  1 9 0 2 
I REMEMBER WHEN Bruce Springsteen’s 
Greatest Hits album came out. I was in col-
lege, and I walked through the snow down 
to the record store (the record store!) and 
bought it on compact disc. For a fan of 
any musician, greatest hits albums were 
always a little strange. You were used to 
hearing songs in the context of the other 
songs on the record. Now here they were 
all out of order, and only the hits, not the 
B-sides and non-radio-friendly tracks 
where they belonged. In Springsteen’s 
case, all the hits were there, of course—
“Born to Run,” “Hungry Heart,” “Born in 
the U.S.A.” (And also, curiously, “Atlantic 
City.” Was that a hit?) I loved them all as 
songs, but I wondered if this album would 
sound like an album or merely a collec-
tion of songs. 
Because there’s a difference.
This question might not make sense 
to anyone very young, because albums 
aren’t a thing anymore. Today, the single 
is everything, and we stream songs one 
at a time on Spotify and make playlists 
(which aren’t all that different from mix-
tapes). But albums used to be conceived 
as complete works, with all the songs in a 
precise order, ideally adding up to some-
thing more powerful than each individual 
track. I wondered if Springsteen’s songs 
out of order might lose some of that power.
They didn’t. At least I didn’t think they 
did. The reason is that the songs were so 
good that not only did they stand on their 
own, but I heard a newness in them that 
was exciting.
You’re holding the first-ever “greatest 
hits” issue of Popular Mechanics. To kick 
off our 117th year, we thought we’d look 
back and see how much of our history holds 
up—how many stories still matter. A ton, 
it turns out. Most, even. We had a blast 
looking through the 12 decades of Popular 
Mechanics, and we found so many stories 
that still ring true that we’re thinking of 
making an annual thing of this. Volume 
I, Volume II, etc. 
This exercise was like using reclaimed 
materials to construct some new and 
equally useful, equally wonderful thing—
a dining table out of barn wood. You go 
back, you find the best stuff, you touch 
it up, you use it. Presented in a new con-
text, it not only continues to do its job, it 
takes on new meaning, stirs in us differ-
ent feelings. These stories from all eras of 
our history are not only still relevant, but 
they come to us full of the passions and 
dreams of people who were pretty much 
just like us. As it turns out, the old, worn 
wood of a hayloft looks new and vibrant 
in the center of the family room. So it is 
in this issue. We appreciate these things 
that were created so carefully before our 
time, and we’ve used them to build some-
thing for you, anew. 
JANUARY/FEBRUARY _ 2018
4
P O PULA R M EC H A N I C S.CO M
P O PULA R M EC H A N I C S.CO M

Switch to GEICO and save money for the things you love.
Maybe it’s maintaining that vintage classic you own. Or the lease on the new one. Cars are what you 
love – and they don’t come cheap. So switch to GEICO, because you could save 15% or more on car 
insurance. And that would help make the things you love that much easier to get.
WON’T PAY
FOR ITSELF.
Some discounts, coverages, payment plans and features are not available in all states or all GEICO companies. Homeowners and renters coverages are written through non-afﬁliated insurance companies and are
secured through the GEICO Insurance Agency, Inc. Boat and PWC coverages are underwritten by GEICO Marine Insurance Company. Motorcycle and ATV coverages are underwritten by GEICO Indemnity Company.
GEICO is a registered service mark of Government Employees Insurance Company, Washington, D.C. 20076; a Berkshire Hathaway Inc. subsidiary. © 2017 GEICO
Auto • Home • Rent • Cycle • Boat
geico.com    |    1-800-947-AUTO (2886)    |    local office

 
  
  
   
  
WHERE ELSE  
YOU CAN  
FIND US
 In 2007, China used a missile to shoot one of its own 
defunct satellites out of the sky. Which prompted U.S. mili-
tary leaders to work even harder to protect our orbiting 
spacecraft. We talked to Air Force Space Command about 
protecting U.S. satellites from attack, the challenges of serv-
ing as space traffic control for tens of thousands of objects 
in orbit, and keeping GPS running for the world. Find the 
exclusive interview at popularmechanics.com/AFSPC.
FACEBOOK 
/PopularMechanics
INSTAGRAM 
@popularmechanics
TWITTER 
@PopMech
SNAPCHAT 
PopMech
ONLINE!
WHAT WE’RE UP 
TO BEYOND THESE 
PAGES
ON TAP!
This fall, Popular 
Mechanics partnered 
with Blue Point Brew-
ing Company to learn 
about and design 
our very own beer. 
The 1902 Lager—
named after the year 
PM was founded—is 
inspired by America’s 
crisp pre-Prohibition 
pilsners. We updated 
the style with oats 
and juicy American 
hops for a surprising 
yet satisfying pint. 
Find out more about 
it on page 18.
S
tauer brings back the “Noire”, a 
design based on an elegant time-
piece built in 1936. Black dialed, com-
plex automatics from the 1930s have 
recently hit new heights at auction. 
One was sold for in excess of $600,000. 
We thought that you might like to have 
an affordable version that will be much 
more accurate than the original.
Basic black with a twist. Not only 
are the dial, hands and face vintage, but 
we used a 27-jeweled automatic move-
ment. This is the kind of engineering 
desired by fine watch collectors world-
wide. But since we design this classic 
movement on state of the art computer-
controlled Swiss built machines, the 
accuracy is excellent. The  movement of 
the Stauer Noire wrist watch carries an 
extended two year warranty. But first 
enjoy this handsome timepiece risk-free 
for 30 days for the extraordinary price 
of only 3 payments of $33. If you are 
not thrilled with the quality and rare 
design, simply send it back for a full 
refund of the item price. But once you 
strap on the Noire you’ll want to stay 
in the black.
I’ll Take  
Mine Black… 
No Sugar
•  27-jewel automatic movement   
•  Month, day, date and 24-hour, sun/ 
moon dials  •  Luminous markers   
•  Date window at 3’ o’clock   
•  Water resistant to 5 ATM   
•  Crocodile embossed leather strap  
in black fits wrists to 6½”–9”
14101 Southcross Drive W., Dept. NWT357-06 
Burnsville, Minnesota 55337 www.stauer.com
1-800-333-2045
Offer Code: NWT357-06 
You must use this offer code to get  
our special price.
Stauer Noire Watch $399†
Your Cost With Offer Code $99+S&P
Save $300
OR 3 credit card payments 
of $33 + S&P
Stauer
®
† Special price only for customers using the offer 
code versus the price on Stauer.com without your 
offer code.
Rating 
of A+
Exclusive Offer— 
Not Available in Stores
6

 
“While shopping, my wife saw an expensive metal 
table she liked. I offered to make her one, but with 
my own design & style. Even with little metalworking 
experience, I imported my sketch and cut out the metal 
table - all in one piece and with no other materials. The 
table came out just how I imagined! Plus, several people 
want to buy my table design. Now I can make my ideas 
LQWRXQLTXH SUR¿WDEOHSURMHFWVXVLQJWKH3ODVPD&$0 ®!”
  ID[  ZZZSODVPDFDPFRP
32%R[&RORUDGR&LW\&2
-Dennis Cordova,  Amateur Metalworker
The PlasmaCAM ® machine 
makes it easy for you to cut 
intricate metal 
projects.  Call with this 
code  96UJY for your 
free demo video to see 
what you can do with this 
amazing machine!

RESOLVE TO DRIVE SAFER!
SEE OUR FULL LINE OF  DASH CAMS AT BESTBUY.COM
Introducing the Car and Driver Minio Pro Dash Cam. Featuring the latest technology 
and easy-to-install equipment, this Dash Cam makes it easy to stay safer this year.

@PopularMe chanics
9
HOW
BY  E Z R A  DY E R
The Korean Peninsula is hot right now. 
Nuclear tension, the Olympics, and . . . Kia! 
Here’s how the car company went from 
rental-lot reject to customer favorite.
After panels have been 
stamped and hand-
inspected for defects, 
robots handle the welding. 
This Kia plant in Georgia 
operates 24 hours a day, 
five days a week.
MONTH _ 2017
JANUARY/FEBRUARY _ 2018
@PopularMe chanics
9

FIVE-WORD 
REVIEWS
(KIA EDITION)
OPTIMA PHEV
The plug-in goes  
29 miles.  
CADENZA
Posh, but nobody 
knows it.
SORENTO
Locking center 
diff! What? Gnarly.
SEDONA
Solid minivan, plus 
quasi-SUV hood. 
SOUL
Most popular  
cube since Rubik’s.
STINGER
Rear-wheel drive, 
365 horsepower, 
fun.
A welder makes 
final repairs to a 
completed body 
before it goes 
to paint.
But for the past two 
years, Kia has ranked 
number one on the 
IQS survey, with 
corporate siblings 
Hyundai and Gene-
sis near the top, too. 
But reputations have 
inertia. I recently 
heard a comedian 
named Paul Var-
ghese do a whole slew 
of Kia jokes. Setup: 
“The guy at the rental 
counter said, ‘Sir, we 
upgraded you . . . to a 
Kia.’ ” (Audience laughs.) Punch line: “You 
upgraded me from what, shoes?” 
Scott Upham, CEO of Valient Market 
Research, has followed the Korean auto 
companies for decades and written stud-
ies to help their managers understand how 
to establish manufacturing in the U.S. 
“After Hyundai’s initial failures with its 
first wave of cars, they spent over a billion 
dollars researching how to improve qual-
ity,” he says. “This was new, for a Korean 
brand to make this high-level investment 
into quality. But it takes time to build up 
goodwill. They’ve had a tough row to hoe.”
Everyone at Kia, both at the Georgia 
factory and in Seoul, is aware of this, work-
ing hard to reverse those perceptions.
I REMEMBER DRIVING the cars that 
informed that era of Kia. The mid-2000s 
Amanti felt like a goggle-eyed Mercedes 
E-Class rip-off. The Sedona was built with
so much cast iron it weighed as much as 
a Tahoe. But change started in 2006. Kia 
hired designer Peter Schreyer away from 
Audi. It was a big poach —his résumé 
included the iconic Audi TT—and after 
he arrived, the cars started looking bet-
ter. In 2009, the Soul became a surprise 
I WONDERED IF THERE WAS A TURNING 
POINT, WHERE AN EXECUTIVE IN KOREA 
POUNDED A FIST ON A CONFERENCE TABLE.
NIRO
Prius mileage with 
better styling.
I WASN’T SURE Kia would go for it. I was 
going to visit the factory in West Point, 
Georgia, an hour southwest of Atlanta, 
and drive 400-something miles home to 
North Carolina in a Sorento SX Limited 
plucked straight off the assembly line. 
Handing a freshly built car over to a mag-
azine writer requires confidence in your 
product—no break-in mileage, and no 
making sure that I get a perfect car. But 
Kia agreed. It’s a bold play, one that dem-
onstrates that it has a point to prove.
Kia spent the early 2000s, its forma-
tive years, as the butt of jokes. Its cars 
were a reliable fixture at the bottom of the 
J.D. Power Initial Quality Study (IQS), 
which tallies owners’ complaints after 
three months of driving. As recently as 
2005, Kia ranked 30th. A few years before 
that, it anchored the bottom, 37th place. 
Like fellow Koreans Hyundai and Dae-
woo, its cars were known for cheap MSRPs 
and not much else. In the early 2000s, the 
mechanic who worked on my ’91 Saab—no 
paragon of reliability itself—had a lucra-
tive side job keeping Kias on the road. “I’ve 
got a pile of Sportage engines out behind 
the building,” he told me. “They’re always 
blowing up.” 
10
P O PULA R M EC H A N I C S.CO M
JANUARY/FEBRUARY _ 2018


Far left: Using a computerized wrench, a 
worker calculates and records the number  
of revolutions and torque applied to bolts  
for the rear seat. Left: Inconspicuous 
mechanical platforms assist in the instal-
lation of doors. Below: Entering the paint 
station requires a decontamination process 
similar to a microchip factory’s clean room.
hit, and, across the whole company, 
IQS numbers and sales tracked up. In 
2005, Kia’s market share was 1.62 per-
cent, rising to 3.53 percent today. That 
growth is unprecedented in this indus-
try, and partly the result of Schreyer’s 
mission to make Kias better looking. 
More specifically, to make them look 
different from Hyundais.
Ah yes, Hyundai. Back in 1998, 
Hyundai bought a bankrupt Kia, and 
now owns about a third of the com-
pany. For the cars bearing either 
name, think of them as siblings, but 
not twins. Within the parameters of 
shared engineering, Hyundai and Kia 
have fairly wide leeway to design and 
market their cars in different ways. Not 
every Kia has a Hyundai equivalent, 
and vice versa. There is no Kia version 
of the Hyundai Veloster, no Hyundai 
version of the Soul. I’d say Kia’s designs 
skew younger and sportier, in general, 
but maybe I’m just buying into that 
hip-hamster-based marketing.
Besides introducing anthropomor-
phic hamsters, Kia has also gradually 
moved upmarket. Charging more 
for its cars, says Kia spokesman Neil 
Dunlop, reflects a deliberate distinc-
tion between cost and value—“It’s not 
about being at the bargain end of the 
pricing spectrum,” he says. That means 
modern Kias still tend to be somewhat 
less expensive than their competitors, 
but not always. The Cadenza Limited is 
about $45,000. A totally loaded Lexus 
ES 350 is only about $3,000 more, while 
a lesser ES might cost the same. Charg-
ing similar prices is part of Kia’s way 
of saying, We’re not so different from 
Lexus, you know. 
This pricing tactic reflects a trans-
formation beyond quality. On the 
factory floor, I wondered if there was 
a particular moment, a turning point 
when an executive in Korea pounded 
a fist on a conference table and issued 
a decree to beat Lexus in the IQS. It 
took a few weeks for Kia, writing from 
Korea, to issue a response stating that 
there had been such a decision: “Yes, 
over a decade ago, Hyundai Motor 
Group, which includes Kia, made a 
conscious and deliberate decision to 
concentrate on quality rather than vol-
ume.” It seems nobody there wants to 
take credit. But back in Georgia, Kia 
was totally willing to show me how it 
translated that unlikely goal—worst to 
first—into a reality.
WEST POINT, LIKE any car factory, 
is where theories and goals meet the 
harsh reality of large-scale manu-
facturing. This is where a thousand 
things can go wrong. Kia’s strategy is 
to catch them early. This plant has 39 
codes just to flag paint defects (No. 14: 
“thin coat”; No. 39: “mottle”). And a 
The Newest Car Company: It isn’t Tesla or Faraday Future—it’s Genesis, Hyundai’s luxury division, 
which officially hung its shingle in late 2015. Hyundai has sold Genesis-branded cars for years, but those 
were merely the beachhead to get U.S. buyers accustomed to the idea of an upscale Korean car. Now, 
Genesis is its own company and its latest sedans crib directly from the Lexus strategy in the early ’90s: 
Meet or beat the established player in quality, performance, and luxury at a significantly lower price. 
New Genesis models, like the twin-turbo, rear-wheel-drive G80 Sport (left), are an enticing proposition 
for the brand-agnostic: You’re paying for the car, not the badge. At least, not yet.
12
P O PULA R M EC H A N I C S.CO M
JANUARY/FEBRUARY _ 2018

  
A Sorento like my factory-fresh 
SX Limited costs $47,140. Paying 
that much for a Kia makes more 
sense from the heated and cooled, 
14-way adjustable, Nappa-leather-
upholstered driver’s seat.
“FOR A KOREAN 
COMPANY TO SPEND 
$1 BILLION TO 
RESEARCH QUALITY, 
THIS WAS NEW.”
panel only gets paint if it makes it past 
an earlier barrage of quality tests. “If 
even a single hair gets into a die,” says 
Ted Arnold, senior manager of quality 
assurance, “that can come out in the 
metal.” Thousands of tons of stamping 
force, and a hair can ruin everything. 
Arnold is an industry veteran, hav-
ing come from a Mercedes plant in 
Alabama. And even though there are 
3,000 workers employed at West Point, 
he seems to know everyone—at least, 
everyone on this day shift. The line 
runs 24 hours a day, Monday to Friday. 
When a shift changes, the incoming 
workers stand behind the ones who are 
about to punch out and seamlessly con-
tinue building cars. “A lot of people 
around here used to work in the tex-
tile industry,” Arnold says. “So there 
was already a skilled labor force that we 
could recruit.” Every one of the plant’s 
employees spent at least 40 hours at 
the $22 million Kia Georgia Training 
Center down the road, which houses 
welding, robotics, and electronics and 
quality-control labs. And more than 
two-thirds of those employees have 
flown to Korea for even more training. 
Robots weld and stamp panels like 
in any modern car factory, but there’s a 
surprising amount of human artistry 
in a Sorento, Optima, and Hyundai 
Santa Fe, the three models built here. 
Consider stoning, for instance. Workers 
hand-rub fine stones over every tenth 
door panel that comes through, search-
ing for imperfections. “Any high points 
will show up bright silver, and low 
points will be darker,” Arnold says. If 
they find anything wrong, they rub the 
entire batch. And the batch that came 
before that. “We want to catch anything 
before it gets to paint, because here it’s 
easier to fix,” he says. I figured this is the 
sort of job that would be done by laser-
eyed Terminator robots the world over. 
But Honda does this, too, at its plant in 
Marysville. For quality control, even on 
the scale of Hondas and Kias, human 
hands still play a role in the business of 
smashing metal into shape. 
AFTER ANY FLAGGED issues are 
fixed (my loaner Sorento had only one, 
resolved earlier on, noted as some kind 
of residue on one of the seats), the car 
gets four gallons of gas, just enough 
to test it and move it around en route 
to the dealer. A diagnostic computer 
fires the car’s electric synapses while 
a worker sits behind the wheel push-
ing buttons on the dash, verifying all 
the connections. Front-seat coolers: 
check. The surround-view cameras are 
calibrated by driving the car into what 
looks like a Hollywood green-screen 
room, the Kia employee tapping tar-
gets on the dash touchscreen. The car 
gets an alignment, followed by a high-
speed four-wheel dynamometer test to 
verify engine power and transmission 
function. Then, it’s outside for a lap 
around the test track, where a driver 
checks the antilock brakes, steering, 
acceleration, suspension, and even 
the brake’s hill-holder function. Back 
inside, the Sorento enters a leak-test 
chamber that looks like an exception-
ally ferocious car wash. 
But it’s the same question as the 
stoning: Doesn’t everyone do this? No, 
not everyone. I’ve seen McLaren dyno 
test each $200,000-plus supercar. But 
in Marysville, Honda only spot checks. 
Kia does this with every car.  
Tour over, I climb into my Sorento, 
which has 13 miles on the odometer. 
I ask Arnold if I need to break it in, 
take it easy for a few hundred miles. 
He says there’s no particular break-in 
period—after all, they gunned it on the 
dyno test from the first moment the oil 
was warm. So as I turn onto the high-
way on-ramp, I floor it, summoning 
all 290 horses from the 3.3-liter V-6. 
It’s peppy, the Sorento. But this design 
has been around a while. Introduced 
in 2011, it shows its age. The transmis-
sion has six gears instead of eight or 
nine. There’s no electronic lane keep-
ing. And when I stop for gas, there’s a 
plastic cap to unscrew. Little details 
remind you that the Sorento is due for 
an overhaul, but the car is otherwise a 
fundamentally pleasant companion. 
The interior is smartly designed—
actual knobs for the stereo and 
HVAC—and quiet on the highway. The 
Sorento is competent and well made, 
a car that strives to soothe rather than 
excite. Kia now knows how to do the 
latter (see: Stinger) but that’s not the 
mission for midsize crossovers. 
I would cover nearly 1,000 miles 
before Kia reclaimed the Sorento. 
Along the way, there were a thousand 
things that could have gone wrong.  
But nothing did. 
@PopularMe chanics
13
JANUARY/FEBRUARY _ 2018

 
 
FINALLY! A SITE 
SELLING INDIE FOOD 
AND SPIRITS
America holds a bounty of hand-
crafted whiskeys, bacons, and 
hot sauces that are easy to covet 
but only stocked locally. That’s 
why Mouth.com was created. 
The site’s buyers comb the country to bring the very best small-batch 
food and drink, like Colorado’s The Real Dill Pickles and California’s 
True Jerky (get the Korean BBQ beef), into a single online shop that 
ships coast to coast. “Mouth found us four months after we started 
selling at a San Diego farmer’s market,” says James Evans, sales 
director at True Jerky. “Now we’re starting national distribution.” 
Mouth’s gift boxes and guides for events like weddings, housewarm-
ings, and birthdays simplify your shopping, while also making you 
appear far more thoughtful than the guy showing up with a gift card. 
Nobody needs to know the Hot Hot Hot Sauce collection ($73) or 
The Indie Negroni Kit ($102) only took four clicks to buy.
Shut it down and start the physical cleaning. 
Clogged vents and overheating prompt the 
machine to slow down. Dab rubbing alcohol 
on a microfiber cloth, wipe the screen, key-
board, and case, and shoot air under the keys. 
Extra credit if you unscrew the shell (check iFixit.com) and take 
a hobby paintbrush to the circuits and fans—but this may void 
the warranty. For the trackpad, a business card fits in the groove 
around the edge, and a Mr. Clean Magic Eraser gets oil off the sur-
face. Now boot it up. Open the applications folder and uninstall 
anything you don’t use. Be ruthless. Next, reduce the apps that 
automatically run when you start up (the Task Manager’s Startup 
tab on a PC; the Users & Groups folder called Login Items on a 
Mac) to two essentials. Completely clear the desktop. Run the 
storage optimization app (Disk Cleanup on a PC; Disk Utility on 
a Mac). And if the laptop is pestering you to download updates, do 
it. Unless it’s five years old, the latest software will make it faster 
and more secure.
—Alexander George
Last winter, we hired an interior designer. She scheduled a time to come 
over, spent 30 minutes measuring our living room, and sent that info to a 
CAD artist who set it up with all the proposed furniture. We had to pay that 
CAD artist, too. PLNAR, a new room-mapping app that runs on Apple’s 
ARKit, doesn’t totally replace that, but it definitely would have saved us 
time and a little money. With my iPhone, I measured the same room in less 
than two minutes. After you mark out the perimeter by aiming the phone 
at the floor and tapping a button at every corner or new surface, you can 
mark off walls, doors, and openings. There’s a lot of clutter in the room 
while we figure out where to put things, but the app still worked over fur-
niture that was blocking sight lines. You can then send a PDF and CAD file 
of the room layout to yourself or your designer. It can also measure walls to 
create 3D room models, and map backyards, where using a tape measure is 
either annoying or useless. 
                       —Peter Martin
GIVE YOUR 
LAPTOP AN 
OIL CHANGE
MEASURE ROOMS FOR REMODELING 
PROJECTS ON YOUR PHONE
JANUARY/FEBRUARY _ 2018
14
P O PULA R M EC H A N I C S.CO M

7KHSHGDOKHOLFRSWHU)HUULVZKHHODQGJRFDUWZHUHDOOIRUPHG
RQWKH)DEULFDWRU:KHQSHGDOHGWKHPDLQIRDPURWRUEODGHV
DQGWKHWDLOURWRURQWKHKHOLFRSWHUWXUQZKLOHWKHFKRSSHULWVHOI
WUDYHOVDURXQGLQDZLGHFLUFOH:DWFKRXUOLYHDFWLRQYLGHRRI
WKLVUHDOO\IXQSHGDOKHOLFRSWHUDWZZZ6KRS2XWÀWWHUVFRP
2XU
HTXLSPHQWFDQ
JUHDWO\LPSURYH
\RXURUQDPHQWDO
DQGJHQHUDOPHWDO
IDEULFDWLQJPHDQV
RIPDNLQJLQFRPH
:LWKRXUPDFKLQHV
WZRGLPHQVLRQDO
SODVPDFXWDUWZRUN
FDQEHFRPHSDUWRI
WKUHHGLPHQVLRQDO
XWLOLWDULDQSURMHFWV
2XU
WRROVDUH
XVHGLQHYHU\
VWDWHE\ZHOGLQJ
VKRSVVFKRROV
JRYHUQPHQWDJHQFLHV
DQGWKHPLOLWDU\
8)+8QLYHUVDO)DEULFDWRU
25%2UQDPHQWDO5ROOHU%HQGHU
5ROOVULQJV%HQGVWXELQJ
ÁDWVVTXDUHVDQGURXQGV
)RUPVVFUROOVDQGEDVNHWV
7ZLVWVSLFNHWV
25%
1HZ
  
 7RROVHPSOR\VHYHUDO
86 &DQDGLDQ
SDWHQWV 
2UGHU&DWDORJ
32%R[&RORUDGR&LW\&2

 
 
16
P O PULA R M EC H A N I C S.CO M
THE APPLE 
DIASPORA
Among Apple’s lesser-known products: some of 
the world’s greatest engineering, managerial, and 
creative talent. We assembled an abridged list of 
notable alumni who aren’t moving into Apple’s 
new headquarters in Cupertino, and asked a few 
of them about what it’s like inside the most 
important—and secretive—technology company.
CURRENTLY 
 CEO of Adobe Systems, a $64.4 billion com-
pany best known for products like Photoshop, 
InDesign, Lightroom. Narayen had to deal with 
Apple again when Steve Jobs omitted Adobe’s 
Flash software from the iPad and iPhone.
AT APPLE (1989–1995) 
 Multiple senior management positions.
Shantanu Narayen
CURRENTLY  
 Head of a to-be-announced 
nonprofit. Before that, he 
was the cofounder and head 
engineer of WhatsApp, the 
messaging app for which Face-
book paid $19 billion in 2014. 
AT APPLE (1993–1996) 
 Hardware, then software, 
engineer. He worked on 
the first Power Macintosh 
computers.
Brian Acton
CURRENTLY 
 CEO of Essential, 
a smartphone com-
pany, and head of 
Playground Global, 
which gives resources 
to startups. Before 
that, he cocreated 
and developed the 
Android operating 
system.
AT APPLE 
(1989–1992) 
 Software engineer 
during development 
of the Macintosh Por-
table and then the 
PowerBook.
Andy Rubin
CURRENTLY 
 Partner at Greylock Partners, 
a venture-capital firm that has 
made lucrative investments 
in companies like Airbnb, 
Facebook, and Dropbox. 
Before that, he was CEO and 
cofounder of LinkedIn (now at 
around 500 million users).
AT APPLE (1994–1996)
 Developed user experience 
for Apple products. He created 
an early social network called 
eWorld, later bought by AOL.
Reid Hoffman
AT APPLE (1978–1982)  
 Director of strategy and marketing during 
the early years of the Apple II.
CURRENTLY  
 Founded Electronic Arts in 1982. Current 
market capitalization is $35 billion thanks to 
franchises like FIFA, Madden, and The Sims. 
He’s also a professor at UC Santa Barbara.
Trip Hawkins
CURRENTLY  
 Partner at Root Ventures, where she advises 
startups. Before that, she was head of hard-
ware development at Pearl Automation, which 
made the only non-factory backup car camera 
we’ve tested that actually worked. The com-
pany shut down in 2017.
AT APPLE (2007–2013) 
 Went from intern to engineering program 
manager. She worked on the first Apple Watch 
and several generations of the iPod Touch.
 “I was an intern in the iPod New Tech 
team, which is exactly what it sounds like. 
We took these new technologies that might 
not be mature enough for a current prod-
uct, assessed them, then worked with the 
suppliers and the inventor. When we felt 
comfortable and the product had matured, 
they’d be included in the design for the next-
generation iPod or iPhone. It was really, really 
fun. You’re seeing the coolest stuff!”
Chrissy Meyer
CURRENTLY  
 Advisor for Bridgewater Associates, the 
world’s largest hedge fund. Until April last year, 
he was co-chief executive. The company han-
dles about $160 billion.
AT APPLE (1997–2006)  
 Senior executive, oversaw the development 
and release of the iMac and iPod.
Jon Rubinstein
CURRENTLY 
 Vice president of 
research and develop-
ment at DJI, the largest 
drone manufacturer in 
the world.
AT APPLE 
(2006–2015) 
 Head of the division 
responsible for the 
iPhone’s antennas.
Robert Schlub

JANUARY/FEBRUARY _ 2018
@PopularMe chanics
17
AT APPLE  
(2006–2007)  
 Built hardware and 
software that ran the 
iPhone’s graphics.
CURRENTLY  
 Building his house in 
the first app with the 
pull-to-refresh function 
you see everywhere on 
smartphones. Twitter 
bought Brichter’s com-
in 2010.
up a former Apple executive who I had confided in off 
and on. He said, ‘You don’t join a startup to get rich. You 
join a startup because you want to learn. And people 
who focus on learning will find that it pays higher divi-
dends than earning a fat check at a stable company.’ So 
far, that has run true. At a startup, you are forced to do 
things yourself. I’ve learned UX [user experience] design, 
user research, mobile software development, platform 
software development—things I would have never had 
exposure to because Apple is far too secretive in the 
way that it develops things.”
CURRENTLY  
 Head of product at Eero, which makes the best and 
best-looking Wi-Fi routers we’ve tested. 
AT APPLE (2008–2015)
 Engineering manager for iPod, iPhone, then Apple 
Watch, working on the original design and production 
for stuff like haptic actuators.
Paul Nangeroni
CURRENTLY 
 Cofounders of Nest Labs. The company’s 
original smart thermostat was the break-
through product that helped create the 
Internet of Things industry. Google bought 
the company for $3.2 billion in 2014. Rogers 
is still chief product officer. Fadell quit in 2016. 
AT APPLE (2007–2010) 
 Rogers oversaw the software that ran the 
iPod and iPhone. Fadell has been called the 
Podfather for his role in creating the iPod. 
Matt Rogers and Tony Fadell
CURRENTLY 
 Director of Tesla Glass, 
where he develops solar 
panels for charging 
stations.
AT APPLE (2008–2014) 
 Senior materials engineer. 
His name is on the patents 
for dozens of products 
related to the iPhone.
Mike Pilliod
AT APPLE  
(2011–2017)  
 Senior director and 
architect for Developer 
Tools. He helped create 
the programming lan-
guage Swift, which runs 
on every Apple device.
CURRENTLY  
 Engineering director 
at Google, working in 
the machine learning 
and artificial intelligence 
division. Before that, 
he was VP of Autopilot 
Software at Tesla but 
quit after six months, 
reportedly because he 
Chris Lattner
CURRENTLY  
 Founder and CEO of Instrumental, which 
makes devices and software that scans for 
AT APPLE (2009–2015) 
 Oversaw the assembly logistics, both in 
Cupertino and at the plants in China, that  
produced millions of iPod Touches, iPod 
Nanos, and Apple Watches. 
Anna-Katrina Shedletsky
 CEO of Enjoy, a site that 
(2000–2011) 
 Head of retail. He devel-
Ron Johnson
CURRENTLY 
 Head of hardware for Square, 
the mobile credit-card reader 
you see at coffee shops and con-
cert merch tents. He reports to 
CEO Jack Dorsey.
AT APPLE (2003–2011) 
 As the head of accessories for 
the iPod, iPhone, and iPad, he is 
best known for moving iDevices 
from that 30-pin connector to 
the Lightning cable.
Jesse Dorogusker

 
P O PULA R M EC H A N I C S.CO M
To test these new methods, we teamed up with New York’s Blue Point 
Brewing. But instead of making another IPA, we brewed a pre-Prohibition 
lager inspired by what American brewers were making in 1902, the year Popular Mechanics launched. That means we 
used a handful of America’s most abundant grain, corn, a traditional lager yeast, and bittering hops from New York, 
once the country’s leading hop producer. In addition to those hop pellets, we poured debittered leaves into the kettle, 
captured the herbal lemon flavors of an old-world German pilsner and the juicy aromas from today’s biggest IPAs.
THE IPA BOOM that you may have noticed 
at your local restaurant/bar/beer shop/
bodega/grocery store is forcing brewers to 
innovate in the quest to cram more hops 
into every batch. Conventional brewing wisdom saw 
hop pellets and dried flowers go in at the start of a 
boil, the end, and then after fermentation. But the 
hoppiest brewers have already hit the limit of how 
much physical hop flower can go into a beer (about 
three pounds per keg) before a soggy kale taste sets 
in. Nobody likes soggy kale. Here are the new tools 
and tricks for making ridiculously hoppy beer that 
you will want more than one of.
THE NEW  
SCIENCE  
OF HOPS
Brewers, engineers, and 
researchers push the 
boundaries of hoppy beer.
BY M AT T A L LY N
OUR HOPPY EXPERIMENT: 1902 LAGER
Lupulin Powder
• Used for flavor and aroma, this 
yellow-green powder is three 
times more potent than tradi-
tional hop pellets, says John Paul 
Maye, technical director for Hop-
steiner hops company. Dried hop 
flowers are cooled to minus 40 
degrees Fahrenheit, freezing the 
lupulin sacks at the base of hop 
leaves. The flowers pass through 
a series of rolling sieves, separat-
ing the concentrated packets of 
hop oils from the leaves. 
Debittered Leaves
• The cast-off from lupulin powder, 
these leaves act like low-bitter-
ness European hops, and add 
tannins and mouthfeel. We used 
it in our lager (see “Our Hoppy 
Experiment”) to add a kick of old-
school pilsner character under 
the bright, lupulin-powder aroma.
CO2 Extract Hop Oil
• Hop-oil extract replaces bitter-
ing hop pellets added at the start 
of the boil. It can also provide 
aroma and flavor, but that’s often 
frowned on as too untraditional. 
Whirlpool Addition
• After the boil, the unfermented 
beer remains near-boiling during 
the 30 to 60 minutes it takes to 
pump a batch through a whirlpool 
filter and heat exchange before 
it hits the fermenter. The slightly 
lower temperature volatilizes less 
aromatic oil—just like you brew 
coffee sub-boiling—while still dis-
persing hoppy compounds into 
the wort, making it a more effec-
tive addition than late in the boil.
Fermentation Dry Hopping
• Adding hops while the yeast 
ferments increases contact and 
extraction thanks to the  
heat and movement yeast 
generates. Some yeast strains 
also interact with hop oils, 
typically amplifying juicy flavors 
and muting the piney notes.
As the CO2 passes 
through the hop pel-
lets, the aromatic 
oils and acids dis-
solve into it. The 
green vegetable 
material, about 70 
to 90 percent of the 
hop pellet by weight, 
is left behind.
CO2 is pressurized to 
as much as 6,000 psi to 
reach the supercritical 
state, where it acts like 
a gas with the density 
of a liquid, and then sent 
through hop pellets.
The hop-filled CO2
is decompressed, 
releasing the hop 
oils and acids into a 
honey-like goop of 
flavor and aroma.
ILLUSTRATION BY SINELAB
18
JANUARY/FEBRUARY _ 2018

Meet Leesa, The Better New Mattress™
with the most verified 5-star reviews*
Leesa is a new kind of mattress that ships to you compressed in a box, 
with a 100-night risk-free sleep trial, free shipping and easy returns. Leesa 
is not just a new kind of mattress, it’s a new kind of company. Through the 
Leesa One-Ten Program, it strives to provide a better place to sleep for 
everyone, by giving one mattress to a shelter for every ten mattresses sold.
Get $100 off  the Leesa Mattress at Leesa.com/PopMechanics
$100
OFF
Free Shipping & Returns
100-Night Sleep Trial
Made in the USA
*Based upon reviews of currently available mattresses posted to mattress companies’ own websites.

Robots armed with MIG welders are com-
pleting construction of the first 3D-printed 
stainless-steel bridge this spring. The Neth-
erlands-based design company behind the 
bridge, MX3D, specializes in large-scale 3D 
printing, making custom furniture, art, and industrial tools. It launched 
the project in 2015 to push the possibilities of 3D fabrication in con-
struction and architecture, says MX3D chief technology officer Tim 
Geurtjens. The robot 3D printers were developed out of necessity after 
MX3D couldn’t buy printers capable of building bigger objects. So the 
firm outfitted a standard automotive assembly robot with a MIG welder, 
and then wrote software to turn it into an additive printer. “A MIG 
welder melts stainless-steel wire on a layer. It’s strong and homogeneous, 
and if you keep adding wire, that’s 3D printing,” says Geurtjens. The 
39-foot pedestrian walkway will be installed in Amsterdam’s red light 
district after several months of stress testing. Once installed, sensors 
on the bridge will report back to MX3D, creating a digital mirror of the 
bridge to monitor flex, vibrations, and foot traffic.
A little-known breed of concrete mixed with glass fibers is elevating the 
masonry material from something you’d only stand or drive on to a material 
you can eat off—or put your plate on. Standard concrete is tough, but heavy 
and weak under tension without rebar, which makes it even heavier. But high-
strength glass-fiber-reinforced concrete (GFRC), a mix typically used to coat 
building exteriors, is being adopted by artisans who turn it into (relatively) 
lightweight sinks, chairs, and dining tables, says Brandon Gore, founder 
of the Concrete Design School in Eureka Springs, Arkansas. GFRC substi-
tutes plasticizers and polymers for much of the usual cement, making a 
higher density mix that can be cast as thin as one inch, is less prone to air 
bubbles, and can be polished to a matte finish like slate. In addition 
to leading GFRC workshops, Gore uses it to make custom furniture: 
tables that appear draped in cloth, sinks that look like a riverbank. He 
recommends a countertop for your first project. “There’s very little 
forming,” he says. “If you mix it right and cast properly, it’s almost 
bulletproof.” Gore offers online tutorials at ConservatoryofCraft.
com and you can buy GFRC mixes at BuddyRhodes.com.
The Mychanic Smart Jumper Cables 
($25) include the brilliant feature of 
reverse polarity protection. Live positive 
to dead positive, live negative to ground 
is ingrained in your memory. But if you 
haven’t jumped a car since Pogs were a thing, you’ll be excused for a brief 
lapse that requires the protection. Instead of a blinding spark, followed 
by some creative swearing, crossed wires result in a beep and a blinking 
light. A voltage meter, built into the 12-foot, six-gauge cables, detects 
incorrect voltage (less than zero volts), and triggers the reverse polarity 
alarm, stopping the flow of electrons. The voltage meter also reads the 
charge on your battery to confirm that your battery is the problem, not 
your starter or alternator. Fully charged, with the engine off, a healthy 
battery will register between 12.4 and 12.7 volts. 
THE FIRST 
3D-PRINTED  
STEEL BRIDGE
TRANSFORM CONCRETE INTO FURNITURE 
JUMPER CABLES 
THAT SAVE YOU 
FROM YOURSELF
JANUARY/FEBRUARY _ 2018
20
P O PULA R M EC H A N I C S.CO M

SunSetter, the #1 best-selling awnings in
America for over a decade, invites you to
call, email, or send today for our FREE
Awning Idea Kit and DVD.  Discover
how to outsmart the weather and protect
your family while you turn your deck or
patio into your favorite 3-season outdoor
room — a lovely focal point of your home
and a center for outdoor enjoyment.
A SunSetter puts you in control of the
weather on your deck or patio.  Relax and
entertain outside anytime you want with-
out worrying about hot sun, harmful UV
rays or passing light showers.  It can be
up to 20º cooler under your awning!  A
SunSetter gives you far more cool shade
and protection than a tippy patio umbrella
— yet it’s so affordable you’ll wonder why
you waited so long to get one. Get your
Free Idea Kit and DVD today.
Learn how to transform an ordinary deck or patio into a
beautiful, shaded outdoor room — a cool, protected 
retreat where you and your family will love to spend time.
●Cool Shade in Seconds
●99% UV Protection
●Great Relaxation and     
Entertainment Spot 
●Exceptionally Affordable —    
Prices as Low as $599!
●Saves Energy, Helps Cut 
Air Conditioning Bills     
●Motorized & Manual Models
●Easy to Use, Totally  
Retractable
●Many Exciting Accessories
●Many Designer 
Color Choices
●Unsurpassed Quality
●5-Year Limited Warranty
●No Risk Home Trial
●A Must Have for Decks   
and Patios
©2018 SunSetter® Products
Find out more with absolutely no obligation. Get your
FREE Awning Idea Kit and DVD in any of 4 simple ways:
1. Call Toll Free: 1-800-876-8060, ext. 34168
You can call 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
2. Email to ideakit@sunsetter.com
Be sure to include your full name and mailing address.
3. Go to www.sunsetter.com
4. By Mail: SunSetter Products, Dept. 34168
184 Charles Street, Malden, MA 02148.  Be sure to 
include your complete mailing address and email address. 
FREE

AT SOME POINT, when you’re a half 
mile out to sea and at least forty-five 
minutes from a hot shower, your body 
will tell you that it’s time to go in. Not 
like summer or fall, when you quit if 
the wind changes or the tide gets too 
high. In February, I turn back only 
when my hands and feet stop working. 
My fingers curl up into a claw so I can’t 
grip the board, or I lose feeling in my 
feet and can’t stand up.
That makes me sound tougher 
than I am. Modern wetsuits are very 
good at keeping you warm, 
even comfortable. You can 
spend hours getting tossed 
around in the 45-degree 
Atlantic Ocean. Besides, the 
fun of riding waves is usu-
ally enough to make you not 
notice that your extremities 
aren’t working correctly. Every winter 
surfer’s threshold is different, but the 
time will come when you get cold.
To answer the question I get from 
every down-jacketed pedestrian I 
encounter walking their dog on the 
boardwalk, from people in their drive-
way scraping ice off a windshield: It’s 
worth it because winter waves are 
reliably better than summer waves, 
and you don’t have to suffer crowds or 
beach badges.  
And, yes, it makes you feel tough. 
Walking through an inch of snow 
toward big, loud waves just after dawn, 
no other human in sight, you grasp that 
you’re a long way from help. The same 
water would look green and warm in 
the context of sunshine, lifeguards, and 
moms on blankets handing out pop-
sicles. But when it’s just you, the same 
water is gray and uninviting. If you’re 
like me and spend most waking hours 
in a cubicle, I encourage you to find your 
own version of this, some frightening 
environment that you enter by choice. 
Riding cold waves starts in that 
cubicle. Every day, I check the buoys 
and tides. If the surf looks promising, 
I leave work on Friday, take the three-
hour train down to Asbury Park, New 
Jersey, and walk to the gray, cold, no-
carpet, late-’80s house near the water 
that’s been in my family for decades. If 
I remember, I turn on the Nest thermo-
stat ahead of time to burn off the chill 
before I get there. Because in February, 
22
P O PULA R M EC H A N I C S.CO M
JANUARY/FEBRUARY _ 2018

I’m the only one who goes to the beach.
I tell Siri to wake me up at dawn. She 
does, and with one eye open, I tap the 
Surfline app. Part of me always hopes 
the wind will be off or it’ll be too small, 
something to justify staying under 
warm covers. But I eventually get up, 
drink coffee, contort myself into a thick 
rubber unitard, and drive around with 
the heat blasting, looking for waves. 
The actual surfing is pretty similar 
to any other season. You get the seren-
ity of floating in a big ocean with no 
noise except the water. When the waves 
are overhead, you can get long, fast 
rides that you’ll remember for weeks or 
years. When it’s small, you ride a long-
board and practice cross-stepping and 
graceful turns. 
The difference, though, is that first 
duck dive. When you paddle out from 
shore, trying to get past the break-
ers to the spot in the water where you 
catch waves right as they break, you 
have to go through whitewater. To avoid 
being pushed back to shore, you stroke 
straight at this wall of ocean, then, at 
the last moment, shove your board and 
your body underwater. If you do it right, 
the turbulence passes just overhead, 
and you emerge out the other side. 
Your wetsuit will, as it should, let 
some water in through the hood. But 
when that water sloshes around and 
finally trickles down your back, you’ll 
remember it’s winter. It took practice, 
but I’ve learned to resist gasping. You 
need to keep breathing deeply in case 
the next wave is big and you have to fill 
your lungs before getting held under. 
This experience sounds worse than 
it is, especially if you have the right 
equipment. A good wetsuit, like a 
$500 Patagonia R4, stretches, so every 
stroke doesn’t feel like you’re fight-
ing a dozen TheraBands. The polyester 
lining and seam tape hold the water 
you’ve already warmed up in while 
keeping new, cold Atlantic Ocean 
water out. Even if, back at the parking 
lot, you have to hold your hands under 
your armpits until your fingers warm 
up enough to operate the unlock but-
ton, you won’t go hypothermic, not this 
close to a 7-Eleven. 
But wetsuit designers have yet to 
solve the only part of winter surfing 
I don’t like. I get back to the house, 
stomp the sand off my feet, and can 
barely turn on the shower my arms are 
so exhausted. It’ll take a few tries to 
yank off the gloves, then the booties. 
Then begins the wetsuit extrication. 
Ever put on a duvet cover alone? It’s like 
that, plus weightlifting. Wetsuits only 
work if they’re very tight, so stretch-
ing the rubber open enough to free 
your arms, torso, and legs means lots of 
grunting and flailing. I have punched 
myself in the face more than once. But 
if you’re still cold enough, you don’t 
really feel it. 
I free both feet from the suit, hold 
it up to the showerhead to rinse—look, 
everyone pees in their suit, especially 
in winter. I drop it in the tub, then 
clean myself. Here, you would think 
you want the water steaming hot and to 
stand under it for an hour. But I never 
do. As soon as I can feel blood in all 
fingers and toes, I turn off the water, 
towel off, and put the wetsuit on the 
drying rack. I get into a hoodie and 
sweatpants, pour some lukewarm cof-
fee, then find a couch and a bad TV 
show. Because now, you get this spe-
cial feeling of your body getting back 
to 98.6 degrees. If you didn’t feel it in 
the ocean, now is the time to appreciate 
how much voluntary abuse your body 
can handle, and how good it can make 
you feel after it’s over.
THE COLD-WATER KIT
No, you can’t surf in a dry suit. The loose ones made for kayaking and 
diving will drag when you paddle, and the tight ones weigh too much.
Texture  
Skin 5 Finger 
Glove 5mm
Some like a mit-
ten. I use a glove, 
which gives you 
more grip when 
duck diving and 
popping up. ($70)
GEAR
Xcel Drylock  
TDC Split Toe 
Boot 5mm 
You can go up to 
7mm thickness, 
but unless you’re 
in Scandinavia, 
5mm is plenty. 
($85) 
Yulex Front-Zip 
Hooded Full Suit
No heated vests. 
This is all you 
need, a 5-mil or 
5/4/3 wetsuit. 
Fit is vital, so visit 
a surf shop to try 
it on. ($509)
Surfline 
Buoy readings 
and weather 
forecasts to  
predict the  
surf. Plus: live 
surf cams! 
($70 a year)
Vaseline 
A layer on your 
face minimizes 
windburn. Works 
on land, too. ($4)
Ziploc Bag
For car-key fobs 
and such. Roll 
it up in a Zip-
loc, and stuff it 
down the back 
of your suit. 
@PopularMe chanics
23
JANUARY/FEBRUARY _ 2018

  
U.S., then invest those profits in sharing the 
very same technology with people in devel-
oping countries. The Solar Home 620 ($150) 
is already being used in 5,000 homes across 
Kenya. It will also work well in your RV, your 
tent, your attic, or your kid’s treehouse, on a 
cool evening as the sun sets and he needs a 
place to bring some chocolate milk and turn 
on his music and flip through a book and be 
himself. 
                   —Ryan D’Agostino
Leather is the default interior upgrade on any car. We 
urge you to reconsider. Yes, leather cleans up nice. 
But it’s also freezing in the winter, scorching in the 
summer, and generally not that imaginative. Cloth is 
anything you want, the canvas upon which Porsche 
paints houndstooth and Volkswagen stitches plaid. 
You can heat it, if you like, but you needn’t build an 
entire HVAC system into your seat, because cloth 
breathes. In trucks, cloth is honest. And in a sports 
car, it grips. The Shelby GT350 has Recaro cloth seats 
that glue your torso in place. But if you’d rather be 
plastered against the door when the car pulls a g, 
get that upgrade to leather. Did you know that 
Rolls-Royce uses hides from Alpine bulls that live 
in high-altitude meadows with no mosquitoes or 
barbed wire, so the leather is blemish-free? Cloth 
seats are always blemish-free. And they don’t 
squeak. Get the cloth seats. 
         —Ezra Dyer
GET THE CLOTH INTERIOR
ILLUSTRATION BY CHRIS PHILPOT
24
P O PULA R M EC H A N I C S.CO M
JANUARY/FEBRUARY _ 2018

Real People. STIHL People. You can find them coast to coast, and they define STIHL in many different ways. 
They are American workers building STIHL equipment, and independent Dealers fulfilling the American dream. 
They are professionals working hard to get the job done, and homeowners taking great pride in their landscapes. 
And although they may appear different on the surface, it is what is beneath the surface that makes them the same. 
They all share the same desire for power, quality, and dependability. And they all share the same passion for STIHL. 

Over the years, we’ve seen extraordinary growth – expanding from 50 employees assembling 
one chain saw to 2,100 employees producing over 275 models of handheld outdoor power 
equipment. By combining proven German engineering with advanced American manufacturing, 
our facility in Virginia Beach currently produces and exports products to over 90 countries. 
And while many of our competitors choose to move manufacturing overseas, we remain 
committed to creating more jobs in America.
Built in America sets STIHL apart.
*A majority of STIHL gasoline-powered units sold in the United States are built in the United States from domestic and foreign parts and components.
Heather Jones  |  Assembly / Blowers
BUILT IN AMERICA
*.
*

Malinda & Jarrett Milam  |  Dealers / Owners
M Kay Supply
At STIHL, we choose to sell our products in the U.S. exclusively through servicing 
Dealers, helping our customers get professional advice, product demonstrations, and 
in-store parts and technical service. You won’t find these offerings at the big box stores, 
and that’s why you won’t find STIHL at the big box stores. Providing exceptional 
service, before and after the sale, is a guiding principle we continue to stand behind.
Servicing Dealers in America set STIHL apart.
SERVING AMERICA.
independentwestand.org

Jeremy Hart  |  3rd Generation Logger
*A majority of STIHL gasoline-powered units sold in the United States are built in the United States from domestic and foreign parts and components.
Our commitment to quality manufacturing and superior service has done more than help us 
sell equipment – it has helped us earn a reputation among America’s hardest workers. From 
those who maintain the integrity of our forests and the beauty of our landscapes, 
people choose STIHL when it matters most. Because at the end of the day, there’s no 
substitute for reliability.
Trusted dependability sets STIHL apart.
AT WORK IN AMERICA.

Nathan & Jen Owen |  Homeowners 
*“Number one selling brand” is based on syndicated Irwin Broh Research as well as independent consumer research of 2009-2017 U.S. sales and market share 
    data for the gasoline-powered handheld outdoor power equipment category combined sales to consumers and commercial landscapers. ©2018 STIHL
Our loyal customers have made us the number one selling brand of gasoline-powered 
handheld outdoor power equipment in America*. In today’s marketplace, we know people 
have many choices, so to be chosen more often gives us an enormous sense of pride. We 
respect all those who care for nature, and we sincerely thank all the nation’s homeowners, 
landscapers, loggers, and contractors who proudly use STIHL equipment.
Being Number One in America sets STIHL apart.
NUMBER ONE IN AMERICA
*.


*A majority of STIHL gasoline-powered units sold in the United States are built in the United States from domestic and foreign parts and components.
To find a Dealer:
STIHLdealers.com
For product info:
STIHLusa.com
/stihlusa

The story of STIHL is bigger than any one advertisement can tell. Our story is best 
told by the people who actually use STIHL. That’s why we created RealSTIHL.com – 
a place that captures our customers’ amazing experiences. Do you have a real 
STIHL story to tell? Visit the site or tag your own tweets and posts with #RealSTIHL. 
Right now, people across the country are sharing their stories.
Will you join us? 
18STN8FP1  ©2018 STIHL
Visit RealSTIHL.com
To find a Dealer:
STIHLdealers.com
For product info:
STIHLusa.com
Kelly and Scott Cengia
Homeowners
Jeff Jones
President/Bud Jones and Sons, Inc.
Bill Chambers
Disaster Relief
Hector Cantu | Dealer/Owner
Saw House Power Equipment & Supply
/stihlusa

P R O M O T I O N
to co-host a series of pop-up  
exhibitions and markets celebrating 
innovative and emerging brands and 
the talented people behind them.
2018 event dates coming soon!
This fall,  
Popular Mechanics 
joined forces with  
American Field

BY J A M E S LY N C H
In addition to running a beloved Italian trattoria not far from the 
author’s apartment, chef Anna Klinger has twice been short-listed 
for James Beard’s Best Chefs in America award. 
ANNA KLINGER 
AL DI L A ,  
BROOKLYN , N .Y.
ALL I HAD in my apartment to stanch the blood after 
shaving off the tip of my thumb was a hunk of paper 
towel and six inches of duct tape, which didn’t help my 
nerves. I could feel the dull throb quicken as I turned 
back to the countertop to finish chopping, my thumb 
swaddled thick as a fingerling potato. Beside me stood 
two-time James Beard Best Chefs in America semi-
finalist Anna Klinger, who runs the popular Al Di La 
Trattoria down the street from my Brooklyn apart-
ment. She dispensed a bit of advice that was as useful 
as it was late: When using a sharp knife, pull your fin-
gers in. Use your knuckles as your guide.
I’ve never been a kitchen guy. I’m more of a canoes, 
guns, and tents guy. In the outdoors, 
I can logroll and split firewood, but in 
the kitchen, my confidence evaporates. 
I own exactly zero pans. I cut peppers 
in my hand with a butter knife. During 
one four-month period, I ate the same 
thing—stovetop chicken—for dinner 
every single night. I had asked Klinger to 
come to my apartment to help me out of 
my dark period of kitchen amateurism. 
A man should be able to feed himself, but 
a year and a half after graduating college, 
it was turning out to be more difficult, 
and blander, than I had expected. 
We were going to make my moth-
er’s shepherd’s pie. And a loaf of bread, 
because I figured making two things 
doubled my odds of getting something 
right. Before Klinger arrived, I’d asked 
her for a list of basic kitchen tools (see 
“The Essentials,” page 29) so I wouldn’t 
be stuck browning beef in the micro-
wave in my roommate’s coffee cup. My 
cramped and dingy kitchen overflowed 
with the shiny new tools: a paring knife, 
a chef’s knife, a cutting board, a Dutch 
oven. With all this, I should be able to 
cook anything.  
While I reread my mother’s recipe, 
my duct-tape-wrapped thumb sticking 
out like I was trying to hitch a ride out 
of the kitchen, Klinger got to work. She 
surveyed the partially chopped vegeta-
bles and, with a wet paper towel beneath 
the cutting board (“it stops it from slid-
ing,” she says), wielded the knife to make 
neat colorful piles. “Pivot the knife off 
the tip,” she says. “You don’t want to hear 
it.” Or feel it, I thought.
My kitchen had never smelled of any-
thing but boiled pasta and PB&J, but as 
I dumped our chopped veggies in one 
warm oiled pan and a pound of ground 
beef in another, the scent brought me 
back to my parents’ house in the way that 
only smells, familiar but forgotten, can. 
Feeling like I should be doing something, 
I turned the beef over and over again 
with the wooden spoon. “If you move it 
Tired of “stovetop 
chicken,” a recent 
college graduate 
outfits his first 
kitchen with the 
help of a chef. 
MY FIRST
KITCHEN
PHOTOGRAPH BY MAGGIE SHANNON
P O PULA R M EC H A N I C S.CO M
JANUARY/FEBRUARY _ 2018
26

A) Microphone 
WƌŽŐƌĂŵƵƩŽŶ
C) Rocker Volume Control
D) USB Charging Port &  
ZĞĐŚĂƌŐĞĂďůĞĂƩĞƌǇ
E) Digital Signal Processor
F) Receiver (Speaker)
G) Sound Tube
A
B
C
F
E
D
G
NEW Rechargeable 
Digital Hearing Aid 
Technology Only $199!*
(*Each when you buy a pair)
Rechargeable is now affordable. The new 
HearClearTM HCRC eco-friendly hearing aid 
combines advanced technology with a low price.
Th e new HearClearTM HCRC Rechargeable Digital Hearing Aids 
are now available to you for an unbelievable price! Th is quality 
digital hearing aid has the same key elements that all high end 
digital hearing aids share, but is also rechargeable. Th e microphone 
picks up the sound and sends an electrical signal to the digital 
signal processor which is the “brains” of the hearing aid. Th e 
sound is then adjusted to amplify important speech sounds as well 
as fi ltering out unwanted noise. Once the digital processor has 
amplifi ed the sound, it is passed to the receiver (also known as the 
speaker) which emits a corrected and amplifi ed sound through the 
sound tube into your ear.
Most importantly, your new HearClear 
HCRC hearing aids work at a fraction of 
the cost of name-brand hearing aids, and 
you don’t have to keep changing the batteries! 
You will also love the comfortable, lightweight 
Open-fi t design.
You can spend thousands for an expensive 
hearing aid or you can spend just $219 for a hearing aid that is 
great for most hearing losses (only $199 each when you buy a pair - 
hear up to 3 times better than wearing just one). We are so sure you 
will love our product, that we off er a 100% Money Back Guarantee 
- Risk Free if you are not satisfi ed for any reason.
Rechargeable Digital Hearing Aid - For Only $199!*
KŶůǇΨϭĂĐŚtŚĞŶzŽƵƵǇWĂŝƌ                                    
 (Coupon Code & Price Valid For A Limited Time Only)     The HCRC
*DKEz^s/E'K&&Z!
Use Coupon Code: PM82
ϭϳϳϱϲϳϬϬϱ
Visit and Save: www.AdvancedHearing.com/PM82
Digital sound processing chip 
provides ĐƌǇƐƚĂůĐůĞĂƌƐŽƵŶĚĂŶĚ
makes speech easier to understand 
with less feedback than old analog 
technology
Don’t worry about replacing 
ďĂƩĞƌŝĞƐ
&ƵůůŚĂƌŐĞ'ŝǀĞƐϭϲ
,ŽƵƌƐŽĨhƐĞ;ŚĂƌŐĞƌ/ŶĐůƵĚĞĚ
Easy KŶ%KīƵƩŽŶ
ƵƚŽŵĂƟĐEŽŝƐĞZĞĚƵĐƟŽŶĂŶĚ
Feedback Canceler
ϭϬϬйDŽŶĞǇĂĐŬ'ƵĂƌĂŶƚĞĞ
Hear up to ϯƟŵĞƐďĞƩĞƌ when you 
wear a pair of hearing aids compared 
to wearing just one!
The Rechargeable HCRC!
dŚĞ,ZŝƐĂŐƌĞĂƚŚĞĂƌŝŶŐĂŝĚŝĨǇŽƵ
have a moderate hearing loss. If you are 
not sure how severe your hearing loss 
is, please call ϭϳϳϱϲϳϬϬϱ to discuss 
ǇŽƵƌďĞƐƚŚĞĂƌŝŶŐƐŽůƵƟŽŶ
KƵƌŚĞĂƌŝŶŐ
specialists have a passion for helping you 
make the best choice for your hearing.
Expert Help Available
5 Star Reviews
KƵƚƐƚĂŶĚŝŶŐWƌŽĚƵĐƚ “This product is 
outstanding. Dad loves it, my mom loves 
it, and I am grateful! Don’t believe that 
you have to spend a lot of money to get a 
quality hearing aid”           
- Gilmore B. 
EŽDŽƌĞĞĂĚĂƩĞƌŝĞƐ “This HearClear 
,ZƌĞĐŚĂƌŐĞĂďůĞŚĞĂƌŝŶŐĂŝĚǁŽƌŬƐĂůů
ƚŚĞƟŵĞ
/ƉůƵŐƚŚĞƐĞŝŶĂƚŶŝŐŚƚĂŶĚƚŚĞ
hearing aid charge lasts all day, every day.”        
- Xavier J.
US Company 
Owned And
Operated
FDA
REGISTERED
īŽƌĚĂďůĞYƵĂůŝƚǇ^ŝŶĐĞϭϲ
TM

I watched the 
shepherd’s 
pie through 
the oven door 
convinced  
it would burst 
into flames. 
1. Peel and boil 
potatoes until 
soft enough to be 
mashed with a fork. 
Drain.
2. Add onion to a 
frying pan and cook 
over medium heat 
until translucent. 
Add beef and brown. 
Drain fat.
3. Add tomato soup 
to beef and stir to 
combine. Spread 
beef mixture on the 
bottom of a cast-
iron pan.
4. Rinse frying pan, 
and sauté the carrot 
and green pepper 
for about six min-
utes. Mix in blanched 
green beans, and 
then place all the 
vegetables on top of 
the meat mixture.
5. Mash the potatoes 
with milk, butter, 
salt, and pepper.
6. Cover meat and 
vegetables with 
mashed potatoes 
and bake at 350 
degrees for about 
30 minutes or until 
top of potatoes are 
golden brown.
JAMES’S MOM’S 
SHEPHERD’S PIE
3-4 medium 
potatoes
1
small onion, 
chopped
1
lb ground beef
1
can Campbell’s 
condensed 
tomato soup
1
large carrot
1
green pepper
1
cup green 
beans, blanched 
and chopped
½
cup milk
2
Tbsp butter
salt and pepper
too much, it’s not going to brown. Let it sit a little 
bit,” Klinger said. I set the spoon down and stood 
there, arms hanging at my sides.
A merciful beep meant the oven was ready. I 
wrestled the bread dough I had mixed the night 
before out of its bowl, chunks of the sticky mess 
working its way deep into the duct-tape bandage, 
and plopped it into the lightly floured Dutch oven, 
which I then placed in the 
actual oven. Klinger looked 
calm, but I couldn’t stop fidg-
eting. One thing no one had 
told me about cooking is that 
sometimes you just have to 
wait and let things cook. 
So Klinger and I talked. 
She told me the benefits of 
stainless-steel measuring 
cups over plastic (they don’t 
stain or score) and about 
her mother cooking her way 
through Julia Child’s cook-
books. We put the potatoes 
in water with enough salt “to 
make it taste like the sea,” 
and as we waited for it to boil 
we recounted stories about our childhoods, about 
learning or not learning essential kitchen skills, and 
about the times both of our fathers cooked omelets 
for dinner while our mothers were out of town. I’ve 
never had conversations about any of these things 
in front of a microwave. 
As Klinger promised, the food cooked as we 
talked, and under her trained eye it all finished at 
the same time, which had never happened to me 
before. We moved the bread, a handsome brown, 
onto an improvised cooling rack—the cereal shelf. 
I scraped the softened vegetables out of their pan 
and onto the cooked meat, and after a quick whisk, 
covered it all in mashed potatoes, then tossed the 
whole thing in the oven to 
bake in my new cast-iron pan.
Not even conversation 
could fill these tense five min-
utes. There still seemed to be 
plenty of time to mess it up. I 
watched the shepherd’s pie 
through the oven door con-
vinced it would burst into 
flames. When it was time, 
the fully cooked pie emerged 
from the oven as golden and 
perfect as my mother’s.
I haven’t found many 
meaningful hobbies in the 
cramped spaces of New York 
City yet. It’s hard, moving 
from a college town in Ver-
mont to a tiny apartment in a city. There is no 
garage for working on cars, no shed for tools, no 
yard for an axe or shovel. My calluses have gone 
soft and with them went the satisfaction of mak-
ing things with my hands. But, plunging a fork into 
a meal I had cooked from raw and inedible parts, I 
felt a bit of the old satisfaction creeping in. Cooking 
was pretty much the same as any other skill—all it 
took was a little instruction, a little effort, and the 
right tools. It has been a while since I scrubbed dirt, 
oil, or paint from my hands, but flour, and a little 
blood, makes a worthy substitute. 
Right: Chef Anna Klinger and the 
author immediately post-duct tape 
debacle. Above: Shepherd’s pie 
works well in a cast-iron skillet.
PHOTOGRAPHS BY MAGGIE SHANNON
28
P O PULA R M EC H A N I C S.CO M
JANUARY/FEBRUARY _ 2018

   
THE  
ESSENTIALS
7
1
2
3
4
5
6
8
9
10
11
12
14
1. CUTTING 
BOARD 
A tough, wood-
fiber composite 
board made by 
Epicurean is 
dishwasher-safe, 
and there’s no 
need to oil it.
2. WOODEN 
SPOON
Wood is stiffer 
than plastic, a 
real advantage 
for stirring and 
mashing.
3. CHEF’S KNIFE 
Victorinox makes 
a great, and 
affordable, intro-
ductory knife that 
will serve you 
well for years. If 
you’re ready for 
the next step, try 
something from 
Zwilling.
4. STAINLESS- 
STEEL MEASUR-
ING CUPS 
Spring for the 
metal ones, 
which won’t  
stain or score  
like plastic. 
5. TONGS
They make a 
huge difference 
if you need to flip 
something.
6. HALF-
SHEET PAN  
Perfect for 
roasting broccoli, 
asparagus, or 
potatoes. The 
smaller size is 
easier to store.
7. SPATULA 
Rubber will bend 
into corners and 
slide under eggs. 
Try OXO. 
8. PARING KNIFE
Useful for more 
delicate tasks, 
like chopping 
shallots. Keep all 
knives sharp.
9. PEPPERMILL 
Fresh-ground 
pepper tastes 
better. Plus, 
whole pepper-
corns are cheaper 
than the pre-
ground stuff.
10. DUTCH OVEN 
A Staub, though 
pricey, will be the 
last you’ll ever 
buy. And it looks 
nice enough to 
keep on a shelf.
11. DEEP  
SAUTÉ PAN
Demeyere pans 
are as pretty 
hanging as they 
are on the stove 
top. The depth 
lets you work 
larger quantities 
of food and fry 
bacon without 
splattering.
12. MICROPLANE 
Think fine cheese 
grater. Also 
known as a rasp. 
Works as well on 
cheese, garlic, 
nutmeg, and any-
time a recipe calls 
for citrus peel.
13. CAST-IRON 
SKILLET 
Lodge is an 
American clas-
sic, but a new 
company, Field, is 
trying to redesign 
the old standard, 
and Klinger is a 
big fan. Either will 
set you straight.
14. STRAINER 
Whether you 
buy traditional 
metal or collaps-
ible rubber, you’ll 
save yourself 
from burning 
your hands trying 
to strain pasta 
through the lid 
to your pot. Also 
great for washing 
vegetables. 
Because no one should have to brown beef in the microwave.
@PopularMe chanics
29
JANUARY/FEBRUARY _ 2018

askroy@popularmechanics.com  
@askroypm
You’re not alone. Although I’m of the move-it, don’t-melt-it camp, 
many homeowners and business owners think it makes more 
sense to heat pavement. This is not an inexpensive option. The longer 
and colder the winter, and the larger the heated area, the more it costs 
for installation and operation. You can either heat the entire surface or 
run a pair of tracks down it, heating the pavement one of two ways: with 
a boiler that heats a solution of antifreeze and water or with an electri-
cal heating element. I haven’t seen a detailed engineering study at the 
residential level (there are studies that examine this for airports), but 
one company, Heatizon, claims that a 285-square-foot version of its 
electrical heating mat costs about a dollar or less per hour of operation.
We’re having 
a new drive-
way built, and I 
want to have coils 
installed under 
it to melt snow. 
Thoughts? 
EDITOR’S NOTE
 For this month’s column, 
Senior Home Editor Roy 
Berendsohn scanned decades 
of reader questions to find 
some of his favorites, then 
updated the answers. 
Like the Jersey Devil 
and other urban 
myths, this theory seems 
to have taken on a life of its 
own. I first learned of it in 
the late ’80s from readers 
who said they knew people 
who’d been using the tech-
nique for decades. I’ve also 
heard about people throw-
ing in rotting hamburger 
meat or roadkill. Then or 
now, adding anything to 
your septic tank to stimu-
late decomposition is liable 
to have the opposite effect.  
I suspect that there are 
still people who fervently 
believe in the chicken 
hypothesis, swearing that 
they haven’t had to pump 
their tank in years, if ever. 
Really, all they’re doing is 
contributing to ground-
water pollution by sending 
bacteria-laden filth out 
of an over-burdened tank 
into the system’s leach-
ing field (the buried pipes 
that receive the outflow, 
known as effluent, from 
the septic tank). For fur-
ther study, the National 
Environmental Services 
Center at West Virginia 
University has a wealth of 
information on maintaining 
residential septic systems. 
Until evidence suggests 
otherwise, the center 
advises against using sep-
tic additives. Instead, have 
your septic tank inspected 
yearly and pumped as 
needed, depending on vari-
ables such as the number 
of people who live in the 
home, the size of the tank, 
the system’s age, and soil 
conditions. 
I’ve heard that  
tossing a whole, 
dead chicken into my 
septic tank lessens  
the need to have the 
tank pumped because 
the bacterial action 
created by the rotting 
carcass is effective  
at breaking down  
sewage. True? 
Yes, sort of. An old-
fashioned solution to 
rooftop moss control was to 
stretch copper wires spaced 
at 5-foot intervals horizon-
tally along the roof. The 
tightly stretched wires were 
discreetly positioned right 
at the edge of a shingle to 
be less noticeable. Rainwa-
ter washing over the wires 
leaches copper and copper 
oxides onto the roof, killing 
the moss and leaving behind 
residue that makes it diffi-
cult to establish itself again.
A more modern solution 
is to use products like Scotts 
3-in-1 Moss Control or Bayer 
Advanced 2-in-1 Moss & 
Algae killer. You spray these 
on your lawn, patio, or roof. 
They’re easy to use—the 
applicator attaches to your 
garden hose. You don’t have 
to mix a product at the right 
proportions. 
Will stretch-
ing copper 
wires across my 
roof help elimi-
nate roof moss? 
ILLUSTRATIONS BY JEFF LOWRY
30
P O PULA R M EC H A N I C S.CO M
JANUARY/FEBRUARY _ 2018

SAVE 
59%
 
*Original coupon only. No use on prior purchases after 30 days from original purchase or without original receipt. Valid through 5/1/18.
At Harbor Freight Tools, the “Compare to” price means that the speciﬁ ed comparison, which is an item with the same or similar function, was 
advertised for sale at or above the “Compare to” price by another national retailer in the U.S. within the past 90 days. Prices advertised by others 
may vary by location. No other meaning of “Compare to” should be implied. For more information, go to HarborFreight.com or see store associate.
800+ Stores Nationwide • HarborFreight.com
FREE
WITH ANY PURCHASE 20%
OFF
SUPER COUPON
LIMIT 1 coupon per customer per day.  Save 20% on any 1 item purchased. *Cannot be 
used with other discount, coupon or any of the following items or brands: Inside Track 
Club membership, Extended Service Plan, gift card, open box item, 3 day Parking Lot Sale 
item, compressors, ﬂ oor jacks, safes, saw mills, storage cabinets, chests or carts, trailers, 
trenchers, welders, Admiral, Ames, Bauer, Cobra, CoverPro, Daytona, Earthquake, Fischer, 
Hercules, Icon, Jupiter, Lynxx, Poulan, Predator, Tailgator, Viking, Vulcan, Zurich. Not valid on 
prior purchases. Non-transferable. Original coupon must be presented.  Valid through 5/1/18. 
LIMIT 1 - Cannot be used with other discount, coupon or prior purchase. 
Coupon good at our stores, HarborFreight.com or by calling 800-423-2567. 
Offer good while supplies last. Shipping & Handling charges may apply if not 
picked up in-store. Non-transferable. Original coupon must be presented. 
Valid through 5/1/18. Limit one FREE GIFT coupon per customer per day. 
SUPER COUPON
ANY 
SINGLE 
ITEM
SUPER COUPON
SUPER COUPON
Battle Tested
SUPER 
COUPON
SUPER COUPON
$16999 
16999
 21 GALLON, 2.5 HP, 125 PSI 
VERTICAL OIL-LUBE 
AIR COMPRESSOR 
Customer Rating
• Air delivery:
5.8 CFM @ 40 PSI,
COMPARE TO
HUSKY
$219
MODEL: C201H
ITEM  69091/ 61454
62803/63635/67847 shown
$14999
SAVE 
$69
LIMIT 5 - Coupon valid through 5/1/18*
LIMIT 4 - Coupon valid through 5/1/18*
LIMIT 6 - Coupon valid through 5/1/18*
LIMIT 5 - Coupon valid through 5/1/18*
LIMIT 6 - Coupon valid through 5/1/18*
LIMIT 5 - Coupon valid through 5/1/18*
LIMIT 4 - Coupon valid through 5/1/18*
LIMIT 9 - Coupon valid through 5/1/18*
LIMIT 5 - Coupon valid through 5/1/18*
LIMIT 5 - Coupon valid through 5/1/18*
LIMIT 5 - Coupon valid through 5/1/18*
LIMIT 5 - Coupon valid through 5/1/18*
LIMIT 7 - Coupon valid through 5/1/18*
LIMIT 7 - Coupon valid through 5/1/18*
LIMIT 5 - Coupon valid through 5/1/18*
LIMIT 5 - Coupon valid through 5/1/18*
LIMIT 6 - Coupon valid through 5/1/18*
LIMIT 5 - Coupon valid through 5/1/18*
Customer Rating
6799 
$67
$
99
8",  5 SPEED 
BENCHTOP
DRILL PRESS 
COMPARE TO
BUFFALO BLACK 10299
MODEL: DP5UL
$4999
SAVE 
$53
ITEM     62520/62390/60238 shown
99 
$7999
 RAPID PUMP® 1.5 TON 
ALUMINUM RACING JACK 
 ITEM  68053/62160
62496/62516/69252
60569 shown
SAVE 
$40
• 3-1/2 pumps lifts most vehicles
• Lifts from 3-1/2" to 14-1/8"
• Lightweight 34 lbs.
Customer Rating
SUPER COUPON
COMPARE TO
DURALAST
$9999
MODEL: T815016L
$5999
ITEM 62281/61637 shown
 29 PIECE TITANIUM 
DRILL BIT SET 
$1799 
$1799
Customer Rating
SAVE 
83%
SUPER 
COUPON
COMPARE TO
DEWALT
$60
MODEL: DW1369
$999
 26", 4 DRAWER 
TOOL CART 
ITEM 61634/61952
64096/95659 shown
Customer Rating
SAVE 
$79
• 6200 cu. in. of storage
• 580 lb. capacity
• Weighs 97 lbs.
COMPARE TO
HUSKY
$179
MODEL: HOUC3304B10
149
$9999
SUPER 
COUPON
STEP STOOL/
WORKING PLATFORM
SAVE 
65%
$2999 
$29
$
99
Customer Rating
SUPER 
COUPON
• 350 lb. 
capacity
COMPARE TO
GPL
$5755
MODEL: H-21
66911 shown
NOW
$1999
$499 
$499
SAVE 
65%
 7 FT. 4" x 9 FT. 6" 
ALL PURPOSE WEATHER 
RESISTANT TARP 
ITEM 69249/69115/69137
69129/69121/877 shown
Customer Rating
SUPER COUPON
COMPARE TO
BLUE HAWK
$858
MODEL: BG8X10-Y
NOW
$299
$79
$79
2500 LB. ELECTRIC WINCH WITH 
WIRELESS REMOTE CONTROL
ITEM 61840 /61297/63476/61258 shown
Voted Best Winches
Customer Rating
• Weighs 14.3 lbs.
• 11-1/8" L x 4-1/2" H
COMPARE TO
SUPERWINCH
$17999
MODEL: 1125220
$4999
SAVE $130
SAVE 
$106
$
99 
99
ITEM 63054
62858 shown
10 FT. x 20 FT. 
PORTABLE CAR CANOPY
Customer Rating
COMPARE TO
SHELTER LOGIC
$20599
MODEL: 23522
$9999
4999 
$4999
14" ELECTRIC 
CHAIN SAW
ITEM  61592/67255 shown
SAVE 
50%
Customer Rating
SUPER 
COUPON
COMPARE TO
CRAFTSMAN
$7999
MODEL: GCS400U1
$3999
$10
$10
 18" x 12" 
MOVER'S DOLLY 
• 1000 lb. capacity
ITEM  61899/63095/63096
63098/63097/93888 shown
Customer Rating
SUPER 
COUPON
SAVE 
51%
NOW
$799
COMPARE TO
BUFFALO
TOOLS
$1643
MODEL: HDFDOLLY
Customer Rating
 4-1/2" ANGLE GRINDER 
$1499 
$14
$
99
SAVE 
61%
SUPER 
COUPON
COMPARE TO
PERFORMAX
$2580
MODEL: 2411-1 ITEM  69645 /60625 shown
NOW
$999
$1999
$
99 
$
99
SAVE 
69%
3/8" x 14 FT., GRADE 43
TOWING CHAIN 
ITEM 60658 /97711 shown
Customer Rating
SUPER COUPON
• 5400 lb. capacity
COMPARE TO
MIBRO
$6499
MODEL: 426920
$
99 
99
1/2" COMPOSITE PRO EXTREME 
TORQUE AIR IMPACT WRENCH
• Weighs 4.4 lbs.
SUPER COUPON
ITEM 62891
BOLT BREAKAWAY
TORQUE
1190
FT. LBS.
COMPARE TO
SNAP-ON
$52495
MODEL: MG725
$12999
Customer Rating SAVE $394
$89
$899
8
99
 1500 LB. CAPACITY 
ATV/MOTORCYCLE LIFT 
ITEM 61632
60536 shown
Customer Rating
• Lift range: 5-1/2" to 17"
SUPER 
COUPON
SAVE 
22%
$6999
SAVE 
71%
$999 
$999
 80 PIECE ROTARY TOOL KIT 
ITEM 63292/63235/68986/69451/97626 shown
SUPER 
COUPON
COMPARE TO
PROFESSIONAL WOODWORKER
$2481
MODEL: 51832
$699
Customer Rating
 LOW-PROFILE 
CREEPER 
ITEM  63424 
 63372 shown
$ 27
27799
SAVE  
 50% 
•  300 lb. 
capacity 
COMPARE TO
 MODEL: GM40300 
 POWER
TORQUE 
$ 3999
40"
SUPER COUPON
NOW
$1999
ITEM 69030/69031 shown
TAPE 
COMPARE TO
KOMELON
$698
MODEL: L4825HV
SUPER 
COUPON
$11499 
$11499
SAVE 
$114
1 0" SLIDING COMPOUND 
MITER SAW 
ITEM 61971/61972/98199 shown Blade sold separately.
• Powerful 15 amp motor
COMPARE TO
KOBALT
$199
MODEL: SM2507LW
$8499

How To: Fix Your Fatigue and 
Get More Energy
Founder and Director Dr. Steven 
Gundry is a world-renowned heart 
surgeon, a best-selling author, and the 
personal physician to many 
celebrities. But his breakthrough could 
be the most important accomplishment 
of his career. 
Dr. Gundry has unveiled a simple — 
yet highly effective — solution to is-
sues that plague millions of Americans 
over 40: low energy, low metabolism 
and fatigue.
“When you’re feeling low energy, that’s 
your body screaming HELP!” Dr. 
Gundry’s radical solution was inspired 
by a breakthrough with a “hopeless” 
patient who had been massively over-
weight, chronically fatigued and suffer-
ing from severely clogged arteries.
The secret to his breakthrough? 
“There are key ‘micronutrients’ 
missing from your diet,” Dr. Gundry 
said, “If you can replenish them in very 
high dosages, the results can be 
astonishing.”
Users of this new method is what led 
Dr. Gundry to create an at-home meth-
od for fatigue. 
“They’re reporting natural, long-lasting 
energy without a ‘crash’ and they’re 
IHHOLQJVOLP¿WDQGDFWLYH´KH
revealed yesterday.
Dr. Gundry’s team released a 
comprehensive video presentation, 
so that the public can be educated as 
to exactly how it works. 
Watch the presentation here at 
www.GetEnergy35.com
Within just a few hours, this video had 
gotten thousands of hits, and is now 
considered to have gone viral. One 
viewer commented: “If this works, it’s 
exactly what I’ve been praying for my 
whole life. I’ve never seen anything 
like it before…the truth about my diet 
was shocking and eye-opening.”
It makes a lot of sense, and it sounds 
great in theory, but we’ll have to wait 
and see what the results are. Knowing 
Dr. Gundry, however, there is a great 
deal of potential.
See his presentation here at 
www.GetEnergy35.com
Advertisement

CROSS-
COUNTRY 
SKIING
I GREW UP in Minneapolis, so I can say this for sure: Winter 
is more bearable when you have something to look forward to. 
We knew it was going to get dark and cold for five months, so 
you either embraced the opportunities snow brought—pond 
hockey, snowmobiles, and skiing—or bought a timeshare in 
Orlando. As a young kid with poor hand–puck coordination, I 
was put on skis by my parents. The sport opened up a new side 
of Minnesota. I could now glide through silent white forests 
and trek up frozen creeks I’d fished a season before. Here’s 
how to begin exploring the snow-covered world outside your 
back door.  
                         —Matt Allyn
GETTING STARTED IN...
JANUARY/FEBRUARY _ 2018
33
@PopularMe chanics

1
Go Uphill
When trails get steep, 
your kick zone won’t 
provide enough trac-
tion. The herringbone 
technique, which looks 
just like the pattern, can 
ascend any grade. Turn 
your feet out to form a V 
with your skis, and walk 
up the hill, planting your 
pole behind your boot.  
The basic cross-country technique, the diagonal stride, is like a  
powerful walk with help from your arms. And if you get tired, you can  
always downgrade to actual walking. 
Glide 
If you’re comfortable walking on skis, 
add glide. Step forward and transfer your 
weight to your front ski, compressing its 
kick zone, the area just in front of and under 
your boots that grips the snow. Pull 
the ski back like you’re scraping a 
shoe on the ground to propel 
yourself forward. Drive 
the opposite ski forward, 
transferring your weight 
onto it and enjoying a 
brief, free ride along 
Plant your pole with the basket in line with the opposite foot and your 
arm extended in front of your shoulder. Your arms should swing front-
to-back-to-front like pendulums, providing momentum as they come 
forward. Practice this by holding your poles midshaft and only using 
them to prevent a fall. This will also improve your balance and leg 
drive on each ski.
2
3
WHERE TO START
Groomed Trails
They’re like skiing on rails. Using a heavy-
weight or hydraulic press, a groomer 
carves a hip-width double track into the 
snow. Each track measures 70mm wide, 
enough to accommodate most cross-coun-
try skis (except backcountry skis, which 
are wider). In addition to keeping your skis 
straight, the tracks guide you around turns. 
Backcountry
Anything off a groomed trail counts as 
backcountry. That means your local golf 
course (avoid the greens), parks, and  
frozen lakes in addition to ungroomed 
trails. Skiing without a set track requires 
significantly more balance, but wider skis 
will aid stability. 
Skate Skiing
Performed on wide, groomed lanes, this 
technique mimics the fluid, side-to-side 
motion of skating. It’s faster but requires 
stiffer skis, longer poles, more supportive 
boots—doubling your ski gear—and a hell 
of a lot more balance. Start with rentals 
and a lesson.
THE VARIETIES
THE BASIC MOVEMENTS
Visit a cross-country ski 
center with groomed 
trails, rent some gear, 
and try it out. These 
carved tracks eliminate 
90 percent of your 
worries about sailing off 
into the woods because 
they keep your skis 
pointed forward, says 
Drew Gelinas, the Nordic 
ski director at Vermont’s 
Edson Hill, a lodge near 
Stowe with more than 
15 miles of trails. They 
also offer lessons, which 
significantly accelerate 
your learning.
ILLUSTRATIONS BY STEVE SANFORD
JANUARY/FEBRUARY _ 2018
34
P O PULA R M EC H A N I C S.CO M

Poles
Your poles should 
come up to your arm-
pits. If you’re going 
to ski backcountry, 
opt for a larger bas-
ket to get traction in 
powder. A The Swix 
Classic ($40) works 
well in both situa-
tions. To properly use 
the strap, bring your 
hand through from 
below and tighten 
it enough that you 
can let go of the pole 
when your arm is 
extended back. This 
boosts your power 
and range of motion.
Boots
Cross-country 
skiing needlessly 
offers two incom-
patible binding 
systems (SNS and 
NNN). Neither has a  
real advantage, but 
the B  Salomon 
Escape 7 ($135) is 
available with either 
interface and adds 
an ankle cuff for  
stability. Backcoun-
try skiers should  
buy taller, more  
supportive boots 
(like a hiking boot) 
with a gaiter ring.
Clothes
You’re going to fall 
a lot and sweat a 
lot, so wear water-
resistant layers that 
breathe, says Gelinas. 
Our favorites are 
the C  Swix Univer-
sal pants ($99), D
Black Diamond First 
Light Hybrid hoody 
($229), E  Smart-
wool PhD light 
base layers (top, 
$80; F  bottoms, 
$85), and G  Gore 
Windstopper box-
ers ($40)—for the 
last place you want 
frostbite.  
D
B
A
C
THE REST OF THE GEAR
Your weight is the main factor in selecting skis, 
which are essentially leaf springs. When  
you step down on one ski, you want the kick zone to  
collapse and bite the snow. While gliding along 
with your weight on both skis, you want the  
kick zone floating above the track. Shorter skis are 
easier to control, so when in doubt, size down.
HOW TO BUY SKIS
Madshus BC 55  
MGV+ ($265)
Fischer Ultralite 
Crown EF ($200)
F
Best for  
Groomed  
Trails
Best for 
Back- 
country
G
E
WHAT’S THAT SPORT WITH THE SKIS AND RIFLES? 
Biathlon, the civilian evolution of a Scandinavian military 
exercise. Cheer for American Lowell Bailey, the current 
biathlon world champion, at the 2018 Winter Olympics. 
Things That Hurt After Your First Cross-Country Ski 
Lower back, shoulders, glutes, leg abductors, upper back, biceps, 
triceps, leg adductors, calves, ego, abs.
JANUARY/FEBRUARY _ 2018
35
@PopularMe chanics

W I T H  E Z R A  DY E R
mentioned the Chevy Silverado’s inde-
pendent front suspension and a Ford 
engineer said, “That’s fine for a coffee-
shop truck.” Ouch. See, the F-250 is 
the truck most often used in commer-
cial fleets, designed to suffer the abuse 
of drivers who throw the keys back on 
FIVE-WORD 
REVIEWS
Ford F-250 
Super Duty 
(The iPhone X.)
Maybe you need a heavy-duty diesel truck. Or maybe you just want one. Either way, your 
choice will likely be guided by some combination of logic and tribalism. To that stew, 
allow us to add a dash of critical insight, based on our tests of the Big Three trucks in 
their most versatile configuration—diesel, single rear wheel, three-quarter-ton 4x4. 
day. Like the F-150, this new Super 
Duty also went to an aluminum 
body, but it lost only 350 pounds 
(compared to the F-150’s 700) 
because Ford reinvested that savings in beefier suspension, 
frame, and drivetrain components. As such, the F-250 is per-
fectly happy ripping out tree stumps and hauling gravel. Yet, 
the Ford is also the most modern and posh truck you can buy—
its electronic variable ratio steering, for instance, is a rarity 
outside the world of luxury cars. Yes, you see a lot of jacked-up 
Super Dutys with loud exhaust, brash and bratty. I guess those 
owners really want to make the most of the tailgate ladder. But 
from the factory, this is a quiet and sophisticated vehicle, an 
Engine: 6.7-liter V-8, 
440 hp/925 lb-ft
Price: $49,020
Minimum payload: 
3,130 lb
JANUARY/FEBRUARY _ 2018
36
P O PULA R M EC H A N I C S.CO M

 
 
 
 
Engine: 
the Cummins makes 660 lb-ft 
of torque, but automatic 3500 
models have as much as 930 
lb-ft. Out on the road, you rou-
tinely see the tachometer drop 
to around 1,000 rpm before the 
Cummins 
(The big rig.)
The Ram is the only 
truck with coil-spring 
(and optional air-spring) rear 
suspension, helping it deliver 
a surprisingly cushy ride. But 
this truck is really defined by 
its engine. While the Ford and 
Chevy use V-8s, the Ram packs 
inder bores the size of elevator 
shafts. Chrysler has been install-
ing these diesels in Rams since 
1989, and the sturdy sixes have 
a diehard following and a repu-
tation for longevity. They can 
also be easily tuned for more 
power, as evidenced by Ram’s 
own disparity in torque ratings, 
Chevy redesigned the 6.6-liter Duramax V-8 for 
2017, even going so far as to include a functional 
hood scoop. (We love functional hood scoops.) Its power 
borders on overkill. I recently rode shotgun with a GM 
engineer in a 3500 dually with the same engine, hauling 
a 20,000-pound excavator. Merging was not a problem. 
(I couldn’t legally drive that thing because the truck and 
trailer were over 26,000 pounds, requiring a commer-
cial license.) The single-rear-wheel model will send you 
from zero to 60 in the six-second range, and the inde-
pendent front suspension contributes to steering that 
is more precise than it has any right to be. On that front, 
GM’s Digital Steering Assist system helps these 7,000-
pound leviathans drive like smaller trucks, adding extra 
assist at low speeds and even applying steering torque 
to help compensate for crowned roads or crosswinds. 
There are plenty of smart updates, but this design is get-
ting on in years—the ignition key is an actual key. When 
JOBS WHERE 
ONLY HEAVY 
DUTY WILL DO
•
•
•
•
JANUARY/FEBRUARY _ 2018
@PopularMe chanics
37

1994 Toyota 
Supra
O W N E R :
Kristopher Gardner
LOCATION: North Richland Hills, Texas
Y E A R S  
O W N E D : 
31/2
F O U N D  O N :  
Online 
forum
P U R C H A S E  
P R I C E :  
$29,750
Where I grew up in 
Ohio, the car scene 
was pretty big, and 
when a Supra would roll into 
one of these meets, it was 
always, “Oh, the Supra’s the 
best.” Then, The Fast and 
the Furious came out, which 
just cemented it even more. 
The body lines are timeless. 
It’s reliable. It had the best 
stopping distance for years 
until Porsche beat them out. 
But really, it’s the 2JZ-
GTE engine. In Japan, the 
car manufacturers used to 
have this gentleman’s agree-
ment that they wouldn’t say 
that their cars made more 
than 276 horsepower. It’s 
100 percent true! But when 
you would dyno them, they 
were probably at 320 to the 
wheels. Add a boost control-
ler, and you can turn it up to 
400 hp or more. For mine, 
I did a full engine rebuild 
around 130,000 miles—big-
ger pistons, bigger injectors, 
higher compression, 
upgraded rods and pistons. 
Once it was done, it made 
811 hp to the wheels. When 
the turbo’s full on at 4,200 
rpm, it’ll punch you in the 
chest and put you in your 
seat. If I went up to a 76mm 
turbo, it’d be making 1,000 
horsepower. 
Toyota’s working on, 
potentially, the FT-1. There’s 
no word whether it’s going 
to be the new Supra. But for 
the fans, if it’s not a 2JZ, it’s 
not a Supra. And the origi-
nal Supra is the dream car. 
I’ve had offers, but I’m not 
gonna sell it.
PHOTOGRAPHS BY MAX B
38
P O PULA R M EC H A N I C S.CO M
JANUARY/FEBRUARY _ 2018

Complete Timing Belt Kits!

A SET OF PLAIN WHITE locking cabinets in the Popular 
Mechanics offices houses the PM archives. The editors here 
pull these hardbound copies—big, black things with gold let-
tering, like volumes of a mail-order encyclopedia—off the 
shelves with surprising regularity. Sometimes it’s to find a 
dusty Shop Note that still works, or to check on a prescient 
old story whose subject is finally news. But much of the time, 
it’s just to smile. This is a magazine that has predicted fly-
ing cars in no fewer than six separate cover stories. We once 
suggested rejuvenating a sputtering ballpoint pen by tying 
it to a string and swinging it around until centrifugal force 
pushed the ink to the tip. We wrote about photography by 
carrier pigeon in prewar Germany.
The thing you’ll notice about pigeon photography, by 
the way, is that it looks just like drone footage—80 years 
before anyone knew what a drone was. We pore through our 
archives, in other words, to be inspired. And in this, our first-
ever collection of Popular Mechanics’ greatest hits, we share 
that inspiration with you. Over the next 36 pages, we pres-
ent things to build, cook, try doing, learn about, and marvel 
at—116 years’ worth, from a vast and sometimes genuinely 
odd assortment of topics. Popular Mechanics is, and always 
has been, an exhaustive review of the things that fascinate 
us and fuel our optimism about the future.
In that spirit, we’ve published the thoughts of curious 
novelists, eminent scientists, and American presidents. 
(Yes, plural.) “In the years before I was born, commenta-
tors declared the American frontier closed,” Ronald Reagan 
wrote in these pages in July 1986. “No more land grabs, no 
more gold rushes.” Popular Mechanics arrived in those same 
years. The first issue is from January 11, 1902, and isn’t 
much more than a pamphlet. There is a copy here in the office 
with yellowed pages that flake around the edges like poorly 
applied paint. It is 16 pages long, monochrome, and carries 
only nine photographs and four advertisements. But for its 
readers, a claustrophobic world must have been nearly impos-
sible to imagine. They read stories about learning languages, 
elementary electricity, quicksand, techniques for cleaning 
pipes, a record-breaking electric automobile, and the rise 
of telephones. American life, they knew, was in bloom. So 
of course Reagan was just teeing up his real point. “Ameri-
cans need frontiers,” he said. “Close one down and we open 
up another.” He wrote of the space station we were planning 
to build—and today, as you read this, the International Space 
Station, a frontier outpost on the edge of the unknown, orbits 
overhead. “What now exists only in our imagination will 
someday become a tool for greater prosperity,” Reagan said. 
Indeed. We’ll continue to build up and out and in deep space 
and cyberspace. And at each new outpost, you can be certain 
Popular Mechanics will be the village rag, reporting, as it 
always has, on a world shaped by curious, interested, inno-
vative people—a frontier that will never be closed or tamed.
Popular Mechanics has been serving five generations of Americans  
(and counting) with great stories and rock-solid advice.  
The best of it was indispensable when it came out—and remains so today.
PHOTOGRAPH BY BEN GOLDSTEIN
JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2018 
040



D
espite their exhaustion, the pilots and 
crewmen were in a jovial mood. The 
day was bright and clear, and the intel-
ligence reports were good: The planes 
should encounter little flak on their 
bombing run into North Vietnam. It was near midday 
on Saturday, July 27, 1967. The ship was the mammoth 
aircraft carrier USS Forrestal—a floating skyscraper 
more than three football fields long with four acres of 
deck space, ten deck levels, 2,000 compartments, and 
a crew of more than 5,000. She was steaming through 
the Gulf of Tonkin at a brisk 27 knots only 60 miles off 
the enemy coast. In the past four days her A-4 Skyhawks 
and F-4 Phantoms had made 150 sorties into North 
Vietnam. Now it was time for another mission. By all 
indications, it would be routine. There was no hint of 
the colossal disaster about to strike. 
As pilots manned their planes and crewmen loaded 
bombs into racks beneath the wings, there was an air 
of relaxed calm—too relaxed. Some were visiting bud-
dies in areas on the flight deck where they didn’t belong. 
Others were strolling through their work bare-chested 
and in shorts. Those loading bombs were strong- 
backing the job, giving no thought to the use of nearby 
hoisting equipment. 
“We were pros,” was the attitude of one sailor. “What 
could happen?”
What could—and did—happen was the death of 134 
officers and men, terrible injuries to 161 others, and 
the near destruction of one of the Navy’s most power-
ful fighting ships—all in a matter of minutes.
Seconds before the first scheduled launch the ship’s 
normal routine was abruptly shattered as a Zuni rocket 
streaked aft from the wing of a Phantom parked on the 
foredeck. No one is sure to this day just what triggered 
the Zuni, but the missile shot down the flight deck and 
The cry went out, but before it could 
be heeded, the mighty carrier Forrestal 
exploded into a raging inferno—a living 
nightmare that was to last for days, claim 
134 lives, and badly cripple one of the 
world’s greatest warships. In the past few 
years, similar disasters have struck other 
carriers, causing a rising death toll. Here’s 
the revealing story of how such tragedies 
occur and what’s being done to stop them.
By Mort Schultz
Illustration by Roy Grinnell
EDITOR’S NOTE
 In the 1960s, aircraft carrier fires plagued the Navy. This 
article, which reports that new technology and training 
made subsequent fires less disastrous, is newly relevant in 
the wake of last summer’s deadly collisions involving Naval 
ships. Senator John McCain was then a Navy lieutenant  
commander on the carrier (see page 45).
043

slammed into a Skyhawk waiting to take off on the afterdeck, 
blasting the bomber and spewing blazing jet fuel onto other air-
craft standing nearby. 
Within an instant, the afterdeck is a raging inferno as one fuel 
tank after another explodes in the intense heat. Pilots attempting 
the leap from their planes fall helplessly into the fiery sea of burn-
ing fuel. Crewmen rushing to their aid are engulfed by the flames 
and disappear. Others caught between the spreading fire and the 
edges of the deck are forced overboard. Bits of burning bodies are 
blown in all directions.
But the worst is still to come. Lying on the deck near the flames, 
hidden by billowing smoke, are two 1,000-pound bombs, apparently 
jolted loose from one of the Skyhawks. In less than two minutes, 
they will wipe out most of the trained firefighters aboard the For-
restal, tear huge craters in the hull, and put the ship in deep trouble. 
“Fire on the flight deck, fire on the flight deck,” blare the ship’s 
loudspeakers. “All hands, man your battle stations.” Urgently 
shouted orders mingle with the rapid-fire clang of the general 
quarters alarm bell. Frantically, the two main firefighting par-
ties struggle to reach the flames, pulling hoses and carrying 
extinguishers. 
“I watched them from the island,” one officer recalls. “They 
were having trouble. Fire had cut off plugs in the stern. Those 
amidships had developed pump problems. So the men had to 
haul hoses from the forward stations.”
Precious seconds lost—seconds that gave those two hidden 
bombs time to get hotter. Finally, the men get their lines hooked 
up and are ready to start spraying foam on the fire-swept after-
deck. But it’s too late. As the firefighters approach the flames, 
there are two gigantic explosions a fraction of a second apart 
that rock the mighty 78,000-ton carrier as if she were a toy boat 
in a bathtub. Suddenly the men are gone—they simply vanish. 
In their place are huge, ugly, gaping holes in the deck. Those 
two unseen 1,000-pound bombs, ignited by the mounting heat, 
had ripped through two-inch-thick steel plate like cardboard, 
exposing the decks below. Rivers of flaming jet fuel 
pour down the holes deep into the bowels of the 
ship, turning her insides into a living nightmare. 
Scores of men caught in the intricate maze of com-
partments and companionways belowdecks are 
trapped and die, many of them needlessly. Escape 
routes could have been used, but either the men 
hadn’t been told about them or in their panic had 
forgotten them. 
Topside, the scene is still one of horror and havoc. With most 
of the experienced firefighters lost, the job of saving the ship now 
falls on a courageous but inexperienced crew. This leads to terri-
ble mistakes that cost more lives. In the confusion and disorder 
that prevail, little is done in the next five minutes to keep fire from 
spreading to other bombs and missiles lying on the flight deck. 
More explosions shake the Forrestal—nine major blasts in all—
each ripping a new hole in the deck through which jet fuel pours. 
Finally—nearly eight minutes after the original Zuni mishap—
the order goes out to close the divisional steel doors between the 
ship’s compartments—the first thing that should have been done 
to keep fire from spreading belowdecks. 
Then comes the most tragic irony of all. Gallant but untrained 
firefighting crews, hurriedly formed, work side by side, some 
Right: Hours after the 
initial blast, men aboard 
the Forrestal still fight 
fires on wreckage-strewn 
flight deck. Below: Smoke 
and flames stream aft 
from the stricken carrier 
as a destroyer rushes to 
her aid, picking up sur-
vivors blown or forced 
to jump into the sea. 
The explosion-triggered 
inferno raged several 
days, taking a tragic toll: 
134 dead, 161 injured, 
63 aircraft destroyed or 
damaged, and $72 million 
worth of damage to the 
ship itself. This was the 
second and worst of three 
major carrier fires occur-
ring during the 1960s. 
Clockwise from middle: Aboard the Oriskany, men above deck anxiously await 
word of shipmates trapped in bunks by fire. Forty-four died. Carrier America 
tries out automatic flight-deck sprinkler system designed to prevent Forrestal-
type disasters; twin nozzles can spray foam and Purple K together; new 
“lightwater” foam effectively smothers a jet fire in tests. 
044
POPULAR MECHANICS

unwittingly nullifying 
the effects of the others. 
One team sprays on pro-
tein foam—the proper 
extinguishing agent for 
petroleum-fed fires—while 
another comes along and, 
knowing nothing better, 
washes away the foam with 
water. The foam works only 
if it’s allowed to blanket a 
fire and smother it; water 
merely dilutes the foam 
and renders it ineffective. 
More precious time is lost 
and the fire rages on. There 
is concern for the after 
ammunition magazine. If 
flames reach it, the entire 
ship could go up. Luckily, 
the magazine is ordered 
flooded in time to prevent 
this danger. Other ships in 
the task force, heeding the 
Forrestal’s distress call, 
rush to her aid, but can do 
little to help except to stand 
by and search for survi-
vors. A few of the men who 
jumped or were blown over-
board are picked up, but 
most are never recovered. 
Gradually, the mis-
takes of those first terrible 
moments become appar-
ent and corrective orders 
are issued. The ship is 
kept headed into the wind 
to confine the fire to the stern, but speed is 
reduced from 27 knots to 15 to keep the wind 
from fanning the flames. After ten exhaustive, 
agonizing hours of firefighting, the main blazes 
are at last brought under control, but other fires 
continue to burn throughout the ship for days. 
“I lost track of time,” says Chief Petty Offi-
cer Gerard G. Johnson, “but I do know I was 
still putting out fires when the ship pulled into 
Subic Bay in the Philippines.” 
The grim tragedy aboard the fire-ravaged 
Forrestal took a fearsome toll: 295 crewmen 
dead or disabled, 63 of the carrier’s 81 air-
craft destroyed or damaged, and $72 million 
worth of damage to the ship itself. Her gut-
ted stern charred and twisted, the crippled 
carrier remained out of action for more than 
six months. It may be a miracle that she sur-
vived at all. 
Actually, fires aboard ships of the size 
and complexity of an aircraft carrier are not 
uncommon and occur almost daily. While few 
reach the magnitude of the Forrestal’s, each 
holds the potential for a Forrestal-type trag-
edy—a fact that has prompted Navy men to 
exclaim that “an aircraft carrier is a disaster 
waiting to happen.”
Only nine months prior to the Forrestal fire 
another major carrier catastrophe occurred 
aboard the USS Oriskany off Vietnam. The 
trouble began as sailors were unloading illu-
minating magnesium parachute flares from 
planes after a scrubbed bombing mission. The 
ripcord on one of the flares being carried over 
a crewman’s shoulder snagged on the edge of 
a watertight door. Forty-four men perished 
and $7 million worth of damage resulted. A 
third major carrier mishap occurred aboard 
the USS Enterprise on January 14, 1969,  
75 miles south of Pearl Harbor. During maneu-
vers, hot exhaust from a jet-engine starting 
unit caused a bomb to explode. The bomb had 
been stupidly placed only 18 inches away from 
the unit’s exhaust pipe. Result: 28 crewmen 
dead, 300 injured, 15 planes destroyed, and 
$68 million in damage to the ship. 
“There are 14 carriers in the fleet and I bet 
they have several fires a day when at sea,” says 
Lt. Cmdr. John Donnelly, executive officer of 
the U.S. Navy Damage Control Training Center 
in Philadelphia. His command, plus another 
one like it in San Diego, trains sailors going to 
sea in the techniques of shipboard damage con-
trol, which includes firefighting. 
“Fires have to be expected on a carrier,” 
explains Donnelly. “You can’t escape that 
fact—not with the overwhelming amount of 
fuel and explosives involved, mixing with care-
lessness and chance which 5,000 people living 
together in a relatively confined area present.” 
But disasters teach lessons. The three major 
carrier fires of the 1960s shocked the Navy, 
which realized that unless firefighting train-
ing and equipment improved, more accidents 
of the Forrestal type could be expected. And 
improved they have been, with significant 
results. Since the Enterprise, the number of 
fires hasn’t diminished, but the severity of 
their effects has. Within recent years, more 
than 700 have been reported, and no one 
knows how many more have gone unreported. 
But the important point is that not since the 
tragic events of the 1960s has there been a 
major ship fire at sea. The chances for another 
Forrestal-type tragedy are slimmer today than 
ever before. Perhaps the lives lost on the For-
restal, Oriskany, and Enterprise were not 
entirely in vain after all.
Fifty years ago, a tragic fire 
aboard the aircraft carrier USS 
Forrestal left nearly 300 sailors 
and Marines dead or injured. On 
that Saturday morning in July, 
as I sat in the cockpit of my A-4 
preparing to take off, a rocket 
hit the fuel tank under my air-
plane—and the fire erupted. As 
I scrambled out of my aircraft 
and ran across the burning flight 
deck, I watched as sailors carried 
hoses and extinguishers toward 
the flames. A moment later, the 
first bomb exploded, and those 
brave men were gone.
As ready as the Forrestal was 
for combat, nothing could have 
prepared us for the calamity 
that befell us that day. But while 
the men on board may not have 
been prepared for that particular 
enemy, they fought it coura-
geously nonetheless. In the end, 
134 brave souls died in the heroic 
struggle to save the Forrestal.
The tragedy aboard the 
Forrestal exposed significant 
shortfalls in the Navy’s safety 
posture. In response, the Navy 
instituted substantial changes 
to its training regime and stan-
dard operating procedures, 
resulting in a safer and more 
effective force.
Even so, going to sea in ships 
remains and will always be an 
inherently dangerous vocation. 
The 17 lives lost aboard the 
USS Fitzgerald and USS John S. 
McCain this past summer dem-
onstrate the need for continued 
vigilance in training and safety 
standards.
Across the armed services, 
preventable accidents dur-
ing peacetime operations and 
training are now killing more of 
our service members than our 
enemies on the battlefield. We 
must never relent in the quest to 
improve our standards and pro-
tect those putting their lives on 
the line for our freedom. As one 
of the lucky ones who escaped 
the horrific flames of the For-
restal, I consider it my sacred 
duty to do no less.
John 
McCain
JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2018
045

By THOMAS P. LAKE
GOOD SEAMANSHIP
is the  
latest, all-new marine 
smartwatch, meaning not only can it access the Garmin 
Connect IQ store to get a variety of apps, but it’s designed 
for handling other nautical tasks, like checking tides,  
alerting you to drifting, and logging fish you reel in.
GETTING IN AND OUT
W
HEN stepping into a small boat, always place the 
first foot in the center of the floor, never on the 
gunwale. Then immediately place your weight 
on this foot and crouch down, resting a hand lightly on each 
gunwale, and sit down. When getting out, keep one hand 
on the dock or landing platform, to hold the boat against 
it. Then rise to a crouching position and step quickly and 
smoothly to avoid pushing the boat away from the dock. Also, 
while transferring your weight from the foot in the boat to 
the other on the dock, pull your feet together to prevent the 
boat from being pushed away.
 Follow any hobby for 116 years and you’ll see a lot of things 
change (especially gear, judging by these illustrations). But as the 
following three primers attest, the underlying skills never do.
Classic Know-How
POPULAR MECHANICS
046

STEERING
To practice steering 
safely, tie the bow to 
the dock, leaving only 
a foot or two of slack 
in the painter (the 
rope by which a boat 
is made fast). Then 
step in and, when 
seated, push against 
the dock to swing the 
stern out until it is at 
right angles with the 
dock. Now start the 
motor and run it at 
very slow speed. The 
bow is held against 
the dock by the 
propeller thrust and 
the short-tied painter 
prevents it from 
slipping far while you 
study steering effects.
DOCKING
H
EAD for the dock at very nearly the place at which you want the boat to 
lie. Throttle down to about 5 or 6 mph. When a length and a half from 
the dock, and collision seems inevitable, suddenly throw the steering 
lever hard over to one side, so that the propeller is facing about 60 degrees from 
astern. The stern immediately begins to swing around the bow. Hold this steer-
ing angle and slow the motor to dead slow. By this time the forward motion of the 
boat is almost entirely lost, and the boat is at right angles to its original course. It 
is now parallel to the dock, and not more than several inches from it. Then, before 
the boat begins to develop headway, shut off the motor. Keep in mind that a heav-
ily loaded boat usually requires more room to slide sideways, and may be sluggish 
in responding to the hard-over, and that longer boats may approach the dock at 
an angle of 45 degrees or even less because they have more grip on the water and 
require less turn to make them lose headway.
W
HEN your course 
takes you near large, 
fast boats, you have 
the problem of crossing waves 
made by them. Suppose that a 
large boat is rapidly overhaul-
ing you from behind on your port 
(left) side. Alter the course about 
30 degrees to the right to put 
more room between your courses. 
As the boat goes by, keep an eye 
on the large, steep-sided bow 
wave, and, as it approaches, turn 
and head for it. When the wave 
is immediately ahead, reduce 
speed so the bow can lift with the 
impact. As the wave rolls past the 
stern, swing back to your origi-
nal course. If your boat has a wide, 
flaring bow, you can alterna-
tively meet the wave broad on the 
bow (about 45 degrees from dead 
ahead). The wide flare throws 
spray outward and provides a 
sharp lift to the bow, usually suffi-
cient to clear the crest of the wave.
CROSSING WAVES
SHOVING OFF
G
IVE a slight shove against the dock to push the bow farther away from the dock than the stern, 
so that when the boat gathers headway (forward motion) the stern will not be swung into the 
dock if it is necessary to turn immediately. If you are facing forward, as you should be, turn your 
head and watch the corner of the stern nearest the dock. Only when this has drawn clear of the dock can 
you turn the boat. If you can’t see over the dock from your position in the boat, run slowly and wide of the 
dock until you have passed the end. If no boat is approaching, you may speed up.
047

SIZES  
AND TYPES  
OF CLAW  
HAMMERS
USING A CLAW  
HAMMER
G
RIP the hammer 
near the end of the 
handle. This hold 
gives the maximum leverage, 
power, and drive. The trick 
in starting a nail is to use 
light taps, holding the handle 
approximately at right angles 
to the axis of the nail and uti-
lizing the wrist as a pivot. 
After starting, or setting, the 
nail, use the full stroke. When 
heavy blows are required, the 
wrist, forearm, and upper 
arm are brought into simul-
taneous use to deliver the full 
driving power of the hammer. 
As the head of the nail nears 
the work surface the force of 
the blows should be lessened.
When pulling a nail, 
proceed by stages, as undue 
pressure may break off the 
nailhead. Raise the nail 
slightly, then release the 
claws and take another 
bite. The initial stroke 
should be stopped just 
before the poll of the ham-
mer contacts the surface of 
the work, as the leverage is 
greatly reduced when the 
poll becomes the fulcrum. 
Lift the hammer and insert 
a block or wedge before 
applying pressure in the 
second stage. 
A
GOOD hammer makes fewer “mistakes” and causes less fatigue than a poorly made 
one. A quality hammer is tough and durable: The face of the poll is polished smooth and 
the edges are ground to a uniform bevel to prevent chipping; the claws are ground to 
“nipper” ends for getting into narrow spaces between nailheads and the surface of the work. A 
tapered slot between the claws has the right bevel to grip not only the head but also the body of a 
nail firmly. Handles are shaped to give a certain amount of spring to ease shock and minimize 
strain on the arm muscles of the user.
C
LAW hammers come in various  
weights, 5-, 7-, 13-, 16-, and 
20-ounce heads being more or less 
standard. Alternatively there are num-
bered sizes, No. 1 being the largest and  
No. 4 the smallest. A No. 1½ hammer with 
a 16-ounce head is best for all-around use.
Finishers like a pronounced crown, 
or bell face, on the poll, as this enables 
them to drive a nail flush or slightly 
below the surface of the wood without 
denting it. However, such a hammer 
requires skillful handling; general 
use calls for less crown. Claws come in 
two main types: a pronounced curve, 
especially suited to pulling nails, or 
straighter and heavier, good for prying 
or ripping.
POPULAR MECHANICS
048

SAFETY RULES YOU SHOULD ALWAYS OBSERVE
MORE
CARE OF HAMMER
F
OR the safety of yourself and others who may 
be nearby, never use a hammer with a loose 
head. Take time to put in new wedges or install 
a new handle. Details below, A to D inclusive, show 
four essential steps in replacing a hammer handle. 
These steps apply to all types of hammers with only 
minor variations. When replacing the handle, never 
burn the old wood out of the eye as the heat may draw 
the temper of the head.
When the tool is not in use keep the head oiled 
to prevent rusting. Wipe off the oil before using.
EVEN MORE ON USING  
A CLAW HAMMER
S
OMETIMES a big nail—that is, long and large 
diameter—will be missing its head. That makes 
it tough to use a claw hammer in the traditional 
way. Don’t despair! One extra tool and a little luck will 
help. Here are three workarounds, in ascending order 
of desperation:
1. Wedge the nail deep enough into the claw that the 
sides of the claw bite into it, in a manner that will allow 
it to be pulled in the usual fashion.
2. If the nail is too large, or awkwardly located, try 
gripping it with a pair of locking pliers, close to the 
substrate. Roll against the pliers’ jaw for leverage.
3. Bite into the headless nail with locking pliers, this 
time nearer the top. Then grip with the claw against 
the pliers, which act as the nail’s head.
Works like a charm. 
Think the job out 
beforehand and 
stick to your plan.
Plan an escape 
route at a 
45-degree angle 
opposite the direc-
tion of tree fall.
Wear a hard hat 
if there is any 
chance of timber 
or branches falling 
from above. 
2018 UPDATE!
Wear a hard hat. 
Period. 
Don’t wear loose-
fitting clothing. 
It could become 
caught in the 
chainsaw or falling 
limbs. Always wear 
work gloves.
If your job collects 
a crowd, stop.
Work only with a 
sharp saw chain.
How to 
Fell, Buck, 
and Limb 
a Tree
B
ASICALLY, 
there are 
three reasons 
why a homeowner 
has to take down a 
tree on his property: 
1. Room is needed 
for an addition; 2. 
The tree has died 
and poses a safety 
threat with the first 
heavy windstorm 
that comes along; or 
3. A dense cluster of 
trees requires pru-
dent thinning.
Felling a tree 
with a handsaw or 
axe is now a thing 
of the past. A gas 
or electric chain-
saw is the only way 
to go, but it must 
be used correctly. 
If you don’t own a 
chainsaw, it is well 
worth the few dol-
lars it will cost to 
rent one.
JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2018
049

Basic Sawing Techniques: Notching and Felling
FORESTER
VETERAN
A
Done properly, it takes three cuts to fell a tree: two passes to 
make the undercut (notch) and a back cut on the opposite side of 
the trunk. The notch should be cut to a depth of approximately 
one-third the tree diameter, and perpendicular to the line of fall. 
After making the first two cuts, remove the wedge from the trunk.
Make the back cut at least 2 inches higher than the notch so 
as to leave a “hinge” of uncut wood to guide the tree over. Do 
not cut through the notch. As the tree starts to fall, pull your saw 
free. Immediately turn off power and retreat quickly along your 
pre-planned escape route. If you suspect the tree may not fall in 
the desired direction, or may tilt back causing the saw to bind, 
do not complete the back cut. Withdraw the saw and use wood, 
plastic, or magnesium wedges to open the cut and tilt the tree in 
the direction of the fall.
Bucking a Tree for Log Cuts 
Once the tree is down, keep in mind that wood is heavy and that it will bend and pinch the saw if improperly supported. (The trunk will 
weaken at the point where you make the cut unless the tree is lying on perfectly flat ground or supported as shown.) To cut the trunk, 
use the bucking and two-cut sequence shown. The first cut should be no deeper than one-third the trunk diameter.
In 2018, our chainsaw 
of choice is still this 
industry veteran. The 
newest versions have 
carburetor heating and 
heated handles—no 
small advantage in the 
cold dark of winter.
Getting Rid of  
the Tree Stump
The cheapest way to elimi-
nate the stump is to simply 
bury it. Cut the stump off 
close to the ground and 
cover it with soil. To speed 
the rotting process, bore 
holes 6 inches deep before 
burying. For aesthetic rea-
sons, cover the mound with 
ground-cover plantings.
Limbing a Tree
To saw off a large limb supported only 
by the trunk, first cut one-third of the 
way through the limb on its under-
side. Make a second cut through the 
limb from the top. Make certain you 
lash the ladder securely to the tree. 
Run a rope around the trunk a couple 
of times, then tie it securely to the top 
rung. Plant the ladder so that its feet 
are level and are placed a distance 
from the base of the tree that is equal 
to one-quarter of the vertical height.
050
POPULAR MECHANICS

MARCH 1912
Remarkable Weather  
of 1911 1
“It has been found that if the air 
contained more carbon diox-
ide, which is the product of the 
combustion of coal or vegetable 
material, the temperature would 
be somewhat higher. Since burn-
ing coal produces carbon dioxide 
it may be inquired whether the 
enormous use of the fuel in 
modern times may not be an 
important factor in filling the 
atmosphere with this substance, 
and consequently indirectly rais-
ing the temperature of the earth.”
MAY 193 0
Is Our Climate Changing? 2
“The belief that appreciable 
changes of climate occur within 
the compass of human memory 
is at least 99 percent illusion. The 
other 1 percent of the idea may 
be based on facts, more or less.” 
APRI L 19 4 0
Coal Dust Speeds Melting of 
Ice by Absorbing Sun’s Heat
“Glaciers which are now breed-
ing grounds of cold-air masses 
affecting climate and weather of 
civilized regions might someday 
be melted by widespread use of 
coal dust and thus soften the cli-
mate of the moderate latitudes.”
SE PTE M B E R 1957
What’s Happening to the 
Weather 3
“Q: What are some of the 
occurrences during the 
warm period that is sup-
posed to be ending? A: 
Sverre Petterssen, Uni-
versity of Chicago: If the 
warm trend continues there will 
be some remarkable changes. 
There will be very little summer 
ice in the Arctic. With this would 
be a northward migration of 
vegetation, fish, and animal life. 
Cyclones would continue to move 
northward. I think the changes 
would be quite severe.”
AUGUST 19 6 4
The Air Around Us:  
How It Is Changing 4
“Man’s tampering with nature 
has thrown earth’s CO2 cycle 
out of balance. A prime offender, 
researchers agree, is the 
automobile.”
APRI L 19 8 8
South to the Pole 5
“There is speculation that atmo-
spheric pollution may have already 
contributed to global warming—
with damaging consequences for 
the south polar ice cap.” 
JAN UARY 19 97
200-mph Trees Bomb Away 
at Greenhouse Effect 6
“Moshe Alamaro believes the 
answer is to replace the forests. 
The key to his plan is an aerody-
namic tree-planting cone strong 
enough to sustain the 200-mph 
impact of striking the earth.”
OC TO B E R 2 0 0 4
The Cold Truth 7
“There is an emerging consensus 
that future global models will only 
confirm the need for tighter con-
trols on greenhouse gases. But 
for the moment, only one predic-
tion can be made with any degree 
of confidence: Global warming 
may hold some chilling surprises.”
We’ve been reporting on shifting weather patterns 
for more than a century. What has changed is the 
outlook we have on the possible consequences.
051
JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2018
1
2
3
6
4
7
5

 
SEEKING G
uarded by sandbags, a man sits 
before a panel on which are rows 
of gauges. As he turns valves, nee-
dles of the gauges spin and gyrate. 
From behind the sandbags comes a 
1
all the fires of hell have been 
raging in the little cylinder 
behind the sandbags. Terrifi-
cally explosive gases have just 
reached a temperature half 
that of the sun and a velocity 
of 3,600 miles per hour—and 
Scientists are hardheaded men. They do not 
speculate on traveling to the moon every time they 
see a sky rocket.3 They say simply:
“We are experimenting with fuels for rockets. 
We’ve found out a few things. It may be that in the 
reasonably near future science will succeed in send-
ing a rocket higher than any man-made contrivance 
ever traveled before. Perhaps such a rocket might 
reach an altitude of 500,000 feet.
“If a rocket could be shot that high, it could carry 
recording instruments which would gather infor-
mation of the greatest importance. A rocket to the 
moon...Men still dream of that. But science deals 
with facts. Still, the dream is perhaps a little bit 
nearer realization.”
Behind that simple statement is another chap-
ter in man’s struggle to escape the chains of gravity 
EDITOR’S NOTE
 When we took readers inside the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory in November 2016 (“The Right Kind of 
Crazy”), we hinted that John Parsons and the CalTech 
group that founded the lab were a wild bunch blow-
ing stuff up in the California desert. Here’s a look at 
that early work, which did indeed feature explosions.
Our view from the 
1940s makes the early 
work of JPL—before 
it had formally taken 
that name—seem 
oddly modest. The 
lab’s official histo-
rian, ERIK CONWAY,
helped us understand 
the bigger picture, 
as it can only be seen 
with eight decades of 
perspective.
1. The setting, curi-
ously omitted in 
the original article: 
Arroyo Seco, Califor-
nia, circa 1938.
2. The researcher 
had good reason to 
be tense: The sci-
entists had already 
been thrown out of 
CalTech for explo-
sions on campus.
3. According to Con-
way, the men simply 
POPULAR MECHANICS
052

which bind him to one planet.
Three years ago it was decided to 
study rocket motors at California Insti-
tute of Technology.4 Although many 
rocket experiments had been conducted 
throughout the world, no complete and 
systematic investigation of motors has 
been available.5 Yet it is just those very 
problems of a powerful enough fuel and 
a long-life combustion chamber that are 
the stumbling blocks which are holding 
back rocket flights.
So three experimenters at California 
Tech, Frank J. Malina, John W. Parsons, 
and Edward Forman,6 decided to build a 
rocket which did not fly, a rocket which 
moved but a few fractions of an inch, but 
which told those vital facts about what 
goes on when a charge is fired.
As a background for their work, they 
had the long history of rocket experi-
mentation, going back to the days of early 
Chinese culture when rockets were first 
used for fireworks displays. The western 
world did not begin to construct rock-
ets until about the fourteenth century. 
Immediately, the question of their pos-
sible military importance arose. But no 
one devised a successful military rocket 
until 1805, when William Congreve per-
fected one—and in so doing helped write 
the American national anthem.
For it was the Congreve rockets fired 
by the British forces attacking Fort 
McHenry that inspired Francis Scott 
Key to write the lines of “The Star Span-
gled Banner,” “and the rockets’ red 
glare.” Congreve rockets were also used 
with telling effect against Napoleon at 
Waterloo. Both incendiary and explosive 
charges were carried by these rockets.
But whatever the military signifi-
cance of the rocket, its most dramatic 
and intriguing potentiality is that of con-
quering space.7 Although many older writers of fantasy 
speculated on space rockets, the first really practical 
experimentation in America was done by Professor 
R.H. Goddard, beginning in 1909.
In 1918 Goddard published a set of calculations 
which he believed established the possibility of a rocket 
flight to the moon. If such a rocket could be constructed, 
he proposed that a small charge of flash powder be car-
ried, and exploded when the rocket struck the moon. 
The flash would be visible to the earth’s large telescopes.
Ten years later Goddard fired some experimental 
altitude rockets which attained a height of about two 
miles and a vertical climbing speed of 700 miles per 
hour, far greater than the fastest airplane. Since that 
time, Goddard has continued his exper-
iments in perfecting rocket design. 
Recently he incorporated a gyroscope to 
stabilize his rockets during flight.
However, the old problem of a suffi-
ciently powerful fuel and a sufficiently 
durable firing chamber still remained. 
Certain experiments seem to favor the 
use of powder explosives, but in general, 
liquid fuels seem to offer the best pros-
pects. A combination of liquid oxygen 
and gasoline has proved very efficient.8
Rockets powered by such fuels have 
been used by the American and German 
rocket societies. A British society has 
made speculative plans for space travel 
should the day ever arrive when fuel and 
construction problems are licked. This 
society has designed space suits, and 
has even made tentative arrangements 
to secure human beings who would be 
willing to take the terrific gamble should 
the conquest of space ever be technically 
possible.
These problems of fuel and com-
bustion chamber the California Tech 
scientists have set out to study—and they 
have made such advancement that they 
talk of a sounding rocket which might 
reach a height of half a million feet.9
The first problem faced 
was to design a highly accu-
rate testing machine. Such 
a device must be able to reg-
ister thrust, temperature, pressure of gases, amount 
of fuel used, and the efficiency of the combustion.
For experimental purposes, gaseous combusti-
bles are used instead of liquid. The propellant now 
being experimented with is a mixture of ethylene 
and oxygen. These gases are kept under pressures of 
1,200 and 2,000 pounds to the square inch. Opera-
tors control the flow of gas by means of valves. The 
gauges which record the performance of the rocket 
motor are photographed to give a permanent record.
The rocket motor is a single steel cylinder about 
18 inches long and six in diameter. It is lined with 
carbon to guard against the terrific heat when the 
motor is operated. A temperature of 5,000 degrees 
knew that a rocket that 
could reach the moon 
was a long way off. 
In fact, Frank Malina 
published an academic 
paper in the late 1930s 
that explored what it 
would take to launch 
people into space.
4. Rockets had never 
been formally studied 
because they weren’t 
as useful as balloons. Of 
limited military appli-
cation, rockets were 
mainly of interest as a 
potential tool for atmo-
spheric studies—but 
balloons could go higher, 
and were less likely to 
demolish a lab building.
5. The formal creation 
of the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory would come 
in 1944. It’s named for 
jets because the 
modern distinction 
between a jet (gets 
oxygen from the air) and 
a rocket (carries its own 
supply of oxygen) didn’t 
yet exist.
6. Only Malina had ties 
to CalTech, where he 
worked at the Gug-
genheim Aeronautical 
Laboratory. Parsons 
and Forman attended a 
CalTech talk on German 
rocket planes, and were 
steered to Malina. They 
worked for a company 
that built explosives.
7. While the CalTech 
rocketry work was 
spurred in part by antici-
pation of the U.S. joining 
World War II, long-range 
rockets were at this 
time so inconvenient to 
launch and so inaccurate 
that the work was ulti-
mately not significant to 
the war effort.
8. JPL’s liquid fuel 
technologies had a long 
life span: With minor 
chemical modifications, 
they were in service 
until the 1980s, and a 
derivative is still used in 
spacecraft today.
9. In 1946 a test of JPL’s 
WAC Corporal rocket 
reached 230,000 feet, 
finally surpassing what 
balloons could do. 
Malina, not particularly 
interested in weapons 
applications, left JPL in 
1947 because CalTech 
rebuffed his suggestion 
to make it into a 
sounding rocket for 
scientific use.
Right: A rocket 
starts up fired by 
remote control. 
Below: A test 
rocket used at 
California Tech.
JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2018
0 53

 
Fahrenheit is sometimes reached—almost half that 
of the sun’s corona.
Rocket motor, tanks of ethylene and oxygen, and 
connecting tubes are mounted on a torsion balance 
so delicate that it will register forces of only one-
tenth of an ounce. When the motor is fired, motor, 
lines, and braces move as a single unit. The thrust 
is then registered by a dial on the control panel.
Because of the terrifically explosive character 
of all fuels used, the control panel and operator are 
protected from the firing chamber by sandbags. 
Once a nozzle blew out during a test, and the result-
ing roar was heard for blocks.10
Nozzles for the rocket motor are made from 
such substances as pure carbon, stainless steel, and 
copper alloys. Experiments have shown that few 
substances will stand the extreme heat and pres-
sure of the exhaust gases. Velocities of 6,000 feet 
per second, or better than 3,600 miles per hour, 
have been recorded. Often after one minute in the 
firing chamber, a nozzle, which a moment before 
was a beautifully machined piece of metal, will be 
charred, distorted, and blacked, looking as if it had 
been subjected to the eternal fires.
Rocket scientists have calculated that a velocity 
of seven miles per second, or approximately 25,000 
miles per hour, would be necessary for a rocket to 
escape Earth’s gravity. They further believe that 
6,000 tons of fuel would be necessary to carry ten 
tons of payload. The California men do not specu-
late on space travel. However, they do say that their 
experiments indicate that with a “step” rocket (one 
having three motors, two of which would be released 
during flight), a velocity of 11,000 feet per second 
might be reached. This would carry the rocket to a 
height of 500,000 feet, five times the record height 
for a sounding balloon.11 Physical information gath-
ered by such a rocket would be of incalculable value.
Meanwhile, the motor behind the sandbags 
hisses and thrusts and the needles on the dials con-
tinue to write their record of vital facts. And another 
significant step is being taken in man’s struggle to 
conquer space.12
10. Worth men-
tioning: Because of 
the explosions they 
caused, colleagues 
at CalTech had taken 
to calling Malina, 
Parsons, and Forman 
the “Suicide Squad.” 
11. JPL helped cre-
ate a two-step rocket 
by combining a WAC 
Corporal with a Ger-
man V-2. In 1949 it 
went up 244 miles.
12. Despite the lack 
of an impact on 
World War II, JPL 
went on to develop 
new propellants, 
large-scale solid 
rockets, radio-
controlled guidance 
systems—technolo-
gies that meant their 
impact on the Cold 
War was massive. 
And we made it to 
the moon.
Some of Waldemar Kaempffert’s fore-
casts (Personal helicopters! Food made 
from sawdust!) were a smidgen off. Oth-
ers, like video calling, were prescient. What 
about 2068? Futurist Amy Webb suggests 
completely automated transportation, 
personalized medicine and education, 
and the primacy of the Amazon–Whole 
Foods conglomerate. Intangible changes, 
too. “Human data will be equivalent to any 
other natural resource, like precious met-
als. The country that has the ability to mine 
and refine its citizens’ data—you could see 
shifts in global superpowers.”
and, in response, people develop new technologies and 
combine old technologies to find new ways to extract 
oil.” So we have more than we think—and need, he says, 
since alternatives will get cheap far before we run out.
Dick Frederic wrote after Hurricanes 
Connie and Diane thrashed the Atlan-
tic coast in 1955, boosting interest in 
how superstorms form—and might 
be prevented. Predictions for 2017’s 
storms were more accurate, but a 
precise cause is still hard to pin down. 
M A R C H  19 5 6 ,  PA G E
Phil Klotzbach, an atmospheric 
scientist at Colorado State Uni-
versity, says last year saw the 
third or fourth warmest oceans 
since 1980, which fuels storms. 
More significant was extremely 
low vertical wind shear, varia-
tion in speed and direction that 
can pull apart a storm’s eye. 
Regardless, unable to control 
wind—or cool oceans—we’re 
no closer to ending hurricanes 
than in 1955. But we’re better 
at seeing them coming. And 
meteorologists are no longer 
faxing storm-pattern Polaroids 
to the Weather Bureau.
The three headlines below are all more than half  
a century old, but the questions are still relevant—so we  
looked into them. Again.
POPULAR MECHANICS
054

JAN UARY 19 0 6
“Socker” Football
“The appalling list of 19 deaths 
and 132 serious accidents during 
the American football season of 
1905 has called forth the demand 
from the press, public, and college 
presidents for an immediate and 
radical change. ‘Socker’ football 
[Ed: Today called ‘soccer’] is sug-
gested as much less strenuous.”
MARCH 1910
Football Armor 1
OC TO B E R 1939
Touchdowns in the  
Making 2
“‘Stub’ Allison, head football coach 
at the University of California: 
‘Twenty-five years ago the devel-
opment or selection of varsity 
football material was largely a 
survival of the fittest. The empha-
sis was on weight and strength; 
today it is on speed and brains. 
Only the fastest, brainiest, and 
best-conditioned men make the 
California Golden Bear teams.’”
OC TO B E R 19 4 4
3
4
5
tive equipment. One of the most 
important may be that carried 
on at Northwestern University. 
In their experiment, they are 
putting instruments into a foot-
ball helmet which are designed 
to radio back to the sidelines 
data on both impact and brain 
activity.”
N OVE M B E R 19 85
Television Touchdowns 6
“When a New Jersey player gets 
ing on the field.”
OC TO B E R 19 95
Battle Helmets 7
formation that helmets 
goal line.”
FE B RUARY 2 0 07
Anatomy of a Hit 
etry System, which employs 
impacts all the time,’ says 
Biomechanics, ‘and several 
over 150 g’s.’”
Inventors have been working on football 
equipment for more than a century, trying to help 
the sport’s safety catch up to its visceral appeal.
055
4
5
F O O T B A L L
2

2 Store items in jars.
As numerous shop owners discovered long ago, 
baby-food bottles are ideal keepers for all kinds of 
small items. In my shop, I changed several large 
shelves above my workbench to accommodate over 
100 of these jars. By adding a smaller shelf between, 
I could fit three rows and still have space left on the 
wider shelves for tools I want to keep nearby tempo-
rarily, but not clutter the workbench. 
Small jars are ideal for holding nails, screws, and nuts. Use a 
label-maker to identify similar-looking contents. A goose-neck 
lamp, shown, aids sorting and selection.
Storing saws with the blades facing 
the wall helps protect them from 
accidental contact. For smaller saws, 
use the hook from the top of a coat 
hanger instead of spring clamps.
1 Hang saws  
teeth in.
Most people store their hand-
saws flat, and, by doing so, use 
space that is better left to other 
things. I created this storage 
system under my 8 x 48–inch 
grinder shelf. The 2¾-inch 
spring clamps hold the top of 
my large saws securely, while the 
two ½-inch-thick dowels on the 
bottom keep each blade aligned. 
It works best if these dowels are 
loose enough to rotate when the 
blade is inserted. 
A place for everything 
and everything in place 
is the way of life in this 
well-organized shop. 
By Jorma Hyypia 
3 Ways a Professional  
Keeps His Shop Organized
 It’s a new year. Time to get organized (and lose five pounds). From  
Popular Mechanics’ back catalog, here are classic techniques that we’d  
endorse for any maker in 2018. 
Organize Everything
2
1
056

MATERIALS LIST
B
A
C
D
E
G
H
F
I
J
K
You can use Peg-Board to 
mount narrow shelving for 
holding jars and other small 
objects that can’t be hung 
from a hook. And because 
the shelves are hung on the 
Peg-Board, they’re completely 
adjustable. It takes 4 feet 
of wall space to mount a 
standard ¼-inch-thick sheet 
of Peg-Board, and the shelves 
can be made out of 4-foot-long 
1 x 4s supported by modified 
Peg-Board hooks. To re-
shape the hook, secure it in a 
metalworking vise, then use a 
hammer to tap open the hook 
so it’s bent at 90 degrees and 
projects horizontally. Next, 
bore two holes in the back 
edge of each shelf in which the 
hooks will be mounted. Bore 
these 1½ inch deep using a 
13⁄64-inch bit. For a 4-foot-long 
shelf, locate the hooks about 
6½ inches from each end. 
—Leonard Heiferling
1. A magnetized tool rack may hold those tools 
that do not easily fit on racks or other perforated-
board hangers. Surprisingly heavy tools may be 
held by such racks. 
2. Use plywood 
scraps to make  
a stand for 
sheet magnets,  
shown here.
A portable vise can be set aside to 
make more surface area available, 
especially useful in a small shop. 
KEY
No
Size and description
A
1
3⁄16" x 2" x 91⁄2" 
flat iron bar
B
1
4" thumbscrew
C
1
nut, welded to  
flat iron
D
1
collar to suit nut
E
2
3⁄4" No. 7 flat-head  
screws
F
1
3⁄4" x 8"–diameter  
plywood disc
B  /  Eight 
1⁄4"-20 or 
1⁄4"-28
machine 
screws
TOOL 
RACK
C  /  Two  
8-32
brass bolts
D  /  Two 
magnets,
Edmund
No. P 40,818
A  /  Drill
for 
machine
screws
K  /  Tap
for 
machine
screws
J  /  Two  
1⁄8" x 1" x 10"
steel bars
I  /  21⁄2"- 
square 
wood apron
H  /  Two  
flat-head 
wood
screws
G  /  Two 
mounting 
screws
F  /   
9⁄16" x 41⁄2"
wood spacer
E  /  Four  
3⁄32" x 7⁄8" x 
23⁄4" pole 
pieces
3 Clever Ways  
to Put Magnets  
to Work
3. Slip a key into a 
small paper enve-
lope along with a 
magnet and seal 
with a paper clip. 
Hide the key under 
any metal shelf for 
retrieval whenever 
you need it. 
3 Make a  
roaming vise. 
Mount a vise to a piece of 
¾-inch plywood and clamp 
it wherever it’s needed. If 
the vise vibrates when doing 
heavy work, just slip a thin 
wood shim between the base 
and the bench. When the 
wedge is properly fitted, the 
play will disappear and you 
can glue it to the base to make 
the adjustment permanent. 
3
057
JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2018

Tomato 
tower
String trellis
Freestanding 
trellis
Railroad tie, 
gravel-side 
up
Rolling planter
Brickwork
Tomatoes
Bell peppers
Snap beans
Cabbage
Onions
Carrots
Leaf lettuce
Radish
Melon 
box
5'
1' 6"
5'
058
POPULAR MECHANICS
A
C
B
D
Simple garden structures 
can help you beat weeds and 
high food bills.
EDITOR’S NOTE
  For much of Popular Mechanics’ history, 
the typical reader had plenty of space for a 
garden. But by 1980, with more and more 
people in cities and suburbs, many households 
didn’t have the space to feed a whole family 
from their own land. Or so they thought.
BY D. X . FENTEN
I
f you have a spot as small as  
10 x 10 feet, you can grow and 
harvest luscious vegetables 
starting in a few weeks and con-
tinuing through the first fall frost. 
Using a system called intensive garden-
ing, you can produce more in your small, 
carefully regulated plot than most gar-
deners tilling much larger plots.
SELECT THE SITE
Choose a spot that can get a good water 
supply and at least six hours of direct 
sunlight each day. Be sure your site 
is at least 15 feet away from any large 
trees or shrubs whose roots will com-
pete with, and steal, vital moisture and 
nutrients from your vegetables. Also 
make sure it is not a low spot where 

JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2018
0 59
Growing Aids
B / TOMATO TOWER
A tomato tower pro-
tects crops from pets 
and wildlife, and offers 
solid support around the 
plant. Tomatoes should 
be staked.
#9 wire 
hangers
#9 wire 
hangers
2 x 4 frame
4’
1'
1' 6"
4 x 4 
post
30"
6 x 6 wire 
mesh
A / PLANTER BOX
A planter box is an 
easy-to-move plant-
ing space. Melons and 
squash should be grown 
on a support. If the fruits 
become heavy, suspend 
them in old panty-hose 
legs.
41⁄2"
5"
17"
Equal space
Drain holes
3⁄4" exterior-
grade plywood 
bottom
1 x 2 cleats
2 x 2 side 
pieces
2 x 2 
verticals 
and 
horizontals
1⁄2" x 11⁄2"
notch
Continued on next page
B
A
water will collect and rot plant roots. 
Once you’ve selected a location, put 
8-inch-tall retainers around the area. 
If you don’t have a suitable space, make 
one by building raised garden beds, 
with walls 2 feet tall.
BUILD GROWING AIDS
With the aid of some easily constructed 
growing aids, your crop can grow up 
instead of across, adding greatly to 
the amount of growing space. Build 
the aids out of wood. To avoid rot, you 
should use pressure-treated lumber, 
or—if you’d rather avoid the chemi-
cals in a treatment—heart-grade cedar 
or redwood. On any structure that 
requires mesh, it’s a good idea to stay 
away from metal. Instead, to avoid 
burning plants, substitute meshes that 
are made of string or plastic.
PREPARE THE SOIL
You can buy a garden soil formulated 
for vegetables, or create a fertile mix-
ture from your own soil and a few 
additional ingredients. A local nursery 
can test your soil and advise as to what 
components it needs to power an inten-
sive garden, or you can use this recipe: 
To ordinary soil, add large quantities 
of organic matter like compost or leaf 
mold (if not available, substitute peat 
moss), sand, and well-rotted manure—
the compost and manure in equal 
amounts. Mix everything slowly and 
evenly. Fill the retainers to just about 
2 inches below the top. At this point, 
the mixture has sufficient nitrogen 
but still requires potassium and phos-
phates. Add fireplace (wood) ashes for 
the potassium and bone meal or rock 
phosphate for the phosphates. Give 
everything one last mix, then water 
thoroughly until the soil is soaked sev-
eral inches down (all the way to the 
bottom if using raised beds). After a 
day or two, test the uppermost soil by 
compressing a handful. If it makes a 
muddy ball, it’s still too wet. If it crum-
bles a bit, you’ll know that it’s ready.
PLANT THE GARDEN
Put a divider across the bed, right down 
the middle. Make it strong enough and 
just wide enough for you to walk across. 
Now you will be able to reach across 

060
POPULAR MECHANICS
frame
Lath 
material
60" to 72"
6 horizontals 
(equal spaces)
2 verti-
cals (equal 
spaces)
Lath
Lath
1 x 2
Hinge
Double action hinges
(3 required)  
(Stanley No. CD875)
Frame
Metal eye 
hooks
STRING 
TRELLIS
DOWEL 
TRELLIS
FREESTANDING 
TRELLIS
Wood dowel
Wood stakes
Dowel may 
project as 
design detail
C / ROLLING PLANT BOX
Fill a rolling plant box to within  
2 inches of the top with a soilless 
mix. Plant flowers, cherry toma-
toes, small cukes, and other light 
vegetables through the mesh; then 
turn the unit to follow the sun. Your 
crop will grow sideways, sticking 
out through the mesh.
D / TRELLIS
Trellises increase efficiency in 
small plots, provide access to ripe 
vegetables, and reduce weeding. 
A string trellis is ideal for peas, 
beans, and other light vegetables; 
dowel trellises support toma-
toes, cukes, and other heavier 
vegetables.
from any side or in the middle without 
walking on and compacting the soil.
When you have decided which veg-
etables to grow, determine the amount 
of space each will require. Be as accu-
rate as possible. You can get a good idea 
of the spacing from the seed packet, 
but be careful. Seed packets usually tell 
you to plant in rows, with large spaces 
in between. Your mightily enriched 
soil eliminates the need for those “wide 
open” and wasteful spaces. For exam-
ple, if you were planting beans in a 
“normal” garden, you would plant 
seeds about 3 inches apart in rows 24 
inches apart. In intensive gardens like 
yours, you’ll plant those bean seeds 
about 3 inches apart, with no rows, 
over the entire area reserved for beans. 
Your richly fortified soil has the capa-
bility to support all those beans and 
assure you heavy harvests.
KEEP IT WORKING
Be very careful about the watering. 
You must never allow the soil to dry 
out. As soon as it appears that the top 
several inches of soil have become dry, 
start watering. Don’t trust your eye 
entirely. Check to see if the soil is dry 
to the touch.
The last secret of intensive gar-
dening is to keep it working. Just as 
soon as you harvest one crop, put in 
another. The soil mixture has been 
formulated to support many crops 
over a whole season. Keep it full and 
you’ll have the most delicious, beau-
tiful vegetables you’ve ever seen or 
eaten—and all of them from a trim 
garden that itself eats up very little of 
your lawn space.
2 x 3 wood 
frame
Line box with black 
polyethylene
3⁄4" plywood
2" casters
2 x 4 foot
Metal eye 
hooks and 
wire ties
2" wire 
mesh
Growing Aids
D

Roy’s First Story
DESIGN 
CENTER
Popular Mechanics: You’d been at 
the magazine a few years before 
this story ran. What took so long?
Roy Berendsohn: Popular Mechan-
ics followed the apprenticeship 
model—not unfamiliar to me from 
my time as an apprentice cabinet-
maker. It was a given when you were 
hired that you had a lot to learn 
mechanically and journalistically.
PM: Planning a project with a com-
puter seems pretty advanced for 
1989. Was this a big step forward?
RB: Yes, it was quite advanced then 
and continues to be. On the other 
hand, having a neatly drawn plan to 
present to the building department 
has always been important. That 
was true before the computerized 
Design Center, and is still true now.
PM: How have things progressed  
in the last 30 years?
RB: Having a kiosk in every store 
became a bit outmoded when the 
internet came around. There are 
free plans on the web you can print 
and submit, along with cut sheets of 
hardware and materials. Decks.com, 
for example, has existing plans and 
design software to help you create 
from scratch. And there are sites for 
other types of projects, too.
PM: So—does the story hold up?
RB: I think so. The notion that we’d 
have more ways to explore project 
designs before cutting any lumber 
was on target. Plus the tone is polite 
and informed. Treating the reader 
politely never goes out of style.
Trex, a company that builds composite decking, continues on with this idea. Its Trex 
Deck Starter Tool is a user-friendly means to approximate the cost of using Trex mate-
rials to build a deck (or just add Trex surfaces and railings). We used the tool to map out 
a simple 12 x 12 deck and received, in minutes, a pdf that gave us approximate materi-
als pricing ($2,700, not including the pressure-treated posts over which the Trex railing 
sleeves would fit) and data sheets that would simplify filing for a building permit. —R.B.
A
s do-it-yourself projects go, 
building a deck is among 
the most complex. Weyer-
haeuser intends to make 
the process less daunting with its com-
puterized Design Center. Poised in 
front of the computer’s screen, home-
owners plot the deck’s outline and then 
progress to a finished plan, requir-
ing only the help of a home center 
employee trained in using the system. 
You can save time and money by not 
having to make repeated trips to the 
lumberyard to buy or return materials 
due to inadequate plans.
Do-it-yourselfers can quickly 
out areas or ones that are 
U-shaped or L-shaped. 
Any design can have 
decking (flooring) 90 
can rotate it on the computer screen, 
examining it from above, below, or 
from any angle. You can focus on part 
of the deck—its stairs, for instance—
and zoom in for a closer look, then 
zoom back.
When finished designing, you can 
request a three-page computer print-
out that includes the following: a 
perspective drawing of the deck with 
the materials cost on the day the deck 
was designed, a color-coded framing 
plan that includes the length to cut 
support posts (based on level ground), 
and a materials list that includes lum-
ber, masonry materials, and hardware.
Most construction questions the 
plans don’t answer can be resolved 
with a Weyerhaeuser brochure for 
prospective deck builders, titled, 
naturally, “How to Build a Deck.” 
Remember, municipalities often 
require a building permit to build a 
deck, the plans for which need to be 
submitted for review.
BY ROY BERENDSOHN
061
JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2018


JANUARY/FEBRUARY  2018
063
ILLUSTRATION ROBERT C. KORTA
THE WISDOM
of
> THE SUNROOF is nonsense. (February 2017)
> WE AMERICANS ARE convinced we can do most things better, and certainly much quicker than anybody else. (April 1907)
> STEP ONE: Scratch head. (November 1997)
> AMONG THE HUNDREDS of nail types available at any hardware store, only one size and shape is the best to use for a particular job. 
Other nails may do the job, but the right one will do it better. (June 1968)
> ASSORTED RUBBER BANDS can be cut from worn-out rubber gloves. (March 1952)
> THE DIAMOND WAS once such a dull little pebble you wouldn’t even stoop to pick it up. (February 1950)
> FOR THE LAST TIME, there is no spinning in foosball.(February 2015)
> YOU THINK YOU’RE SAFE in sleep, you think you’re beyond fear, but the reeling mind is most vulnerable a few hours  
after midnight. (September 2015)
> IN THE MATTER of staining, all other furnishings in the room should be considered. (July 1911)
> TO MAKE REMOVING CONCRETE forms easier, use double-head duplex nails. (May 1997)
> ONE WAY TO HONE your instrument flying skills is to go out and practice in an airplane. But this takes time and fuel, and incurs  
a certain risk. (May 1980)
> IN PAINTING, it is best to remove all the hinges. (March 1941)
> DON’T THROW AWAY your old garden hose when you get a new one; you can make a yard sprinkler out of it. (June 1946) 
> IN THIS DAY and age of specialized power equipment, it’s refreshing to know that a human-powered tool like the bench plane is still 
indispensable. (October 1984)
> KNOWING WHAT YOUR CUE BALL will do after it makes contact with an object ball helps you avoid scratching (also, cursing and 
throwing things). If you strike firmly in the center of the cue ball, it will slide along the felt rather than roll. When a sliding cue ball 
makes contact with an object ball, the two will always separate at an angle of 90 degrees. (February 2015) 
> THERE IS PROBABLY nothing that appeals to the average boy quite so much as a gun. (June 1923)
> A SMALL NUMBER OF TOOLS for space walks are like those special tools annoyingly called for in car manuals—designed from 
scratch for a single purpose. (February 1986)
> MAYBE we’re overdoing things a bit in this modern generation. (April 1960)
> WHEN YOU HAVE the opportunity to witness modern American craftsmen plying their intricate trades, you gain a new apprecia-
tion for that portion of the human soul that cries out for excellence. Look at a craftsman as he labors over his wood, metal, glass, or other 
material and, at first glance, your attention will be drawn to the hands. But you have to look deeper. The work of the hands is merely the 
outward manifestation. True craftsmanship is a journey of the spirit. (May 1989)
> YOU’D BE SURPRISED how many people don’t bother to lock their cars. (December 1964) 
> DON’T TRUST traffic lights totally. (August 1975) 
> IF YOU WORK in wood, there’s a good chance that most everything you’ll ever build will be based on a 90-degree angle. (May 1999)
> A TRUSTED NEIGHBOR is invaluable. (September 1971)
> PUT A MEDIUM-SIZE MAN in the saddle of a midget-size motorcycle, and you have the ingredients of a whale of a time. (January 1965)
> WHEN NAILING TOGETHER two pieces of wood of different thicknesses, the general rule is to select a nail long enough that two-thirds 
of its length will be in the larger piece. (April 1960)
> THERE ARE TWO VITAL FACTS necessary to know in order to obtain a bargain on a used car—when the car was built, and how far it 
has been driven. (September 1926)
> BATHROOM REMODELS DEMAND the skills of all the major crafts. (May 1999)
> ONE SURE WAY to keep the peace in a bedroom shared by two active boys is to split the room in two.(September 1977)
> CREAM CHEESE usually contains one or more of a trio of ingredients—xanthan gum, guar gum, and locust bean gum—that help 
thicken and stabilize it. Works wonders on eggs. (September 2014)
> CITY LIGHTS are a thrilling spectacle from the air. (June 1939)
> TAKING CARE of the shining exterior won’t do much to extend the car’s life if you ignore the greasy side. Most corrosion begins some-
where on the underside and works its way through to the top. (October 1984)
> TIME IS merciless. (August 1995)
> IF YOUR TOILET won’t shut off, try jiggling the handle. It might work. (December 2005)
Some of the magazine’s best advice, completely out of context.

EDITOR’S NOTE
 In the early 1950s, with 
powerful rockets developed 
in the war effort, space travel 
was a tantalizing possibility. 
Naturally, PM reported on  
how it might work. We got 
pretty close.
I
n 1952, the article “Shall We Move to Another Planet?” high-
lighted what were, at the time, the most promising ideas about 
how mankind might explore the universe beyond Earth’s atmo-
sphere. This was five years before the first Soviet satellite, Sputnik 
1, would reach orbit; 17 years before Americans would reach the 
moon; and 59 years before the NASA space shuttle program would be 
shuttered. The article included predictions of the space shuttle and the 
International Space Station, and more outlandish ideas, like that we 
might use nuclear-fusion-powered jets to move other planets closer to 
the sun and modify their sizes to be more Earth-like for colonization.  
We asked astronaut Scott Kelly, who has logged 520 days in space 
over four missions, to read the original 1952 feature and tell us how 
actual space travel compares. 
This diagram shows a rocket  
with two boosters falling off. 
That’s like the space shuttle. In 
real life, rockets don’t go straight 
up like that, but the concept is 
correct. And transport rockets 
200 feet tall, and carrying a 
30-ton payload—those are 
space-shuttle-like numbers.
(Appearance 
from space as 
yet unknown)

I THOUGHT the story was  
entertaining. That headline 
makes it sound like something 
you could just do right then, 
over the weekend. 
My first comment is that 
the future is a long period of 
time. So for me to say all of this 
or some of this is just complete 
B.S.—I don’t think I would ever 
go as far as to say something will 
never happen. But with current 
understandings of physics and 
technology, moving a planet, or 
taking a planet and stripping 
off some of its mass so its grav-
ity is more Earth-like, seems a 
little bit far-fetched.
As far as space travel goes, 
there’s a line in the story that 
says astronauts in zero gravity 
will have the sensation of falling 
all the time, which they seemed 
very concerned about. Yeah, ini-
tially you feel like you’re falling, 
so their concern is warranted, 
but in reality people get used 
to the feeling pretty quickly. I 
got used to it in a few minutes. 
I have heard of people on the 
shuttle flights who felt like they 
were falling for the whole week 
or two they’re up there, though.
There’s also talk in the story 
about how ventilation will be an 
issue. In reality it is a big con-
cern. We have procedures where, 
if we’re going behind a panel 
or a rack on the space station, 
we’re supposed to have an oxy-
gen sensor to make sure there’s 
enough oxygen, because the 
ventilation isn’t good. So they 
definitely had that figured out.
At the end, there’s a great line 
that talks about how it took 100 
million years for aquatic animals 
to transition to land, and it only 
took 1 million years for man to 
make it to space. I’d say you can 
take it one step further: For us 
to venture away from Earth, to 
live off Earth or out of our solar 
system permanently, it might 
take 100 million years. I like the 
idea that it took us a long time to 
get to where we are now, and it 
might take just as long for us to 
get to another planet. 
—As told to Lara Sorokanich
Scott Kelly’s book Endurance, 
about his year in space, is 
available now.
The story posits an 
orbital station at 
350 miles altitude 
that would have to 
move 16,200 miles 
per hour to maintain 
its position—those 
numbers are pretty 
close to reality, from 
what I understand. 
As for inflatable por-
tions of spacecraft 
that could be col-
lapsed in transport 
and inflated once in 
space: On the ISS, 
we have the BEAM, 
the Bigelow Expand-
able Activity Module, 
which creates an 
inflatable habitat.
There’s a lot of 
concern about keep-
ing the spacecraft 
warm, but a much 
larger issue is how 
you reject heat, from 
both your electron-
ics and the sun.
I think it’s pretty cool they were think-
ing about this before we had all the 
space junk we have to worry about 
today. In the story they’re more worried 
about meteoroids, but we have shields 
now that protect from the man-made 
objects left up in space. The space  
station gets hit all the time with stuff.
An Update
SCOTT KELLY
SCOTT KELLY
JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2018
065

vehicle that’s still a world-beater.
T H E  J E E P
N OVE M B E R 19 4 2
Miracle on Wheels 1
“Army men call the jeep a miracle 
on wheels. Engineers at the huge 
Willys plant, where thousands are 
rolling down assembly lines devoted 
to automobiles, believe the jeep’s 
uses are still relatively unexplored. 
After the war, its designers see it 
as a prime farm tool. Right now, 
however, it has a wartime job to do 
alongside the fighting men. They’ll 
do it, too, these jeeps and Yanks.”
FE B RUARY 19 4 8
Jeep Posse 2
“While overseas, thousands of GIs 
dreamed of the day when they 
would be turned loose with a jeep 
and a tankful of gasoline. Today 
that overseas dream has come.”
AUGUST 1955
Uranium Hunt by Jeep 3
“Old-time prospectors are some-
what startled when they see the 
latest uranium-mining equipment 
whiz by. Atop the cab of his pilot 
Jeep, Francis K. Campbell of Hous-
ton, Texas, has installed a detecting 
device that not only reports radio-
activity but whether the rays are of 
the type produced by uranium. The 
findings are recorded on a moving 
graph beside the driver’s seat.”
N OVE M B E R 19 85
4
strip to Eugene the Jeep in 1936, 
‘a wonderful animal who could do 
most anything.’ Others credit 
an anonymous sergeant at 
the Holabird testing facil-
ity, who transposed the 
word jeep for a more 
colorful expletive.”
N OVE M B E R 19 9 6
Wrangler on the Rubicon 5
“When we decided to test the 
mettle of Jeep’s new TJ Wrangler, 
there was only one place we con-
sidered—the legendary Rubicon. 
Right off the bat we’re impressed 
at how our Wrangler just soaks up 
the bumps and jolts.”
JAN UARY 2 01 8
It’s a Jeep Thing 6
I was at a stoplight in New York 
City recently when a black 
late-model Wrangler pulled up 
next to me. My girlfriend, in the 
passenger seat, told me the 
driver had his window down to 
talk. I rolled down mine. “That’s 
the last real Jeep,” he told me, 
admiringly. My Jeep is a 2005. In 
2007 Chrysler redesigned the 
Wrangler top to bottom, soften-
ing the boxy lines and replacing 
the AMC straight six that had 
been under the hood for four 
decades. “By the way,” he said, 
“as long as I have you here, can 
you explain ‘It’s a Jeep thing’ to 
her?” He nodded toward the 
woman in his passenger seat. 
My girlfriend laughed; she was 
always mocking me for throw-
ing a Jeep Wave when I passed 
other Wranglers. “I can’t,” I 
said, and the light turned green.         
—Kevin Dupzyk
1
2
3
4
6
5
POPULAR MECHANICS

Rooftop Rack and 
Pop-Up Shelter
BY GENE RAPP
W
ITHOUT THE 
pop-up shelter, 
this platform 
serves as an overhead lug-
gage rack to carry supplies 
and camping gear. Even 
with the lean-to-type pop-
up top installed, there is 
still a forward luggage space 
the width of the car and 
about 43 inches long avail-
able for stowage. Since the 
067
JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2018 
EDITOR’S NOTE
  Camper vans are heavily 
associated with the ’70s, but 
there’s still a place for a vehicle 
with the functionality of a small 
home that’s not the size of one. So 
here’s a way to add closet space.
shelter hinges to the roof 
rack with removable pins, 
it is easy to convert the plat-
form from elevated sleeping 
porch to luggage carrier or 
spectator deck.
The starting point in the 
construction of the roof-
top carrier is the placing 
of 2 x 6s across the roof’s 
width at the rib-support 
points of your vehicle. 
Sketch an outline of the 
roof contour on each 2 x 6 
and then cut on a band saw. 
Next cut the ½-inch ply-
wood deck sections, whose 
exact dimensions will be 
determined by the width 
of your vehicle. These sec-
tions are screwed to the ribs 
and edged with 1 x 10 white-
pine rails. 
For the pop-up top, 
1 x 10s form end pieces,  
and ribs and side pieces  
are of 1 x 4. Stiffeners made 
of 1 x 2 lumber run the 
length and are covered with 
1⁄8-inch hardboard. Suitcase 
latches hold down the aft 
edge of the top.
To finish the rack, white 
duck canvas strips are glued 
to the underside of the rib 
supports to prevent scratch-
ing the van roof. Trailer skin 
sheeting covers the side rails 
and the pop-up top; edge 
everything with aluminum 
trim. Eyebolts or loose-pin 
butt hinges are placed on 
the deck forward of the shel-
ter top; more eyebolts or pad 
eyes provide anchor points 
for lines securing gear boxes 
and equipment. Turnbuck-
les snug the platform to 
hooks that catch under the 
van’s drip rails.
The roof platform is 
light enough to allow young-
sters to mount it. Add on the 
pop-up top, tilt it up, and 
rig curtains, and the kids 
have their own compart-
ment. Without the top, it’s 
a front-row box for specta-
tors at sporting events. Once 
the race or game begins, 
the roof platform, complete 
with sun umbrella and deck 
chairs, becomes an ideal 
vantage point.
*For today’s equivalent, try .030 beveled aluminum skin from Mirage Trailer Parts.

  
POPULAR MECHANICS
068
F
F R O M T H E M O M E N T the first airplane 
crashed into the World Trade Center on the 
morning of September 11, 2001, the world 
has asked one simple and compelling ques-
tion: How could it happen?
Three and a half years later, not everyone is convinced 
we know the truth. Go to Google.com, type in the search 
phrase “World Trade Center conspiracy,” and you’ll get 
links to an estimated 12,300,000 websites. Thousands of 
books on 9/11 have been published; many of them reject 
the official consensus that hijackers associated with 
Osama bin Laden and Al Qaeda flew passenger planes 
into U.S. landmarks.
To investigate 16 of the most prevalent claims made by 
conspiracy theorists, Popular Mechanics assembled a team of nine 
researchers and reporters who, together with PM editors, consulted 
more than 70 professionals in fields that form the core content of 
this magazine, including aviation, engineering, and the military.
In the end, we were able to debunk each of these assertions with 
hard evidence and a healthy dose of common sense. We learned 
that a few theories are based on something as innocent as a report-
ing error on that chaotic day. Others are the byproducts of cynical 
imaginations that aim to inject suspicion and animosity into public 
debate. Only by confronting such poisonous claims with irrefutable 
facts can we understand what really happened on a day that is for-
ever seared into world history. 
      —The editors
DEBUNKING the
M Y T H S
PM examines the evidence and 
consults the experts to refute 
the most persistent conspiracy 
theories of September 11.
No Stand-Down Order
C L A I M : No fighter jets were scrambled from any of the 28 Air 
Force bases within close range of the four hijacked 
flights. “On 11 September Andrews had two squadrons of fighter 
jets with the job of protecting the skies over Washington, D.C.,” says 
the website emperors-clothes.com. “They failed to do their job.” 
“There is only one explanation for this,” writes Mark R. Elsis of 
StandDown.net. “Our Air Force was ordered to Stand Down on 9/11.”
F A C T :
On 9/11 there were only 14 fighters on alert in the con-
tiguous 48 states. No computer network or alarm 
automatically alerted the North American Air Defense Command 
(NORAD) of missing planes. “They [civilian Air Traffic Control, or 
W TC: PHOTOGRAPH BY ROB HOWARD
EDITOR’S NOTE
 This may have been the most controversial  
story we ever did. It certainly garnered the 
largest response. Hundreds of letters came in  
after we debunked many prevalent conspiracy 
theories surrounding the 9/11 attacks. Thirteen 
years later, we still get letters. 

         
JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2018
0 69
ATC] had to pick up the 
phone and literally dial 
us,” says Maj. Douglas 
Martin, public affairs 
officer for NORAD. Bos-
ton Center, one of 22 
Federal Aviation Admin-
istration (FAA) regional 
ATC facilities, called 
NORAD’s Northeast Air 
Defense Sector (NEADS) 
three times: at 8:37 a.m. 
EST to inform NEADS that Flight 11 was hijacked; at 9:21 a.m. to 
inform the agency, mistakenly, that Flight 11 was headed for Wash-
ington (the plane had hit the North Tower 35 minutes earlier); and 
at 9:41 a.m. to (erroneously) identify Delta Air Lines Flight 1989 
from Boston as a possible hijacking. The New York ATC called NEADS 
at 9:03 a.m. to report that United Flight 175 had been hijacked—the 
same time the plane slammed into the South Tower. Within minutes 
of that first call from Boston Center, NEADS scrambled two F-15s 
from Otis Air Force Base in Falmouth, Massachusetts, and three 
F-16s from Langley Air National Guard Base in Hampton, Virginia. 
None of the fighters got anywhere near the pirated planes. 
Why couldn’t ATC find the hijacked flights? When the hijackers 
turned off the planes’ transponders, which broadcast identifying 
signals, ATC had to search 4,500 identical radar blips crisscrossing 
some of the country’s busiest air corridors. And NORAD’s sophisti-
cated radar? It ringed the continent, looking outward for threats, 
not inward. “It was like a doughnut,” Martin says. “There was no 
coverage in the middle.” Pre-9/11, flights originating in the States 
were not seen as threats and NORAD wasn’t prepared to track them.
Puffs of Dust
C L A I M : As each tower collapsed, clearly visible puffs of dust and 
debris were ejected from the sides of the buildings. An 
advertisement in The New York Times for the book Painful Ques-
tions: An Analysis of the September 11th Attack made this claim: 
“The concrete clouds shooting out of the buildings are not possible 
from a mere collapse. They do occur from explosions.” Numerous 
conspiracy theorists cite Van Romero, an explosives expert and vice 
president of the New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology, 
who was quoted on 9/11 by the Albuquerque Journal as saying “there 
were some explosive devices inside the buildings that caused the 
towers to collapse.” The article continues: “Romero said the collapse 
of the structures resembled those of controlled implosions used to 
demolish old structures.”
F A C T :
 Once each tower began to collapse, the weight of all the 
floors above the collapsed zone bore down with pulver-
izing force on the highest intact floor. Unable to absorb the massive 
energy, that floor would fail, transmitting the forces to the floor 
below, allowing the collapse to progress through the building in a 
chain reaction. Engi-
neers call the process 
“pancaking,” and it does 
not require an explosion 
to begin, according to 
David Biggs, a struc-
t u r a l eng i ne er at 
Ryan-Biggs Associates 
and a member of the 
American Society of 
Civil Engineers team 
that worked on the 
FEMA report.
Like all office build-
ings, the WTC towers 
contained a huge volume 
of air. As they pancaked, 
all that air—along with 
the concrete and other debris pulverized by the force of the collapse—
was ejected with enormous energy. “When you have a significant 
portion of a floor collapsing, it’s going to shoot air and concrete dust 
out the window,” National Institute of Standards and Technology 
lead investigator Shyam Sunder tells PM. Those clouds of dust may 
create the impression of a controlled demolition, Sunder adds, “but 
it is the floor pancaking that leads to that perception.”
Demolition expert Romero regrets that his comments to the 
Albuquerque Journal became fodder for conspiracy theorists. 
“I was misquoted in saying that I thought it was explosives that 
brought down the building,” he tells PM. “I only said that that’s 
what it looked like.”
Romero, who agrees with the scientific conclusion that fire trig-
gered the collapses, demanded a retraction from the Journal. It 
was printed September 22, 2001. “I felt like my scientific reputa-
tion was on the line.” But emperors-clothes.com saw something 
else: “The paymaster of Romero’s research institute is the Pentagon. 
Directly or indirectly, pressure was brought to bear, forcing Romero 
to retract his original statement.” Romero responds: “Conspiracy 
theorists came out saying that the government got to me. That is the 
farthest thing from the truth. This has been an albatross around my 
neck for three years.”
Flight 77 Debris
C L A I M : Conspiracy theorists insist there was no plane wreck-
age at the Pentagon. “In reality, a Boeing 757 was never 
found,” claims pentagonstrike.co.uk, which asks the question, 
“What hit the Pentagon on 9/11?”
F A C T :
Blast expert Allyn E. Kilsheimer was the first struc-
tural engineer to arrive at the Pentagon after the crash 
and helped coordinate the emergency response. “It was absolutely 
a plane, and I’ll tell you why,” says Kilsheimer, CEO of KCE Struc-
tural Engineers PC, Washington, D.C. “I saw the marks of the plane 
wing on the face of the building. I picked up parts of the plane with 
the airline markings on them. I held in my hand the tail section of 
the plane and I found the black box.” Kilsheimer’s eyewitness 
account is backed up by photos of plane wreckage inside and outside 
the building. Kilsheimer adds: “I held parts of uniforms from crew 
members in my hands, including body parts. Okay?”
Though dozens of witnesses 
saw a Boeing 757 hit the 
building, conspiracy advo-
cates insist there is evidence 
that a missile or a different 
type of plane smashed into 
the Pentagon.

firestorm of exploding glass 
fractures the light in a blaze 
of brilliant sparkles. This is 
car abuse at its most spec-
tacular—monster trucks dive-bombing a 
squad of sacrificial automobiles, pouncing 
and bouncing crazily over roofs and hoods, 
and bashing them pancake-flat. It’s the 
“Monster Mash,” and it’s a box-office smash.
Bulldozer brawn is just the beginning. 
The public eventually tired of a pack of sin-
gle-purpose monsters whose whole act was 
simply pounding cars into scrap. So the 
event’s promoters had to come up with new 
forms of monster truck madness—mud 
racing, sand drags, hill 
climbs, and more. And 
as the madness evolved, 
so did the trucks. Today’s 
monster trucks are faster, 
absorb more stress, and 
require more control. 
They have to stay in their 
lanes over bouncy, twist-
ing obstacle courses, 
where the obstacles are 
junk cars. That’s no small 
feat when you’re bounding 
along on four huge tires 
that ride like beach balls.
To get an idea of what 
goes into a modern mon-
ster masher, we went 
to St. Louis, Missouri, 
home of the most famous 
big-wheeler of them all—
Bigfoot. All told, there 
are no fewer than 12 Big-
foots, representing three generations  
of development.
Peeking under the skin of one of the new-
est versions, the first thing you notice is the 
skin itself. The entire Ford pickup body is all 
fiberglass, with door handles and headlights 
painted on. The frame uses chromoly steel 
tubing, similar to the frames used in sta-
dium race trucks. Driver comfort, believe it 
or not, was also a major concern. The older 
trucks were bashing the drivers around 
inside their cabs almost as much as they 
bashed the cars underfoot. Easing the shock 
loads finding their way into the cab helps the 
driver maintain better control, and also cuts 
down on the medical bills.
Extra-generous suspension travel is the 
key to going faster, jumping higher, and 
EDITOR’S NOTE
 We’ve always had a thing for big trucks and big 
engines—especially when they’re used to crush 
stuff. Bigfoot had been through twelve iterations 
when we first published this story. Twenty-six 
years later, they’re up to number 21, which is still 
destroying old cars and making crowds cheer. 
keeping the 10,000-pound truck on an even 
keel. It is achieved by using a four-link setup. 
Four bars extend from the pivot point at the 
center of the frame to pivot points on the 
axles. Two huge nitrogen-charged shocks at 
each corner help maintain ride height and 
jounce and rebound characteristics. Ini-
tially, the shocks move two inches for every 
inch of wheel movement. But as the shocks 
compress into their last stage, the damping 
ratio stiffens to 1:1. 
While many of Bigfoot’s parts—such as 
driveshafts and tie rods—are handmade, 
some are adapted from agricultural and 
industrial applications. The new trucks 
run Rockwell F106 axle housings (nor-
mally used in school buses). Mechanics 
cut the ends off the housings and weld on 
special flanges. The axle 
itself comes with a plane-
tary gear reduction on the 
end of the shaft. This setup 
allows additional 3.56:1 
gear reduction to ease the 
torque load on the axle. 
Custom-made one-
piece rims (safer and 
lighter than two-piece 
rims) carry 66x43x25 Fire-
stone Terra tires. In the real 
world, these tires support 
30-mile-per-hour liquid fer-
tilizer spreaders. Inflated to 
between five and 11 pounds 
per square inch, the tires, 
about $2,000 apiece, com-
press right to the rims on 
jumps. Shaving the tread 
on new tires cuts another 
200 pounds—per tire—off 
the truck’s weight.
BY CLIFF GROMER
PHOTOGRAPH BY BIGFOOT 4X4 INC.
POPULAR MECHANICS
070

Pumping big power to Bigfoot’s big feet 
starts off with a Ford Motorsport high-
nickel-content cast-iron 460 cylinder block 
that’s bored and stroked to 500 cubic inches. 
The engine, fed by Crower fuel injection and 
boosted by a 30 percent overdriven Blower 
Drive Service 8-71 supercharger, seems to 
provide more than enough muscle.
In case you’re wondering what the third 
“4” is in Bigfoot 4x4x4, it’s for four-wheel 
steering. Hydraulics, borrowed from vari-
ous agricultural and industrial jobs, turn the 
steering knuckles on front and rear axles. 
The front system uses a conventional belt-
driven power-steering pump. Rear steering 
uses electric-driven hydraulic pumps con-
trolled by a switch mounted on the shifter. 
Tie rods, front and rear, connect the steer-
ing knuckles to keep the wheels parallel 
in case the truck comes off a jump on one 
Bigfoot No. 8 sports the latest 
in monster truck technology. 
Computer-designed chassis with 
four-link suspension and smaller-
size tires gives this Bigfoot more 
speed, stability, durability, and 
comfort than its ancestors.
wheel. They prevent the pressure from forc-
ing the hydraulics on one side from turning 
the wheel in.
The front-steering hydraulic sys-
tem uses a relief valve to blow off excess 
pressure. Without the valve, a one-point 
front-wheel landing could generate enough 
back-force in the hydraulics to whip the 
steering wheel with such violence that it 
could break a driver’s fingers and wrists.   
FIBERGLASS CAB 
AND BED
CHROMOLY  
STEEL-TUBE  CHASSIS
HYDRAULIC 
STEERING ARM
ENGINE RADIATOR
ROLL CAGE
FUEL CELL
C-6 AUTOMATIC 
TRANSMISSION
REAR-STEERING 
SOLENOIDS
BDS 8-71 
SUPERCHARGER
500-CU.-IN. FORD  
MOTORSPORT ENGINE
DUAL-NITROGEN 
SHOCK ABSORBERS
12-IN.  
DISC BRAKE
TRANSFER 
CASE
4-LINK 
SUSPENSION
66x43x25 TERRA TIRE
CUSTOM ONE-PIECE RIM
DRIVESHAFT
STEERING KNUCKLE
PLANETARY GEAR-
REDUCTION HUB
TIE ROD
ROCKWELL F106 
AXLE HOUSINGS
DIFFERENTIAL 
(6.20:1)
ILLUSTRATION BY DON MANNES
071

 M A R C H  1 9 3 0
T
hink of finding hot dogs or ham-
burgers ready when you stop 
driving at noon, or having a stew 
sizzling and savory at the end of a long 
day’s drive. By placing foil-wrapped pack-
ages of food atop the engine exhaust 
manifold you can prepare a hot meal 
as you travel. When you stop, just lift 
the hood and dish out the meal. Make 
sure you place the foil package atop the 
exhaust—not the intake—manifold. The 
latter doesn’t get hot enough for cooking. 
On V-8 engines, the package goes atop the 
block, between the cylinders. Hot dogs 
take about 25 miles to cook; hamburg-
ers, 50 or 60. For a trip of several days, 
a number of complete 
foil-wrapped meals 
can be prepared before 
departing and carried 
inside a small ice chest.
Back in April 1988, we were dreaming of the hybrid future and conceived our own concept car—
the creatively named “PM”—to show how things might work in the distant year of 2001. Our 
idea was to use a three-cylinder gas engine driving one end of the car, with electric motors at 
the other end to provide all-wheel drive. “Batteries would supplement the underpowered gas 
motor for bursts of acceleration and brief bursts of four-wheel drive,” we said. “Vehicle could 
also be driven as pure electrical drive, with gas motor switched on briefly to provide power for 
acceleration.” If any of that sounds familiar, it’s because that’s exactly how the three-cylinder 
hybrid BMW i8 works. It took 26 years (the i8 debuted in 2014) and 
some of the details are different, but still: We called it. —Ezra Dyer
O U T  O F 
C O N T E X T
Racing 
Motor Car 
Literally 
Flies 
Through Air 
JULY 1911
Sheep-Killing 
Parrots 
Escape into 
America 
DECEMBER 
1917
Sharks  
Are 
Cowards
MAY  
1927
Energy 
Expended 
in Speaking 
Found of 
Little Value 
MAY 1932
Pacific Ocean 
Not Big 
Enough to Hold 
the Moon 
NOVEMBER 
1932
Half Brain  
as Good as 
Whole One, 
Surgery Finds 
DECEMBER  
1939
TORQUE MANAGEMENT 2001
1988
A P R I L
Millinery has not here-
tofore been considered 
sufficiently mechanical 
to find mention in these 
columns. But the lat-
est Parisian conception, 
worn at the recent auto 
show in that 
city, seems 
to deserve an 
illustration.
F E B
1 9 0 6
Motor millinery.
R E C I P E : 
BEEF STEW À LA MANIFOLD
The serious car-engine chef quickly discovers it takes 
at least three hours to cook a full meal, even a stew.
1. Cut into one-inch cubes enough lean beef to sat-
isfy those end-of-the-trip appetites. Place this meat 
atop three layers of foil. 
2. Drain a can of mushrooms and add the contents. 
Also add half a package of dry onion soup mix and a 
tablespoon each of barbecue sauce and butter. 
3. In the same package, place carrots and small pota-
toes. It is best to parboil vegetables before your trip 
to ensure cooking and to retain moisture: the car-
rots for ten minutes, the potatoes for five.
4. Put the foil package on the exhaust manifold and 
twist a couple short lengths of wire around them to 
prevent slipping from engine vibration.
5. Drive. 
WHILE YOU
D R I V E
Bread that comes to the 
housewife ready-cut is 
now on the market in 
many cities, a slicing and 
wrapping machine doing 
the cutting and packing 
the cut loaf in a waxed 
container to keep it fresh. 
The machine cuts 29,000 
slices an hour from 
1,000 loaves. The bread, 
ready for using when 
unwrapped, is particularly 
adapted for sandwiches, 
because it is evenly and 
smoothly cut.
B R E A D 
S L I C E R 
C U T S  A N D 
W R A P S 
T H O U S A N D 
L O AV E S 
A N  H O U R
Automobile Hat
  In 116 years, very few topics have escaped the notice of  
PM editors. Here, excerpts of some of the current staff’s favorite 
reporting from throughout the magazine’s lifetime.
Clippings
POPULAR MECHANICS
072

FIRST
IN AMERICA
JOSHUA FERRIS
BY
J U N E
1 9 5 7
America’s first speed law was passed by the board 
of selectmen in Boston, in 1757, and limited traf-
fic to a foot pace on Sundays. This ordinance 
recited that “coaches, sleighs, chairs, and other 
carriages” were being driven with great rapidity 
through the streets, and interfering with the Sab-
bath worship. If the walking pace were exceeded, 
the ordinance exacted a fine of ten shillings from 
“the master of the slave or servant so driving.”
A farmer near Philadelphia recently heard a roar, 
a whistling sound, and then saw something hit the 
ground in a cloud of dust. A mineralogist hurried 
to the spot when the farmer telephoned that he 
believed a meteorite had fallen. Search showed that 
something had fallen, but the object was nothing but 
a wrench that had been dropped from an airplane 
flying at high altitude.
Dutch Boy  
Holds Your 
Pipe with  
Both Hands 
MAY 1940
Rings  
Aid  
African 
Courtships 
MAY 1947
“Passengers”  
Over Cliff at 
Supersonic Speed 
JANUARY  
1955
Licking  
Our Missile 
Fizzle? 
MAY  
1961
Antarctic to  
Flee Women  
but Have Problems  
Just the Same 
NOVEMBER 1961
Wastebaskets  
Eat Trash  
and Like It 
MARCH  
1975
Novel  
Surgery for 
Detached 
Heads
JULY  
1999
Thomas Siemons of Wenatchee, Washing-
ton, guarantees a perfectly level “flattop” cut. 
He uses a horizontal, swinging iron bracket 
equipped with two swivel arms that hold a 
clipper blade in level position. With clipper 
attached, Siemons moves the apparatus in 
sweeping arcs to produce a haircut in five min-
utes less time than for the usual trim.
Callers to a dial-your-match system are first given 
a secret password. Then they are asked to fill out a 
short questionnaire. The questions ask such things 
as height and weight, and may also get into astro-
logical signs and sexual preferences. The caller’s 
questionnaire is computer matched with all the 
others. The caller can then read the answers given 
by those the computer has picked as compatible. 
Everything from casual dating to marriage has 
resulted. So, if you’re ready for it, on the other 
side of your modem, people like Lynn 432, Jill 490, 
Janet 418, Clark 201, Tony 765, and many more are 
just dying to meet you. 
I still can’t explain why I 
decided to solo any more 
than I can understand why 
I agreed to learn to fly, unless 
it is to say that I could solo, 
just as I could learn to fly, 
and like the man who looks 
at the bird and senses the 
possibility of human flight, 
what is possible is often sim-
ply what is done. That is the 
human record, to the world’s 
delight and the world’s 
dismay.
I don’t want to oversell 
it, but if I needed any reas-
surance that year that I was 
not dying as my father had 
died and that I had things 
to live for despite his pain-
ful absence, I found it that 
day in front of the double 
lines of the runway waiting 
for clearance from air traf-
fic control, when I knew that 
despite being hobbled and 
despite being anguished, 
I had prevailed over my 
grief and my fear and over-
come a not inconsiderable 
amount of technical chal-
lenge to prove to myself that 
I was still mentally sound 
and ticking. I was in Six-Two 
Romeo absent all expertise 
and guidance but my own, 
and I took her up in the air 
by myself without reserva-
tions or second thoughts, 
and as I circled the pattern, 
I whooped with happiness 
and pumped my fist in vic-
tory and failed to repress 
a smile so insistent that it 
began to hurt my face.
EARTH CURVE TABLE SHOWS HOW FAR AIRPLANE PILOTS CAN SEE
Pilots of a Flying Fortress cruising at 25,000 feet can see right into Germany before they are out of sight of 
England’s Channel coast, according to a formula worked out by Pan American Clipper captains. By elevating 
yourself, you can look right over the curvature of the earth. Given clear skies, the chart below shows the dis-
tance in miles that a pilot can see at varying altitudes.
A U G U S T  1 9 8 3
W R E N C H  F A L L I N G  F R O M  P L A N E  C A U S E S
J A N U A R Y 1 9 3 1
S E P T E M B E R 2 0 1 5
D E C E M B E R 19 3 0
LEARNING TO FLY:
THE SOLO
JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2018
073

J A N U A R Y  
F E B R U A R Y
BY
74
A
B
How  
Popular  
Mechanics 
inspired  
the most  
famous  
escape in 
history.
JACQU E L I N E  
DET W I L E R
P

E
F
G
C
D
The November 1960 issue 
of Popular Mechanics, one 
of two that inspired the 
escape (A); an investigator 
finds a tunnel (B); Alcatraz 
today (C); the article (D) that 
helped Alcatraz prisoners 
Frank Morris (E), John Anglin 
(F), and Clarence Anglin (G)
brave San Francisco Bay.
@POPULARMECHANICS

                      
December in Chicago and there’s some loon pre-
tending to drown in the Sheraton Towers Hotel pool. 
It’s an indoor pool, but still. This guy is floating in 
there in a white T-shirt and jeans, upright, with his 
head lolled back and his eyes closed, sneakers just 
grazing the bottom. An inflatable plaid life vest 
barely holds his face out of the water. Later, he grabs 
for a floating cushion, but that slips out of his hands 
and he sinks up to his forehead reaching for it. 
This man’s name is Bayard Richard, and you 
shouldn’t worry about him. He swam backstroke 
for the University of Wisconsin, and could make 
it to the edge of the pool and climb out whenever 
he wants. Richard is thirty years old and works at 
Popular Mechanics in the promotions department. 
Mostly he comes up with ideas to get companies 
interested in buying ads—mailers, meetings, stuff 
like that. It’s a great job: He makes about $5,000 a 
year, and the office, on East Ontario Street, has a 
coffee cart and two secretaries. Besides, if you offer 
yourself up to help the editors execute some scheme 
like testing life jackets in a hotel swimming pool, 
you get paid a dollar. 
Richard climbs out of the pool to try another 
device. He’s testing them one at a time—a vest, a 
second vest, a belt, a floating jacket, that useless 
cushion. Each time, the outdoors editor pushes 
Richard into the pool and watches to see how he 
comes up. Richard plays it up for the camera, clos-
ing his eyes, holding his breath for a second or two, 
flopping back, playing dead. 
The shoot takes about two hours, and then Rich-
ard changes into dry clothes and a warm jacket and 
gets his dollar from petty cash. He takes the train 
home to the house he just bought in Park Forest, 
and that’s the end of it. He doesn’t see the article, 
“Your Life Preserver—How will it behave if you need 
it?” when it comes out in March 1962. He doesn’t 
even realize the editors used (and misspelled) his 
B
C
A
2018
A Ten days after the con-
victs disappeared, the 
Coast Guard found a home-
made life vest off Angel 
Island in San Francisco 
Bay, but no bodies.
B The March 1962 issue of 
Popular Mechanics con-
taining Bayard Richard’s 
life-vest test.
C A few of the 80-plus 
tools Frank Morris and the 
Anglin brothers made or 
stole while building their 
escape supplies.
name. In fact, Richard doesn’t think about the arti-
cle again for forty-five years, until his grown son 
Paul is drinking a cup of coffee and turns on a doc-
umentary about the 1962 escape from Alcatraz on 
the History Channel. The host talks about the frigid 
waters of San Francisco Bay, a major deterrent to 
potential jailbreakers—and how the infamous 1962 
escapees found a solution in an edition of Popular 
Mechanics in the prison library. The host holds a 
copy up to the camera. There in the grainy photos, 
recognizable from the crew cut everyone in the fam-
ily jokes about and the nose Paul and his brother 
David share, is a thirty-year-old Bayard Richard. 
Paul nearly chokes on his coffee. As David remem-
bers it, “Paul’s looking at the television going, wait 
a minute, that’s my dad!”
II. “I just thought 
to myself, that’s 
one of the most 
I. “Like insurance, 
lifesaving devices 
are hard to value. 
If you don’t need 
them, they’re use-
less, even a bother. 
If you do need 
them, they’re 
priceless.”
—POPULAR MECHANICS, 1962
76
J A N U A R Y  
F E B R U A R Y

D
77
Like all Alcatraz residents, Frank Morris had 
about four hours of free time until lights out after 
dinner. That’s likely when he saw the issue for the 
first time, sitting in his dank cell, about the size of 
a pool table. He may have lain on his bed and put 
his feet up on the toilet, listening to the seagulls 
and the sounds of life floating across San Fran-
cisco Bay from the city, and imagined how he 
himself would float over the bay like a seagull, to 
drink in bars and meet a girl and procure a car 
to drive to Mexico. And then, looking at Bayard 
Richard there in that pool in Chicago, Frank Mor-
ris had an idea.
The story of the escape is legend, thanks in 
part to the 1979 movie Escape From Alcatraz star-
ring Clint Eastwood as Morris. What happened: 
Morris (imprisoned for bank robbery), along with 
John and Clarence Anglin (two brothers, also 
bank robbers) and Allen West, a fourth coconspir-
ator who ended up staying behind, chipped out the 
disintegrating concrete around the air vents at the 
back of their cells, expanding the holes until they 
were large enough to accommodate a person. They 
crawled through the holes into a utility corridor, 
then established a secret workshop above their 
own cellblock, hanging blankets to hide them-
selves from patrolling guards. Over time, using 
more than eighty tools they created or stole, the 
four men made dummy papier-mâché heads to 
fool the guards into thinking they were still in 
their beds. Then, on June 11, 1962, Morris and the 
Anglins climbed a broken utility shaft, ran across 
the roof, and left. They were never seen again.
Even people who have studied the escape for 
years will never know if Popular Mechanics gave 
Morris the idea to attempt it or whether the mag-
azine simply provided a method. It certainly 
contributed to the likelihood of success. Even the 
FBI and the Federal Bureau of Prisons seemed to 
think so. Screenwriter Richard Tuggle noticed 
references to this publication in both agencies’ 
files while researching the screenplay that would 
become the Eastwood movie. “I think it’s safe to 
say that if those guys had not had Popular Mechan-
ics, they never would have tried to escape,” he says. 
“The magazine gave them the final key that they 
needed to be able to try this crazy thing.”
In the movie, Tuggle included just one line 
to explain how Popular Mechanics might have 
inspired the convicts. In the lunchroom with the 
Anglins, Morris (Eastwood) whispers his plan to 
tunnel through the concrete at the back of his cell, 
then build something to carry them through the 
frigid, roiling bay to the mainland.
“You’re gonna steal some raincoats, some con-
tact cement,” Eastwood-as-Morris says. “We’ll 
make a life raft and some life preservers out of it. I 
read how to do it in Popular Mechanics.”
D Frank Morris requested 
five magazines before  
his escape. The FBI didn’t 
seem to think Chess 
Review was relevant. 
incredible stories 
I’ve ever heard.”
—RICHARD TUGGLE, screenwriter, Escape From Alcatraz
Once the Chicago-based editorial department 
completed the life-jacket article, it went with the 
rest of the March 1962 issue to a printing pro-
duction facility in midtown Manhattan. Just one 
copy made it from there to Alcatraz’s dedicated 
post office at 7th and Mission Street in San Fran-
cisco (no zip code, as these did not exist until July 
1, 1963). A mail vehicle brought the magazine to 
Pacific Street Wharf, where it boarded a steam-
ship that ran to Alcatraz twice a day, every day 
except Sunday.
Inside the prison, the issue would have gone 
straight to an administration office, where cen-
sors removed any content that might help convicts 
escape. But the story on life jackets, with the photos 
of Richard, survived, and the magazine reached the 
library intact. There, it was added to a delivery cart 
that a prisoner pushed from cell to cell. 
POPULARMECHANICS.COM
@POPULARMECHANICS

                   
2018
A
78
“Vulcanizing takes about 15 minutes, and welds 
the nine cut-out sections into an airtight shape.”   
By March 1962, the raft was nearing completion, 
but the prisoners weren’t ready to leave just yet. A 
new issue of Popular Mechanics had just arrived. 
And wouldn’t you know it, there was a life-vest dem-
onstration inside. 
IV. “Alcatraz sells.”
—JOHN CANTWELL, Alcatraz ranger
Present day. A park ranger named John Cantwell is 
opening the gates to the Anglin brothers’ cells so a 
III. “When you 
have all the time 
in the world, like 
these fellas did, it’s 
amazing what a 
person can do.”
—DON EBERLE, FBI agent in charge of 1962 Alcatraz 
escape investigation 
There are actually two issues of Popular Mechanics 
in the Alcatraz file at the Park Archives and Records 
Center in San Francisco’s Presidio National Park, 
and both are in remarkable condition considering 
how many prisoners, law-enforcement officers, and 
historians have pawed through them over the years. 
The corners are ruffled, the paper gone soft, as if it’s 
been conditioned by sea breeze. But the covers are 
still bright—headlines promising a PM jet and a 
Go-anywhere boat and All the ’61 cars in color! over 
photos of Chevys and speedboats in washed-out tur-
quoise and red and yellow. If they weren’t marred by 
the signatures of FBI agents, you could frame the 
covers and hang them on a wall.
The other issue is from November 1960. In it is 
an article about a hunter who builds his own goose 
decoys out of found rubber, using a technique called 
vulcanizing. To people who think about vulcanizing 
at all—which is to say, almost nobody—this is a fairly 
boring process by which sulfur or other curatives cre-
ate water-resistant links between rubber molecules. 
To Morris and the Anglins, though, it was informa-
tion worth its weight in government pardons. 
“Step one—cut the pattern from an old rubber 
inner tube.”
It was a common belief at Alcatraz that if any-
body beat the prison’s escape-proof reputation, the 
government would close the facility. So when Mor-
ris and the Anglins came asking for raincoats, lots 
of convicts obliged, happy to play even a small part 
in shutting down the Rock. They wore their own 
rubber coats out to the yard, then dropped them so 
the would-be escapees could casually pick them up 
and carry them back to the secret workshop. Mor-
ris, the Anglins, and West amassed at least fifty 
raincoats this way.
“Step two—seam edges are buffed and spread 
with solvent, then vulcanized with thin raw rub-
ber strips.”
Over several months, the four prisoners secreted 
rubber cement (many varieties of which include 
vulcanizing agents) from Alcatraz’s cobbling and 
glove-making shops, then spread it on the seams 
of the raincoats to join them into a raft. 
A A page from the origi-
nal Escape From Alcatraz 
script, featuring the scene 
in which Frank Morris 
first gets his hands on 
Popular Mechanics.
J A N U A R Y  
F E B R U A R Y

POPULARMECHANICS.COM
@POPULARMECHANICS
B
C
D
79
TV journalist can stick her head into the enlarged 
air vent. The fifty-fifth anniversary of the escape 
is coming up, and she needs a teaser shot for a seg-
ment she’s producing. “I got an inside look at the 
infamous cells,” she says in an on-camera jour-
nalist voice, “which are normally off-limits to the 
public.” Tourists crowd around, many of them fam-
ilies with young boys who, for the moment, have put 
away their video games and cellphones and even 
removed the headphones that come with the audio 
tour to stare into the concrete boxes where bad men 
lived squalid little lives. The boys jockey for posi-
tion. “Did they leave from there?” one asks. “Did 
they make that hole?” 
“Can we see the raft?”
No one looks bored. Even the dads, in their shorts 
and ball caps and performance fleece, have ques-
tions for Cantwell. It’s been this way since soon after 
Tuggle’s movie was released. “I think Don Siegel told 
me that Paramount spent $1 million, which was a 
lot of money back then, in fixing up the prison to be 
what it was in the old days,” Tuggle says. “The movie 
really changed the physical site, and then gave pub-
licity to the escape. And people started going.”
Today, more than 1.7 million people visit the 
prison every year, peering into cells stocked with 
period-specific reading materials—Life, Sports 
Illustrated, and many copies of Popular Mechanics. 
They listen to the audio tour, which urges them to 
imagine eking out day after miserable day there. To 
imagine the creativity and dedication it would take 
to escape. Cantwell has watched many thousands 
of them, and he sees their emotional states trans-
form as the tour brings them deeper and deeper 
inside the prison walls. “People are fascinated with 
the macabre,” he says. With irony, and hubris, and 
wrestling with the fat thumb of institutional power. 
When you take the tour of this lonely buoy in the 
middle of San Francisco Bay, part of you feels like, 
just maybe, Morris and the Anglins earned their 
freedom. Maybe even deserved it. 
And that’s a strange feeling.
“That’s the difficulty in being a writer of a true 
event,” says Tuggle. “In reality, Morris and the 
Anglins were probably bad guys...But for a movie, 
you can’t have that. I wanted to show what these guys 
did, and the only way to have the audience behind 
them was to make the characters nicer than they 
were in real life.” 
As for Bayard Richard—whose one-off stunt in 
a hotel pool launched a butterfly effect that led to a 
prison escape, a movie, and the revitalization of a 
historic landmark—does he feel he played a part in 
creating a cult of personality around a trio of dudes 
you wouldn’t want to encounter in a San Francisco 
alley? “No,” he says. “It’s just the kind of thing you 
do when you’re in the magazine business.” 
Popular Mechanics tells its readers how to make 
things. Always has, since 1902. When that informa-
tion gets used illegally, there’s not much we can do 
about it. On one hand, the magazine doesn’t con-
done prison escapes. But there’s something about 
the way Morris and the Anglins went about it—they 
were nonviolent offenders who broke out of the most 
notorious prison in the world without harming so 
much as a seagull—that seems in the spirit of the 
magazine: decent, almost charming lawlessness, 
more Ocean’s 11 than Scarface. We’d rather hear a 
story about how that life-jacket article kept a whole 
family safe during an afternoon boat ride, but who 
would make a movie about that?                                            
B Clint Eastwood as  
Frank Morris in Escape 
From Alcatraz.
C A dummy head made 
with hair stolen from the 
barbershop fooled the 
guards into thinking the 
prisoners were still in bed.
D Today, cells on the  
official Alcatraz tour 
contain old copies of Life, 
Sports Illustrated, and  
Popular Mechanics.

BY MORTON E . MILLIKEN
A
hydraulic press is expensive 
ready-made, but you can make 
one from a few dollars’ worth 
of structural iron and a $20 hydraulic 
auto jack. My press uses a 3-ton jack; do 
not use a larger one. The base and top 
parts of the press are 10-inch lengths 
of 4-inch channel; the movable jaw is 
made of two 10-inch lengths of 2-inch 
angle. The two rods are the result of cut-
ting a 3-foot length of ½-inch-diameter 
threaded rod in half.
Weld together the pieces of 2-inch 
angle to create a box—the moving plat-
form. (For a wider platform, bolt an 
extra length of angle to the platform, 
as pictured.) Then create a cardboard 
template to help locate ½-inch-diam-
eter holes 7 inches apart, center to 
center, on the platform and both pieces 
of channel. Assemble the frame by 
threading the rod through one piece 
of channel, then the moving platform, 
then the other piece of channel, using 
one nut and washer on either side of 
each channel hole. When the frame 
parts are assembled, the platform 
should drop to the base without bind-
ing. Put the jack in place and the press 
is complete.
Center the jaw and the work to pre-
vent snagging. Neat right-angle bends 
in mild steel are easy with a V-block 
and angle iron as a form. A two-part 
form band-sawed in 2-inch oak block 
will produce curved work.
Hydraulic 
Press You 
Can Build
A simple frame and 
hydraulic auto jack 
make a powerful press  
for bending jobs.
Left: Use a 
band saw 
to cut a 
two-part 
wood form 
for curved 
bends. Right: 
A V-block 
and angle 
iron make 
right angles. 
EDITOR’S NOTE
  There’s an old saw about not wasting 
your time on tools that are only good for one 
thing. The pleasure of this project comes 
from looking at a car’s bottle jack and realiz-
ing it has more uses. And from realizing that, 
forty years later, a jack is still only $20.
POPULAR MECHANICS
080

AVOID CUPPING BY 
ALTERNATING
JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2018
0 81
E A SY  WAYS  
TO  D O  
H A R D  T H I N G S
The windlass is used to winch the car to 
firm footing as illustrated. To do this, 
a small log is placed upright in a shal-
low hole dug next to a tree to which it is 
linked with a rope as shown. One end 
of a tow rope is then tied to the car and 
the other end is wound on the log, after 
a loop is tied on the end. A stout pole 
inserted in the loop is used as a lever to 
operate the windlass.  —Contributed 
by E.V. Reyner, Salinas, California
Playing Cards Serve 
as Template to Copy 
Irregular Work
Accurate fittings for moldings, cor-
nices, etc., can be cut using two decks 
of playing cards to form a template of 
the work to be copied. Just stack the 
cards and then press one end over the 
contour of the work as shown. After 
squeezing the stack tightly to avoid 
slipping, remove it and trace the con-
tour on the piece to be cut.
When tabletops and other wide pan-
els are built of random-width boards, 
the heart grain of the boards should 
change direction from board to board 
and bar clamps should be placed on 
alternate sides of the work.
Winch Mired Car to Firm 
Ground with Spanish 
Windlass
HOMEMADE LEVEL
Jas. Morton Jr., Dunn, Tennessee

082
POPULAR MECHANICS
Easel
T E X T A N D P H O T O G R A P H S  BY  
N E A L B A R R E T T
We all want the best for our children—
even when their creative endeavors 
seem to overtake every surface in the 
house. How do you know when it’s  
gone too far? Well, when you start 
writing checks with a Day-Glo pen or 
get the cold shoulder for accidentally 
sitting on your finger-painted portrait, 
it’s time to bring some of your own 
skills into the act. To help out, we’ve 
designed an easel to help focus your 
kids’ expressive energy. It features a 
dry-marker board on one side and a 
corkboard on the other.
PROJECT
Use a router and edge guide to cut 
the mortises in the easel legs. Then, 
readjust the bit depth and rout the panel 
grooves. Use a table saw to cut the ten-
ons on the rails.
Cut ¼-inch maple plywood to 
size for the easel panels. Cut the 
1⁄8-inch-thick cork a few inches oversize, 
and apply spray adhesive to secure it to 
one panel.
Press the cork in place and trim 
excess with a utility knife. For the 
white marker board, we bought a framed 
board from a home center and removed 
the frame.
1
2
3
EDITOR’S NOTE
  This easel combines a 
dry-erase board with a cork 
board, offering a creative 
(and erasable) outlet for your 
children. Build it for them, or, 
better yet, build it with them.

We finished 
the easel with 
three coats of 
McCloskey Water 
Base Polyure-
thane in a satin 
finish. To do the 
job, first remove 
all hardware and 
sand the wood 
with 120-, 150-, 
and 220-grit 
sandpaper. Then 
apply each coat 
according to the 
manufacturer’s 
instructions. 
When the final 
coat is dry, rub 
the surface with 
4/0 steel wool 
and buff with a 
soft cloth. 
KEY
QTY.
SIZE
DESCRIPTION
A
4
13⁄16" x 21⁄2" x 431⁄2"
maple (leg)
B
2 
13⁄16" x 21⁄2" x 23"
maple (rail)
C
2
13⁄16" x 35⁄16" x 23"
maple (rail)
D
2
1⁄4" x 161⁄4" x 22"
plywood (panel)
E
1
1⁄8" x 161⁄4" x 22"
marker board
F
1
1⁄8" x 161⁄4" x 22"
cork1
KEY
QTY.
SIZE
DESCRIPTION
G
2
13⁄16" x 23⁄4" x 24"
maple (tray)
H
2
13⁄16" x 11⁄4" x 127⁄8"
maple (bracket)
I
4
1⁄4"–20
threaded insert2
J
2
back-flap hinge
K
4
1⁄4"–20
threaded knob3
L
8
11⁄2" No. 8
flat-head screw
MATERIALS LIST
FINISHING
1/4"-DIA. HOLE
1-1/8"
1/2"
2-1/2"
13/32"
73˚
17˚
17˚   
17˚   
CUT WITH AMANA BIT 
NO. 45986 IN ROUTER
CL
1
1
A
B
C
H
H
K
I
L
C
E
L
G
G
D
D
F
J
PROJECT
JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2018
0 83
Bore pilot holes for the ¼-inch 
threaded inserts in the outer edge 
of each leg. Use a 6mm Allen wrench 
to drive the inserts into the holes until 
they’re flush.
Bore screw holes for attaching the 
trays. We used an angled block as 
a guide for accurate hole position and 
angle. Rout recesses in the trays and 
secure them to the frames.
Support the easel frames so they 
lie flat, and install the hinges at the 
frame tops. Then, cut the brackets to size, 
bore holes for the knobs, and install the 
brackets.
4
5
6
1. No. 15108; 2. No. 31872; 3. No. 70003; available at Rockler Woodworking and Hardware; 800-279-4441; rockler.com.

Watch the Action!
PERFORMANCE
EXTREME
JANUARY 25 - 28 • ROLEX 24 AT DAYTONA
MARCH 14 - 17 • MOBIL 1 TWELVE HOURS OF SEBRING
SEE OUR FULL LINE OF AUTOMOTIVE ACCESSORIES AT WEATHERTECH.COM
FloorLiner™
BumpStep®XL
Cargo Liner
24" Hitch Mounted Bumper Protection
Order Now: 800-441-6287
Canadian Customers
WeatherTech.ca
American Customers
WeatherTech.com
European Customers
WeatherTech.eu

© 2018 by MacNeil IP LLC
No-Drill MudFlaps
CargoTech®
Seat Protector
Acura · Audi · BMW · Buick · Cadillac · Chevrolet · Chrysler · Dodge · Ferrari · Ford · GMC · Honda · Hummer · Hyundai · Inﬁniti · Isuzu 
Jeep · Kia · Land Rover · Lexus · Lincoln · Maserati · Mazda · Mercedes-Benz · Mercury · Mini · Mitsubishi · Nissan · Oldsmobile · Plymouth  
Pontiac · Porsche · Saab · Saturn · Scion · Subaru · Suzuki · Toyota · Volkswagen · Volvo
Accessories Available for 

CREDITS
p. 14 laptop: Getty Images; p. 18 beer 
glass: Getty; beer can: Alli Holloway; 
pp. 22–23 surfers: Jeremy Hall; Ziploc, 
Vaseline: iStock; p. 33 Getty; pp. 44–45 
U.S. Navy; p. 51 biosphere: courtesy 
Tom Lamb; p. 55 top left: courtesy 
Spencer Jones; helmet illustration: Paul 
Kratter; camera: ABC Sports; p. 66  
No. 4: George Nagher; soldier illustra-
tion: Bill Mauldin Estate; p. 88 Getty. 
POPULAR MECHANICS (ISSN 0032-4558) 
is published monthly except for combined 
January/February and July/August, 10 
times a year, by Hearst Communications, 
Inc., 300 West 57th Street, New York, NY 
10019 U.S.A. Steven R. Swartz, President & 
Chief Executive Officer; William R. Hearst III, 
Chairman; Frank A. Bennack, Jr., Executive 
Vice Chairman; Catherine A. Bostron, 
Secretary. Hearst Magazines Division: 
David Carey, President; John A. Rohan, Jr., 
Senior Vice President, Finance. ©2018 
by Hearst Communications, Inc. All rights 
reserved. Popular Mechanics is a registered 
trademark of Hearst Communications, Inc. 
Periodicals postage paid at N.Y., N.Y., and 
additional entry post offices. Canada Post 
International Publications mail product 
(Canadian distribution) sales agreement 
no. 40012499. CANADA BN NBR 10231 
0943 RT. POSTMASTER: Send all UAA to 
CFS. (See DMM 707.4.12.5); NON-POSTAL 
AND MILITARY FACILITIES: send address 
corrections to Popular Mechanics, P.O. Box 
6000, Harlan, IA 51593. Printed in U.S.A. 
EDITORIAL & ADVERTISING OFFICES: 
300 West 57th Street, New York, NY 
10019-3797. SUBSCRIPTION SERVICES: 
Popular Mechanics will, upon receipt of a 
complete subscription order, undertake 
fulfillment of that order so as to provide the 
first copy for delivery by the Postal Service 
or alternate carrier within 4 to 6 weeks. 
>>> Subscription prices: United States and 
possessions: $24.00 for one year. Canada 
and all other countries: $40.00 for one year. 
>>> Should you have any problem with your 
subscription, please visit service.popularme-
chanics.com or write to Customer Service 
Department, Popular Mechanics, P.O. Box 
6000, Harlan, IA 51593. Please enclose your 
mailing label when writing to us or renewing 
your subscription. >>> Popular Mechanics is 
not responsible for unsolicited manuscripts 
or art. None will be returned unless 
accompanied by a self-addressed stamped 
envelope. MAILING LISTS: From time to 
time we make our subscriber list available 
to companies who sell goods and services 
by mail that we believe would interest our 
readers. If you would rather not receive 
such offers via postal mail, please send 
your current mailing label or exact copy to 
Popular Mechanics, Mail Preference Service, 
P.O. Box 6000, Harlan, IA 51593. You can 
also visit http://hearst.ed4.net/profile/
login.cfm to manage your preferences and 
opt out of receiving marketing offers by 
email. AS A SERVICE TO READERS, Popular 
Mechanics publishes newsworthy products, 
techniques, and scientific and technological 
developments. Because of possible variance 
in the quality and condition of materials and 
workmanship, Popular Mechanics cannot 
assume responsibility for proper application 
of techniques or proper and safe functioning 
of manufactured products or reader-built 
projects resulting from information 
published in this magazine.
©2018 MacNeil IP LLC
For US Customers 
WeatherTech.com
For Canadian Customers 
WeatherTech.ca
For European Customers 
WeatherTech.eu
WeatherTech.com · 800-441-6287
SinkMat™
Made in USA
Under Sink Protection
MEET THE UPTOWN MAVERICK BOOT
Like a well-worn leather jacket, this street boot feels as 
good as it looks. With a light, springy sole cushioned for 
a ride, you’re ready to zip up and step out.
www.samuelhubbard.com/men/dress-shoes/uptown-maverick/
PROMOTION
A COLLECTION OF PRODUCTS & OFFERS FROM OUR PARTNERS

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To learn about limited-time, money-saving 
offers and for the dealer nearest you, visit
nde bed  
esse s
Advertising Rates: Megan James: 212 649-4206
Available at these fine retailers    
Before
After
Quickly 
dissolves oil 
stains from 
driveways, 
garages 
and parking 
areas.
Penetrates 
deep to lift 
the toughest 
stains - new 
or old.
Easy-to-Use: 
Apply, Scrub 
and Rinse.
Visit OilVanish.com
in participating stores
! !!  ! 
    

Landscape Yards, Grade Driveways
Pull Logs, Plow Snow, Food Plots
Make Trails, Gardens, Small Ponds
    
!!  ! 
1-877-828-8323
StruckCorp.com/homeowner
Use Code: PM118
The MAGNATRAC® RS1000 is your year round
power solution for the toughest jobs on your
property. It’s rugged with 1,500 lbs. of pulling
power! - Factory Direct Pricing & Made in USA!
*with every RS1000 purchase for a LIMITED TIME!
RS43
CentralBoiler.com
or call 800-248-4681
The Ultimate 
Wood Heat.
With an EPA-certified outdoor wood 
furnace from Central Boiler, you'll save 
money and have peace of mind knowing 
you're heating your home and more with 
safe, even, clean and comfortable heat.
Stainless Models available
It’s important that your outdoor furnace and system be 
properly sized and installed. See your local dealer for 
more information. ©2017 Central Boiler • ad7343
Underbed Dressers
ultimatebed.com
Put Up to 24 Drawers
Under Your Beds
SOON Church and Government uniting, 
will suppress “RELIGIOUS LIBERTY” 
enforcing a “NATIONAL SUNDAY LAW,” 
leading to the “MARK” OF THE BEAST. 
Be informed / Be forewarned!
Need mailing address for FREE materials.
TBSM, Box 99, Lenoir City, TN 37771
thebiblesaystruth@yahoo.com. 1-888-211-1715

BIG QU ESTIONS . 
ANSWE RS YOU  
CAN ’T FI N D ON  
TH E I NTE RN ET.
Do you have unusual questions about how things work and why stuff happens? This is the place to ask them.  
Don’t be afraid. Nobody will laugh at you here. Email greatunknowns@popularmechanics.com. 
Would a 1960s-era designated “Fallout Shelter”  
help me in a nuclear attack today? 
e’ve all seen those yellow and black signs, embla-
zoned with three triangles, announcing the 
presence nearby of a fallout shelter. These are, at 
this point, antiques, vestiges of a more innocent 
time; a time when we liked to cling to the notion that a nuclear 
attack was readily survivable, sort of like a tornado, but with 
more gamma rays and fewer flying cows. 
Truthfully, fallout shelters were never 
all they were cracked up to be. Rolled out 
in the early 1960s by the now-defunct 
Office of Civil Defense, they were never as 
well-equipped or funded as originally envi-
sioned, which, frankly, didn’t much matter. 
The advent of thermonuclear warheads—
high-yield hydrogen bombs much more 
powerful than those dropped on Japan 
during World War II—rendered them 
moot. Fallout shelters were often spaces 
like concrete-walled basements that could 
be retrofitted with air filtration systems, 
intended to protect occupants from the 
radioactive byproducts of a modest nuclear 
detonation. They’d have been superflu-
ous under a genuine onslaught of commie 
megatons. “You wouldn’t really have to 
deal with fallout,” says Jeff Schlegelmilch, 
deputy director of the National Center for 
Disaster Preparedness at Columbia Uni-
versity. “Because you would just be dead from the initial blast.” 
Kind of a good news/bad news scenario, we suppose.
As to whether these shelters “still work,” one first has to con-
sider whether they “still exist.” Suppose that, rattled by Kim 
Jong-un’s latest rhetoric, or perhaps concerned at the pros-
pect of leaky X-ray machines in your dentist’s office, you were 
lured by one of those old signs to seek shelter. “Spoiler alert,” 
says Schlegelmilch, “there is most likely no fallout shelter in the 
building.” At least not in the sense you might imagine. “Build-
ings probably have repurposed those shelters in the past few 
decades,” says Nancy Silvestri of New York City’s Emergency 
Management Department. “They probably turned them back 
into laundry rooms and things like that.” 
You will undoubtedly get some strange 
looks when you crouch behind the dry-
ers, screaming “duck and cover!” at your 
bewildered audience of Tide-slinging 
housekeepers and homemakers.
That’s not to say that they’re any less 
effective at shielding you from radiation 
now that they’re more likely to contain 
Maytags than MREs. “These locations 
were chosen because they either already 
were or could be easily retrofitted into 
rooms that could block the radiation,” 
says Schlegelmilch. “There may not be 
supplies. I don’t know if the ventilation 
systems would still be functional, but 
theoretically they could provide some 
protection from radioactive fallout as is.” 
The ultimate irony, Schlegelmilch notes, 
is that such shelters might be more useful 
today than they were in their prime. “With 
the kind of threats we would see from ter-
rorist organizations—even some weapons that North Korea has 
demonstrated capacity for—you are looking at weapons that 
would take out many blocks but throw radiation much farther 
through the mushroom cloud.” So maybe it’s worth noticing 
those old signs after all—and packing some laundry in a go-bag 
to pass the time while you wait for the dust to settle, so to speak. 
88
P O PULA R M EC H A N I C S.CO M
JANUARY/FEBRUARY _ 2018


Discover what lies beyond.
 r;ub;m1;|_;;mu;Ѳňm;	ƏƍƎѴoѲ7)bm]ĸ
"|Ѵbv_7-m1;7"or_bvঞ1-|;7$_;m;	oѴ7)bm]® is rebuilt from the road up, nearly 
ƖƏrom7vѴb]_|;u|_-m0;=ou;|=;-|u;v-vloo|_;uķlou;ro	;u=Ѵ;m]bm;m-ѴѴŊm;	
7o0Ѵ;	bv_0om;=uom|vvr;mvbom-bѴ-0Ѵ;ƕŊvr;;7|ol-ঞ1 -ѴŊѴ|1_$u-mvlbvvbom
-m7u;;uv;m7|_;bm7v|uĽvCuv|rrѴ;-uѴ-Ťvv|;lŖ$_bvbv-|u;r;u=oul-m1;
|ou;uķ0bѴ||o]o0;om7-m|_bm]|_-|Ľv1ol;0;=ou;
powersports.honda.com ALWAYS WEAR A HELMET, EYE PROTECTION AND PROTECTIVE CLOTHING. NEVER RIDE AFTER CONSUMING DRUGS OR ALCOHOL, AND NEVER USE THE STREET AS A RACETRACK. OBEY THE LAW AND READ 
THE OWNER’S MANUAL THOROUGHLY. For rider training information or to locate a rider training course near you, call the Motorcycle Safety Foundation at 800-446-9227. *For using Apple CarPlay, connection to a commercially available 
Bluetooth® headset is necessary. Apple CarPlay™ is a trademark of Apple Inc. Bluetooth® is a registered trademark of Bluetooth SIG, Inc. Gold Wing® is a registered trademark of Honda Motor Co., Ltd. ©2018 American Honda Motor Co., Inc. 

