GUIDE TO 
POSTAL 
SMUGGLING 

GUIDE TO POSTAL SMUGGLING 
CONTENT:
1. How to Make the USPS Work for YOU
2. Internal Canadian Mail
3. Comparision US,Canadian (UK) laws
4. What You Should Know About PO Boxes 
5. What Happens Between Your Mailbox and Their Mailbox 
6. What You Should Know About Foreign Mail Misc. 
7. UK Mail: Shipping from Overseas 
8. Concealment Methods
9. Concealment Methods
10.
Appendix


How to Make the USPS Work for YOU
I seem to notice very frequently that misinformation is spread regarding the 
USPS and their handling of mail. Here are the first few titbits of information you may be able to use 
to further protect yourself. 
First and foremost in my opinion is to inform everyone about first-class mail and the family of 
products that fall under its term. 
First-class mail includes 
•
first-class letters 
•
parcels, 
•
priority
•
express mail. 
Do not consider foreign air-mail to be "first-class" because once it leaves our shores it won't be 
treated as such. First-class mail is protected against unlawful search and seizure in the same way 
that your home is. Because of this, any law enforcement agency will need to procure a warrant to 
open this mail. 
Because of this information, I have driven across a few states with 50 Romulus clones in a box with 
addresses and stamps on it. I knew if I got pulled over, while they may or may not find probable 
cause to search the car, 
The police will need a warrant to open the box.
 This also means that if you are mailing Romulan  anything that doesn't smell like pot (seeds, 
mushrooms, etc) you should mail it first-class mail and  package it very well.
Fisrt Class Mail 
•
First-class mail goes on air planes. 
•
Priority often goes by Fed Ex planes
•
Otherwise, it goes on whatever private carrier we can find at the time. 
Because of this, there's never any telling which plane things will go on or when they'll leave.
 I don't send pot by plane because it's not predictable. 

I can send things to California via first-class mail because I know that from my area to LA all our 
mail gets transported via truck. 
Standard mail.
 This covers 
•
"parcel post" mail, 
•
ground mail, which includes Standards A and B mail, 
•
Media (book) Mail,
•
Bound Printed Matter. 
This is mail that won't be going on air planes and won't get sniffed by any dogs for any reasons. 
This is your safer bet. I recently received a nice quarter ounce from a friend in California via Media 
Mail. 
I had him 
•
wrap the baggy tight with Reynold's wrap,
•
re-wrap it with some cayenne pepper in the wrapping 
so that in the off case a dog does sniff at it, it will most likely get this and ruin its sense of smell for 
a week or so, but it's not a foolproof method. 
Then, the baggy 
•
went into a video cassette clamshell,
•
 which was then taped closed,
•
 placed in a box with stuffing, 
•
and each seam of the box was covered with a sturdy tape.
 I personally like self-adhesive THICK brown strapping tape for its durability and ability to seal 
well. This was sent via Media Mail and took about 4 days to arrive. I've received an ounce at a time 
and I know I could receive more, but I don't want to do it too frequently because it's just not the 
greatest idea.
When packaging anything, make sure you seal each seam.
 This not only prevents scent from escaping better than if you hadn't, but it also prevents tampering 
and prevents the parcel from being opened. 
If the person on the other end knows that you will cover each seam, when you receive it make sure 

each seam is still sealed. Also, for further security, write something along where the tape and the 
box comes together. 
This will provide another indicator as to whether or not the parcel has been tampered with. 
If the letters don't match up perfectly, you know the tape has been taken off. 
In all my many years of postal experience I've only TWICE seen law enforcement ask to watch mail 
coming to a certain recipient, and he was dealing in kiddie porn. I see plenty of contraband go 
through FedEx the mailstream, and I'm able to tell this because I've received so much of it in my 
years. 
Basically I believe it's safe to mail most contraband if you're smart about it. Postal workers do not 
receive training on identifying contraband other than bombs. 
I've never seen a parcel break open with contraband in it. You can see where I'm going with this. 
Concerning return addresses: [Always put a valid return address that can be delivered to! That does 
not have to be your address, just one that can be delivered to.] I would suggest you do not mail 
things to people other than yourself [or fictitious names at a proper address]. 
Here's why. If the letter carrier does not know the name at the address, they often times have the 
parcel or letter red handed and sent back to wherever it came from. If the return address isn't real, 
the mail goes to the San Francisco Mail Reclamation Unit (aka Dead Letter Office), where it is 
opened in an attempt to identify who it needs to go to. 
Obviously if there is contraband inside they will contact the 
postal inspectors have the highest successful prosecution rate of any law enforcement agency 
in the world. 
Here's an addendum: all that discussion about search warrants and first class mail does not apply 
when the package enters the U.S. for a foreign country. 
Customs can search whatever they want. (In legal jargon, there is no reasonable expectation of 
privacy at an international border.) More details at the Foreign Mail section. 
In the US, Parcel post mail CAN be opened by postal employees. I've opened Book Rate mail on a 
couple occasions. We call this revenue protection. Once a woman brought me a parcel 
approximately 4"x4"x42" and said it contained nothing but books, videos, and no personal 
correspondence, which I knew was an out-and- out lie. I informed her of our revenue protection 
policy and asked her if she wanted to send it another class. She said she didn't think anyone would 
open it anyway, so she wanted it sent along. After she left, another clerk opened the parcel up, saw a 
nice Indian rug, re-taped it, and sent it along First Class with the additional postage due. It may 
seem rotten, but it does happen, so if you do send things along these classes of mail, make sure the 

contents are well-stealthed. 
INTERNAL CANADIAN MAIL 
Canadian postal systems are pretty much the same. Lots of dope goes through the mail, and you 
rarely hear of it getting found unless by accident. 
Searches are typically
•
a balance between a reasonable expectation of privacy and either 
•
national interest or 
•
safety of the carrier. 
The other issue that frequently enters the fray is the "agent of the state" concept. I wonder if there 
were ever to be a request by the police or other state law enforcement agency to search domestic 
mail, if the search could successfully excluded as a breach of rights on the 
basis that the postal carrier was acting at the behest of the state. Certainly you have a reasonable 
expectation that your letters won't be read and the gifts to your family members will not be ripped 
open. In any case that I have seen that involved the mail, the police themselves had to be present, 
warrant in hand, to search the item. I don't think any postal employee has the authority to search 
regular mail for any reason. As far as I understand it, Canada Post is almost completely privatized, 
but has nearly identical regulations to the USPS.
In Canada no postal employee has the authority to search regular mail for any reason.
It is an offence for any person (postal employees included) to delay, open or redirect any piece of 
mail or package. Punishable by up to five years in prison. (Section 48, CPIA) 
Canada Post is still a Crown Corporation bound by the Privacy Act. 
The exception is in the Transportation of Dangerous Goods like
•
Explosives, 
•
corrosives,
•
poisons etc. 
Now, incoming and outgoing international mail may be searched, but only by customs employees. 
According to the various Acts they may not be randomly searched, but can only be opened if they 
have a reasonable suspicion that there is some kind of contraband inside. I expect that Customs 
employees don't give a shit about what is reasonable, so expect it all to be searchable. Customs 
officers have no jurisdiction over internal mail. So the minor difference in our mail systems seems 
to be that if postal employees in Canada open your mail for any reason other than genuine safety 

concerns, they get fired, and charged with an offence. 
Comparision US,Canadian (UK) laws
There are actually some differences between Canadian and U.S. law on this. Whether or not there is 
a "search" is only based on the "reasonable expectation of privacy" standard (under U.S. law). To 
some extent there is a "social balancing" element built into this in that search and seizure law says 
that some expectations are "unreasonable" (e.g. not recognized by society). But the actual test is just 
an objectively reasonable subjective expectation of privacy. There are also "exigency" measures; 
this is where the "Terry stop" stuff (reasonable suspicion based stop and frisk) comes from, and is 
also the basis for DUI and escape-convict roadblocks. The idea is basically (this is not legalese) that 
really important social needs justify a little bit of an intrusion, as long as it’s not really directed at 
anyone in particular. Agents of the government. Based on what I have seen in your post other places 
around here, it sounds like U.S. and Canadian law are basically the same on this. A non-government 
agent acting at the behest of the government triggers all of the constitutional search and seizure 
doctrines. Basically, there's no difference between "official" and "unofficial" government agents. 
The post office isn't an "unofficial" agent of the government that could be asked to help out by 
police, the Post Office is the government -- so all the protections apply. 
In Canada the defence bar went crazy arguing the arbitrary detention and search issues when the 
impaired driving programs were started up. Eventually the Supreme Court set it out in R. v. 
Ladouceur the public interest vs. individual rights issue. Since we do not have automatic exclusion 
of evidence rules, there is always a test under section 24(2) of the Charter as to whether the 
admission of evidence obtained in a breach of rights should be excluded or included. Inculpatory 
evidence, such as confessions, is almost always excluded, but "real" evidence (the knife, the bag of 
coke) may be included notwithstanding the breach, depending on the seriousness of the 
circumstances. Recently the Court of Appeal for Ontario decided that since marijuana is not 
considered a serious drug by Canadians anymore, it should almost always be excluded even though 
it is "real" evidence. This was a very important turn of events that almost no one seems to be aware 
of. 
Although we have 
categoric exclusion of unlawfully seized evidence, in practice our worlds may still be close.
 The US Supreme Court has been more conservative in recent years and has carved a number of 
"exceptions" to exclusions. There is an exception for an unlawful seizure made upon a defective 
warrant 
obtained in good faith, there is an exception for evidence that was in the process of being 
discovered, 
there is an exception if the police are able to sufficiently purge themselves of the violation. So even 
though exclusion is in theory automatic, in real life there are a number of exceptions that essentially 
go 
"this wasn't that bad of a violation" and let evidence in. I am not aware of any aspect of federal 
constitutional law that distinguishes between real and inculpatory evidence, though there are of 
course 

the Miranda warnings that apply only to interrogations. So I find it interesting that in their actual 
function the two systems are pretty similar. 
Here's Stillman, relatively new but still on point. The older cases I cannot find online and will have 
to look up when I get to my office. I should have most of them on my saved office computer when I 
was still using Quicklaw (Same as Westlaw)
EDIT: Here's a good overview of the situation from the Justice (FEDS) Canada site, with all 
relevant cases cited: 
http://canada.justice.gc.ca/en/dept...ection24ss2.htm
If you're interested in our rights to counsel cases and the attendant analysis in terms of exclusion of 
evidence the most frequently cited cases are "Bartle" and "Prosper" 
You should be able to find them online here:
http://www.lexum.umontreal.ca/csc-scc/en/ 
Oh yeah, and Stillman: 
http://www.hrcr.org/safrica/freedom...y/stillman.html 

What You Should Know About PO Boxes 
PO Boxes are a great tool for receiving contraband. 
Personally, I have opened a few boxes for myself under a variety of pseudonyms over the years. 
My favourite was a box whose box holder's name were 
"Norton Leight", PO Box 5 
You probably can't get PO Boxes under assumed names like I can, because you need photo ID. 
What you do not need
•
is a driver's license, 
•
a state ID card is just fine and easier to obtain. 
I don't suggest you use any type of identity theft to procure this or the PO Box, because this is 
what the Postal Inspectors are going after most fervently
. However you can get it, get a state ID card with an assumed name. The next item you want to have 
is a piece of mail going to an assumed street address. This is often very useful if you can't get any 
"regular" photo ID. Clerks often times will allow private sector photo Id's such as a business's id 
badge, but in that case they want a letter going to your "street address". Obviously you don't want to 
use your real street address. The letter has to be round-dated or otherwise cancelled. 
There are two easy ways to get this done. 
1. I'd suggest you find the address you want to use. Public buildings, vacant houses, etc. are 
great for this. Make out your professionally printed or otherwise professional-looking letter, 
and take it into a post office OTHER than the one you want the PO Box at. There's two ways 
to get it cancelled and back to you. First and safest is to just give it to the clerk and ask for it 
to be round-dated right then and there so you're certain it will be accepted on time (say it's a 
credit card bill, etc.). Once it's round dated, act like you're mad at yourself for not enclosing 
the check or something of that sort. 9 out of 10 times you'll get it back from them. Just walk 
out at that point. Tell them you forgot your chequebook or whatever if they ask. Most likely, 
they won't ask. 
2. The second and more risky method is to go into a very small rural office, where there is 
usually only one person in the office at any given time. Make up a reason to get them to look 
in the back of the office. A good excuse for this is to get indignant about your social security 

check not arriving yet. Even though they go back, they're probably just getting coffee 
orblowing you off. We know when they arrive; we don't lose them, whatever. Just get him 
out of the way. There will be a round-dater stamp by his window console. Use it. Use it real 
quick. Even if you're on camera, the picture will be so horrible that you will NOT be 
identified. The tapes they use are 24 hour tapes and have horrible quality, and are re- used on 
top of that. 
Once you have the PO Box, 
•
subscribe to a couple regular magazines or get a few typical catalogues delivered there 
regularly so that everything seems legit. 
•
When you check your box, regularly make an issue to look inside to see if there is a piece of 
paper hanging from the back of the box. 
•
On the two occasions I've been told to keep track of names and addresses going to a box, the 
inspectors have a "cover" placed on the box, a piece of paper hung from the back informing 
the box clerk to write down this information. 
•
Papers are often hung just saying the box holder’s names, so you need to make sure you 
recognize the paper hung from the back. 
•
Pull the paper off the first time you see it. It's normal for them to fall off, so don't sweat this.
•
Don't check your box at regular intervals. Do it on an odd schedule.
•
 Small rural offices often have box lobbies that are open 24 hours a day. Take advantage of 
this. 
•
Driving in the dark lets you know if you're being tailed, and you can mix up the hours you 
check the box this way.
•
 If you're going to get pinched, they will usually follow you to the box when they know 
you're going to open it, then they pop you then and there. Once, a kiddie porn trader got 
pinched from using a box in my office. They knew exactly when he would be checking his 
box. He drove in from halfway across the state a couple times a week on business and 
checked the box at a regular time. He was stupid, and not just for trading disgusting kiddie 
porn. They kept his box opened for months and months, using it to bring down people 
worldwide. 
•
Make sure correspondents of yours know if you get pinched. 
•
Create a way to let them know. Let them know whenever something is going to be sent to 
them.
•
 If it's out of schedule, they know to clean house. 
•
Just be more careful than you need to be. PO Boxes are great. 
•
I always get my contraband there, and I'd suggest you use them to your advantage. 

UPS Store, PostNet, etc. are much more lax as far as security goes. You can get private mail boxes 
at Mailboxes Etc. [now known as the UPS Store], but I don't trust them. 
Someone making minimum wage has a lot less to lose by opening a package to see what's 
inside than a federal employee making $25-35 an hour. 
When you open a box at these places, they are required to take the same information that a regular 
post office requires, and they have to file it with whatever post office the Mailboxes Etc's zip 
code falls under. 
Postal inspectors also find it much easier to strong arm these guys into thinking that they have the 
right to get whatever info, so don't think you're going to be any safer there. Comments: By "round-
dated," I believe he means "postmarked" or "cancelled." That is, it has to have an official Post 
Office stamp across the stamp area that displays date of submission to the office. It verifies that the 
piece of mail was actually handled and delivered by the USPS. 

What Happens Between Your Mailbox and Their Mailbox 
This was posted on website by a postmaster  (USPS) 
I've been trying to think of further ways I can help people out as far as being able to mail pot, and I 
guess one avenue I should touch on is what happens to a letter and what happens to a small parcel 
once it's in the mail stream. 
This has a good amount of bearing on how you should package whatever you're sending, because I 
think most people don't realize just how easily packages and letters get ripped up, broken open, 
become soggy and tears, etc.
First off let's talk about letter-mail. When you drop a letter off at your local post office or in your 
mailbox, it makes its way into automatic cancelling machines. These machines do almost 
everything automatically, from facing the mail upright, cancelling the stamp(s) on the letter, to the 
sorting of the mail. 
IMPORTANT:
•
most people don't realize that a photo is taken of almost EVERY letter passing through the 
mail stream. At up to 60 pieces per minute,
•
 each machine 
1. can take a picture of the letter, 
2. create a unique florescent id tag that is places on the lower-back of the letter, and
3.  it runs through OCR software to sort it automatically.
•
Lots of people think you can just write "hand cancel" and that it won't make it through these 
machines. 
•
Think again. Basically if you DO place things in envelopes, such as seeds, be careful. 
•
I don't know why I haven't seen more torn-open letters from a certain Canadian seed 
supplier, because their stealth method would almost certainly stop up the machine and 
probably tear open the envelope, leaving you screwed.
•
 Once it goes through this machine, it may go through a few others before it's sent out to 
your local main office unit, where it's sorted according to zip code and then further to the 
letter carrier, and even as the route is to be delivered, called "delivery point sequencing".
•
Just be careful when you send letters of any sort, I'd say each machine tears on average 50 a 
day, and most main offices have upwards of 30 or 40 of these sorting machines. 
•
If you're sending a flat-mail piece, such as a large flat manilla envelope, the method of 
sortation is almost identical to letter-mail. Small parcels are not. Small parcels make their 
way from your local office to a main office unit, where it makes it to a Small Parcel and 
Bundle Sorter, aka SPBS. At this machine, a clerk sits at a console, takes each small parcel, 
looks at the zip code, and keys in a four-digit code according to mail type and zip code. 
This is one place where lots of mail is damaged, and it's what you have to look out for.
•
 Everyone has had mail arrive in poor condition. It's just a fact of life. However, when 

you're sending contraband, this is NOT AN OPTION. The small parcels make their way to 
the clerk via automated belts. 
•
Mail of all sizes and weights get dropped, dumped, smashed, and otherwise manhandled 
together. At one time I knew someone had an ounce or so in a thick padded envelope 
because I could smell it through a tear that was caused by a large parcel smashing into it. I 
covered the hole with thick brown tape as a favour to a fellow brave heart. The mail falls 
into sacks or hampers, and can end up anywhere, under whatever. 
•
Mail sometimes becomes waterlogged for SOME reason, and a tear is very likely to occur 
when this happens. This is why I make sure contraband is placed inside something rigid like 
an opened VHS cassette or even a VHS clamshell, which is then taped totally closed.
•
I place this in a larger container, not rigid usually, something padded and more sublime 
looking. 
•
The mail eventually makes its way to your local office, where your carrier delivers it to you. 
Basically what I'm telling you is that 
•
YES, your mail DOES GET MISHANDLED FREQUENTLY. 
•
I used to get quite disgusted at how often machinery tears mail up, but in the grand scheme 
of things, every man, woman, and child on the PLANET would have to sort mail by hand 
for two hours a day just to keep up with the sheer volume, which NEVER stops. Not even 
on holidays and Sundays. 
•
Your mail goes through machines whether you want it to or not. Just be careful, don't think 
it's going to get hand sorted daintily from one sack to another. 
•
Package it so well that the person on the other end has to put out some effort to open it.
 
  It's 
just better that way. 
•
I have to say first class mail is the way to go. With first class, chances are GOOD that it's 
going to go by truck. We have a "strategic' partnership with FedEx that lets us send our 
Priority mail on their planes, and I don't really know what happens when the mail goes on 
them.
•
First class is normally protected against searches without a warrant,
 
  just make sure you 
package your stuff extremely well so it will not possibly come open even when our 70 year 
olds drop 40lb boxes on it from four feet up. 
•
Make sure it doesn't smell
 
 , I once saw a hazardous materials guy called in to take care of a 
particularly smelly package, which he confiscated and sent a letter to the recipient telling 
him he was being mailed something illegal and "do not do it again".
•
Fed Ex and UPS isn't protected like USPS is.
•
Postal inspectors in the major facilities that try to incriminate employees so they usually get 
the people that pick out of the mail stream. First class mail, NOT media mail or library mail 
or priority mail or express mail (though priority and express have the same legal protection 
as first class, they go on air planes). 
Sorry if that was too long-winded, 
I just don't want my brothers and sisters getting pinched because so- and-so didn't package that 
ounce of KGB as well as they should have. 

Possibly illegal post office practice: I had something at work at the post office scare me, since I've 
been known to mail contraband, but it was also a little pathetic too. 
A co-worker brought me a legal sized envelope with a bulging area that felt like beans and smelled 
like pot really strong out of the gaps on the corner of the flap. 
It was quite obvious what was inside, and the co-worker placed the envelope in a HAZMAT 
receptacle. The hazardous materials employee took the envelope, opened it up (I believe this is 
illegal), found a small sack of pot with a bunch of whole coffee-beans (not grounds) around it. He 
gives the sack to another supervisor to destroy 
(I have no idea what check goes on here to make sure it is destroyed) and he leaves a note in the 
envelope and mails it away. The note says that someone was mailing you contraband and that we 
expect it not to happen again. The postal inspectors aren't involved unless it's a large amount found. 
What scares me here is the issue of sanctity of first-class mail. 
I only people that can open a first-class mail piece that doesn't appear to contain an 
immediate hazardous material inside it are postal inspectors and law enforcement with a 
search warrant. 
It's nice to know that with small amounts that it's not really noted, but it's also scary to think that Joe 
Schmo can look/smell/feel your mail and decide he thinks it's pot. What if a cat 
pees on your envelope and he opens it thinking there's meth in it? 
The envelope didn't contain hazmat, it didn't exhibit any hazmat identifiers. It wasn't opened by a 
postal inspector, it was opened by a hazmat employee who I don't think had real legal reason to 
open it. 
But you are right, the person was an idiot to do it that way in the first place. 
I guess the important point to make right now is, 
if you're mailing pot or other drugs, 
SEAL it and have the outside completely clean, hopefully with rubbing alcohol. Be very 
careful and don't be high when you do it, so you can smell it objectively. <-- a good method: 
put it in your car the night before and the next day see if you can smell it when you get in the 
car. 
Also, the Post Office does NOT make little cuts into envelopes to test for anthrax. There isn't even 
equipment that can detect it that quickly, since the letter sorting machines go upwards of 60 letters 
per second. I assume your friends that worked there are casual (IE temporary and not career 
employees) 
I've come across quite a few seed envelopes and various other forms of drug-related contraband and 
known EXACTLY what they were but didn't disturb them or alert the inspectors. 

Some friends told me:
“I have ordered spores under the name "Job Applicant" before out of paranoia. Might be wiser than 
an alias.” Speaking from experience. I wont say how much was mailed, or where from, but I will 
mention that it was from a foreign overseas country, to the states. I really don’t agree with putting 
this information in here, because it can be spot trends to catch people in the end. I will mention 
some things though. 
1. Make sure you put it in something air tight that will not move. 
2. If mailing it over an ocean, mail it parcel post, not air. It will take a lot longer (4 weeks in 
my case) because it is on a boat, but 
3. it is also a lot cheaper, and is with a lot of more cargo, so 
4. chances of being caught are slim. 
5. Mask the smell, don’t use something like pepper over it, 
6. and mask it INSIDE another food product. 
7. Use a few containers. Have some decoys. 
8. Of course use a fake return address, but also 
9. make sure it is someone’s real address to avoid questions. 
10. Mark the real contents of what is inside (except for the contraband), so in case it is 
11. opened, it will not raise alarm. They are NOT allowed to open food product containers, 
that’s why I said to use them (unless they smell the reek of course.) So 
12. wrap your contraband well, tight, and many times. 
13. Don’t use aluminium foil, if x-rayed it's not good to show up hollow balls of foil. Keep care.
14. Customs are allowed to open food containers  open anything that seems suspicious. I recall 
once about 20 large parcels from Laos containing dried fish. About 5 of them were opened 
and resealed by customs. 
15. The only thing that customs are not allowed to inspect is personal letter-mail 
correspondence. 
16. The only thing I would think they might not open out of courtesy would be perishable sealed 
goods like cans of kippered fish or something similar. 
17. have correct postage, just drop it in a blue box. 
18. If the item is over 16 ounces in weight, it needs to be presented to a live postal employee to 
be round-dated. This isn't the USPS's rule, it's the FAA's. 
19. Never mail parcels without a return address. It doesn't have to be your return address, but 
make sure you have one, and I'd suggest a real one. If for some reason the parcel ultimately 
undeliverable, it will be opened at the mail reclamation center, and when they see there's 
drugs in it, they will contact the postal inspectors who WILL investigate the person it was 
initially addressed to. I have a deal of admiration for postal inspectors, because of all law 
enforcement agencies, they're the only one that I truly fear. Nothing's scarier than a postal 
worker always carries a gun on them. 
20. Never use excessive postage. This shows that you didn't want to go to the post office to mail 
it. Almost every mail bomb has had excessive postage on it. 
21. Don't post from a local P.O. because even if the other end denies knowledge, they can just 
check his phone records to see who has been calling from that location. 
22. Good luck

What You Should Know About Foreign Mail
Note: Mail entering the US from a foreign country is not "first class" mail, which is why it wasn't 
mentioned in the posting. There is no first-class foreign mail, it is either air mail or surface mail (up 
to four imperial pounds in weight) or air parcel post and surface parcel post. I'm omitting M-Bags 
and other oddball foreign mailings because nobody here is going to use them. I did say, though, that 
mail leaving our shores going to other countries is not "first-class" mail, I should have said that no 
foreign mail whatsoever is "first-class". Everyone here should know customs can open whatever 
they want. Concerning receiving mail from abroad... Firstly, don't have pot sent to you from a 
foreign country unless you absolutely have to. The US Postal Inspection Service brings around 
1000-1500 drug charges to prosecution and has the highest successful prosecution rate of any law 
enforcement agency in the civilized world. While most of those charges are brought about due to 
domestic mailings, a good portion of the powdered drugs make their way into the states via the post 
office. If you do have to get contraband sent to you, make sure you know what you and they doing.
•
Customs usually opens on average 20% or less of the parcels coming into the states. 
•
They don't open letter-mail and 
•
they usually won't open international express mail. 
•
What they do open are parcels coming in from suspect nations, such as Columbia, Costa 
Rica, due to the high US population there, Holland, Spain, Mexico, and a small handful of 
other nations notorious for drug trade. 
•
If you have to choose one time of year to get things mailed to you, try to have it sent to you 
during December. Customs usually green-tapes or orange-tapes over parcels that they have 
opened, and places a triple-triangle symbol denoting that it has been inspected by customs. 
During December I usually don't see a single small parcel with either of these.
•
Make sure the person sending the contraband fills out a customs declaration completely.
•
 Make sure the customs declaration isn't for any items worth more than $50 or so, otherwise 
inspection is more likely due to customs charges. 
•
If an item is available readily domestically, a customs duty is often charged on the item. 
Obviously, good stealth is suggested. 
•
Don't buy one of those Glade cans with the secret bottom and expect it to arrive. Nobody 
mails Glade from Europe to the states.
•
 I have had hashish sent from Holland by wrapping it in cling film, then encasing it in 
chocolate, placing it in a Dutch or belgian chocolate wrapping, and mailing it that way. 
Even if it is opened, it obviously looks like chocolate, which is something commonly 
mailed from Europe. 
•
It behoves you to also have professional looking mailers, with address labels or better 
printed envelopes. In Sweden, American cigarettes are sold for around 1/3 the average cost 
of purchasing them domestically. A LARGE number of these mailers are sent out from 
Sweden, so much that it wouldn't make sense for customs to open a single one since they're 
highly recognizable. If you purchase cigarettes from Sweden you know which padded 

envelope I'm speaking of, and if you're in 
•
Europe and want to send contraband back, it would be a good idea to re-use one of these 
that you have opened without it looking as if it had been opened. Just take one with you 
over there in your luggage. 
•
Any time you receive contraband, as a way to cover your ass, I would suggest you enclose a 
note such as "Sorry I'm late for your birthday, here's a present I remember you used to love 
that I came across and wanted to send you." This way the contraband is sent to you without 
your prior knowledge, and even if you are caught leaving the post office with it, you have a 
decent defence. 
•
A mushroom spore supplier, The Hawk's Eye, was busted some years back for having 
hashish sent to his PO Box on a regular basis. If you're going to do this sort of thing, don't 
have things sent the same way. 
•
Also, don't send things by registered mail unless the item won't leave the country unless it's 
registered (i.e. most impoverished nations, where mail is often stolen by postal employees 
because there isn't a paper trail). 
•
Registered mail has to be signed for, and you don't want to sign for things unless you don't 
have to. Express mail is the same way, but you can specify "carrier signature release", 
making the letter carrier your approved agent to sign for the package. 
•
As far as sending things out of the country, I do have much experience with that. Canada 
regularly opens parcels that are heavy and/or have expensive items written on the customs 
declaration, because they charge a customs duty quite regularly.People usually won't send 
pot to Canada from the states, so this probably isn't an issue. The same suggestion regarding 
the "birthday" note applies here too. Fill out the customs declaration fully, and make the 
item look professional. 
•
When you bring the item to the post office (all foreign mail MUST have a round-date 
showing that it was presented to a live postal employee per FAA regulations),
•
Ask the clerk if there are any items that are prohibited in that country.
•
Italy is notorious for its strict importation regulations, such as "no toys unless wholly made 
of wood, no haberdashery, no Italian leather (wtf?), no this, no that, etc. etc. etc.". Better 
safe than sorry. 
•
I would suggest you do not mail things to people other than yourself. Here's why. If the 
letter carrier does not know the name at the address, they often times have the parcel or 
letter red handed and sent back to wherever it came from.
•
If the return address isn't real, the mail goes to a Mail Reclamation Unit (aka Dead Letter 
Office), where it is opened in an attempt to identify who it needs to go to. Obviously if there 
is contraband inside they will contact the postal inspectors who have the highest successful 
prosecution rate of any law enforcement agency in the world.
•
If it's going to go back to Thailand if it's not received you might be fairly safe since I 
believe if it's unclaimed there it becomes abandoned, but in other instances you can see 
where this practice is like sleeping in a lion's den. Mailing anything from Thailand is stupid.
•
You'll be lucky to find any good weed there anyway. The islands down south always have a 
good supply of Nepali hash. 
•
Foreign mail is not US First-Class mail and therefore is subject to being opened. 

•
What I think a [foreign marijuana] seed company should do is to find a trusted US postal 
"insider" that can directly drop the seeds into the mail stream when payment to an out-of-
country liaison is confirmed. This way there should be no possible way to open the package 
legally. I used to work as a postman. A postie has a set run, he gets to know a lot of very 
detailed information about the neighbourhood. He is the only one with current info on who 
lives where.
•
Take a good look at your postie, get to know them. A postman could deliver packages to a 
vacant house that he knows has been vacant for a long time [but he won't normally]. 
Concealment is secondary to all the above
I suggest the following methods 
1. Beeswax candleis
2. Chocolate 200g blocksii
3. Vacuum sealed bags same size than letter-mailiii
4. laminated playing cardsiv
5. Belgian pralinesv
6. Delicatessen Food producevi
7. Chemical obfuscationvii

Beeswax Candles
Watch a video on youtube about beeswax candles and the making of the latter.
1. Melt  beeswax candles in hot water on a stove. 
2. Get the wicks out of the boiling water/wax mix.
3. Let water/wax mix.solidify and dicard water 
4. Reheat beeswax in slender vessel
5. make sure to evaporate remaining water from beeswax.
6. Start the dipping your preform with wick protruding from bottom and top
7. Repeat until you have sufficient covering
8. Make sure that the finished article looks and feels like the real thing
9. Repack in origin box

Chocolate 200g blocks
 
 viii  
1. Open Chocolate bar carefully,because you need to reuse all packaging
2. Undo tin foil carefully without damaging it.
3. Melt chocolate in water bath
4. hollow out the backside of a second identical bar 
5. insert  your preform/s 
6. cover in molten chocolate
7. re-wrap in genuine tinfoil.
8. Repackage chocolate 

Vacuum sealed bags same size than letter-mail
1. Make sure to get the size matching you folded letter-mail.
2. Put powder in bag and seal
3. Rubbing Procedure
4. stick bag to letter ( in the fold)
5. Remember never to be high and do not cross contaminate.

Laminated playing cards
1. Take to playing cards.
2. Find a.bag that fits in between the cards perfectly.
3. Put the bag inbetwee the playing cards
4. cut out a piece of lamination plastic measuring 10mm more all around.
5. Laminate the card inside.
6. Do Rubbing procedure

Belgian pralines
 
 ix  
1. Open the box very carefully.
2. Make sure all the packaging can be reused.
3. Take the bottom of pralines
4. Put your preforms in
5. Reseal with chocolate
6. Repackage. Make sure the box looks untouched.
7. Rubbing procedure.

Delicatessen Food produce
 
 x  
1. Use you imagination
2. use stuff like the Swedish fermented herinh, etc 

Chemical obfuscation
It’s not a problem to make a jacket or a suit out of cocaine with the development of the 
chemical industry and the fantasy of drug barons who, according to Interpol, are 
getting more and more profits. It seems that the transportation of heavy drugs in 
briquettes from Latin America is an outdated technology.
A new technology makes it possible to make a product from cocaine for any department of a 
supermarket, including paper, clothes or plastic. The culprits have learned to process cocaine 
powder so that it cannot be detected and hide it in the most secret corners of a postal parcel and 
large consignments of food.
The development of technology has presented new possibilities. Consequently, at present, cocaine 
can be turned into any product, say paper, oil, adhesive, sealants, alcohol or plastic. These products 
are transported in large consignments or in parcels by mail to leading companies which are simply 
unable to check each and every parcel to find whether it contains drugs or not. The more successful 
the efforts made by anti-drug services, the better the fantasy of the adventurous culprits, says fellow 
at the Institute of World Economics and International Relations, Igor Khokhlov in an interview with 
the Voice of Russia.
“The paradox in the fight against drug trafficking and drug sale is that the more effective the 
fight against drug trafficking by special services, the more advantageous becomes this 
business. Russian special service is one of the most effective, if not the most effective 
service in fighting drug trafficking. This is the real situation. It’s very difficult to buy drugs 
in rich and big cities in Russia. It is very dangerous, and it’s difficult to find suppliers 
because police regularly arrest them. In these circumstances, the price of drugs is 
consistently growing. As a result, the conclusion is that the more effective the fight against 
drug business by law enforcement agencies, the more the income of the drug business,


APPENDIX
Rubbing Procedure
•
Rub bag with alcohol
•
Rub bag with Terpintine
•
Rub bag with alcohol
Drug smuggling operations can rely on willing or unwilling couriers. In either case, the 
transport possibilities are seemingly limitless. Cartels and small-time transporters alike are 
driven by the high profitability of the drug trade and they will go to any length necessary to 
accomplish their goals. Here are some of the most widely-used methods of drug transport.
-Willing Couriers-
People willingly transport drugs from one country to another every day. Their methods range from 
the very simple to the ingeniously complex, and they often depend on the sophistication of the 
relevant law enforcement agencies. Here are three of the most common techniques.
1. Personal Concealment
Drug smugglers have developed various ways to carry conceal and carry drugs on their persons. For 
example, women couriers will often replace bra padding with cocaine or other powdered 
substances. People may replace shoe soles and jacket padding in the same way. Morbidly obese 
smugglers have also been known to hide packages under fat rolls – a technique which can even 
evade thorough pat-down searches. Finally, some smuggling operations exploit children as couriers, 
hoping law enforcement officials will pass them over as they conduct searches.
2. Human and Animal Orifices
Another common technique drug smugglers use is to hide drugs in balloons, condoms, or other 
small rubber packages. They then use lubricant to swallow these packages and later take laxatives to 
retrieve them. In some cases, they will also sew these packages under the skins of animals. This 
allows extra opportunities for smuggling and prevents humans from taking the risks of ruptured 
balloons. Overall, these methods allow couriers to evade sniffing dogs, frisks, and other property 
searches that would uncover personally-concealed drugs.
3. Inside Personal Effects
When couriers transport drugs internationally, they often use unsuspicious travel-related objects to 
ship larger amounts and increase their profits. For instance, they might create hidden compartments 
within their luggage for hiding small packages of drugs. They might also use baby bottles, water 
bottles, canteens, windshield wiper fluid tanks, and other liquid storage devices to cunningly 
conceal heroin or other powders.
Cartels and other large operations use highly-sophisticated methods, as well. They may create 
pieces of furniture out of cocaine or soak pieces of fabric in liquidized heroin. They have even been 

known to use small planes, ships, and submarines to sneak into areas that cars can’t access. These 
methods require far more resources than simpler techniques, but they allow very large shipments to 
be made reliably.
-Unwilling Couriers-
Smugglers often take advantage of unwilling participants to reduce their changes of arrest. They 
may use legitimate postal services to ship drugs internationally without having to leave their own 
countries. They also place their cargo onto legal shipping vessels which are already set for 
international trips. These methods are particularly profitable, and the United Nations Office on 
Drugs and Crime estimates that the profit margins for international drug trafficking range from 300 
to 2,000 percent. The following are the most common ways drug smugglers use unwilling couriers.
1. Public Transit
Many regions of the world have international bus and subway lines. Rather than risking arrest by 
carrying drugs on their persons, smugglers often board these transit lines and hide their cargo in a 
public area. They can easily remove the drugs once they reach their destinations, but they can easily 
deny their crimes if law enforcement searches the vehicles.
A more involved approach utilizes cruise ships. Cartels sometimes hide their shipments in the hulls 
of these massive vessels, and hired divers will carefully retrieve them after docking.
Finally, smugglers often take advantage of the civilians using public transport. They plant their 
packages on people or their cargo and retrieve it once they crossed borders. They also use this 
method at airports, where they will bribe cargo handlers into placing drugs into specific bags.
2. Legitimate Postal Services
So many letters and packages are sent every day that it is impossible for law enforcement to inspect 
even a small fraction of them. Smugglers take advantage of this by shipping drugs with legitimate 
mail services. They often use express delivery because the increased pressure for quick delivery 
means even fewer packages get checked.
3. Shipping and Freight Companies
Legitimate shipping operations by truck, ship, and airplane give smugglers a nearly endless list of 
options for drug trafficking. They often just pack their shipments into normal containers aboard 
these vehicles. If they are worried about law enforcement searches, they can easily conceal drugs 
inside almost any product packaging. Pet food bags, toy boxes, and teddy bears have all been used 
to ship drugs internationally.
Despite vigilant law enforcement efforts and international government cooperation, smugglers 
continue to expand their operations. So long as people around the world demand drugs, there will be 
people willing to break the law to sell them.
If you or a loved one is struggling with addiction, use the links below today for a toll-free, no-
obligation consultation. Our dedicated addiction specialists are standing by day and night to help 
you get back on the right track.
Click here for a confidential consultation from an expert at our Florida Drug Rehab. We can help 
you regardless of your location.

Methods:
It’s not a problem to make a jacket or a suit out of cocaine with the development of the 
chemical industry and the fantasy of drug barons who, according to Interpol, are 
getting more and more profits. It seems that the transportation of heavy drugs in 
briquettes from Latin America is an outdated technology.
A new technology makes it possible to make a product from cocaine for any department of a 
supermarket, including paper, clothes or plastic. The culprits have learned to process cocaine 
powder so that it cannot be detected and hide it in the most secret corners of a postal parcel and 
large consignments of food.
The development of technology has presented new possibilities. Consequently, at present, cocaine 
can be turned into any product, say paper, oil, adhesive, sealants, alcohol or plastic. These products 
are transported in large consignments or in parcels by mail to leading companies which are simply 
unable to check each and every parcel to find whether it contains drugs or not. The more successful 
the efforts made by anti-drug services, the better the fantasy of the adventurous culprits, says fellow 
at the Institute of World Economics and International Relations, Igor Khokhlov in an interview with 
the Voice of Russia.
“The paradox in the fight against drug trafficking and drug sale is that the more effective the fight 
against drug trafficking by special services, the more advantageous becomes this business. Russian 
special service is one of the most effective, if not the most effective service in fighting drug 
trafficking. This is the real situation. It’s very difficult to buy drugs in rich and big cities in Russia. 
It is very dangerous, and it’s difficult to find suppliers because police regularly arrest them. In these 
circumstances, the price of drugs is consistently growing. As a result, the conclusion is that the 
more effective the fight against drug business by law enforcement agencies, the more the income of 
the drug business,” Igor Khokhlov said.
Drug barons invest some of their income from the illegal business in storing and transporting drugs. 
This money is sufficient to buy, for example, submarines to store a consignment of cocaine, Igor 
Khokhlov said.
“Several years ago, two submarines that were used to transport cocaine to the U.S. were discovered 
in Colombia. In short, drug curtails in Latin America have large sums of money. Their task is to 
promote drugs on the new markets such as South-East Asia, China, Russia and European countries. 
In short, they are targeting countries with large populations, where there is a potential market of rich 
young people. In these circumstances, the invention of new and unusual methods of transportation 
of cocaine is natural,” Igor Khokhlov added.
Cocaine is the oldest and the most dangerous drug. In the middle of the 19th century, physicians and 
public figures actively advertised it and even included in courses of treatments and popular soft 
drinks. Mankind understood the destructive effect of coca leaves in the early 20th century. 
Afterwards, the drug was officially banned. Cocaine addicts belong to the medium or high class 
because it is an expensive drug and every next dose should be increased. Experts agree that fighting 
against drugs should be started from the other end of the link by treating drug addicted people and 
by intercepting their interest in drugs before its possible appearance. This should be carried out 

while fighting against drug business, of course. In fact, no matter that drug barons use advanced 
technology for their revival, law is one for all, and they are severely punished for violating it. In 
short, the Nobel Prize will not be awarded for inventing a cocaine suit, but jail terms including life 
sentence are guaranteed.
A mule or courier is someone who smuggles something with them (as opposed to sending 
by mail, etc.) across a national border, including bringing in to and out of an international 
plane, especially a small amount, transported for a smuggling organization. The organizers 
employ mules to reduce the risk of getting caught themselves. Methods of smuggling 
include hiding the goods in a vehicle, luggage or clothes, strapping them to one's body, or 
using the body as container. Sometimes the goods are hidden in the bag or vehicle of an 
innocent person, who does not know about this, for the purpose of retrieving the goods 
elsewhere.
In the case of transporting illegal drugs, the term drug mule applies. Slang terms include Kinder 
Surprise and Easter Egg. This is often done using a mule's gastrointestinal tract or other body 
cavities as containers. One method is referred to as body packing, which involves swallowing latex 
balloons (often condoms or fingers of latex gloves) or special pellets[clarification needed] filled 
with the goods and recovering them from the feces later. Other methods of carrying drugs within the 
body include insertion of the package directly into the anus or vagina. This method is far more 
vulnerable to body cavity searches.

PICTURES
i
ii

PICTURES
iii
iv

PICTURES

PICTURES
v
vi

PICTURES
vii

PICTURES
viii
ix

PICTURES
x

