POUL ANDERSON
 
The Tale of Hauk
 
 
One  of  the  most  acclaimed  and  most  prolific  writers  in
science  fiction,  Poul  Anderson  made  his  first  sale  in
1947,  and  in  the  course  of  his  subsequent  fifty-year
career has published almost a hundred books (in several
different fields, as Anderson has written historical novels,
fantasies,  and  mysteries,  in  addition  to  SF),  sold
hundreds  of  short  pieces  to  every  conceivable  market,
and won seven Hugo Awards, three Nebula Awards,  and
the Tolkien Memorial Award for life achievement.
 
Although  Anderson  is  best  known  as  a  writer  of
“hard  science  fiction”  and  fast-paced
 intergalactic
adventure  tales,  he  has  al-ways  loved  fantasy,  and  has
published  a  good  deal  of  it,  some  quite  influential.  His
best  known fantasy  novel  is probably  Three  Hearts  and
Three  Lions,  a  whimsical  “Unknown-style”  deliberately
anachronistic  fantasy  along  the  lines  of  de  Camp  and
Pratt’s The Incomplete  Enchanter,  but with a somewhat
harder  adventure  edge  to  it,  as  though  one  of  the  de
Camp  and  Pratt  stories  had  been  cross-bred  with  a
Sword & Sorcery swashbuckler such as one of Robert E.
Howard’s Conan books; it was followed decades later by
a semi-sequel,  Midsummer  Tempest.  The  more  typical
Anderson  fantasy  story,  though,  abandons  the  whimsy
and  explores  the  harsh,  bleak,  unrelenting,  frequently
violent  territory  of  Norse  mythology  and  folklore—his
explorations  of  that  milieu  include  Hrolf  Kraki’s  Saga,
The Broken Sword, The Golden Horn, The Road of the
Sea  Horse,  The  Sign  of  the  Raven,  and  short  stories
such  as  “The  Peat  Bog”  and  “The  Valor  of  Cappen
Varra”…and the chill-ing story that follows, which tells the
story of a most unwelcome houseguest, one who will not
go away, no matter how many times you ask him to . . .
 
Anderson’s  books  include,  among  many  others,
The  High  Cru-sade,  The  Enemy  Stars,  Brain  Wave,
Tau  Zero,  The  Might  Face,  Orion  Shall  Rise,  The

Shield of Time, The Time Patrol, and The People of the
Wind,  as  well  as  the  two  multivolume  series  of  novels
about  his two most  popular  characters,  Dominic  Flandry
and Nicholas van Rijn. His short work has been collected
in The  Queen  of  Air  and  Darkness  and  Other  Stories,
Guardians  of  Time,  The  Earth  Book  of  Stormgate,
Fantasy,  The  Unicorn  Trade  (with  Karen  Anderson),
Past Times, Time Patrolman, and Explorations. Among
his  most  recent  books  are  the  novels  The  Boat  of  a
Million Years, Harvest of Stars, and The Stars Are Also
Fire.  Anderson  lives  in  Orinda,  California,  with  his  wife
(and fellow writer) Karen.
 
* * * *
 
A man called Geirolf dwelt on the Great Fjord in Raumsdal. His father was
Bui Hardhand, who owned a farm inland near the Dofra Fell. One year Bui
went in viking to Finnmark and brought back a woman he dubbed Gydha.
She became the mother of Geirolf. But because Bui al-ready had children
by his wife, there would be small inheritance for this by-blow.
 
Folk said uncanny things about Gydha. She was fair to see, but spoke
little, did no more work than she must, dwelt by herself in a shack out of
sight of the garth, and often went for long stridings alone on the upland
heaths, heedless of cold, rain, and rovers. Bui did not visit her often. Her
son Geirolf did. He too was a moody sort, not much given to playing with
others, quick and harsh of temper. Big and strong, he went abroad with his
father already when he was twelve, and in the next few years won the name
of a mighty though ruthless fighter.
 
Then Gydha died. They buried her near her shack, and it was
whis-pered that she spooked around it of nights. Soon after, walking home
with some men by moonlight from a feast at a neighbor’s, Bui clutched his
breast and fell dead. They wondered if Gydha had called him, maybe to
accompany her home to Finnmark, for there was no more sight of her.
 
Geirolf bargained with his kin and got the price of a ship for himself.
Thereafter he gathered a crew, mostly younger sons and a wild lot, and
fared west. For a long while he harried Scotland, Ireland, and the coasts
south of the Channel, and won much booty. With some of this he bought his
farm on the Great Fjord. Meanwhile he courted Thyra, a daughter of the
yeoman Sigtryg Einarsson, and got her.
 

They had one son early on, Hauk, a bright and lively lad. But
there-after five years went by until they had a daughter who lived, Unn, and
two years later a boy they called Einar. Geirolf was in viking every sum-mer,
and sometimes wintered over in the Westlands. Yet he was a kindly father,
whose children were always glad to see him come roaring home. Very tall
and broad in the shoulders, he had long red-brown hair and a full beard
around a broad blunt-nosed face whose eyes were ice blue and slanted.
He liked fine clothes and heavy gold rings, which he also lavished on Thyra.
 
Then the time came when Geirolf said he felt poorly and would not
fare elsewhere that season. Hauk was fourteen years old and had been wild
to go. “I’ll keep my promise to you as well as may be,” Geirolf said, and
sent men asking around. The best he could do was get his son a bench on
a ship belonging to Ottar the Wide-Faring from Haalogaland in the north,
who was trading along the coast and meant to do likewise over-seas.
 
Hauk and Ottar took well to each other. In England, the man got the
boy prime-signed so he could deal with Christians. Though neither was
baptized, what he heard while they wintered there made Hauk thought-ful.
Next spring they fared south to trade among the Moors, and did not come
home until late fall.
 
Ottar was Geirolf’s guest for a while, though he scowled to himself
when his host broke into fits of deep coughing. He offered to take Hauk
along on his voyages from now on and start the youth toward a good
liveli-hood.
 
“You a chapman—the son of a viking?” Geirolf sneered. He had
grown surly of late.
 
Hauk flushed. “You’ve heard what we did to those vikings who set on 
us,” he answered.
 
“Give our son his head,” was Thyra’s smiling rede, “or he’ll take the bit
between his teeth.”
 
The upshot was that Geirolf grumbled agreement, and Hauk fared off.
He did not come back for five years.
 
Long were the journeys he took with Ottar. By ship and horse, they
made their way to Uppsala in Svithjodh, thence into the wilderness of the
Keel after pelts; amber they got on the windy strands of Jutland, salt
her-ring along the Sound; seeking beeswax, honey, and tallow, they pushed
beyond Holmgard to the fair at Kiev; walrus ivory lured them past North

Cape, through bergs and floes to the land of the fur-clad Biarmians; and
they bore many goods west. They did not hide that the wish to see what
was new to them drove them as hard as any hope of gain.
 
In those days King Harald Fairhair went widely about in Norway,
bringing all the land under himself. Lesser kings and chieftains must ei-ther
plight faith to him or meet his wrath; it crushed whomever would stand fast.
When he entered Raumsdal, he sent men from garth to garth as was his
wont, to say he wanted oaths and warriors.
 
“My older son is abroad,” Geirolf told these, “and my younger still a
stripling. As for myself—” He coughed, and blood flecked his beard. The
king’s men did not press the matter.
 
But now Geirolf’s moods grew ever worse. He snarled at everybody,
cuffed his children and housefolk, once drew a dagger and stabbed to
death a thrall who chanced to spill some soup on him. When Thyra
reproached him for this, he said only, “Let them know I am not altogeth-er
hallowed out. I can still wield blade.” And he looked at her so threateningly
from beneath his shaggy brows that she, no coward, with-drew in silence.
 
A year later, Hauk Geirolfsson returned to visit his parents.
 
That was on a chill fall noontide. Whitecaps chopped beneath a
whistling wind and cast spindrift salty onto lips. Clifftops on either side of
the fjord were lost in mist. Above blew cloud wrack like smoke. Hauk’s ship,
a wide-beamed knorr, rolled, pitched, and creaked as it beat its way under
sail. The owner stood in the bows, wrapped in a flame-red cloak, an
uncommonly big young man, yellow hair tossing around a face akin to his
father’s, weatherbeaten though still scant of beard. When he saw the arm of
the fjord that he wanted to enter, he pointed with a spear at whose head he
had bound a silk pennon. When he saw Disafoss pour-ing in a white stream
down the blue-gray stone wall to larboard, and be-yond the waterfall at the
end of that arm lay his old home, he shouted for happiness.
 
Geirolf had rich holdings. The hall bulked over all else,
heavy-timbered, brightly painted, dragon heads arching from rafters and
gables. Else-where around the yard were cookhouse, smokehouse,
bathhouse, store-houses, workshop, stables, barns, women’s bower.
Several cabins for hirelings and their families were strewn beyond. Fishing
boats lay on the strand near a shed which held the master’s dragonship.
Behind the steading, land sloped sharply upward through a narrow dale,
where fields were walled with stones grubbed out of them and now
stubbled after harvest. A bronze-leaved oakenshaw stood untouched not

far from the buildings; and a mile inland, where hills humped themselves
toward the mountains, rose a darkling wall of pinewood.
 
Spearheads and helmets glimmered ashore. But men saw it was a
sin-gle craft bound their way, white shield on the mast. As the hull slipped
alongside the little wharf, they lowered their weapons. Hauk sprang from
bow to dock in a single leap and whooped.
 
Geirolf trod forth. “Is that you, my son?” he called. His voice was
hoarse from coughing; he had grown gaunt and sunken-eyed; the ax that he
bore shivered in his hand.
 
“Yes, father, yes, home again,” Hauk stammered. He could not hide
his shock.
 
Maybe this drove Geirolf to anger. Nobody knew; he had become
impossible to get along with. “I could well-nigh have hoped otherwise,” he
rasped. “An unfriend would give me something better than straw-death.”
 
The rest of the men, housecarls and thralls alike, flocked about Hauk
to bid him welcome. Among them was a burly, grizzled yeoman whom he
knew from aforetime, Leif Egilsson, a neighbor come to dicker for a horse.
When he was small, Hauk had often wended his way over a wood-land trail
to Leif’s garth to play with the children there.
 
He called his crew to him. They were not just Norse, but had among
them Danes, Swedes, and English, gathered together over the years as he
found them trustworthy. “You brought a mickle for me to feed,” Geirolf said.
Luckily, the wind bore his words from all but Hauk. “Where’s your master
Ottar?”
 
The young man stiffened. “He’s my friend, never my master,” he
answered. “This is my own ship, bought with my own earnings. Ottar abides
in England this year. The West Saxons have a new king, one Al-fred, whom
he wants to get to know.”
 
“Time was when it was enough to know how to get sword past a
Westman’s shield,” Geirolf grumbled.
 
Seeing peace down by the water, women and children hastened from
the hall to meet the newcomers. At their head went Thyra. She was tall and
deep-bosomed; her gown blew around a form still straight and freely
striding. But as she neared, Hauk saw that the gold of her braids was
dimmed and sorrow had furrowed her face. Nonetheless she kindled when

she knew him. “Oh, thrice welcome, Hauk!” she said low. “How long can
you bide with us?”
 
After his father’s greeting, it had been in his mind to say he must soon
be off. But when he spied who walked behind his mother, he said, “We
thought we might be guests here the winter through, if that’s not too much
of a burden.”
 
“Never—” began Thyra. Then she saw where his gaze had gone, and
suddenly she smiled.
 
Alfhild Leifsdottir had joined her widowed father on this visit. She was
two years younger than Hauk, but they had been glad of each other as
playmates. Today she stood a maiden grown, lissome in a blue wadmal
gown, heavily crowned with red locks above great green eyes, straight
nose, and gently curved mouth. Though he had known many a woman,
none struck him as being so fair.
 
He grinned at her and let his cloak flap open to show his finery of
broidered, fur-lined tunic, linen shirt and breeks, chased leather boots, gold
on arms and neck and sword-hilt. She paid them less heed than she did
him when they spoke.
 
Thus Hauk and his men moved to Geirolf’s hall. He brought plentiful
gifts, there was ample food and drink, and their tales of strange lands—
their songs, dances, games, jests, manners—made them good
housefellows in these lengthening nights.
 
Already on the next morning, he walked out with Alfhild. Rain had
cleared the air, heaven and fjord sparkled, wavelets chuckled beneath a
cool breeze from the woods. Nobody else was on the strand where they
went.
 
“So you grow mighty as a chapman, Hauk,” Alfhild teased. “Have you
never gone in viking…only once, only to please your father?”
 
“No,” he answered gravely. “I fail to see what manliness lies in falling
on those too weak to defend themselves. We traders must be stronger and
more war-skilled than any who may seek to plunder us.” A thick branch of
driftwood, bleached and hardened, lay nearby. Hauk picked it up and
snapped it between his hands. Two other men would have had trouble
doing that. It gladdened him to see Alfhild glow at the sight. “Nobody has
tried us twice,” he said.
 

They passed the shed where Geirolf’s dragon lay on rollers. Hauk
opened the door for a peek at the remembered slim shape. A sharp whiff
from the gloom within brought his nose wrinkling. “Whew!” he snorted. “Dry
rot.”
 
“Poor Fireworm has long lain idle,” Alfhild sighed. “In later years, your
father’s illness has gnawed him till he doesn’t even see to the care of his
ship. He knows he will never take it a-roving again.”
 
“I feared that,” Hauk murmured.
 
“We grieve for him on our own garth too,” she said. “In former days,
he was a staunch friend to us. Now we bear with his ways, yes, insults that
would make my father draw blade on anybody else.”
 
“That is dear of you,” Hauk said, staring straight before him. “I’m very
thankful.”
 
“You have not much cause for that, have you?” she asked. “I mean,
you’ve been away so long…Of course, you have your mother. She’s borne
the brunt, stood like a shield before your siblings—” She touched her lips.
“I talk too much.”
 
“You talk as a friend,” he blurted. “May we always be friends.”
 
They wandered on, along a path from shore to fields. It went by the
shaw. Through boles and boughs and falling leaves, they saw Thor’s image
and altar among the trees. “I’ll make offering here for my father’s health,”
Hauk said, “though truth to tell, I’ve more faith in my own strength than in any
gods.”
 
“You have seen lands where strange gods rule,” she nodded.
 
“Yes, and there too, they do not steer things well,” he said. “It was in a
Christian realm that a huge wolf came raiding flocks, on which no iron would
bite. When it took a baby from a hamlet near our camp, I thought I’d be less
than a man did I not put an end to it.”
 
“What happened?” she asked breathlessly, and caught his arm.
 
“I wrestled it barehanded—no foe of mine was ever more fell—and at
last broke its neck.” He pulled back a sleeve to show scars of terrible bites.
“Dead, it changed into a man they had outlawed that year for his evil deeds.
We burned the lich to make sure it would not walk again, and there-after the

folk had peace. And ... we had friends, in a country otherwise wary of us.”
 
She looked on him in the wonder he had hoped for.
 
Erelong she must return with her father. But the way between the
garths was just a few miles, and Hauk often rode or skied through the
woods. At home, he and his men helped do what work there was, and gave
merriment where it had long been little known.
 
Thyra owned this to her son, on a snowy day when they were by
themselves. They were in the women’s bower, whither they had gone to
see a tapestry she was weaving. She wanted to know how it showed
against those of the Westlands; he had brought one such, which hung
above the benches in the hall. Here, in the wide quiet room, was dusk, for
the day outside had become a tumbling whiteness. Breath steamed from
lips as the two of them spoke. It smelled sweet; both had drunk mead until
they could talk freely.
 
“You did better than you knew when you came back,” Thyra said. “You
blew like spring into this winter of ours. Einar and Unn were withering; they
blossom again in your nearness.”
 
“Strangely has our father changed,” Hauk answered sadly. “I
remem-ber once when I was small, how he took me by the hand on a
frost-clear night, led me forth under the stars, and named for me the
pictures in them, Thor’s Wain, Freyja’s Spindle—how wonderful he made
them, how his deep slow laughterful voice filled the dark.”
 
“A wasting illness draws the soul inward,” his mother said. “He ... has
no more manhood…and it tears him like fangs that he will die helpless in
bed. He must strike out at someone, and here we are.”
 
She was silent a while before she added: “He will not live out the year.
Then you must take over.”
 
“I must be gone when weather allows,” Hauk warned. “I promised
Ottar.”
 
“Return as soon as may be,” Thyra said. “We have need of a strong
man, the more so now when yonder King Harald would reave their free-hold
rights from yeomen.”
 
“It would be well to have a hearth of my own.” Hauk stared past her,
toward the unseen woods. Her worn face creased in a smile.

 
Suddenly they heard yells from the yard below. Hauk ran out onto the
gallery and looked down. Geirolf was shambling after an aged carl named
Atli. He had a whip in his hand and was lashing it across the white locks and
wrinkled cheeks of the man, who could not run fast either and who sobbed.
 
“What is this?” broke from Hauk. He swung himself over the rail, hung,
and let go. The drop would at least have jarred the wind out of most. He,
though, bounced from where he landed, ran behind his father, caught hold
of the whip and wrenched it from Geirolf’s grasp. “What are you doing?”
 
Geirolf howled and struck his son with a doubled fist. Blood trickled
from Hauk’s mouth. He stood fast. Atli sank to hands and knees and fought
not to weep.
 
“Are you also a heelbiter of mine?” Geirolf bawled.
 
“I’d save you from your madness, father,” Hauk said in pain. “Atli
followed you to battle ere I was born—he dandled me on his knee—and
he’s a free man. What has he done, that you’d bring down on us the anger
of his kinfolk?”
 
“Harm not the skipper, young man,” Atli begged. “I fled because I’d
sooner the than lift hand against my skipper.”
 
“Hell swallow you both!” Geirolf would have cursed further, but the
coughing came on him. Blood drops flew through the snowflakes, down
onto the white earth, where they mingled with the drip from the heads of
Hauk and Atli. Doubled over, Geirolf let them half lead, half carry him to his
shut-bed. There he closed the panel and lay alone in darkness.
 
“What happened between you and him?” Hauk asked.
 
“I was fixing to shoe a horse,” Atli said into a ring of gaping
onlook-ers. “He came in and wanted to know why I’d not asked his leave. I
told him ‘twas plain Kolfaxi needed new shoes. Then he hollered, ‘I’ll show
you I’m no log in the woodpile!’ and snatched yon whip off the wall and took
after me.” The old man squared his shoulders. “We’ll speak no more of
this, you hear?” he ordered the household.
 
Nor did Geirolf, when next day he let them bring him some broth.
 
For more reasons than this, Hauk came to spend much of his time at
Leif’s garth. He would return in such a glow that even the reproachful looks

of his young sister and brother, even the sullen or the weary greet-ing of his
father, could not dampen it.
 
At last, when lengthening days and quickening blood bespoke
seafar-ings soon to come, that happened which surprised nobody. Hauk
told them in the hall that he wanted to marry Alfhild Leifsdottir, and prayed
Geirolf press the suit for him. “What must be, will be,” said his father, a
better grace than awaited. Union of the families was clearly good for both.
 
Leif Egilsson agreed, and Alfhild had nothing but aye to say. The
betrothal feast crowded the whole neighborhood together in cheer. Thyra
hid the trouble within her, and Geirolf himself was calm if not blithe.
 
Right after, Hauk and his men were busking themselves to fare.
Regardless of his doubts about gods, he led in offering for a safe voyage
to Thor, Aegir, and St. Michael. But Alfhild found herself a quiet place
alone, to cut runes on an ash tree in the name of Freyja.
 
When all was ready, she was there with the folk of Geirolf s stead to
see the sailors off. That morning was keen, wind roared in trees and skirled
between cliffs, waves ran green and white beneath small flying clouds. Unn
could not but hug her brother who was going, while Einar gave him a
handclasp that shook. Thyra said, “Come home hale and early, my son.”
Alfhild mostly stored away the sight of Hauk. Atli and others of the
household mumbled this and that.
 
Geirolf shuffled forward. The cane on which he leaned rattled among
the stones of the beach. He was hunched in a hairy cloak against the sharp
air. His locks fell tangled almost to the coal-smoldering eyes. “Father,
farewell,” Hauk said, taking his free hand.
 
“You mean ‘fare far,’ don’t you?” Geirolf grated. “ ‘Fare far and never
come back.’ You’d like that, wouldn’t you? But we will meet again. Oh, yes,
we will meet again.”
 
Hauk dropped the hand. Geirolf turned and sought the house. The
rest behaved as if they had not heard, speaking loudly, amidst yelps of
laugh-ter, to overcome those words of foreboding. Soon Hauk called his
orders to begone.
 
Men scrambled aboard the laden ship. Its sail slatted aloft and filled,
the mooring lines were cast loose, the hull stood out to sea. Alfhild waved
until it was gone from sight behind the bend where Disafoss fell.
 

Tire summer passed—plowing, sowing, lambing, calving, farrowing,
hoeing, reaping, flailing, butchering—rain, hail, sun, stars, loves, quarrels,
births, deaths—and the season wore toward fall. Alfhild was seldom at
Geirolf’s garth, nor was Leif; for Hauk’s father grew steadily worse. After
midsummer he could no longer leave his bed. But often he whis-pered,
between lung-tearing coughs, to those who tended him, “I would kill you if I
could.”
 
On a dark day late in the season, when rain roared about the hall and
folk and hounds huddled close to fires that hardly lit the gloom around,
Geirolf awoke from a heavy sleep. Thyra marked it and came to him. Cold
and dankness gnawed their way through her clothes. The fever was in him
like a brand. He plucked restlessly at his blanket, where he half sat in his
short shut-bed. Though flesh had wasted from the great bones, his fingers
still had strength to tear the wool. The mattress rustled under him.
“Straw-death, straw-death,” he muttered.
 
Thyra laid a palm on his brow. “Be at ease,” she said.
 
It dragged from him: “You’ll not be rid ... of me…so fast ... by
straw-death.” An icy sweat broke forth and the last struggle began.
 
Long it was, Geirolf’s gasps and the sputtering flames the only noises
within that room, while rain and wind ramped outside and night drew in.
Thyra stood by the bedside to wipe the sweat off her man, blood and spittle
from his beard. A while after sunset, he rolled his eyes back and died.
 
Thyra called for water and lamps. She cleansed him, clad him in his
best, and laid him out. A drawn sword was on his breast.
 
In the morning, thralls and carls alike went forth under her orders. A
hillock stood in the fields about half a mile inland from the house. They dug
a grave chamber in the top of this, lining it well with timber. “Won’t you bury
him in his ship?” asked Atli.
 
“It is rotten, unworthy of him,” Thyra said. Yet she made them haul it to
the barrow, around which she had stones to outline a hull. Meanwhile folk
readied a grave-ale, and messengers bade neighbors come.
 
When all were there, men of Geirolf’s carried him on a litter to his
resting place and put him in, together with weapons and a jar of Southland
coins. After beams had roofed the chamber, his friends from aforetime
took shovels and covered it well. They replaced the turfs of sere grass,
leaving the hillock as it had been save that it was now bigger. Einar

Thorolfsson kindled his father’s ship. It burned till dusk, when the horns of
the new moon stood over the fjord. Meanwhile folk had gone back down to
the garth to feast and drink. Riding home next day, well gifted by Thyra, they
told each other that this had been an honorable burial.
 
The moon waxed. On the first night that it rose full, Geirolf came
again.
 
A thrall named Kark had been late in the woods, seeking a strayed
sheep. Coming home, he passed near the howe. The moon was barely
above the pines; long shivery beams of light ran on the water, lost
them-selves in shadows ashore, glinted wanly anew where a bedewed
stone wall snaked along a stubblefield. Stars were few. A great stillness lay
on the land, not even an owl hooted, until all at once dogs down in the garth
began howling. It was not the way they howled at the moon; across the mile
between, it sounded ragged and terrified. Kark felt the chill close in around
him, and hastened toward home.
 
Something heavy trod the earth. He looked around and saw the bulk
of a huge man coming across the field from the barrow. “Who’s that?” he
called uneasily. No voice replied, but the weight of those footfalls shiv-ered
through the ground into his bones. Kark swallowed, gripped his staff, and
stood where he was. But then the shape came so near that moonlight
picked out the head of Geirolf. Kark screamed, dropped his weapon, and
ran.
 
Geirolf followed slowly, clumsily behind.
 
Down in the garth, light glimmered red as doors opened. Folk saw
Kark running, gasping for breath. Atli and Einar led the way out, each with a
torch in one hand, a sword in the other. Little could they see beyond the
wild flame-gleam. Kark reached them, fell, writhed on the hard-beaten clay
of the yard, and wailed.
 
“What is it, you lackwit?” Atli snapped, and kicked him. Then Einar
pointed his blade.
 
“A stranger—” Atli began.
 
Geirolf rocked into sight. The mould of the grave clung to him. His
eyes stared unblinking, unmoving, blank in the moonlight, out of a gray face
whereon the skin crawled. The teeth in his tangled beard were dry. No
breath smoked from his nostrils. He held out his arms, crook-fingered.
 

“Father!” Einar cried. The torch hissed from his grip, flickered weakly
at his feet, and went out. The men at his back jammed the doorway of the
hall as they sought its shelter.
 
“The skipper’s come again,” Atli quavered. He sheathed his sword,
though that was hard when his hand shook, and made himself step
for-ward. “Skipper, d’you know your old shipmate Atli?”
 
The dead man grabbed him, lifted him, and dashed him to earth.
Einar heard bones break. Atli jerked once and lay still. Geirolf trod him and
Kark underfoot. There was a sound of cracking and rending. Blood spurted
forth.
 
Blindly, Einar swung blade. The edge smote but would not bite. A
wave of grave-chill passed over him. He whirled and bounded back inside.
 
Thyra had seen. “Bar the door,” she bade. The windows were already
shuttered against frost. “Men, stand fast. Women, stoke up the fires.”
 
They heard the lich groping about the yard. Walls creaked where
Geirolf blundered into them. Thyra called through the door, “Why do you
wish us ill, your own household?” But only those noises gave answer. The
hounds cringed and whined.
 
“Lay iron at the doors and under every window,” Thyra commanded.
“If it will not cut him, it may keep him out.”
 
All that night, then, folk huddled in the hall. Geirolf climbed onto the
roof and rode the ridgepole, drumming his heels on the shakes till the
whole building boomed. A little before sunrise, it stopped. Peering out by
the first dull dawnlight, Thyra saw no mark of her husband but his
deep-sunken footprints and the wrecked bodies he had left.
 
“He grew so horrible before he died,” Unn wept. “Now he can’t rest,
can he?”
 
“We’ll make him an offering,” Thyra said through her weariness. “It
may be we did not give him enough when we buried him.”
 
Few would follow her to the howe. Those who dared, brought along
the best horse on the farm. Einar, as the son of the house when Hauk was
gone, himself cut its throat after a sturdy man had given the hammer-blow.
Carls and wenches butchered the carcass, which Thyra and Unn cooked
over a fire in whose wood was blent the charred rest of the dragonship.

Nobody cared to eat much of the flesh or broth. Thyra poured what was left
over the bones, upon the grave.
 
Two ravens circled in sight, waiting for folk to go so they could take
the food. “Is that a good sign?” Thyra sighed. “Will Odin fetch Geirolf
home?”
 
That night everybody who had not fled to neighboring steads
gath-ered in the hall. Soon after the moon rose, they heard the footfalls
come nearer and nearer. They heard Geirolf break into the storehouse and
worry the laid-out bodies of Atli and Kark. They heard him kill cows in the
barn. Again he rode the roof.
 
In the morning Leif Egilsson arrived, having gotten the news. He
found Thyra too tired and shaken to do anything further. “The ghost did not
take your offering,” he said, “but maybe the gods will.”
 
In the oakenshaw, he led the giving of more beasts. There was talk of
a thrall for Odin, but he said that would not help if this did not. Instead, he
saw to the proper burial of the slain, and of those kine which nobody would
dare eat. That night he abode on the farm.
 
And Geirolf came back. Throughout the darkness, he tormented the
home which had been his.
 
“I will bide here one more day,” Leif said next sunrise. “We all need
rest—though ill is it that we must sleep during daylight when we’ve so much
readying for winter to do.”
 
By that time, some other neighborhood men were also on hand. They
spoke loudly of how they would hew the lich asunder.
 
“You know not what you boast of,” said aged Grim the Wise. “Einar
smote, and he strikes well for a lad, but the iron would not bite. It never will.
Ghost-strength is in Geirolf, and all the wrath he could not set free during
his life.”
 
That night folk waited breathless for moonrise. But when the gnawed
shield climbed over the pines, nothing stirred. The dogs, too, no longer
seemed cowed. About midnight, Grim murmured into the shadows, “Yes, I
thought so. Geirolf walks only when the moon is full.”
 
“Then tomorrow we’ll dig him up and burn him!” Leif said.
 

“No,” Grim told them. “That would spell the worst of luck for
every-body here. Don’t you see, the anger and unpeace which will not let
him rest, those would be forever unslaked? They could not but bring doom
on the burners.”
 
“What then can we do?” Thyra asked dully.
 
“Leave this stead,” Grim counselled, “at least when the moon is full.”
 
“Hard will that be,” Einar sighed. “Would that my brother Hauk were
here.”
 
“He should have returned erenow,” Thyra said. “May we in our woe
never know that he has come to grief himself.”
 
In truth, Hauk had not. His wares proved welcome in Flanders, where
he bartered for cloth that he took across to England. There Ottar greeted
him, and he met the young King Alfred. At that time there was no war going
on with the Danes, who were settling into the Danelaw and thus in need of
household goods. Hauk and Ottar did a thriving business among them. This
led them to think they might do as well in Iceland, whither Norse folk were
moving who liked not King Harald Fairhair. They made a voyage to see.
Foul winds hampered them on the way home. Hence fall was well along
when Hauk’s ship returned.
 
The day was still and cold. Low overcast turned sky and water the hue
of iron. A few gulls cruised and mewed, while under them sounded creak
and splash of oars, swearing of men, as the knorr was rowed. At the end of
the fjord-branch, garth and leaves were tiny splashes of color, lost against
rearing cliffs, brown fields, murky wildwood. Straining ahead from afar, Hauk
saw that a bare handful of men came down to the shore, moving listlessly
more than watchfully. When his craft was unmistakable, though, a few
women—no youngsters—sped from the hall as if they could not wait. Their
cries came to him more thin than the gulls.
 
Hauk lay alongside the dock. Springing forth, he called merrily,
“Where is everybody? How fares Alfhild?” His words lost themselves in
silence. Fear touched him. “What’s wrong?”
 
Thyra trod forth. Years might have gone by during his summer
abroad, so changed was she. “You are barely in time,” she said in an
unsteady tone. Taking his hands, she told him how things stood.
 
Hauk stared long into emptiness. At last, “Oh, no,” he whispered.

“What’s to be done?”
 
“We hoped you might know that, my son,” Thyra answered. “The
moon will be full tomorrow night.”
 
His voice stumbled. “I am no wizard. If the gods themselves would
not lay this ghost, what can I do?”
 
Einar spoke, in the brashness of youth: “We thought you might deal
with him as you did with the werewolf.”
 
“But that was—No, I cannot!” Hauk croaked. “Never ask me.”
 
“Then I fear we must leave,” Thyra said. “For aye. You see how many
have already fled, thrall and free alike, though nobody else has a place for
them. We’ve not enough left to farm these acres. And who would buy them
of us? Poor must we go, helpless as the poor ever are.”
 
“Iceland—” Hauk wet his lips. “Well, you shall not want while I live.”
Yet he had counted on this homestead, whether to dwell on or sell.
 
“Tomorrow we move over to Leif’s garth, for the next three days and
nights,” Thyra said.
 
Unn shuddered. “I know not if I can come back,” she said. “This
whole past month here, I could hardly ever sleep.” Dulled skin and sunken
eyes bore her out.
 
“What else would you do?” Hauk asked.
 
“Whatever I can,” she stammered, and broke into tears. He knew:
wedding herself too young to whoever would have her dowryless, poor
though the match would be—or making her way to some town to turn whore,
his little sister.
 
“Let me think on this,” Hauk begged. “Maybe I can hit on something.”
 
His crew were also daunted when they heard. At eventide they sat in
the hall and gave only a few curt words about what they had done in for-eign
parts. Everyone lay down early on bed, bench, or floor, but none slept well.
 
Before sunset, Hauk had walked forth alone. First he sought the grave
of Atli. “I’m sorry, dear old friend,” he said. Afterward he went to Geirolf’s
howe. It loomed yellow-gray with withered grass wherein grinned the skull

of the slaughtered horse. At its foot were strewn the charred bits of the
ship, inside stones which outlined a greater but unreal hull. Around reached
stubblefields and walls, hemmed in by woods on one side and water on the
other, rock lifting sheer beyond. The chill and the quiet had deepened.
 
Hauk climbed to the top of the barrow and stood there a while, head
bent downward. “Oh, father,” he said, “I learned doubt in Christian lands.
What’s right for me to do?” There was no answer. He made a slow way
back to the dwelling.
 
All were up betimes next day. It went slowly over the woodland path to
Leif’s, for animals must be herded along. The swine gave more trou-ble
than most. Hauk chuckled once, not very merrily, and remarked that at least
this took folk’s minds off their sorrows. He raised no mirth.
 
But he had Alfhild ahead of him. At the end of the way, he sprinted
shouting into the yard. Leif owned less land than Geirolf, his buildings were
smaller and fewer, most of his guests must house outdoors in sleep-ing
bags. Hauk paid no heed. “Alfhild!” he called. “I’m here!”
 
She left the dough she was kneading and sped to him. They hugged
each other hard and long, in sight of the whole world. None thought that
shame, as things were. At last she said, striving not to weep, “How we’ve
longed for you! Now the nightmare can end.”
 
He stepped back. “What mean you?” he uttered slowly, knowing full
well.
 
“Why—” She was bewildered. “Won’t you give him his second
death?”
 
Hauk gazed past her for some heartbeats before he said: “Come
aside with me.”
 
Hand in hand, they wandered off. A meadow lay hidden from the garth
by a stand of aspen. Elsewhere around, pines speared into a sky that today
was bright. Clouds drifted on a nipping breeze. Far off, a stag bugled.
 
Hauk spread feet apart, hooked thumbs in belt, and made himself
meet her eyes. “You think over-highly of my strength,” he said.
 
“Who has more?” she asked. “We kept ourselves going by saying
you would come home and make things good again.”
 

“What if the drow is too much for me?” His words sounded raw
through the hush. Leaves dropped yellow from their boughs.
 
She flushed. “Then your name will live.”
 
“Yes—” Softly he spoke the words of the High One:
 
“Kine die, kinfolk die,            
and so at last oneself.
This I know that never dies;                   
how dead men’s deeds are deemed.”
 
“You will do it!” she cried gladly.
 
His head shook before it drooped. “No. I will not. I dare not.”
 
She stood as if he had clubbed her.
 
“Won’t you understand?” he began.
 
The wound he had dealt her hopes went too deep. “So you show
yourself a nithing!”
 
“Hear me,” he said, shaken. “Were the lich anybody else’s—”
 
Overwrought beyond reason, she slapped him and choked, “The
gods bear witness, I give them my holiest oath, never will I wed you unless
you do this thing. See, by my blood I swear.” She whipped out her dag-ger
and gashed her wrist. Red rills coursed out and fell in drops on the fallen
leaves.
 
He was aghast. “You know not what you say. You’re too young, you’ve
been too sheltered. Listen.”
 
She would have fled from him, but he gripped her shoulders and
made her stand. “Listen,” went between his teeth. “Geirolf is still my
father— my father who begot me, reared me, named the stars for me,
weaponed me to make my way in the world. How can I fight him? Did I slay
him, what horror would come upon me and mine?”
 
“O-o-oh,” broke from Alfhild. She sank to the ground and wept as if to
tear loose her ribs.
 

He knelt, held her, gave what soothing he could. “Now I know,” she
mourned. “Too late.”
 
“Never,” he murmured. “We’ll fare abroad if we must, take new land,
make new lives together.”
 
“No,” she gasped. “Did I not swear? What doom awaits an
oath-breaker?”
 
Then he was long still. Heedlessly though she had spoken, her blood
lay in the earth, which would remember.
 
He too was young. He straightened. “I will fight,” he said.
 
Now she clung to him and pleaded that he must not. But an iron calm
had come over him. “Maybe I will not be cursed,” he said. “Or maybe the
curse will be no more than I can bear.”
 
“It will be mine too, I who brought it on you,” she plighted herself.
 
Hand in hand again, they went back to the garth. Leif spied the
hag-gard look on them and half guessed what had happened. “Will you fare
to meet the drow, Hauk?” he asked. “Wait till I can have Grim the Wise
brought here. His knowledge may help you.”
 
“No,” said Hauk. “Waiting would weaken me. I go this night.”
 
Wide eyes stared at him—all but Thyra’s; she was too torn.
 
Toward evening he busked himself. He took no helm, shield, or
byrnie, for the dead man bore no weapons. Some said they would come
along, armored themselves well, and offered to be at his side. He told them
to follow him, but no farther than to watch what happened. Their iron would
be of no help, and he thought they would only get in each other’s way, and
his, when he met the over-human might of the drow. He kissed Alfhild, his
mother, and his sister, and clasped hands with his brother, bid-ding them
stay behind if they loved him.
 
Long did the few miles of path seem, and gloomy under the pines.
The sun was on the world’s rim when men came out in the open. They
looked past fields and barrow down to the empty garth, the fjordside cliffs,
the water where the sun lay as half an ember behind a trail of blood. Clouds
hurried on a wailing wind through a greenish sky. Cold struck deep. A wolf
howled.

 
“Wait here,” Hauk said.
 
“The gods be with you,” Leif breathed.
 
“I’ve naught tonight but my own strength,” Hauk said. “Belike none of
us ever had more.”
 
His tall form, clad in leather and wadmal, showed black athwart the
sunset as he walked from the edge of the woods, out across plowland
to-ward the crouching howe. The wind fluttered his locks, a last brightness
until the sun went below. Then for a while the evenstar alone had light.
 
Hauk reached the mound. He drew sword and leaned on it, waiting.
Dusk deepened. Star after star came forth, small and strange. Clouds
blowing across them picked up a glow from the still unseen moon.
 
It rose at last above the treetops. Its ashen sheen stretched gashes
of shadow across earth. The wind loudened.
 
The grave groaned. Turves, stones, timbers swung aside. Geirolf
shambled out beneath the sky. Hauk felt the ground shudder under his
weight. There came a carrion stench, though the only sign of rotting was on
the dead man’s clothes. His eyes peered dim, his teeth gnashed dry in a
face at once well remembered and hideously changed. When he saw the
liv-ing one who waited, he veered and lumbered thitherward.
 
“Father,” Hauk called. “It’s I, your eldest son.”
 
The drow drew nearer.
 
“Halt, I beg you,” Hauk said unsteadily. “What can I do to bring you
peace?”
 
A cloud passed over the moon. It seemed to be hurtling through
heaven. Geirolf reached for his son with fingers that were ready to clutch
and tear. “Hold,” Hauk shrilled. “No step farther.”
 
He could not see if the gaping mouth grinned. In another stride, the
great shape came well-nigh upon him. He lifted his sword and brought it
singing down. The edge struck truly, but slid aside. Geirolf’s skin heaved,
as if to push the blade away. In one more step, he laid grave-cold hands
around Hauk’s neck.
 

Before that grip could close, Hauk dropped his useless weapon,
brought his wrists up between Geirolf’s, and mightily snapped them apart.
Nails left furrows, but he was free. He sprang back, into a wrestler’s stance.
 
Geirolf moved in, reaching. Hauk hunched under those arms and
himself grabbed waist and thigh. He threw his shoulder against a belly like
rock. Any live man would have gone over, but the lich was too heavy.
 
Geirolf smote Hauk on the side. The blows drove him to his knees
and thundered on his back. A foot lifted to crush him. He rolled off and
found his own feet again. Geirolf lurched after him. The hastening moon
linked their shadows. The wolf howled anew, but in fear. Watching men
gripped spearshafts till their knuckles stood bloodless.
 
Hauk braced his legs and snatched for the first hold, around both of
Geirolf’s wrists. The drow strained to break loose and could not; but
nei-ther could Hauk bring him down. Sweat ran moon-bright over the son’s
cheeks and darkened his shirt. The reek of it was at least a living smell in
his nostrils. Breath tore at his gullet. Suddenly Geirolf wrenched so hard
that his right arm tore from between his foe’s fingers. He brought that hand
against Hauk’s throat. Hauk let go and slammed himself backward before
he was throttled.
 
Geirolf stalked after him. The drow did not move fast. Hauk sped
be-hind and pounded on the broad back. He seized an arm of Geirolf’s and
twisted it around. But the dead cannot feel pain. Geirolf stood fast. His
other hand groped about, got Hauk by the hair, and yanked. Live men can
hurt. Hauk stumbled away. Blood ran from his scalp into his eyes and
mouth, hot and salt.
 
Geirolf turned and followed. He would not tire. Hauk had no long while
before strength ebbed. Almost, he fled. Then the moon broke through to
shine full on his father. “You…shall not…go on…like that,” Hauk mumbled
while he snapped after air.
 
The drow reached him. They closed, grappled, swayed, stamped to
and fro, in wind and flickery moonlight. Then Hauk hooked an ankle behind
Geirolf’s and pushed. With a huge thud, the drow crashed to earth. He
dragged Hauk along.
 
Hauk’s bones felt how terrible was the grip upon him. He let go his
own hold. Instead, he arched his back and pushed himself away. His
clothes ripped. But he burst free and reeled to his feet.
 

Geirolf turned over and began to crawl up. His back was once more to
Hauk. The young man sprang. He got a knee hard in between the
shoulderblades, while both his arms closed on the frosty head before him.
 
He hauled. With the last and greatest might that was in him, he hauled.
Blackness went in tatters before his eyes.
 
There came a loud snapping sound. Geirolf ceased pawing behind
him. He sprawled limp. His neck was broken, his jawbone wrenched from
the skull. Hauk climbed slowly off him, shuddering. Geirolf stirred, rolled,
half rose. He lifted a hand toward Hauk. It traced a line through the air and a
line growing from beneath that. Then he slumped and lay still.
 
Hauk crumpled too.
 
“Follow me who dare!” Leif roared, and went forth across the field.
One by one, as they saw nothing move ahead of them, the men came after.
At last they stood hushed around Geirolf—who was only a harmless dead
man now, though the moon shone bright in his eyes—and on Hauk, who
had begun to stir.
 
“Bear him carefully down to the hall,” Leif said. “Start a fire and tend it
well. Most of you, take from the woodpile and come back here. I’ll stand
guard meanwhile… though I think there is no need.”
 
And so they burned Geirolf there in the field. He walked no more.
 
In the morning, they brought Hauk back to Leif’s garth. He moved as if
in dreams. The others were too awestruck to speak much. Even when
Alfhild ran to meet him, he could only say, “Hold clear of me. I may be
under a doom.”
 
“Did the drow lay a weird on you?” she asked, spear-stricken.
 
“I know not,” he answered. “I think I fell into the dark before he was
wholly dead.”
 
“What?” Leif well-nigh shouted. “You did not see the sign he drew?”
 
“Why, no,” Hauk said. “How did it go?”
 
“Thus. Even afar and by moonlight, I knew.” Leif drew it.
 
“That is no ill-wishing!” Grim cried. “That’s naught but the Hammer.”

 
Life rushed back into Hauk. “Do you mean what I hope?”
 
“He blessed you,” Grim said. “You freed him from what he had most
dreaded and hated—his straw-death. The madness in him is gone, and he
has wended hence to the world beyond.”
 
Then Hauk was glad again. He led them all in heaping earth over the
ashes of his father, and in setting things right on the farm. That winter, at the
feast of Thor, he and Alfhild were wedded. Afterward he became well
thought of by King Harald, and rose to great wealth. From him and Alfhild
stem many men whose names are still remembered. Here ends the tale of
Hauk the Ghost Slayer.
 
* * * *

