Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems 377
Bartosz Powałka
Arkadiusz Parus
Marcin Chodźko
Roman Szewczyk   Editors
Mechatronics—
Trending Future 
Industries

Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems
Volume 377
Series Editor
Janusz Kacprzyk, Systems Research Institute, Polish Academy of Sciences,
Warsaw, Poland
Advisory Editors
Fernando Gomide, Department of Computer Engineering and Automation—DCA,
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering—FEEC, University of Campinas—
UNICAMP, São Paulo, Brazil
Okyay Kaynak, Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey
Derong Liu, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University
of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, USA
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
Witold Pedrycz, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Alberta, Alberta, Canada
Systems Research Institute, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland
Marios M. Polycarpou, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
KIOS Research Center for Intelligent Systems and Networks, University of Cyprus,
Nicosia, Cyprus
Imre J. Rudas, Óbuda University, Budapest, Hungary
Jun Wang, Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong,
Kowloon, Hong Kong

The series “Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems” publishes the latest
developments in Networks and Systems—quickly, informally and with high quality.
Original research reported in proceedings and post-proceedings represents the core
of LNNS.
Volumes published in LNNS embrace all aspects and subﬁelds of, as well as new
challenges in, Networks and Systems.
The series contains proceedings and edited volumes in systems and networks,
spanning the areas of Cyber-Physical Systems, Autonomous Systems, Sensor
Networks, Control Systems, Energy Systems, Automotive Systems, Biological
Systems, Vehicular Networking and Connected Vehicles, Aerospace Systems,
Automation, Manufacturing, Smart Grids, Nonlinear Systems, Power Systems,
Robotics, Social Systems, Economic Systems and other. Of particular value to both
the contributors and the readership are the short publication timeframe and
the world-wide distribution and exposure which enable both a wide and rapid
dissemination of research output.
The series covers the theory, applications, and perspectives on the state of the art
and future developments relevant to systems and networks, decision making, control,
complex processes and related areas, as embedded in the ﬁelds of interdisciplinary
and applied sciences, engineering, computer science, physics, economics, social, and
life sciences, as well as the paradigms and methodologies behind them.
Indexed by SCOPUS, INSPEC, WTI Frankfurt eG, zbMATH, SCImago.
All books published in the series are submitted for consideration in Web of Science.
For proposals from Asia please contact Aninda Bose (aninda.bose@springer.
com).
More information about this series at https://link.springer.com/bookseries/15179

Bartosz Powałka · Arkadiusz Parus ·
Marcin Chod´zko · Roman Szewczyk
Editors
Mechatronics—Trending
Future Industries

Editors
Bartosz Powałka
West Pomeranian University of Technology
in Szczecin
Szczecin, Poland
Marcin Chod´zko
West Pomeranian University of Technology
in Szczecin
Szczecin, Poland
Arkadiusz Parus
West Pomeranian University of Technology
in Szczecin
Szczecin, Poland
Roman Szewczyk
Faculty of Mechatronics
Warsaw University of Technology
Warsaw, Poland
ISSN 2367-3370
ISSN 2367-3389 (electronic)
Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems
ISBN 978-3-030-93376-0
ISBN 978-3-030-93377-7 (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93377-7
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2022
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether
the whole or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse
of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar
or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

Scientiﬁc Committee Members
• Iwona Adamiec-Wójcik, University of Bielsko-Biała, Poland
• Jan Awrajcewicz, Lodz University of Technology, Poland
• Szymon Banaszak, West Pomeranian University of Technology in Szczecin,
Poland
• Stefan Berczy´nski, West Pomeranian University of Technology in Szczecin,
Poland
• Anna Boczkowska, Warsaw University of Technology, Poland
• Marcin Chod´zko, West Pomeranian University of Technology in Szczecin, Poland
• Olaf Ciszak, Poznan University of Technology, Poland
• Jaspeet Dhupia, The University of Auckland, New Zealand
• Sławomir Duda, Silesian University of Technology, Poland
• Steve Franklin, ASML, Netherlands
• Janusz Fr˛aczek, Warsaw University of Technology, Poland
• Phillippe Garrec, CEA LIST Interactive Robotics Laboratory, France
• Józef Gawlik, Cracow University of Technology, Poland
• Marek Gzik, Silesian University of Technology, Poland
• Izabela Janowska, Université de Strasbourg
• Jerzy Jó´zwik, Lublin University of Technology, Poland
• Wojciech Lisowski, University of Science and Technology, Poland
• Tadeusz Łagoda, Opole University of Technology, Poland
• Maciej Majewski, Koszalin University of Technology, Poland
• Krzysztof Mendrok, University of Science and Technology, Poland
• Arkadiusz M˛e˙zyk, Silesian University of Technology, Poland
• Andrzej Milecki, Pozna´n University of Technology, Poland
• Mirosław Pajor, West Pomeranian University of Technology in Szczecin, Poland
• Wojciech Kacalak, Koszalin University of Technology, Poland
• Janusz Kacprzyk, Systems Research Institute of the Polish Academy of Sciences,
Poland
• Krzysztof Kali´nski, Gda´nsk University of Technology, Poland
• Janusz Kowal, University of Science and Technology, Poland
• J˛edrzej Kowalczyk, FANUC, Poland
v

vi
Scientiﬁc Committee Members
• Stanisaw Legutko, Pozna´n University of Technology, Poland
• Krzysztof Marchelek, West Pomeranian University of Technology in Szczecin,
Poland
• Magdalena Niemczewska-Wójcik, Cracow University of Technology, Poland
• Arkadiusz Parus, West Pomeranian University of Technology in Szczecin, Poland
• Zbigniew Pater, Lublin University of Technology, Poland
• Bartosz Powałka, West Pomeranian University of Technology in Szczecin, Poland
• Mariusz Rz˛asa, Opole University of Technology, Poland
• Holger Seidlitz, Brandenburg University of Technology, Germany
• Andrzej Seweryn, Gda´nsk University of Technology, Poland
• Jarosław S˛ep, Rzeszów University of Technology, Poland
• Jerzy A. Sładek, Cracow University of Technology, Poland
• Eugeniusz ´Swito´nski, Silesian University of Technology, Poland
• Anna Timﬁejczuk, Silesian University of Technology, Poland
• Tadeusz Uhl, University of Science and Technology, Poland
• Daniel H. Wagner, Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel
• Roman Szewczyk, Warsaw University of Technology, Poland
• Michał Wieczorowski, Pozna´n University of Technology, Poland

Foreword
5th International Conference Mechatronics 2021 Ideas for Industrial Applications
and XX Welding Seminar was held from 8 to 10 September 2021 in Szczecin, Poland.
The conference was organized by the Faculty of Mechanical Engineering and Mecha-
tronics of the West Pomeranian University of Technology in Szczecin. The confer-
ence continued the tradition of previous meetings that were held in Warsaw, Łód´z,
Gda´nsk, and Wisła.
The conference attracted 68 participants from New Zealand, France, Germany,
and Poland. The conference was an international forum for exchange of ideas
and networking between academia and industry. The meeting included plenary
session, sessions on various topics of mechatronics such as virtual sensing and image
processing, simulations, smart materials, nano/micro-systems, actuators and motion
control, sensor and signal processing, autonomous robots and vehicles, human-
machine interaction, intelligent systems and material joining technology. The confer-
ence included also meetings with the industry over coffee and poster session. Due to
the COVID-19 pandemic the conference was organized in a hybrid mode, bringing
in-person and virtual participants together.
Szczecin, Poland
September 2021
Bartosz Powałka
vii

Contents
Adaptive Control of the Autonomous Car . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Jarosław Oskroba and Krzysztof Mendrok
Destruction of Engine Exhaust Valves as the Source of a Vessel
Loosing Steerage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
M. Kawiak and S. J. Krajewski
Application of the Keyhole TIG Process for High Productivity
Welding of Superduplex Stainless Steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
M. Chudzi´nski, S. J. Krajewski, and P. Zmitrowicz
Modeling of Thermal Stresses in Technological Equipment of Heat
Treatment Furnaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
Artur Bajwoluk
Functional Assessment of Projection Screen Materials for Thermal
Detection in Virtual Shooting Trainers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
Maciej Boruci´nski
Modal Analysis of Honeycomb Core Sandwich Panel Using Finite
Element Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
Arkadiusz Charuk and Paweł Dunaj
Finite Element Modelling of Thin-Walled Box Beams Partially
Filled with Polymer Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
Beata Niesterowicz, Tomasz Okulik, Stefan Berczy´nski, and Paweł Dunaj
Uncertainty Budget for Static Stiffness Measurement According
to ISO 230-1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
Paweł Majda and Joanna Jastrz˛ebska
Effect of Thermal Cycles on the Microstructure and Mechanical
Properties of the Heat Affected Zone for the HCT600C Advanced
High Strength Complex Phase Steel Used for Car Body . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
101
M. Kawiak and S. J. Krajewski
ix

x
Contents
Diagnostics of the Turbine Set Bearing with the Use of Experimental
Modal Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
112
Marcin Chod´zko and Bartosz Powałka
Geometric Model of Ball-End Micro Milling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
121
Marcin Gołaszewski and Bartosz Powałka
Analysis of the Possibility to Compensate for Selected Tool Setting
Errors in the Lens Grinding Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
132
Michał Zarzeczny
The Treadmill Control System Based on the SteamVR Tracking
System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
143
Kamil Stateczny, Paweł Herbin, Karol Mi˛adlicki, and Artur Górnostaj
Author Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
165

Adaptive Control of the Autonomous Car
Jarosław Oskroba and Krzysztof Mendrok
Abstract In recent years, there has been intense progress in the autonomous car
ﬁeld. In large part of the publication, the problem of controlling the movement of
an autonomous vehicle is solved based on machine learning algorithms that require
training data, signiﬁcant computing power, and memory resources. The work aimed
to ﬁnd an alternative methodology that would allow adaptive car control in various
road scenarios. The following tasks were analyzed: driving in a column of cars
with a safe distance, overtaking maneuver and returning to the correct lane, keeping
the vehicle in the middle of the lane while moving along a winding track with
automatic speed adjustment. During the simulation, data from sensors (cameras,
LIDAR) were used by adaptive controllers. A state machine was used to switch
between controllers. The visualization of the system’s operation was realized thanks
tothenewlyintroducedpossibilityofintegratingthegraphicsengine“UnrealEngine”
and “Matlab 2021a”. Based on the algorithm’s operation, it was found that adaptive
controllers can effectively cope with the control of autonomous vehicles in various
situations.
Keywords Adaptive control · Autonomous car · Adaptive cruise control · Lane
tracking · Overtaking maneuver
1
Introduction
In recent years, the technology of controlling autonomous vehicles has been the main
topic of research and development in the automotive industry [1]. With the rapid
increase in computational capabilities, it is possible for the more accurate obser-
vation and analysis of the vehicle’s surroundings, which translates into improved
safety and driving comfort. The car’s computer uses these observations to make
decisions regarding the planning of the vehicle’s trajectory. Autonomous car systems
use decision algorithms information from various onboard sources such as cameras,
J. Oskroba · K. Mendrok (B)
AGH University of Science and Technology, Mickiewicza 30, 30-059 Kraków, Poland
e-mail: mendrok@agh.edu.pl
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
B. Powałka et al. (eds.), Mechatronics—Trending Future Industries, Lecture Notes
in Networks and Systems 377, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93377-7_1
1

2
J. Oskroba and K. Mendrok
Li-DAR scanners, ultrasonic sensors, GPS, accelerometers, and gyroscopes. In scien-
tiﬁc publications, more and more attention is paid to autonomous systems of the ﬁrst
and second level [2], such as Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS). An
example of such a system is Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC), which allows main-
taining a safe distance from the car in front. A classic proportional-integral-derivative
(PID) controller was used to implement the ACC system, the settings of which were
selected using the pole placement method [3]. Variable structure control methods
such as sliding control, which it solves, have also been proposed problems of PID
controllers, such as overshoot or long settling time [4]. One of the most modern
solutions of the ACC system design is fuzzy control coupled with the trafﬁc jam
driving function. In this approach, it is possible to resume movement after stopping
[5]. Another essential issue increasing the capabilities of an autonomous vehicle is
the modeling of a smooth lane change maneuver [6]. In order to achieve higher levels
of autonomy, machine learning algorithms are used that extend the capabilities of
autonomous vehicle control with the ability to adapt to speed limits, character recog-
nition, or trajectory planning based on navigation commands. “End-to-end” archi-
tecture is becoming more and more popular, allowing to deliver a complete solution
with a single model, such as deep training networks. Technically, the training of such
a network is done using learning by imitation. So the technique involves studying
experts’ decisions in various scenarios to ﬁnd a mapping between the recorded envi-
ronment and the activities performed. Research results show that end-to-end systems
are capable of operating autonomously in a simulated urban environment. Despite
changes in lighting, they were able to adapt to trafﬁc lights and speed limits and carry
out navigation commands [7].
The work aimed to ﬁnd an alternative methodology that would allow adaptive car
control in various road scenarios. The three road scenarios were analyzed: driving
in a column of cars with a safe distance, overtaking maneuver and returning to the
correct lane, keeping the vehicle in the middle of the lane while moving along a
winding track with automatic speed adjustment. The visualization of the system’s
operation was done with the newly introduced Automated Driving Toolbox™, which
integrates the graphics engine “Unreal Engine” and “Matlab 2021a”.
2
Autonomous Driving Scenarios
2.1
Simulation Environment
Driving scenarios were simulated using the Automated Driving Toolbox™library,
part of the Matlab package. Automated Driving Toolbox™allows to model and
visualize the operation of vehicle control algorithms. The environment is available
in the R2021a Matlab version and uses the Unreal Engine provided by Epic Games.
Unreal Engine allows to conﬁgure available scenes or create one using the provided
editor. It is possible to create a winding road, multi-lane highway, or even a virtual

Adaptive Control of the Autonomous Car
3
city including buildings, trafﬁc lights, and pedestrians. The available objects to be
moved in simulations are vehicles, which can also be subjected to modiﬁcations
such as dimensions or mass. Additionally, cameras and sensors are available in the
environment ultrasonic and LiDAR scanners. In conjunction with the vehicle model,
this environment can be used to develop, test, and verify the operation of algorithms
controlling autonomous driving [8].
2.2
Adaptive Cruise Control
The initial issue when simulating the ACC operation was to create a car model and
control system. The lead vehicle (truck) was created so that the user could inﬂuence
the car’s speed by setting the desired value on the potentiometer. The relationship
between speed and inertia of the vehicle was modeled using the ﬁrst-order inertial
element. The maximum acceleration of the leading car was limited to 1 m/s2, which
is consistent with the truck acceleration tests [9]. Due to the movement of vehicles
only along one axis, the implementation of the vehicle turning was not considered
(it will be introduced in subsequent scenarios). The second car in the column was
controlled by the state machines operating in two parallel inﬂuencing modes (Fig. 1).
The ﬁrst state machine switched between constant speed, adaptive driving (sailing
mode), braking, and emergency braking, taking into account the distance from the
vehicle in front and the selected driving mode. The second state machine included
the driving modes: Eco, Normal and, Dynamic. Selected driving mode affected the
maximum achieved acceleration as well as the distance to the preceding car. In the
sailing mode, the motion parameters were controlled by the MPC controller.
The distance ranges are multiplied by a factor of 1.1—Eco, 1—Normal, 0.9—
Dynamic. The maximum accelerations achieved in Eco, Normal and Dynamic modes
are 1.5, 2.5, and 3.5 m/s2, respectively.
In normal mode, for a distance of more than 50 m from the vehicle in front, the state
machine activates the mode of reaching the constant speed. The vehicle acceleration
Fig. 1 Block diagrams of state machines

4
J. Oskroba and K. Mendrok
Fig. 2 A complete block diagram of a system that simulates the operation of adaptive cruise control
is 2.5 m/s2. When the distance is between 17 and 40 m, the car switches to the
so-called sailing mode in which the adaptive cruise control controls acceleration.
For distances below 15 and 10 m, the car enters the braking mode (acceleration −
5 m/s2) and, respectively, emergency braking (acceleration −10 m/s2). An additional
implemented mechanism was the control of the vehicle’s lights, which depending on
acceleration direction turns on the braking lights.
For comparison purposes, a third car was added to the column. Its behavior is
deﬁned by the state machine as for vehicle no. 2. The difference is the use of the
PID controller in the sailing mode. The input to the PID controller is the difference
between the current distance from the vehicle in front and the safe distance, calculated
as a rule of two seconds. The rule deﬁnes the minimum distance per unit of time that
a driver must maintain from the vehicle in front [10]. During the simulation, there
were functions that monitor the distance between cars, taking into account different
dimensions of vehicles). In the event of a collision, the simulation is stopped. A block
diagram of the simulation system is presented in Fig. 2.
2.3
The Overtaking Maneuver
Another simulated scenario is a safe overtaking maneuver. In this event, the 3rd
vehicle in the column, traveling at a higher speed than the overtaken vehicles, indi-
cating lane change (with the direction indicator), performs an overtaking maneuver,
then returns to the original lane, keeping the smoothest possible trajectory (Fig. 3).
The main challenge when creating a safe maneuver was to generate a smooth trajec-
tory during a lane change. The lane change trajectory was developed based on the
work [11]. In order to describe the position of the car depending on the steering
angle, a simpliﬁed car model was used, the so-called "Kinematic bicycle model".
The start of the overtaking maneuver procedure depends on the safe distance from
the 2nd vehicle. If it is greater than 100 m, the maneuver starts. Return to the original
lane begins when the car lines up with the ﬁrst vehicle in the column.

Adaptive Control of the Autonomous Car
5
Fig. 3 Visualization of the overtaking maneuver
2.4
Lane Tracking
The last considered maneuver was driving on a winding road, taking into account
keeping a safe distance from the vehicle in front. For this task, simultaneous lane
maintenance systems [12] and adaptive cruise control were used (Fig. 4). In the
event of crossing the lane dividing line, the lane-tracking system adjusts the steering
angle appropriately to restore proper driving. The algorithm takes as input the frame
captured by the monocular camera. The system uses vision algorithms to detect
the boundaries of lanes and provide information about the type of road markings.
The center of the lane is estimated from the resulting curves (Fig. 5). If the vehicle
deviates from the trajectory deﬁned by the center of the lane, the system will adjust
the steering wheel accordingly to restore normal lane travel. The predictive control
Fig. 4 Block diagram for controlling the movement of the vehicle while driving on a winding track

6
J. Oskroba and K. Mendrok
Fig. 5 Visualization of the operation of the lane-tracking system
model (MPC) was used to control the trajectory. In the example shown, the prediction
horizon is set to 2 s.
3
Results
The results were obtained based on the collected data from the simulations. In the
ﬁrst driving scenario (driving in a column of cars), the analysis of maintaining the
distance from the preceding vehicles in distance correction, emergency braking, and
restarting motion after a complete stop was analyzed. One of the most important
criteria was keeping a safe distance from the vehicle in front. The acceleration of
the 2nd car time history is shown in Fig. 6. In Fig. 7 the distance between cars is
presented.
Fig. 6 Acceleration of the 2nd car—given and obtained

Adaptive Control of the Autonomous Car
7
Fig. 7 Distance between 1st and 2nd car
Analyzing the above graphs, it is visible that the 2nd car managed to keep a safe
distance while driving behind the leading vehicle, despite the strong braking of the
ﬁrst vehicle. The state machine responded to changes in distance to adjust the speed
of the vehicle. To catch up with the leading vehicle, state 1 was activated, and the
adaptive cruise control (state 2) was launched to maintain the distance. Initializing
state 3 triggered a braking mode to prevent a collision. Good settings adopted in
the control system are conﬁrmed because the state machine did not enter emergency
braking mode while driving.
During the overtaking maneuver, the steering angle and the distance to the
overtaken cars were analyzed (Fig. 8)
By observing the cars distance graph (Fig. 9), it can be stated that the overtaking
maneuver ran smoothly. The distances to the preceding cars indicate that the ﬁrst car
was overtaken after 20 s of movement, while the second car was overtaken by about
25 s. The minimum distance between the vehicles is 5 m. An inﬂection is visible
on the graph of the distance between the vehicles. It results from the braking of the
second vehicle in the column.
Fig. 8 The steering angle in time

8
J. Oskroba and K. Mendrok
Fig. 9 The distances from the preceding cars
During the simulation of the vehicle moving on a winding road, the velocity of
the leading car (Fig. 10), distance between the vehicles (Fig. 11) and the deviation
from the center of the lane (Fig. 12) were investigated.
Analyzing Fig. 12, it can be seen that the deviations from the center of the lane
range from −0.5 to 0.5 m. The most signiﬁcant deviations occurred at the beginning
of the simulation, when the system positioned the vehicle in the center of the lane.
The car maintained its position on the lane despite heavy braking. Only the deviation
from the center of the lane increased.
Fig. 10 Velocity of the leading car

Adaptive Control of the Autonomous Car
9
Fig. 11 Distance between cars
Fig. 12 Deviation from the lane center
4
Summary
The developed methods of adaptive vehicle control have been successfully applied
in various road scenarios. Simulation tests carried out in the Matlab-Simulink envi-
ronment with the use of the “Unreal Engine” graphics engine showed that a properly
designed state machine switching between driving modes (adaptive cruise control,
acceleration, and braking modes) can be used for autonomous driving in a column
of vehicles on a straight section of the highway. Such an algorithm can be used for
active driver assistance and act as an automatic emergency braking system.
The controller’s functionality was expanded by adding a lane tracking assistant,
which, based on the information collected from the camera, was able to keep the
vehicle in the center of the given lane in parallel with speed regulation with acceptable
accuracy.

10
J. Oskroba and K. Mendrok
The safe overtaking maneuver was achieved thanks to the smooth course of the
turning trajectory. An additional parameter improving the overtaking maneuver was
adjusting the overtaking time depending on the road situation (available space for
the maneuver).
Further development of the adaptive control system may include the expansion to
support additional road maneuvers such as: driving in an urban agglomeration with
adaptation to speed limits and trafﬁc lights.
References
1. Litman, T.: Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions. Victoria Transport Policy (2021)
2. Zanchin, B.C., Adamshuk, R., Santos, M.M.: On the instrumentation and classiﬁcation of
autonomous cars. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics
(SMC) (2017)
3. Zhang,J.L.,Loannou,P.A.:Longitudinalcontrolofheavytrucksinmixedtrafﬁc:environmental
and fuel economy considerations. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. (2006)
4. Li, S.E., Deng, K., Li, K.Q., Ahn, C.: Terminal sliding mode control of automated car-following
system without reliance on longitudinal acceleration information. Mechatronics (2015)
5. Zhang, G.X., Wang, Z.C., Fan, B.W., Zhao, L., Qi, Y.Z.: Adaptive cruise control system with
trafﬁc jam tracking function based on multi-sensors and the driving behavior of skilled drivers.
Adv. Mech. Eng. (2018)
6. Feng, X., Hu, J., Huo, Y., Zhang, Y.: Autonomous lane change decision making using
different deep reinforcement learning methods. In: 19th COTA International Conference of
Transportation Professionals (2019)
7. Haavaldsen, H., Aasbø, M., Huo, Y., Lindseth, F.: Autonomous Vehicle Control: end-to-end
Learning in Simulated Urban Environments. Norwegian University of Science and Technology,
Trondheim, Norway (2019)
8. Witryna internetowa MathWorks.: (2021). https://www.mathworks.com/products/automated-
driving.html
9. Bokare, P.S., Maurya, A.K.: Acceleration-deceleration behaviour of various vehicle types. In:
World Conference on Transport Research—WCTR 2016 Shanghai (2016)
10. Maitra, B., Cheranchery, M.F., Prasad, P.: Rules For Safe Driving
11. Houenou, A., Bonnifait, P., Cherfaoui, V., Wen, Y.: Vehicle trajectory prediction based on
motion model and maneuver recognition. In: International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS 2013) (2013)
12. MathWorks web page.: https://www.mathworks.com/help/mpc/ug/lane-keeping-assist-with-
lanedetection.html. Accessed 02 Sep 2021

Destruction of Engine Exhaust Valves
as the Source of a Vessel Loosing Steerage
M. Kawiak
and S. J. Krajewski
Abstract When a vessel looses steerage, it may be due to a failure of the main
engine. Such an instance is discussed in the article. A fault of a single exhaust valve
resulted in an exponential spread of the destruction of other parts of the engine:
the second exhaust valve split into three pieces, openings were knocked out in the
head and in a piston, valve seats cracked, an opening appeared in one of the seats
allowing cooling water to enter into a cylinder, the surface of the cylinder underwent
plastic strain, pieces of the valves got into the turbocharger, where they caused
minor damage. Due to a high degree of plastic strain, the surfaces of the cracks in
the damaged elements have lost their original features; therefore, the author was able
to identify only a hypothetical cause and course of the destruction process. In the
conclusion, the author emphasises the signiﬁcance of engine operation monitoring
and fault diagnosis for the sake of safety of maritime transport.
Keywords Failure · Marine engine · Valves · Diagnostics
1
Introduction
There are various causes of maritime accidents. One of them can be a failure of the
propulsion or steering system that makes one unable to steer a vessel. The part of the
steering system that is most susceptible to damage is the propeller shaft [1] which is
subject to the following changeable factors: bending moment, torque moment, axial
thrust force, temperature and corrosive environment. The risk of the occurrence of
a fatigue crack in the propeller shaft increases along with the severity of weather
conditions as they exert a direct inﬂuence on the dynamics of shaft loading. The
article [2] discusses an example of a shaft that cracked into two parts. The crack
appeared due to corrosive inﬂuence of sea water and variable torque moment. The
immobilised ship was towed to a shipyard, where the damaged shaft got replaced
with a new one. Any case like that involves a considerable economic loss due to
M. Kawiak (B) · S. J. Krajewski
West Pomeranian University of Technology in Szczecin, Av. Piastow 19, 70-310 Szczecin, Poland
e-mail: michal.kawiak@zut.edu.pl
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
B. Powałka et al. (eds.), Mechatronics—Trending Future Industries, Lecture Notes
in Networks and Systems 377, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93377-7_2
11

12
M. Kawiak and S. J. Krajewski
delays on the route of the vessel, the vessel itself being out of operation and high
repair cost. Immobilisations that result from a failure of the main engine are equally
frequent. A developing fault of a given element of the valve train, supply, lubrication
or cooling system of the engine does not always culminate in such extreme situations,
however. The engine can stop if a fault of a given element initiates exponential spread
of destruction of the other parts of the engine. Such a case is described in the present
article. A crack of an exhaust valve pin lead to a catastrophic damage of the engine.
In consequence, the vessel required towing.
Among the faults of various parts of Diesel engines, the most frequently analysed
ones are the faults of exhaust valves. It is understandable, because the valves operate
under extreme thermomechanical load that often leads to fatigue failure, for example.
There are various reasons for valve failures, some of which are discussed in the
papers discussed below. Having analysed different instances of damaged combustion
engine valves, the authors of the article [3] emphasise that valves often crack due to
their being subject to cyclic load in high temperatures. High temperature causes the
hardness and yield point of the valve material to fall; it also accelerates corrosion,
which may result in valve pins wearing in the guides. In addition, when a valve
hits the valve seat in a cyclic manner, some material may chip off the surface of
the head. The fractographic examination described in the paper [4] showed that
fatigue cracking is the main mechanism that damages valve springs. Because of
spring fractures, the stems of two valves—an intake and an exhaust one—failed
by fatigue too. In the work [5], optical microscopy, scanning electron microscopy
and optical emission spectroscopy were used to investigate the causes of a failure
of an exhaust valve in a Diesel engine. On the basis of the results obtained, it was
observed that the direct cause of valve fracture is forces and stresses occurring when
the valve hits the seat. Other factors that bore an inﬂuence on reducing the expected
service life of the valve were also brought to attention. When fuel and lubrication
oil are combusted, byproducts deposit on the surfaces of the valve and seat. When
the layer of impurities thickens, it acts like an insulator. For this reason, the valve is
often subject to overheating and hot corrosion. The hard and brittle layer of surface
impurities undergoes spallation under impact. In consequence, the working space of
the cylinder unseals and the dynamics of engine operation worsens. High temperature
and cyclic gas exchange in the cylinder affect also the chemical composition and
the structure of the valve material [5]. The study presented in this article showed
that carbon content in the surface layers of the valve material decreased by over
30% in the course of operation. Unfavourable changes in the structure of the valves
were also observed. In the work [6], an instance of a failure of three exhaust valves
in an electric generator is presented. Melted injector tips indicate that combustion
problems took place in the engine. Incorrect parameters of the combustion process
lead to the emergence of hard deposits on the surfaces of the valves and valve seats
as well as numerous pits and considerable material loss. Another article [7] describes
an instance of a failure caused by overheating of an exhaust valve. A considerable
hardness loss, oxidation of the valve surface and galling on the valve pin suggest
that overheating did take place. High temperature and material ageing decreased
the fatigue properties, which lead to multiple fatigue crack initiation followed by

Destruction of Engine Exhaust Valves as the Source of a Vessel Loosing Steerage
13
the rapid process of cracks merging and propagation. It the valve itself may also
happen to be the source of failure. Such a case was presented in the article [8].
After just three months of operation, an exhaust valve of a marine engine failed. In
order to extend the service life of the valve, the surface of the valve face was clad
with cobalt base alloy with the use of a laser. Microstructural and chemical analyses
revealed that the properties of the alloy layer on the valve face not only were far
from the designed ones, but they also proved inhomogenous. In effect, a premature
failure took place. A similar instance is described in the article [9]; in this case, a
piece of valve head broke off due to a material defect. Besides post-failure analyses,
experimental studies on the wear of valves and valve seats with the use of simulating
testers are also being conducted [10]. The results obtained show [10] that a failure of
the contact conical surfaces of the valves and valve seats is caused mainly by elastic
and plastic deformation, spalling and fatigue micro-cracks. Corrosive atmosphere
intensiﬁes the course of failure at a high temperature. The rate of valve wear is higher
than the general wear rate of mechanical elements. While analysing the causes of
failures of different parts of diesel engines, one cannot neglect the ways in which
the parts affect one another. Valves act on the cylinder head through valve seats, and
the head acts on the valves. The authors of the article [11] state that cylinder head
cracking constitutes one of the most common problems concerning the durability of
diesel engines. Usually, the cracks appear near exhaust valves, where the thermo-
mechanical conditions are most unfavourable. The results of FEM analysis of the
cracks in the cylinder head are consistent with the results of experimental tests [11].
Cracks in the head may lead, for instance, to decompression in the cylinders and
valve seat clearance, which will produce less favourable operating conditions for the
valves. A failure of one or more valves should not instantly lead to an emergency
shutdown of the marine engine. Proper failure monitoring and diagnosis allows to
stop the engine at an opportune moment, replace the faulty valves and re-start the
engine. There is a direct correlation between the reliability of marine engines and
marine safety; therefore, specialised diagnostic devices are installed aboard vessels
[12]. The need for monitoring the operation of marine engines and proper fault
diagnosis is emphasised in numerous academic papers on this subject matter [13–
17]. The work [13] introduces the possible uses of Acoustic Emission (AE) to detect
valve faults in combustion engines. The results of the conducted tests showed that AE
is an effective method of fault detection and identiﬁcation of fault types. The study
involved constructing an expert system based on acoustic emission data. A neural
network was trained based on time domain using the data from AE analysis. The
system proved very effective in terms of distinguishing healthy valves from the faulty
ones and differentiating between the types of defects. Unfortunately, the system is
capable of detecting only three types of faults, i.e. valve clearances, semicarcks and
spalling. Similar ﬁndings were presented in the PhD dissertation [14]: methods based
on AE can be effective in fault diagnosis, but only in certain types of diesel engines. A
widespread use of this method is impossible in case of the co-occurrence of a number
of adverse events resulting from the operation of various engine parts and phenomena
related to the combustion process. Another paper [15] claims that the AE technique is
an effective method of machine condition monitoring and fault diagnosis. However,

14
M. Kawiak and S. J. Krajewski
on the basis of the review of the most recent literature in the ﬁeld, the authors of the
article[15]concludedthatAEsignalanalysisandartiﬁcialintelligencetechniquesare
still rarely used for machine condition monitoring and fault diagnosis. Detection of
marineenginefaults is difﬁcult for technicians overlookingengineoperation, because
of a high range and various combinations of possible faults. Numerous studies are
being conducted so as to solve this problem. The authors of the article [16] point
out to developments in this ﬁeld that have been made due to the implementation
of fault detection and diagnosis systems that employ different methods based on
dynamic model, multidimensional statistical analysis, fuzzy logic, genetic algorithm,
artiﬁcial neural network, etc. The effective operation of each expert system depends
on the available database. For example, once the database for a system for marine
engine operation assistance based on Sulzer Diesel AL 25/30 test station has been
extended, the scope of possible testing highly increased [17]. The studies conducted
in order to expand databases are being carried out on a large scale and they mostly
concern engines that can be seen as the “hearts” of vessels. This can be observed
in the literature quoted above, but also in the articles [18–20] whose authors deal
with diagnosing the wear of the piston-cylinder system. Research on diagnosing
cavitation-erosion and fatigue faults of the ship hull is also being conducted [21, 22].
The following article investigates an instance when, initially, one of the exhaust
valves failed. Due to further continuous operation of the engine, another exhaust
valve, a cylinder, a piston and cylinder head failed. The cylinder no. 1 unsealed due
to openings that were knocked out in the head, which eventually caused the engine to
stop. Thevessel lost steerageandwas towedtoashipyard. Suchaserious failurecould
have been avoided had the vessel been equipped with appropriate devices monitoring
engine operation in real time or had servicing personnel been capable of identifying
the signals indicating the faulty operation of the engine. Fortunately, despite the fact
that none of these conditions had been fulﬁlled, the event did not cause a maritime
disaster, but merely a failure. The case in question proves that research in the realm
of monitoring marine engine condition, fault diagnosis and ways of implementing
the existing solutions on a larger scale is highly important.
2
Subject of the Study
In the course of repair of Stork Wärtsilä 6SW28 engine, ten irregular steel lumps
were extracted from the engine; these turned to be fragmented exhaust valves. Some
of the lumps were found as far as the turbocharger area, where they caused some
minor damage. The valve no. 1 broke into seven parts (the pin and six fragments of
the head), and the valve no. 2 broke into three parts (the pin and two fragments of
the head). The study presented in the article was conducted on the research material
available to the author (Figs. 1 and 2). As one can see (Fig. 1), in case of the valve
no. 1, the material consisted of the pin and a single fragment of the head, and in case
of the valve no. 2—the pin and two fragments of the head. The bigger fragment of

Destruction of Engine Exhaust Valves as the Source of a Vessel Loosing Steerage
15
a)
b) 
Fig. 1 Failed exhaust valves: a Valve no. 1, b valve no. 2
Fig. 2 A fragment of the head of the marine engine cylinder no. 1 cut into ﬁve pieces numbered
1–5

16
M. Kawiak and S. J. Krajewski
the latter was, however, cut into four pieces in the course of the previous study. One
of the pieces is not shown in the picture.
Tests were also conducted on the head of the cylinder no. 1 together with the
valve seats in which the failed valves were located. Due to a great mass of the head,
its lower part was cut off and further cut into 5 pieces in order to facilitate visual
inspection thereof (Fig. 2). The numbers 1 and 2 correspond to the numbers of the
exhaust valves (Fig. 1).
3
Results of the Study
The two exhaust valves did not fail at the same time. This is indicated by the appear-
ance of the fracture of valve pins shown in Fig. 3. The form of the fracture suggests
that the valve no. 1 was the ﬁrst to crack. It can be assumed that there were two
equally probable courses of destruction of the valve no. 1. The ﬁrst one presup-
poses that the dynamic loads acting in the spot of greatest stress concentration (i.e.
where the pin that had a small cross-section area would pass through the head that
had a much bigger cross-section area) lead to material fatigue, and fatigue fracture
appeared. The whole head fell into the cylinder, yet the engine was still in opera-
tion. During compression and exhaust strokes, the piston would hit the pin (over an
extended period of time) in a way that it resembled the process of forging, so the
surface lying perpendicularly to the pin axis underwent plastic deformation and it
no longer exhibited the features of a fatigue fracture; at the same time, the surface
displays no information as to the cause of the damage. The piston would also hit
the head moving freely above it. In effect, the head crumbled into 6 pieces. The
second possible course assumes that the process of fatigue fracture was initiated in
the spot where a small local fault had already existed. After some time, parts of the
head crumbled. The dynamic load of the valve lost the axial symmetry. In the course
of further operation, the valve was simultaneously stretched and bent. As a result,
the material of the valve pin fatigued. Further destruction of the valve occurred in
accordance with the steps described above.
Fig. 3 Fractures of the pins
of valves no. 1 and 2

Destruction of Engine Exhaust Valves as the Source of a Vessel Loosing Steerage
17
The probable course of destruction of the valve no. 2 is the following: while the
valve was open, one of the pieces of the head of the valve no. 1 got between the
valve head and seat; while the valve was closing, the two forces acting on the valve
caused the head to break into two pieces and the pin to bend (Fig. 2). The fracture of
the pin of the valve no. 2 (Fig. 3) is a typical brittle fracture that appeared within a
short period of time under a load that exceeded the tensile strength (when the valve
is being closed). For the most part, the surface of the fracture is not perpendicular
to the pin axis, contrary to the surface of the fatigue fracture of the pin of the valve
no. 1 that is indeed perpendicular to the pin axis. As compared to the fracture of the
pin of the valve no. 1, the fracture of the pin of the valve no. 2 underwent minor
deformation in the further course of engine operation (Fig. 3).
The fractures of the heads of the valve no. 1 (Fig. 4) and the valve no. 2 (Fig. 5)
are due to different types of load. The outer structure of the valves conﬁrms this
observation. On the surface of the fracture shown in Fig. 4, one can see characteristic
features of a fatigue fracture. The fracture was initiated in a nucleation point from
which the lines of crack front radiate. With the increase in the number of dynamic
load cycles, the fatigue crack propagated further into the material. The surface of
the fracture shown in Fig. 5 is characterised by high roughness, and the bands of
irregularities spread mostly parallelly to the valve axis. Their shape indicates high
plastic deformation of the head material in this area. It is a typical fracture that
appears under the effect of temporary load.
In the course of the study, another hypothesis explaining the cause of valve no.
1 destruction was formulated. It was thought that the failure of the vessel initiated
because the valve seat was mounted within the engine head in an unstable way, so that
Fig. 4 A photograph
showing the fracture of the
head of the valve no. 1

18
M. Kawiak and S. J. Krajewski
Fig. 5 A photograph
showing the fracture of the
head of the valve no. 2
the seat could move in relation to the head. The results of the study discussed below
did not conﬁrm this hypothesis, however. The seats of the exhaust valves mounted
within the openings in the engine head were still ﬁrmly mounted in the parts 1 and
2 (Fig. 2), and they would not move under the effect of forces acting on them. In
order to conduct a visual inspection of the outer surfaces of the valve seats as well
as the surfaces of the openings in the engine head, kerfs were cut on the parts 1 and
2 with the use of a chainsaw. After having been hit with a hammer, the part no. 1
of the head split into three pieces (Fig. 6), and the part no. 2 into two (Fig. 8). The
seat of the exhaust valve from the part no. 1 was extracted in its entirety (Fig. 6 and
7), while the seat of the valve no. 2 was extracted in three pieces (Fig. 9). Figure 7
depicts the outer surface of the valve seat extracted from the part no. 1 of the engine
head, and Fig. 9 shows the surface of the opening in the part no. 2 of the head. The
surfaces of both the valve seats and the openings in which the seats were mounted
Fig. 6 Part no. 1 of the head
(Fig. 2) split into three
pieces, along with loose
valve seat no. 1

Destruction of Engine Exhaust Valves as the Source of a Vessel Loosing Steerage
19
Fig. 7 The seat of the
exhaust valve no. 1 after
having been extracted from
the engine head
shown in the ﬁgures mentioned above are covered in a layer of tarnish—products that
appeared mainly under the effect of cooling water dribbling through the cracks and
aggressive environment, i.e. mainly high-temperature exhaust gases. If contact areas
of two elements are in relative motion during machine (engine) operation, friction
forces start acting on such surfaces. In effect, a thin layer of, e.g. oxides, scale, etc.
is removed from the surface in the ﬁrst place. Next, the surfaces grind in and become
metallic, smooth and shiny. As it was stated above, both the surfaces of the valve
seats and the surfaces of the openings in which the valves were mounted are covered
in a layer of tarnish. It means that while the engine was in operation, the seats of
the exhaust valves remained still in relation to the engine head. There surfaces show
no traces of a possible axial or rotary movement. The phenomenon of the surfaces
grinding in did not take place. In addition, the ports of the conduits through which
water is supplied to the seats are not damaged, and there are no visible strains (Figs. 6
and 8).
Fig. 8 Part no. 2 of the head
(Fig. 2) divided into two
pieces and the loose seat of
the valve no. 2

20
M. Kawiak and S. J. Krajewski
Having extracted the seat of the valve no. 1 from the engine head, the author of
the article observed that the crack extended for over the half of the seat’s perimeter
(Fig. 7). The cracks of the valve seat no. 2 that appeared in the course of engine
operation were so extensive (Fig. 9) that once the seat got loose, it split into three
pieces. The valve seats cracked under the effect of thermal stresses in the spots
where the cross-section areas are most diverse. No such cracks appear at regular
temperatures of engine operation. It means that the temperature of the valve seats
must have increased above the permissible temperature because of the faulty work
cycle within the cylinder no. 1. In addition, the difference in the values of thermal
expansion coefﬁcients for steel (seat) and cast iron (head) was conducive to the
occurrence of thermal stress. On the conical surface of the seat of the valve no. 2,
one can see numerous high plastic deformations that are the result of the piston
hitting the seat with the pieces of valve heads in between. This proves that, apart
from thermal stress, it were also the impact forces that played an important part in
the process of cracking of the seat. The surface of the seat of the valve no. 1 features
minor plastic deformation, as compared to the surface of the seat of the valve no. 2
in which, however, an opening was knocked-out (Fig. 6), allowing cooling water to
get inside.
Cracked valve seats raised the question whether the cracks appeared due to
improper cooling of the head and whether there was some obstruction in the cooling
water conduit. In order to answer these questions, the head was cut so as to the whole
conduit could be inspected. Figure 10 shows only a part of the conduit in which a
conglomeration of impurities was found. At ﬁrst sight it may seem that it were the
impurities that obstructed the water ﬂow during engine operation, which could lead
to an uncontrollable increase in the temperature inside the cylinder. A lump of impu-
rities (Fig. 11) was extracted from the conduit (Fig. 10), which was followed by the
analysis of the chemical composition of the lump. The analysis was conducted using
energy-dispersive spectrometry (EDS) with a Hitachi ﬁeld emission scanning elec-
tron microscope, equipped with Noran 7 microanalysis system by ThermoScientiﬁc.
The analysed material was mounted in Struers’ PolyFast conductive resin. Then, a
metallographic specimen was produced in a standard way. It was already at a low
magniﬁcation that one could observe that the impurities were a mixture of swarf and
rust. For this reason, the measuring points for analyzing the chemical composition
were located on the swarf and within the rust area. The results of the analysis are
given in Fig. 12 and Table 1. The results clearly show that such form of impurities
appeared only when the head was being cut with a chainsaw. They are a mixture of
cast iron chips that appeared in the course of cutting of the head, and the rust spalled
from the surface of the conduit. The surface of the chips in not corroded, and their
chemical composition corresponds to the composition of the iron from which the
head was cast. The rust, in turn, contains elements coming both from cast iron and
cooling water. The rust had been depositing on the inner surface of the conduit for
a long time. After spalling, the rust and the swarf accumulated in the lower part of
the conduit, which was triggered by cutting the head. On the basis of the consid-
erations above, it may be stated that the cooling conduit was unobstructed, and its

Destruction of Engine Exhaust Valves as the Source of a Vessel Loosing Steerage
21
b) 
a) 
c) 
Fig. 9 The seat of the exhaust valve no. 2 after having been extracted from the engine head—three
shots showing the size of the cracks

22
M. Kawiak and S. J. Krajewski
Fig. 10 Uncovered cooling
conduit in the engine head,
partially ﬁlled with a mixture
of swarf and rust
Fig. 11 A lump of swarf
and rust extracted from the
cooling conduit in the engine
head
cross-section got reduced only by a minor degree by the layer of rust deposited on
the surface of the conduit.
4
Conclusion
Even a seemingly insigniﬁcant fault of a given engine part may lead to immobilization
of a vessel on the high seas if not detected and ﬁxed in time. This is conﬁrmed by the
instancedescribedabove,whenavesselloststeerageandhadtobetowedtoashipyard
to undergo a repair. In this case, impurities in one of the exhaust valves initiated the
destruction of the subsequent elements, which eventually lead to engine shutdown.
At one point, it was only because of tailwind that the captain standing on the bridge
couldnoticewhitesmokecomingoutfromachimney.Heinstantlyloweredtheengine
speed to “Dead slow ahead”. The engine stopped without emergency signals. The
attempts to re-start the engine failed. Striking is the fact that the servicing personnel
had not reported any anomalies beforehand, they had failed to correctly interpret the
acoustic signals being produced in the course of the piston hitting the valve heads and
their crumbling. On the other hand, one can say that fault detection is very difﬁcult
and requires a lot of experience on the part of the crew, as there is a wide range

Destruction of Engine Exhaust Valves as the Source of a Vessel Loosing Steerage
23
 a)
 b)
Fig. 12 Results of the X-ray microanalysis of the chemical composition of the impurities from the
cooling conduit in the head: a Measuring points on swarf, b measuring points on rust
Table 1 The percentage of elements in the components of the impurities from the cooling conduit
in the engine head
Area of
analysis
C
O
Al
Si
P
S
Cl
Ca
Cr
Mn
Fe
Ni
Cu Mo
Swarf
1,58
0,14 1,75
0,54 0,51 94,27 0,62 –
0,51
Rust
6,46 25,81 0,12 1,24 0,06 2,21 0,11 0,27 0,22 0,43 60,95 0,57 –
of possible faults and combinations thereof. When human senses fail, one should
resort to relevant systems monitoring engine operation and diagnosing failures so as
to ensure the safety of the crew and the vessel itself.

24
M. Kawiak and S. J. Krajewski
References
1. Vukeli´c, G., Vizentin, G.: Common Case Studies of Marine Structural Failures. https://doi.org/
10.5772/intechopen.72789
2. Balyts’kyi, O.I., Kawiak, M., Kawiak, P.: Assessment of the fatigue damage to the propeller
shaft in a sea water. Mater. Sci. 49(1), 130–133 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11003-013-
9592-4
3. Raghuwanshi, N.K., Pandey, A., Mandloi, R.K.: Failure analysis of internal combustion engine
valves. Int. J. Innov. Res. Sci. Eng. Technol. 1(2), 173–181 (2012)
4. Yu, Z.-W., Xu, X.L.: Failure analysis on diesel-engine valve springs. J. Fail. Anal. Prev. 9(4),
329–334 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11668-009-9247-9
5. Vardar, N., Ekerin, A.: Investigation of exhaust valve failure in heavy-duty diesel engine. Gazi
Univ. J. Sci. GujSci 23(4), 493–499 (2010). https://dergipark.org.tr/en/download/article-ﬁle/
83408
6. Morehouse, D., Porter, J., Hiltz, J., Brauss, M.: Diesel engine valve failures. In: Confer-
ence Paper (2002). https://www.researchgate.net/publication/275641222_DIESEL_ENGINE_
VALVE_FAILURES
7. Kwon, G.H., Han, M.S.: Analysis of failure of the exhaust valve stem from the Waukesha
P9390 GSI gas engine. Eng. Fail. Anal. 11(3), 439–447 (2004). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eng
failanal.2003.05.015
8. Smole´nska, H., Ko´nczewicz, W.: Failure analysis of the exhaust valve face in diesel marine
engine. Adv. Mater. Sci. 10(2), 12–18 (2010). https://doi.org/10.2478/v10077-010-0006-0
9. Lus, T.: Contemporary diagnostic and tuning methods for marine diesel engines. J. KONES
Power. Transp. 14(4), 239–246 (2007). http://yadda.icm.edu.pl/yadda/element/bwmeta1.ele
ment.baztech-article-BUJ5-0037-0025?q=bwmeta1.element.baztech-volume-1231-4005-jou
rnal_of_kones-2007-vol__14_no__4;24&qt=CHILDREN-STATELESS
10. Zhao, Y.-C., Yan, H.-Z.: Experimental study on wear failure course of gas-valve. Valve-Seat
Engine. J. CENT South Univ. Technol. 12(Suppl. 1) (2005). 1005-9784(2005)S1-0243-04
11. Ashouri, H., Beheshti, B., Ebrahimzadeh, M.R.: Analysis of fatigue cracks of cylinder heads in
diesel engines. J. Theor. Appl. Mech. 54(2), 369–383 (2016). http://yadda.icm.edu.pl/yadda/
element/bwmeta1.element.baztech-08dcf673-6063-4b2d-81ae-faf6f11ae8c1
12. Witkowski, K.: Stan diagnostyki technicznej okr˛etowych silników tłokowych. Diagnostyka 34,
85–92
13. Jafari, S.M., Mehdigholi, H., Behzad, M.: Valve fault diagnosis in internal combustion engines
using acoustic emission and artiﬁcial neural network. Shock Vib. 2014, Article ID 823514
(2014). https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/823514
14. Lowe, D.P.: Characterisation of combustion related acoustic emission sources for diesel
engine condition monitoring, Dissertation. In: Faculty of Science and Engineering. Queensland
University of Technology (2013)
15. Ali, Y.H., Rahman, R.A., Hamzah, I.R.: Acoustic emission signal analysis and artiﬁcial intelli-
gence techniques in machine condition monitoring and fault diagnosis. J. Technol. (Sci. Eng.)
69(2), 121–126 (2014)
16. Khajavi, M.N., Nasiri, S., Eslami, A.: Combined fault detection and classiﬁcation of internal
combustion engine using neural network. J. Vibroeng. 16(8), 3912–3921 (2014)
17. Charchalis, A., Szyfelbain, M.: New methods of marine power plant diagnostics. J. KONES
25(1), 33–40 (2018)
18. Balyts’kyi, O.I., Abramek, K.F.: Diagnostic parameters of wear of a piston-buch-cylinder
system. Mater. Sci. (2), 234–236 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11003-013-9604-4
19. Balyts’kyi, O.I., Abramek, K.F., Shtoeck, T., Osipowicz, T.: Diagnostics of degradation of the
lock of a sealing ring according to the loss of working gases of an internal combustion engine.
Mater. Sci. 50(1), 156–159 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11003-014-9704-9
20. Balyts’kyi, O.I., Abramek, K.F., Mrozik, M., Shtoeck, T., Osipowicz, T.: Evaluation of the
losses of hydrogen-containing gases in the process of wear of pistons of an internal-combustion
engine. Mater. Sci. 53(2), 289–294 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11003-017-0074-y

Destruction of Engine Exhaust Valves as the Source of a Vessel Loosing Steerage
25
21. Balyts’kyi, O.I., Chmiel, J.: Degradation of steels in the hulls of river ships. Mater. Sci. 43(3),
434–438 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11003-007-0050-z
22. Balyts’kyi, O.I., Chmiel, J.: Resistance of plate shipbuilding steels to cavitation-erosion
and fatigue fracture. Mater. Sci. 50(5), 736–739 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11003-015-
9779-y

Application of the Keyhole TIG Process
for High Productivity Welding
of Superduplex Stainless Steel
M. Chudzi´nski
, S. J. Krajewski
, and P. Zmitrowicz
Abstract The paper presents an attempt to use an innovative mechanized K-TIG
welding method (a variant of the TIG method) for single-pass welding of superduplex
stainless steel without bevelling the edges and without adding a ﬁller metal. The
TIG method combines a number of advantages, but the disadvantage is certainly
the long and manual welding process. Despite the undisputed high quality of the
welded joints, this method is associated with low productivity, deformations and
a strong dependence of the ﬁnal effect on the welder’s skills. The paper describes
the design and mode of operation of a fully mechanized welding station for the K-
TIG process (which is a complex mechatronic system), the use of which eliminates
the disadvantages of the TIG process while maintaining all of its advantages. The
characteristics of the duplex steel, as well as the aspects and limitations related
to its weldability are also presented. Welding tests were carried out and the test
results obtained met the standards based requirements for qualifying the welding
procedure and for its practical use in industrial manufacturing. As part of the paper,
a comparative analysis of welding productivity was also carried out by determining
the productivity and welding time for the TIG and K-TIG methods in similar process
conditions.
Keywords Superduplex steel · Ferritic-austenitic steel · SAF 2507 · K-TIG ·
Keyhole TIG · Keyhole gas tungsten arc welding · Welding productivity
M. Chudzi´nski
MEKRO Sp z o.o., ul. Bydgoska 1, 86-105 ´Swiecie, Poland
S. J. Krajewski (B) · P. Zmitrowicz
West Pomeranian University of Technology in Szczecin, al. Piastów 17, 70-310 Szczecin, Poland
e-mail: skrajewski@zut.edu.pl
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
B. Powałka et al. (eds.), Mechatronics—Trending Future Industries, Lecture Notes
in Networks and Systems 377, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93377-7_3
26

Application of the Keyhole TIG Process for High Productivity …
27
1
Introduction
1.1
Duplex Steels and Their Weldability
Duplex steels. Thanks to the ferritic-austenitic microstructure, they combine the
advantages of both chrome ferritic steel, as well as those of chromium-nickel
austenitic steel, i.e. outstanding mechanical properties (high strength, good correla-
tion between impact strength and elongation) and excellent corrosion resistance in
both gas, as well as liquid environments [1, 4, 10, 13, 14].
This material, known for more than 70 years, was initially considered non-
weldable or very difﬁcult to weld. Processing restrictions led to reluctance to its
use. The successive generations, however, which are more processing-friendly, are
gaining more and more popularity, successfully competing with austenitic steel.
Duplex steels are classiﬁed, according to increasing corrosion resistance, into: lean
duplex (e.g. 2101, 2304), duplex (still the most popular 2205 grade) and superduplex
(e.g. 2507), and in recent years the hyperduplex subgroup (e.g. 3207) with corrosion
resistance comparable with the super-austenitic steels has also been introduced. The
history of the development of the more known duplex steel grades is shown on a
diagram in Fig. 1. The third generation grades are more and more widely used in
all kinds of equipment and structures, both in the chemical, food and petrochemical
industries (tanks, exchangers, pipelines), as well as in construction (e.g. bridges,
airport terminal structures and roofs) [1, 4, 10, 13, 14].
The competitiveness of duplex steels versus austenitic steels is based on their
much higher strength while providing similar corrosion resistance. Thanks to such
feature, the cross-sections of the structural elements, and thus their weight, can be
Fig. 1 History of the development of duplex steel [1, 13]

28
M. Chudzi´nski et al.
Fig. 2 Comparison of yield strength and corrosion resistance correlation for duplex and austenitic
stainless steels [4]
signiﬁcantlyreduced.Thecorrelationbetweencorrosionresistanceandyieldstrength
of austenitic steels and duplex steels is illustrated in Fig. 2 [1, 4, 9, 10, 13].
The key factor for the properties of duplex steel is its microstructure—the share
of the individual phases and the shape thereof. A typical two-phase duplex steel
microstructure is provided in Fig. 3. This example shows the microstructure of a
wrought blank—superduplex S32750 (2507) sheet. The most favorable case, from
the point of view of mechanical and corrosion resistance properties, is an equal
share of 50% of two basic phases—austenite and ferrite, without other secondary
precipitates. The phase proportion of 30–70% is still tolerated for maintaining the
strength and corrosion resistance properties [9, 10].
For basic materials, at the stage of their manufacture, such a symmetrical propor-
tion of microstructure components is easily achieved by the chemical composition
of steel and heat treatment—supersaturation [10, 13].
Welding of duplex steel. Welding of austenitic-ferritic steel (steps of the weld
jointformationaredepictedinFig.4)causesalocal“distortion”inthemicrostructure.
It is characteristic of the weld joint zones [14]:
• Heat affected zone (HAZ)—clusters of “feathery” austenite particle precipitates
appear in the matrix of the predominant ferrite
• Weld—coniferous austenite precipitates in the ferrite matrix are predominant.
Figure 5 shows the microstructure of the superduplex steel S32750 (2507) weld
joint with the above-mentioned zones and base material (BM) marked.

Application of the Keyhole TIG Process for High Productivity …
29
Fig. 3 Typical microstructure of superduplex stainless steel; bright ﬁelds—gamma phase
(austenite), dark ﬁelds—alpha phase (ferrite) [proprietary]
Fig. 4 Principle of dendritic solidiﬁcation and austenite formation in duplex steel welds [14]

30
M. Chudzi´nski et al.
Fig. 5 Typical microstructure of a duplex steel welded joint cross section [proprietary]
The main factor determining the proportions between ferrite and austenite in the
individual zones is the welding thermal cycle. It is a function of linear welding energy
and interpass temperature.
The additional limitation of weldability, especially of the superduplex steel, is its
sensitivity to precipitates due to the thermal impact. i.e. welding or heat treatment.
There are at least a dozen or so precipitates that pose a hazard for the properties of
steel, the occurrence of which is dependent on a sufﬁciently long stay of steel within
a speciﬁc temperature range. This is illustrated in Fig. 6. The σ (sigma) phase poses
a particular hazard [10, 13].
Due to the above risks of excessive local distortion of the ferrite–austenite ratio
and the possibility of secondary precipitates, the “safe” arc energy ranges (for these
steels calculated without the method coefﬁcient, i.e. as the product of multiplying
welding current and arc voltage, divided by welding speed) and interpass temperature
for the superduplex steel welding were determined. Compared to other steels, these
ranges are narrow (see Fig. 7). Other recommendations for welding include: the need
to use an austenite forming ﬁller metal and large bevel angles [8].
Duplex steels can be welded using all popular arc welding methods (processes
111, 121, 135, 136, 141 according to EN ISO 4063; respectively also marked as
MMA or SMAW, SAW, MAG or GMAW, FCW or FCAW, TIG or GTAW), as well
as laser and plasma welding methods [3, 8, 10, 11].

Application of the Keyhole TIG Process for High Productivity …
31
Fig. 6 TTT diagram for various precipitates appearing in SAF 2507. Curves indicate 1% volume
fraction precipitates [13]
Fig. 7 Recommended arc energy and interpass temperatures for welding stainless steels [8]

32
M. Chudzi´nski et al.
1.2
Keyhole TIG Process Characteristic
K-TIG (Keyhole Tungsten Inert Gas Welding) process is an innovative welding
method that is a variation of the TIG process (141), enabling deep penetration, while
ensuring high productivity and quality of the welding process. Due to the relatively
low linear welding energy, this process has been used in welding such materials
as: titanium and its alloys, zirconium, corrosion-resistant steels and high-strength
carbon steels [18].
K-TIGweldingtorchisdesignedinsuchawaythattheinfusibletungstenelectrode
is intensivelycooledbyliquid, whichmeans that thehightemperatureareaat thetipof
the tungsten electrode is signiﬁcantly reduced, thus the cathode area is concentrated
and much narrower as compared to the conventional TIG process. The electric arc
ﬂows from the cathode with a smaller area, which leads to an increase in the current
density, and thus the magnetic pinch effect is enhanced in the arc ﬂux. The arc
is limited to some extent, which results in increased arc pressure. If the welding
current ﬂowing through the arc rises above 300 A, the arc pressure is high enough
to overcome the surface tension forces. The liquid metal is displaced by the arc ﬂux,
which creates a cavity inside the weld pool. If the welding current is large enough,
the welded material is completely “pierced” and the so-called “keyhole” in the liquid
weld pool is formed [17] (Fig. 8).
K-TIG process enables butt welding of joints with full penetration, without bevel-
ling the edges, up to a thickness of 11 mm for corrosion-resistant steels, up to 16 mm
for titanium welding and up to 9 mm for C-Mn carbon steels. Such joints can be
made as one-sided, single-pass welds without the use of any additional material for
Fig. 8 K-TIG welding process diagram [15]

Application of the Keyhole TIG Process for High Productivity …
33
welding. The distance (spacing) between the joined sheets is minimal and may not
exceed 0.5 mm, however, high accuracy of the joined sheets assembly is required,
taking into account the smallest possible linear axis misalignment. Shielding gas
is required during the welding process, both from the face side, as well as the gas
forming the root of the weld joint, to prevent air access and its oxidation [12].
Due to the complex and non-linear physics of the process, the K-TIG method can
be used to connect both sheets as well as pipes, but only in the ﬂat (horizontal) posi-
tion. Additionally, welding parameters such as welding current and welding speed
should be precisely controlled. They have a substantial impact on the dimensions
and position of the weld pool in relation to the forming “keyhole” at the bottom of
the weld joint. Increasing or decreasing the welding parameters causes a change in
the arc’s linear energy, which in turn impacts rapid change in the behavior of the
“keyhole”. This may lead to the formation of gas pores in the weld joint or welding
imperfections in the form of undercuts on the face of the weld joint [16].
1.3
Keyhole TIG Equipment Package—Mechatronic System
Increasingly high level of science and progress in manufacturing methods enable
automating the manufacturing process using a variety of technical methods. The
primary goal of automation is to reduce the production costs. Mechanization of
the manufacturing process is understood as replacing human work with a machine
controlled by a man. Automation is the higher level of mechanization development,
where the manufacturing process takes place without a direct human intervention.
In such case, the machines are equipped with automatic control systems.
Automation of welding processes requires an interdisciplinary approach, looking
for solutions to many speciﬁc problems not found in other technologies. The main
focus is on the different machining accuracy and the different size of the parts (work-
pieces)tobewelded.Thismakesitnecessarytouseverydiverseweldingtechnologies
and welding equipment.
The second feature that characterizes welding technology is usually low accuracy
of workmanship and assembly of the parts to be joined. Therefore, the welding
stations must be adapted to making parts with much larger dimension tolerances
than those required in case of using other technologies. This makes it impossible,
in many cases, to use devices with a strict (rigid) program of operation, making the
entire system substantially more complicated.
The third issue related to welding technology is the deformation of parts caused
by the welding thermal cycle. It makes it necessary to use solutions enabling ﬂexible
adaptation of the welding arc path to a change of position of the welding place due
to deformation.
In accordance with the ISO 15614-1 requirements, each mechanization level
should be independently qualiﬁed, which means that in addition to the welding
method itself, it should be taken into account whether welding will be carried out
in the following way: manual, partially mechanized, fully mechanized or automatic.

34
M. Chudzi´nski et al.
Fig. 9 Block diagram of the welding mechatronic system [proprietary]
That is, it is necessary to take into account the given welding station’s design solu-
tion, i.e. a set of devices for conducting the welding process located within a speciﬁc
space and constituting a technological whole.
In the world of welding technologies, fully mechanized welding is understood as
a welding process in which all main operations, excluding handling (manipulation)
of the welded workpiece, are performed automatically. It should be added that it is
possible to manually change the main variables of the process during welding [6, 7].
The tests of welding the superduplex steel joints using the K-TIG process were
carried out on a mechatronic system, which is characterized by ﬂexibility, ease of
conﬁguration and, at the same time, adaptability and ease of use. The block diagram
of the system is shown in Fig. 9. The system is composed of:
• main alignment and working movements control unit
• welding device (welding parameters) control unit
• welding head speed and oscillation control unit
• welding pool, weld joint face and root shielding (protection) gas control unit.
The movements control unit is implemented by means of a welding column and
boom, thanks to which the alignment and working movement of the welding head
ﬁxed to the boom relative to the column is obtained. The support can perform the
alignment movement with the use of rollers on the vertical column gibs at the speed
of up to 1000 m/min and the maximum height of 2300 mm. The arm (boom) with the
gibs, can move horizontally in the support guiding rollers, performing the alignment
or working movement at the speed of up to 3000 mm/min and the maximum reach of
2300 mm. The maximum boom load is 100 kg. The vertical column can be rotated
around its axis by an angle of ±180°. This rotation is carried out automatically with
the use of a motor with a speed in the 0.05 ÷ 0.5 rev/min range. The column is

Application of the Keyhole TIG Process for High Productivity …
35
mounted on a platform, which enables alignment movement along the workpiece at
the speed in the 200 ÷ 2000 mm/min range.
The system uses a current source of the type: HTIG-1000 with the welding current
adjustment range of 60 ÷ 1000A, open circuit voltage of U0 = 79 V and 100% duty
cycle for the maximum welding current. The power source is connected by the
control cables to the welding head in which a non-consumable tungsten electrode
with a diameter of f = 6.4 mm is used, the whole system is cooled with a liquid in a
closed circuit, using a CW-5200 cooler equipped with a system for monitoring the
circuit parameters [5].
The welding head’s working movements are controlled by the BDL-100 type
oscillator. It enables performing working oscillating—swinging movements within
the width in the 0.2 ÷ 40 mm range, at the speed of up to 2400 mm/min. The
oscillator’s additional function is the ability to stop the transverse movement at the
end points, the stopping time can be: 0 ÷ 10 s [5].
The welding process control unit is implemented centrally using a remote
controller. It is possible to control all alignment and working movements, as well as
the welding process parameters: both energy parameters, as well as the gas shield
parameters on the weld joint face and root side with the use of the dedicated software
(see Fig. 10). An additional available function enables collecting information on the
status and failures of the entire system in real time (see Fig. 11) [5]. The conﬁgured
station where the test superduplex steel sheet joints were welded using the K-TIG
process is shown in Fig. 12.
Fig. 10 Main control panel [5]

36
M. Chudzi´nski et al.
Fig. 11 System status and diagnostics panel [5]
2
Research: Materials, Methods and Results
2.1
Purpose and Scope
The selection of welding methods (processes) is a key element determining the speed
and quality of the process of manufacturing each welded structure.
The purpose of the research is to select the K-TIG process welding parameter
ranges that would allow for making a ﬂawless superduplex steel weld joint without
bevelling and without the use of a ﬁller metal, which would keep the microstructure in
all zones free of secondary precipitates with the shares of the major phases within the
30 ÷ 70% range, while increasing the productivity of the welding process. Obtaining
the desired microstructure will allow for obtaining the required strength, impact
toughness (strength) and corrosion resistance of the weld joint and qualifying the
welding procedure for practical applications, in accordance with ISO 15614-1.
2.2
Material, Welding Procedure and Welding Results
The chemical composition of the base material (BM) used—8 mm thick sheets made
of the superduplex 2507 steel (S32750; 1.4410), is provided in Table 1.
Argon (I1 according to ISO 14175) was used as the shielding gas (both from the
face as well as from the root side). The gap between the non-bevelled edges was
0.5 mm. An ISO 6848: WL15 non-consumable electrode with a diameter of 6.4 mm
was used. The stringer bead welding technique was used, with the perpendicular
position of the non-consumable electrode in relation to the welded surface. A 510

Application of the Keyhole TIG Process for High Productivity …
37
 
Power source 
Welding table 
Welding torch 
Movement unit 
Fig. 12 K-TIG welding system
Table 1 Chemical composition of SAF 2507 steel used for welding a joint [proprietary]
C (%)
Mn (%)
P (%)
S (%)
Si (%)
Cu (%)
Ni (%)
Cr (%)
Mo (%)
N (%)
0,015
0,810
0,0284
0,0003
0,325
0,202
5,560
25,177
3,815
0,2714
A DC current with a negative polarity was applied. The set welding speed was
240 mm/min.
Table 2 shows the values of the averaged welding parameters. These parameters
were measured at one second frequency with the HT9022 power logger meter (manu-
facturer: HT ITALIA), which allows for simultaneous logging of, among others,

38
M. Chudzi´nski et al.
Table 2 Welding parameters and heat input
Average welding
current I (A)
Average arc voltage U (V)
Average welding
speed (mm/s)
Average linear
welding energy
(kJ/mm)
516.25 ± 5,55
14.81 ± 0,46
3.96
1.93 ± 0.05
current and voltage. The accuracy of the instrument is ±2% of the welding current
reading and ±1% for voltage.
Table 2 also includes the averaged actual welding speed and linear energy—arc
energy (in kJ/mm), which was calculated using the formula:
E =
U · I
Vsp · 1000
(1)
where:
U
arc voltage, V;
I
welding current, A;
Vsp
welding speed, mm/s;
Preparation of the joint for welding is shown in Fig. 13. The appearance of the
joint surface after welding (from the face and root side) is shown in Fig. 14.
2.3
Joint Examination
Initially the test joint was subjected to non-destructive tests: VT, PT and RT, with no
welding incompatibilities greater than the quality level B, according to ISO 5817,
detected. Non-destructive tests for the ferrite content on the joint surface from the face
and root side were also carried out, determining the percentage content of ferrite in
the base material, HAZ and the weld joint areas. The results obtained are presented in
Fig. 15. They are within the safe value range for mechanical properties and corrosion
resistance: 30 ÷ 70%.
Subsequently, the joint was subjected to destructive tests: tensile, bending, hard-
ness and impact strength (toughness). The results of the impact strength tests
conducted at −20 °C are presented in Fig. 16. The test was carried out for the
cross-sections of the weld joint axis (VWT 0/2), HAZ (VHT 1/2 and VHT 2/2) and
the base material (VHT 5/2). The obtained impact energy values above 135 J are high
as compared to the minimum criterion of 27 J usually applied in the manufacturing
industry.
The macro-scan of the weld joint cross-section and the microstructure of the weld
joint cross-section are shown, respectively, in the pictures (Figs. 17 and 18). The
macroscopic examination does not reveal any incompatibilities. It clearly shows the

Application of the Keyhole TIG Process for High Productivity …
39
Fig. 13 Preparation for welding
Fig. 14 Face and root of a welded joint
shape of the weld and the whole weld joint zone, as well as a signiﬁcantly different
microstructure of the weld and the base material, especially in the weld face area. The
image of the microstructure, similar as in case of other welding methods, shows the
presence of zones differing in the proportion of phases and the structure of austenite
grains: the base material, HAZ and the weld joint. However, there is no signiﬁcant
disproportion in the share of ferrite and austenite in the individual zones of the weld
joint, as is the case with other welding methods. Secondary precipitates have not
been observed either.

40
M. Chudzi´nski et al.
BM
HAZ
WELD
HAZ
BM
FACE
33
41
60
40
34
ROOT
32
41
43
40
33
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Ferrite content, %
Fig. 15 Ferrite content on the surface of a welded joint
BM
(VHT 5/2)
HAZ
(VHT 2/2)
HAZ
(VHT 1/2)
WELD
(VWT 0/2)
J
291.4
135.4
178.9
266.8
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Impact energy, J
Fig. 16 Impact test results
2.4
Welding Productivity Analysis
The actual data from welding 8 mm thick joints, carried out in similar conditions,
was used in order to determine the welding productivity. The preparation and the
process of K-TIG welding is described in Sect. 2.2. In case of the TIG method,
the edges were bevelled and the welding was carried out with the addition of the

Application of the Keyhole TIG Process for High Productivity …
41
Fig. 17 Macroscopic picture of the K-TIG superduplex steel weld joint cross section
Fig. 18 Microstructure of the K-TIG superduplex steel weld joint cross section

42
M. Chudzi´nski et al.
Table 3 Welding productivity and times analysis results—for 8 mm thick superduplex plate
Welding
method
Arc glow time
factor Wj
Average
welding speed
V (mm/s)
Welding
productivity P
(m/h)
Main welding
time tg (h/m)
Total welding
time Tn (h/m)
TIG
0.25
0.35
1.26
0.79
3.17
K-TIG
0.50
3.96
14.26
0.07
0.14
ﬁller metal. In this case, 3 layers of the weld were completed (deposited) in order to
ﬁll the cross-section of the joint. The weld joint carried out using the TIG method
was subjected to the same tests to verify the quality and correctness of the welding
technology.
Table 3 summarizes the data on the welding productivity and welding times for
the TIG and K-TIG methods that are the subject of the comparison.
Welding productivity related to the arc glow time (main welding time) is about
10 times higher for the K-TIG method than for TIG. This parameter demonstrates
how many hours it takes to make a running meter of a weld joint with continuous
welding (arc glow).
Depending on the welding process mechanization degree, different arc glow time
factor values are obtained. For manual welding methods, this factor ranges from 0.2
to 0.3. For mechanized methods it may assume values of 0.3–0.5 and for automated
methods: 0.5–0.8. In case of the robotic welding, values of 0.8 ÷ 0.95 are obtained
[2].
Total welding time (Tn) values were calculated assuming the arc glow time factor
values for the TIG and K-TIG methods of, respectively, 0.25 and 0.50, using the
formula:
Tn = tg
Wj
(2)
where:
tg
main welding time, h/m;
Wj
arc glow time factor;
Thus the mechanization degree has a direct impact on the total welding time. In
case of the K-TIG method, this provides an additional beneﬁt, as the total welding
time of one running meter of a butt weld of 8 mm thick sheets for the TIG method is
3.17 h, while for K-TIG only 0.14 h. The difference is therefore more than 20 times
in this case.

Application of the Keyhole TIG Process for High Productivity …
43
3
Summary
Based on the tests conducted, the following conclusions can be drawn:
• Effective single-pass welding of the superduplex steel using the K-TIG method
without bevelling the edges and without the ﬁller metal is possible (despite the
strict recommendations on the use of large bevelling angles and austenite forming
ﬁller metal)
• Linear welding energy for the superduplex steel welding (1.9 ÷ 2.0 kJ/mm), which
is outside the recommended upper limit (standing at 1.5 kJ/mm) in case of the K-
TIG method, does not cause serious secondary precipitates or excessive austenite
content in the microstructure as the thermal effect is local and short-lived
• The lowest impact strength (toughness) occurs in HAZ, and the welded joint has
a similar impact strength (toughness) as the non-welded material
• The productivity of the K-TIG welding is about 10 times higher as compared to
TIG in terms of the main welding time, while comparing the total welding time,
K-TIG is a more than 20 times faster and more efﬁcient welding method versus
TIG
• Minor post-welding deformations occur.
References
1. Alvarez-Armas, I.: Duplex stainless steels: brief history and some recent alloys. Recent Pat.
Mech. Eng. 1, 51–57 (2008)
2. Chudzi´nski, M.: Analiza czasu i wydajno´sci spawania stali superdupleks. Dev. Mech. Eng.
10(5), 5–14 (2017)
3. Ciechacki, K., Gi˛etka, T., Chudzi´nski, M.: Zastosowanie stali dupleks w przemy´sle
spo˙zywczym. In˙zynieria i Aparatura Chemiczna 52(2), 122–124 (2013)
4. Duplex Stainless Steels.: Outokumpu (2013)
5. HTIG AUTO WELDING MACHINE HC2020 Operating Manual
6. ISO/TR 25901 Welding and related processes—Vocabulary
7. Jarvis, B.L.: Keyhole gas tungsten arc welding: a new process variant. Doctoral thesis (2001)
8. Karlsson, L.: Spawanie stali duplex—Przegl˛ad aktualnych zalece´n. Biuletyn Instytutu Spawal-
nictwa 56(5), 48–48 (2012)
9. NORSOK standard M-601. 5edn (2008)
10. Nowacki, J.: Stal dupleks w konstrukcjach spawanych, 2nd edn WNT, Warszawa (2013)
11. Sales, A.M., Westin, E.M., Jarvis, B.L.: Effect of nitrogen in shielding gas of keyhole GTAW
on properties of duplex and superduplex welds. Weld. World (2017)
12. Shuwan, C., Yonghua, S., Kun, S., Shengyong, G.: Microstructure evolution and mechanical
properties of keyhole deep penetration TIG welds of S32101 duplex stainless steel. Mater. Sci.
Eng. A 709, 214–222 (2018)
13. Smuk, O.: Microstructure and properties of modern. P/M super duplex stainless steels. Doctoral
thesis (2004)
14. Westin, E.M.: Microstructure and properties of welds in the lean duplex stainless steel LDX
2101. Doctoral thesis (2010)
15. Yueqiao, F., Zhen, L., Zuming, L., Yang, L., Yucan, L., Yongxian, H.: Keyhole gas tungsten
arc welding of AISI 316L stainless steel. Mater. Des. 85, 24–31 (2015)

44
M. Chudzi´nski et al.
16. ZuMing, L., ShiYu, C., Shang, L., Zhen, L., JunRui, Y.: Keyhole dynamic thermal behavior in
K-TIG welding process. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 123, 54–66 (2018)
17. ZuMing, L., YueXiao, F., JiaYu, Q., MengNan, F., Zhen, L., JunRui, Y.: Stabilization of weld
pool through jet ﬂow argon gas backing in C-Mn steel keyhole TIG welding. J. Mater. Process.
Tech. 250, 132–143 (2017)
18. ZuMing, L., YueXiao, F., ShuangLin, C., Song, Y., JiaYu, Q., Qu, J., WeiDong, L., Zhen, L.:
Keyhole thermal behavior in GTAW welding process. Int. J. Therm. Sci. 114, 352–362 (2017)

Modeling of Thermal Stresses
in Technological Equipment of Heat
Treatment Furnaces
Artur Bajwoluk
Abstract During operation, cast parts of furnace equipment for thermal and thermo-
chemical treatment are exposed to the recurring impact of many negative factors such
as high and rapidly changing temperature, which signiﬁcantly contribute to their
destruction. The article presents examples of damage observed in cast pallets, which
are part of furnace equipment, on which heat-treated elements are placed during their
treatment. The developed methodology of comparative analysis of various design
solutions used in pallets based on numerical analyzes with the use of the ﬁnite element
method was also discussed. A comparative analysis of ﬁve different wall connection
solutions used in pallets was conducted. These connections were compared in term
of temperature differences arising during cooling process and stresses caused by the
differences. On the basis of the obtained results, it was determined which of the
compared design solutions are recommended for use in real pallet castings operating
under conditions of rapid temperature changes.
Keywords Heat-resistant castings · Heat treatment equipment · Thermal stress
analyses
1
Introduction
Pallet castings are the basic part of accessories of furnaces for heat and thermo-
chemical treatment, on which the heat-treated elements are transported during the
treatment processes. Due to the operating conditions, pallets are exposed to many
unfavorablefactorsnegativelyaffectingtheirdurability.Theseinclude,amongothers,
high and rapidly changing temperature, mechanical load of the charge and the
technical atmosphere inside the furnace chamber [1–3].
Such unfavorable operating conditions mean that after a relatively short time of
exploitation, permanent deformations and cracks appear in the pallets, which, after
reaching critical values, constitute the main reason for the necessity to withdraw them
A. Bajwoluk (B)
West Pomeranian University of Technology, 70-310 Szczecin, Poland
e-mail: artur.bajwoluk@zut.edu.pl
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
B. Powałka et al. (eds.), Mechatronics—Trending Future Industries, Lecture Notes
in Networks and Systems 377, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93377-7_4
45

46
A. Bajwoluk
from further use. Since the cost of furnaces technological tooling is a signiﬁcant part
of the total cost of commissioning and maintaining production on heat treatment
lines, the continuous increase of its durability is of interest to both manufacturers
and users [1–8].
The destruction mechanism of the analyzed pallet castings is complex and is inﬂu-
enced by many details. Among them, an important role is played by thermal stresses
arising in each operating cycle as a result of the temperature gradient generated on
the cross-section of the heated and cooled elements. Due to the nature of operation
in furnaces, these stresses occur cyclically in the structure of the pallet, contributing
to the development of fatigue processes.
The pallet designer has no real inﬂuence on the operational factors inﬂuencing
the value of the generated thermal stresses, because factors such as the annealing
temperature or the temperature and the type of cooling medium are determined by
the desired structure of the treated elements. However, at the stage of designing
the pallet construction, it is possible to select the geometry of the design solutions,
which will contribute to the minimization of the stresses, and thus to increase the
durability of the designed pallets. The choice of such solutions, however, should not
be made arbitrarily, but using a repeatable, appropriately prepared for this purpose
comparative methodology.
The article presents the results of a comparative analysis of ﬁve design solutions
of pallets wall connections, which was carried out with the use of the developed
research methodology, which base on numerical analyzes of heat ﬂow in heated and
rapidly cooled elements during their thermal cycle.
2
Object of Study
2.1
The Genesis of Research
The pallets that are part of technological accessories of the furnaces used to transport
the heat-treated elements are openwork, thin-walled structures, usually cast from
heat-resistant austenitic alloys with a high nickel and chromium content. They are
operated as single elements or as parts of larger multi-level sets (Fig. 1) [1–3].
The external shape and overall dimensions of the pallets are determined by the
furnace chamber in which they are used. The interior of the pallets is usually made
of differently connected pallet walls, also known as vertical ribs, and empty spaces
between them, the so-called sockets. The wall thickness of the pallet is usually in the
range of 6 ÷ 12 mm. The main task to be fulﬁlled by a properly planned interior of a
pallet is to ensure sufﬁciently high strength with the lowest possible weight. In many
cases, the pallet construction should also ensure proper positioning of the charge and
protect it against unplanned movements during transport.

Modeling of Thermal Stresses in Technological Equipment …
47
Fig. 1 Examples of accessories for charge transport in furnaces for heat treatment and thermo-
chemical treatment
As a result of operation in conditions related to the heat treatment processes
to which the transported heat treated elements are subjected, the pallets experi-
ence damage over time—cracks and large, permanent deformations, which cause the
necessity to withdraw them from further use.
A signiﬁcant part of the cracks formed in the pallets during their operation are
located in the vicinity of the wall connections (Fig. 2). These are the areas where, due
to the increased thickness, the temperature change processes take place more slowly
than in the connected walls. As a result, these places are particularly exposed to the
inﬂuence of the temperature gradient, which results from the increased distance of the
center of the connection from the surface and the additional direction of the gradient
that forms between the center of the connection and the center of the cross-section
of the connected walls.
For this reason, it is important that pallets operated under conditions of rapid
temperature changes should use wall connections, which will contribute the least to
the increase of thermal stresses arising during the cooling and heating processes.
Fig. 2 Examples of cracks formed in grate wall connections

48
A. Bajwoluk
2.2
Tested Variants of Connections
In the castings of pallets, many types of wall connections are used, differing in the
number of connected ribs and the angles between them. Figure 3 shows ﬁve types of
such connections. These are an X-type connection used to connect four ribs forming
with each other an angle of 90°, a ring connection (R) used to connect a different
number of walls and connections of three walls: T—which is created when two of the
connected ribs constitute one wall of the pallet, which is accessed by the rib forming
a right angle with it, its variant T 45, in which the rib forms an angle of 45° with the
wall, and the connection Y, in which the connected walls are symmetrically spaced
and form an angle of 120° between them.
From the point of view of the arising thermal stresses, the most important differ-
ence between the presented connections is the local increase on thickness introduced
by them, which becomes a heat nodes during operation. According to [9], in its
description in the connection sketches shown in Fig. 3, circles with centers coin-
ciding with the centers of the given connections were introduced. These circles are
tangent to the connection surface at three points so that their radii are equal to the
shortest distance between the connection center and its surface. The increase in thick-
ness is quantiﬁed by the ratio D/d of the diameter D of the circles formed in this way
to the thickness d of the connected walls.
Points C, Pi and M are also marked on the cross-sections of each of the connections
shown in Fig. 3. Point C is located in the center of the connection. Points Pi lie on its
surface at a distance corresponding to the radius of the inscribed circle, while point
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
Fig. 3 Analyzed types of wall connections: a X, b R, c T, d T45, e Y

Modeling of Thermal Stresses in Technological Equipment …
49
M lies in the center of the connected rib with a constant thickness d, at a distance of
2.5d from the connection center. These points were used to deﬁne the directions for
which the results presented in the next chapter are presented.
3
Numerical Analysis
Apart from a few exceptions [10, 11], there are no publications in the literature that
would analyze the distribution of stresses arising during the operation of pallets in
heat treatment and thermo-chemical furnaces. In works such as [9, 12, 13] there
are comparisons of various design solutions, but these are qualitative comparisons,
largely based on the practical experience of the authors and carried out without
an analysis of stresses arising in the thermal cycle. However, for the quantitative
assessment of the inﬂuence of various design solutions on the thermal stresses arising
in the pallets, methods are needed which can be used for relatively quick comparison
based on the given criteria.
As part of the research, a comparative methodology based on calculations using
the ﬁnite element method was proposed, consisting of two main steps. The ﬁrst step
is to perform simulation analyzes of heat ﬂow during the cooling process of the
analyzed connections. On the basis of the obtained results, the time after which the
temperature difference in the deﬁned direction is the highest is determined for each
of the connections. Correspondingly, for the C–P direction it is the time tmax1, and for
the C–M direction it is the time tmax2. In the second step of the applied comparative
methodology, stress analyzes are carried out, in which the applied load is the change
oftheinitialtemperature,thesamefortheentiremodel,tothetemperaturedetermined
for individual nodes after time tmax1 or tmax2.
The calculations for the analyzed models were conducted in the Midas NFX 2017
software. The used grids consisted of tetrahedral elements are shown in Fig. 4. The
analyzes assumed that the connected walls had a thickness of d = 8 mm, and the
height of the connections was h = 50 mm.
3.1
Heat Flow Analysis
According to the adopted methodology, the ﬁrst step of the calculations was heat ﬂow
analyses. In the adopted calculations, the assumed thermal process was cooling from
an initial temperature of T 0 = 900 °C in a quenching oil at a temperature of 20 °C. It
was assumed that the heat exchange with the environment takes place according to
the natural convection mechanism, and inside the connections through conductivity.
The simulation analyses covered a period of 15 s of the cooling process. The adopted
calculation step was 0.2 s.
The calculations assumed the material properties of cast steel 1.4849
(GX40NiCrSiNb38-19), which in fact is used to manufacture a signiﬁcant amount of

50
A. Bajwoluk
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
Fig. 4 FEM mesh of analyzed wall connections: a X, b R, c T, d T45, e Y
pallets used in heat and thermo-chemical furnaces, operated up to the temperature of
1050 °C. According to the PN-EN 10295: 2004 standard “Heat resistant steel cast-
ings” [14], it was assumed that the speciﬁc heat of cast steel was C = 500 J/(kg K),
and the thermal conductivity was modeled with a temperature-dependent function
(Fig. 5):
λa(T ) = 0, 0152T + 11, 3
(1)
based on the data contained in the standard.
Because at higher temperatures the adopted cooling medium, which is quenching
oil, should be treated as a boiling-evaporating liquid with a heat transfer coefﬁcient
Fig. 5 Thermal conductivity
of cast steel 1.4849 plotted
as a function of temperature
adopted in calculations
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Coeﬃcient λ, W/(m · K)  
Temperature T, °C

Modeling of Thermal Stresses in Technological Equipment …
51
much higher than that of the liquid [15], the use of one averaged value of this coefﬁ-
cient would result in signiﬁcant qualitative differences in relation to the actual curves
of cooling kinetics of analyzed connections. Thus, the analyses assumed the experi-
mentally established [16], simpliﬁed function of the dependence of the heat transfer
coefﬁcient U versus the temperature, presented in Fig. 6.
As a result of the performed calculations, changes in the temperature distribution
over time were determined for the individual analyzed connections. The exemplary
results are presented graphically in Fig. 7 showing the temperature distributions on
the cross-section of the analyzed connections after 5 s of cooling.
For a better comparison of the obtained results, the diagrams in Fig. 8a present the
changes in the distribution of temperature differences between the previously deﬁned
points. Accordingly, in Fig. 8a the changes in the temperature difference between
points C and P (connection center −surface) are presented, and in Fig. 8b between
points C and M (connection center −center of the section of the connected wall). It
can be seen that in the case of both of these directions, the results obtained for indi-
vidual design solutions differ signiﬁcantly from each other. The difference between
Fig. 6 Heat transfer
coefﬁcient versus
temperature relationship
adopted in studies
0
300
600
900
1200
1500
0
200
400
600
800
Heat transfer coef. U, 
W/(m2·K)
Temperature T, °C
boiling liquid
liquid
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
Temperature, °C
Fig. 7 Temperature distribution after 5 s of cooling in oil process—connections: a X, b R, c T, d
T45, e Y

52
A. Bajwoluk
0
50
100
150
200
0
2
4
6
8
10
Temperature diﬀerence 
ΔT, °C
Time t, s
X
R
T
T45
Y
0
50
100
150
200
0
2
4
6
8
10
Temperature diﬀerence 
ΔT, °C
Time t, s
X
R
T
T45
Y
a) 
b) 
Fig. 8 Temperature difference versus time between: a points C and P, b points C and M
the connection with the highest and the lowest maximum temperature difference
ΔT max is about 41% for the C-P direction and about 57% for the C-M direction.
Both in the case of points C and P and points C and M, the highest maximum
temperature differences were obtained in the T 45 connection. In the case of connec-
tion X characterized by a similar D/d ratio, in the C-M direction a similar result was
obtained. However, in the case of the temperature difference in the C-P direction,
the results obtained for X connection were more similar to the results obtained for
the T connection with a much smaller D/d ratio, which is probably due to the full
symmetry of the X connection, which translates into the identical geometry of all arcs
of the rounding of this connection. The smallest temperature differences occurred in
the case of the R and Y connections.
On the basis of the obtained courses of cooling kinetics, the time after which the
highest temperature differences occurred in the given directions were determined.
The time tmax1 and tmax2 along with the highest temperature differences obtained for
the given connections are summarized in Table 1.

Modeling of Thermal Stresses in Technological Equipment …
53
Table 1 Maximum temperatures differences in wall connections
Connection
D/d
 T C−P
max
tmax1 (s)
 T C−M
max
tmax2 (s)
X
2,04
129,4
4,2
173,8
10
R
1,45
105,2
2,2
109
9,6
T
1,63
131,8
2,6
115,3
9,8
T45
2,06
167,3
6
187,2
9,6
Y
1,39
102
2,2
81,6
8,2
3.2
Stress Distribution Analysis
The obtained results of heat ﬂow analyzes were used in the analyzes of thermal stress
distributions. In accordance with the adopted methodology, in these calculations, the
change in the model temperature from the same in its entire volume, T 0, to the
temperature distribution determined after time tmax1 or tmax2, was assumed as load.
In the calculations, an elasto-plastic model of the material with non-linear hard-
ening was adopted, in which the true tensile curve was approximated with several
straight line segments characterized by different values of the strain-hardening
modulus Ei. In the calculations made for austenite, the following experimental
mechanical properties were adopted: thermal expansion coefﬁcient α = 17.7 × 10−6
1/K, Poisson number ν = 0.253, Young’s modulus E = 1.73 × 105 N/mm2, yield
stress Re = 208 N/mm2, and strain hardening modulus E1 = 4.09 × 103 N/mm2 for
the case of exceeded yield strength [4].
Distributions of reduced stresses σ red determined in accordance with the Huber-
Miseshypothesisobtainedonthecross-sectionoftheanalyzedconnectionsareshown
graphically in Figs. 9 and 10. Correspondingly, Fig. 9 shows the stress distribution
determined at the load with the temperature distribution after the time tmax1, and in
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
Stress σred, N/mm2
Fig. 9 Stress distribution on cross-section of connections: a X, b R, c T, d T45, e Y under loading
with temperature distribution over time tmax1

54
A. Bajwoluk
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
Stress σred, N/mm2
Fig. 10 Stress distribution on cross-section of connections: a X, b R, c T, d T45, e Y under loading
with temperature distribution over time tmax2
Fig. 10 at the load with the temperature distribution determined after the time tmax2.
As in the case of heat ﬂow analyzes, it is visible that the difference in geometry
between the various types of wall connections signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced the stress
distributions generated under given conditions.
Stress σ red distributions on the deﬁned directions C–P and C–M obtained for the
analyzed connections are presented in Fig. 11. Figure 11a shows, respectively, the
stress distribution in the C–P direction obtained with the load with the temperature
distributionovertimetmax1,andinFig.11bthestressdistributionintheC–M direction
obtained with the load with the temperature distribution determined after the time
tmax2.
In the case of stress distributions on the C–P direction after tmax1, the highest
stresses arise at the connection surface. Moving away from it deeper into the material,
adecreaseinstressesisvisible,andthentheirincreaseinthevicinityoftheconnection
center. In the case of stress distribution on C–M direction after tmax2, the highest
stresses arise near the connection center and at some distance from it relatively
rapidly drop to the level that occurs at this stage of cooling process in the connected
walls.
In the case of stresses on the C–P direction obtained under the load with the
temperature distribution determined after the time tmax1, the high stresses arising at
the surface for all connections are similar in terms of value. Much greater differ-
ences are seen in the stresses in the central part of the connections. In this area, the
highest, signiﬁcantly different than the results obtained for the other connections,
was obtained in the T 45 connection. The lowest stresses arose in connection R.
In the case of the stresses on the C–M direction obtained under the load with the
temperature distribution determined after tmax2, the greatest differences between the
individual connections are visible in the extent of the area in which the emerging
stresses are much higher than in the connected walls. This area is the largest in the
case of the X connection. The area is signiﬁcantly lower in case of T 45 connection
and the lowest in the three remaining connections, in which the σ red stresses are

Modeling of Thermal Stresses in Technological Equipment …
55
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Stress σred, N/mm2
Normalized distance C-P
X
R
T
T45
Y
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0
4
8
12
16
20
Stress σred, N/mm2
Distance C-M, mm
X
R
T
T45
Y
a) 
b) 
Fig. 11 Distribution of reduced stresses σ red on cross section of analyzed grate wall connections:
a obtained for direction C–P over time tmax1, b obtained for direction C–M over time tmax2
increased on similar distance from the center. It is worth noting that in the case of
the R connection—near its center, stresses were much lower than in the T and Y
connections.
4
Summary
Based on the results of the numerical analyzes, it is clearly visible that the thermal
stresses arising in each connection during cooling differ signiﬁcantly, which means
that in real constructions the type of used wall connection will have a signiﬁcant
impact on the kinetics of fatigue processes generated in the pallets construction in
subsequent operation cycles.
Among the connections type analyzed in this article, the worst results were
obtained for the types T 45 and X. A signiﬁcant increase in the wall thickness intro-
duced by these connections may signiﬁcantly affect the increase in thermal stresses
arising in each subsequent cycle of pallet operation. The results obtained for the
remaining connections are much more similar to each other, while the lowest stresses
among the analyzed design solutions, for the assumed simulation conditions, arise

56
A. Bajwoluk
in the R-type connections, which may be due to the fact that in the case, the resulting
stresses are also partially distributed in the wall connecting ring.
The comparative methodology used in the work allows for a relatively simple
comparison of various design solutions used in the connections of pallet walls used
in heat treatment furnaces, in terms of their inﬂuence on the distribution of thermal
stresses arising under operating conditions. This information is crucial in making
design decisions to increase the durability of the pallets. The applied procedure can
also be used in the case of other design solutions of the technological accessories of
furnaces, as well as other elements operated under conditions of rapid temperature
changes.
References
1. Lai, G.Y.: High-Temperature Corrosion and Materials Applications. ASM International (2007)
2. Davis,J.R.(ed.):Industrialapplicationsofheat-resistantmaterials.In:HeatResistantMaterials,
pp. 67–85. ASM International (1997)
3. Piekarski, B.: Creep-resistant castings used in heat treatment furnaces. In: Szczecin: West
Pomeranian University of Technology Publishing House, Szczecin (2012)
4. Gutowski, P.: Research the causes of cracking in pallets operating in furnaces for the carburising
treatment. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Technical University of Szczecin, Szczecin
(1989)
5. Ul-Hamid, et al.: Failure analysis of furnace tubes exposed to excessive temperature. Eng. Fail.
Anal. 13(6), 1005–1021 (2006)
6. Piekarski, B.: Damage of heat-resistant castings in a carburizing furnace. Eng. Fail. Anal. 17(1),
143–149 (2010)
7. Reihani, A., et al.: Failure analysis of welded radiant tubes made of cast heat-resisting steel. J.
Fail. Anal. Prev. 13(6), 658–665 (2013)
8. Bochnakowski, W., Szyller, Ł, Osetek, M.: Damage characterization of belt conveyor made
of the 330 Nb alloy after service in a carburizing atmosphere in a continuous heat treatment
furnace. Eng. Fail. Anal. 103, 173–183 (2019)
9. Piekarski, B., Drotlew, A.: Designing of castings working in conditions of temperature cyclic
changes. Arch. Mech. Technol. Mater. 28(3), 95–102 (2008)
10. Nandwana, D., et al.: Design, ﬁnite element analysis and optimization of HRC trays used in
heat treatment process. In: World Congress on Engineering 2010, pp. 1149–1154 (2010)
11. Słowik, J.A., Drotlew, A., Piekarski, P.: Mechanical stresses induced by compression in castings
of the load-carrying grate. Arch. Foundry Eng. 16(2), 51–54 (2016)
12. Drotlew, A., Garbiak, M., Piekarski, B.: Cast equipment for heat treatment furnaces. Mac.
Technol. Mater. 9(11), 3–6 (2015)
13. Drotlew, A., Piekarski, B.: Connecting castings for operation under conditions of cyclic
temperature changes. J. Cast. Mater. Eng. 4(1), 16–21 (2020)
14. Standard PN-EN 10295: 2004. Heat resistant steel castings
15. Petela, R.: Heat Flow. Polish Scientiﬁc Publishers, Warszawa (1983)
16. Bajwoluk, A., Gutowski, P.: Thermal stresses in the accessories of heat treatment furnaces
versus cooling kinetics. Arch. Foundry Eng. 19(3), 88–93 (2019)

Functional Assessment of Projection
Screen Materials for Thermal Detection
in Virtual Shooting Trainers
Maciej Boruci´nski
Abstract Small arms training systems with virtual target presentations utilizing
low-energy replacement projectiles require projection screen materials allowing for
correct identiﬁcation of the location of hit and adequate representation of projected
content. An additional requirement is ensuring the safety of personnel and equipment
by reducing kinematic energy of projectiles travelling up-range after bouncing of the
screen while maintaining sufﬁcient durability to withstand heavy use in a training
shooting range. A method for assessing functional properties of materials for such
applications is proposed. Tests are conducted using 6 mm plastic pellets (BB) for
a range of materials and a subset of these are additionally veriﬁed with training
ammunition. It is shown that material selection should take into account the energy
of the projectiles. This means different projectile-screen material interfaces should
be applied and veriﬁed for intended use.
Keywords Small arms training · Thermal hit detection · Virtual shooting ranges
1
Introduction
Dynamic small arms training systems with virtual (projected) targets require detec-
tion of the shooter’s point of aim at the time of shot ﬁred for the system to identify
and register a hit on target.
Some common solutions [1, 3–5] to this are using dedicated camera systems in
order to track either:
• Laser dots from a designator mounted on the gun coaxially to the barrel, or
• Through-holes in the projection screen created by ﬁring live or training ammuni-
tion, or
• Thermal signatures on the projection screen left after an impact by a low energy
replacement projectile.
M. Boruci´nski (B)
West Pomeranian University of Technology, al. Piastów 19, 70-310 Szczecin, Poland
e-mail: mborucinski@zut.edu.pl
Autocomp Management Sp z o.o., al. 1 Maja 36, 71-627 Szczecin, Poland
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
B. Powałka et al. (eds.), Mechatronics—Trending Future Industries, Lecture Notes
in Networks and Systems 377, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93377-7_5
57

58
M. Boruci´nski
This study assumed the latter setup since it is one of acceptable solutions for the
Polish Ministry of Defense’s “Strzelnica w powiecie” program [7].
The system has certain requirements that need to be met for it to work: a projectile
must hit the target projected on a screen, bounce off of the screen leaving a detectable
thermal mark while not damaging the screen’s material. The projectile must also not
pose a threat of collateral damage to personnel and equipment while travelling back
up range. For this reason in such systems a suitable projectile—screen material
combination must be used. Live ammunition is not safe in these situations.
Low energy replacement projectiles considered for this work were 6 mm plastic
pellets (BBs) ﬁred from a commercial-off-the-shelf pneumatic replica weapon (ASG)
and training ammunition ﬁred from a weapon with appropriate adapter. The BBs are
ﬁred usually with up to approx. 1.6 J of muzzle energy, while the training ammunition
is rated at approx. 2.9 J muzzle energy [6, 8].
An example of a system as discussed here is the CQC shooting trainer installed
in Military Institute of Armaments Technology in Zielonka [2]. The system is set
up for training ammunition and uses granulated styrene-butadiene rubber (SBR)
tiles painted white for the screen, while the projectiles used are mostly training
ammunition. This system was treated as reference for assessing functionality of
other materials. The user indicated several areas of improvement to look out for:
• The material’s signiﬁcant weight per square meter prevents it from being applied
to lightly constructed drywall walls, adhesives required to hold it in place make
replacement difﬁcult,
• The material as-is is not very suitable for projection screens due to its dark
color, porous structure and has to be painted white or light gray, with the surface
remaining imperfect,
• The paint surface can get easily damaged requiring near constant touch-ups and
full re-painting after every cycle of trainings.
The study task was to collect an array of materials, test them and identify best
candidates for covering large projection screens in virtual shooting ranges with
thermal hit identiﬁcation.
2
Test Scope
A selection of materials were sourced for the tests, including a reference SBR tile as
used in the described existing solution. The materials were mostly laminated from
a compressible foam or nonwoven glue-bonded with an outer layer. Some of the
materials included pre-installed means of attaching in place by means of a self-
adhesive layer. A pressed granulated rubber-cork composite was also considered.
Full information on the tested materials can be found in Table 1. Pos. 9 in the table
is the reference.
A material’s suitability was assessed based on ease of use (including necessary
preparation), technical parameters such as quality of projected image, hit detection

Functional Assessment of Projection Screen …
59
Table 1 Characteristics of materials selected for the study
Pos
Description
Outer layer
Weight [kg/m2]
Bonding method
to wall
Required
preparation
1
PUR-Ether open
cell (30 mm)
laminated with
closed cell PE
foam (10 mm),
outer layer
laminated to the
closed cell
foam, integral
self-adhesive
layer
Synthetic leather
(PUR), color:
cream 3206,
leather structure,
no perforations
0.672
Self-adhesive
layer in the
material
None
2
Non woven
polyester,
50 mm thick,
laminated with
outer layer
Spunbound
polyester felt,
light grey
1.1
Double sided
adhesive tape
None
3
PUR-Ether open
cell (30 mm)
glue-bonded
with outer layer
Woven glass
fabric
Approx. 0.9
Double sided
adhesive tape
None
4
Non woven
polyester
30 mm,
reinforced outer
layer, integral
self-adhesive
layer
–
0.45
Self-adhesive
layer in the
material
None
(continued)
rate as well as robustness when subjected to multiple impacts in a small area. As the
intention is to cover large areas with the material, availability and pricing were taken
into account when selecting samples.
All materials were signiﬁcantly lighter than the reference allowing for easy
mounting using double-sided adhesive tape and potentially also using Velcro. Some
of the materials could be ordered optioned pre-prepared for Velcro mounting, but
this was not utilized.
3
Test Procedure
The materials were tested on a test rig as presented in Fig. 1. Where a rigid projec-
tion screen (1) was covered with the tested material (2) onto which a projector (3)
displayed target images. FLIR A65 thermal camera (4) controlled by a proprietary

60
M. Boruci´nski
Table 1 (continued)
Pos
Description
Outer layer
Weight [kg/m2]
Bonding method
to wall
Required
preparation
5
PUR-Ether open
cell (30 mm)
glue-bonded
with outer layer
Synthetic leather
(PUR), light
gray, perforated
0.84
Double sided
adhesive tape
None
6
Closed cell PE
foam (10 mm),
laminated outer
layer
Synthetic leather
(PUR), light
gray, perforated,
pronounced
structure
0.28
Double sided
adhesive tape
None
7
Closed cell PE
foam (10 mm),
laminated outer
layer, integral
self-adhesive
layer
Synthetic leather
(PUR), color:
cream 3206,
leather structure,
no perforations
0.28
Double sided
adhesive tape
(Self-adhesive
layer in the
material was not
used)
None
8
Pressed cork
with rubber-cork
outer layer
(approx. 1/3 of
volume), total
thickness 13 mm
Rubber-cork
outer layer
4.8
Double sided
adhesive tape
Painted white (2
coats)
9
SBR granulate
safety ﬂooring
tiles, zielona,
20 mm
–
16.8
Due to high
weight the
sample was not
bonded to wall
Painted white (2
coats)
Fig. 1 Test setup for 6 mm BB

Functional Assessment of Projection Screen …
61
application on a computer (5) recorded the thermal signatures of impacts from 6 mm
BBs shot with an air soft gun (6). A projectile catcher (7) with paper witness was
also employed.
Projection quality was tested with PM5644 test pattern. The BBs used were 0.30 g.
They were ﬁred from a gas operated air soft riﬂe replica with muzzle velocity of
approx. 110 m/s for kinetic energy of 1.8 J. Shots were ﬁred perpendicular to the
surface of the sample from a distance of approx. 550 cm.
The application developed speciﬁcally for this test controlled the thermal camera
parameters, recorded frames, detected shots and played an audio cue whenever a shot
was detected.
Climate control was necessary in the test chamber since without it false positives
were an issue i.e. hit audio cue would play when no shot was ﬁred.
Material samples were checked for damage directly after the test was concluded
and after 24 h. Each target sustained no less than 30 hits during the course of ﬁre.
After most suitable materials with BBs were selected, they were to be tested for
durability against training ammunition. Materials selected for follow-up testing were
shot with 5.56 mm UTM MMR training munitions from a LWRC A6 carbine (M4
derivative). Each sample was shot at distances of 3 and 6 m.
4
Test Results
Test results after the BB ﬁre section are collected in Table 2. A notable ﬁnding was
that none of the ricocheting BBs would consistently puncture the paper witness made
out of 80 g/m2 paper. Whenever “High recoil energy” is registered in the results it is
meant that shooter was in risk of being hit by BBs traveling uprange after bouncing
off the screen.
Unfortunately the BBs hitting the reference material would not leave a distinct
thermal mark. Synthetic leather outer layer in materials gave the best deﬁned impact
point images with the exception of material 6. The difference between a registered
hit and a non-detectable impact is shown in Fig. 2. The woven outer layer material
presented there proved to spread the impact energy over a large area. As such it was
selected for testing with higher energy projectiles.
None of the materials caused any signiﬁcant issues for the projected video. Slight
discoloration was to be expected for non-white surfaces. Detail reproduction was
affected the most by fuzz of non-woven outer layer and chamfering on the edges of
SBR tile.
Regarding the Materials 1 and 5 were signiﬁcant improvements compared to the
reference when using 6 mm BBs. Materials 2 and 7 were indicated as acceptable.
All other samples were not suitable for the task.
Materials 1, 3, 5 and 7 were selected for follow-up testing with training
ammunition in Military Institute of Armament Technology in Zielonka.

62
M. Boruci´nski
Table 2 Results of testing materials with 6 mm BBs
Pos
Detection
(%)
Video
reproduction—colors
Video
reproduction—image
details
Damage
after trials
Recoil
energy
1
100
Minor issues
No issues
Acceptable
Low
2
80
Minor issues
Some issues
Acceptable
Low
3
0
Minor issues
No issues
Acceptable
Medium
4
100
No issues
No issues
Signiﬁcant
damage
Medium
5
86
Minor issues
No issues
No
detectable
damage
Low
6
7
Minor issues
Minor issues
No
detectable
damage
High
7
80
Minor issues
No issues
Acceptable
High
8
0
No issues
No issues
Signiﬁcant
damage
High
9
50
Minor issues
Some issues
No
detectable
damage
Medium
(Reference)
Fig. 2 Twothermalimagescollectedduringtests.Awell-deﬁnedhitcanbeseenontheleft(material
5) and a poorly deﬁned hit on the right (material 3)
All samples with synthetic leather outer layers (Materials 1, 5, 7) were penetrated
by the projectiles. Only Material 3 sustained no permanent damage. Sample impacts
are presented in Figs. 3, 4 and 5.

Functional Assessment of Projection Screen …
63
Fig. 3 Training ammunition impact locations on material 3
Fig. 4 Training ammunition impact locations on material 5
5
Conclusions
Key parameters for testing projectile-screen interface were identiﬁed and validated
for a selection of materials.
For virtual shooting ranges using 6 mm BBs and commercial Air Soft Gun replicas
two materials were found to be especially suitable. Follow-up testing indicated that
these materials might not be a good ﬁt with higher energy projectiles such as training
ammunition. Follow on tests should be performed to ﬁnd materials most suitable for
use with training ammunition.

64
M. Boruci´nski
Fig. 5 Training ammunition impact locations on material 7
Open cell foams and non-woven poliester were most succesful in mitigating recoil,
providedtheouterlayerwasresilientenoughtowithstandtheimpactwithoutdamage.
In all material with synthetic leather over foam some delamination was found in
the interface between the outer layer and the foam after being shot with BBs. This
may ultimately lead to failure of the material and eventually require its replacement
with intensive use.
Self-adhesive layer in the material proved a liability when trying to replace the
material. Use of velcro or double sided tape was the preferred method of mounting.
Acknowledgements The author would like to thank ppk. Tomasz Głogowski for loaning his
personal weapon for tests with training ammunition, Mariusz Gał˛azka and Paweł Markiewicz of
Autocomp Management for developing the hit detection application.
The presented research was performed as part of a project co-funded by National Center
for Research and Development (Narodowe Centrum Bada´n i Rozwoju), Poland granted through
Konkurs nr 10/2019 to perform projects in scope of research and development for defense and
state security, project no.: DOB-BIO10/08/01/2019. This study was supported by the Ministry
of Education and Science, Poland [Impelenatation Doctorate Programme, granted to Maciej
Boruci´nski].
References
1. Haberek, R., Gramasz, K., Chmieli´nski, M.: Wpływ nowoczesnych technologii na realizacj˛e i
wsparcie szkolenia bojowego ˙zołnierzy. Gospodarka Materiałowa i Logistyka (2018)
2. Haberek, R., St˛epniak, S., Głogowski, T., Chmieli´nski: Aspekty logistyczne architektury
trena˙zera walki w pomieszczeniach CQC. Gospodarka Materiałowa i Logistyka 221–231 (2016)
3. Nawrat, A., J˛edrasiak, K., Ryt, A., Sobel, D.: Multimedia ﬁrearms training. System (2016).
https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.1127627

Functional Assessment of Projection Screen …
65
4. Pawłowski, M.: Tendencje rozwojowe urz˛adze´n szkolno-treningowych do szkolenia strz-
eleckiego ˙zołnierzy niezawodowych na przykładzie Centrum Szkolenia Sił Powietrznych w
Koszalinie. Rocznik Bezpiecze´nstwa Morskiego 11 (2017)
5. ´Swiderski, W., Głogowski, T.: Analiza mo˙zliwo´sci oceny efektywno´sci symulatorów szkole-
niowych na podstawie systemu ´Snie˙znik. Problemy Techniki Uzbrojenia 48 (2019)
6. Umarex G36 series gas airsoft. Operating instructions, https://www.umarex.com/ﬁleadmin/man
uals/2.6382.pdf. Accessed 07 Sep 2021
7. Konkurs Ofert “Strzelnica w powiecie 2022” nr 3/2021/BdsPZ˙ZR—Ministerstwo Obrony Naro-
dowej—Portal Gov.pl.: https://www.gov.pl/web/obrona-narodowa/konkurs-ofert-strzelnica-w-
powiecie-2022-nr-32021bdspzzr. Accessed 07 Sep 2021
8. UTM® Product Catalog.: https://utmworldwide.com/UTM%20Product%20Catalog/. Accessed
07 Sep 2021

Modal Analysis of Honeycomb Core
Sandwich Panel Using Finite Element
Method
Arkadiusz Charuk
and Paweł Dunaj
Abstract Honeycomb core sandwich panels are crucial components of many
lightweight structures nowadays. These structures are often subjected to a time-
varying loads, which may cause vibrations of various nature. These, in turn, may
result in the loss of functionality of the structure. Therefore, it is crucial to predict
the dynamic properties of these structures already at the design stage. This paper
presents method of modeling the dynamic properties of a honeycomb core sand-
wich panels using ﬁnite element method. Presented model was developed using a
two-dimensional, quadrilateral, isoparametric plane elements. The model included
the exact geometry of honeycomb core and the adhesive nature of the connection
between the core and the facing sheets. Developed model was experimentally veri-
ﬁed using an impact test. In result it showed a high consistency in prediction of
natural frequencies and mode shapes. The relative error between numerically and
experimentally obtained natural frequencies was not exceeding 8.6%, on average
3.7%.
Keywords Honeycomb core sandwich panel · Finite element analysis · Modal
analysis · Dynamics · Composite
1
Introduction
Honeycomb core sandwich panels are widely used in the aerospace [1], marine
[2] and automotive industries [3] due to their ability to absorb energy [4], effective
sound insulation [5], and high strength-to-weight ratios [6]. Nevertheless, operational
conditions such as time-varying loads [7], aging [8] or impact loading [9] may lead
to disbonding along the face sheets and core interface, which can compromise safety
and integrity of the entire structure [10].
A. Charuk · P. Dunaj (B)
West Pomeranian University of Technology in Szczecin, 70-310 Szczecin, Poland
e-mail: pawel.dunaj@zut.edu.pl
A. Charuk
Meble Morskie Sp. z o.o., 70-002 Dołuje, Poland
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
B. Powałka et al. (eds.), Mechatronics—Trending Future Industries, Lecture Notes
in Networks and Systems 377, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93377-7_6
66

Modal Analysis of Honeycomb Core Sandwich Panel …
67
Therefore, to ensure the functionality of these structures and minimize the risk of
failure caused by dynamic loads, it is necessary to predict their dynamic properties at
the design stage. Finite element models are most often used to predict these properties
[11].
Luoetal.[12]presentedmodalanalysisofasatellitesailboardmadeofhoneycomb
core sandwich panel. The face sheets, frame, and honeycomb were discretized using
two-dimensional ﬁnite elements (CQUAD, Nastran/Patran), while and the remaining
parts of the satellite board were discretized using solid ﬁnite elements (CTETRA,
Nastran/Patran). Subsequent sandwich panel components were connected by adhe-
sive joints. The developed model was further subjected to experimental veriﬁ-
cation, which showed a substantial discrepancies in terms of natural frequencies
(maximum relative error was 12.04%, on average 9.09%) and modal assurance crite-
rion (MAC) value (minimal value was 0.04%). Therefore, model updating procedure
were conducted, owing to which the discrepancies were signiﬁcantly reduced i.e.,
in terms of natural frequencies maximum relative error did not exceed 8.79%, on
average 3.05%).
Bendada et al. [13] modeled the honeycomb core sandwich panel using ﬁnite
element method. The honeycomb core was modeled as a representative volume
element, which was homogenized and orthotropic. Both the core and the face sheets
were discretized using tree-dimensional ﬁnite elements (SOLID185, Ansys). The
developed model was then subjected to experimental veriﬁcation. The comparison
of the numerical and experimental results showed that in case of natural frequen-
cies, the relative error did not exceed 7.8%, on average 1.7%. In addition, the model
accurately reﬂected ﬁrst four mode shapes.
Benjeddou and Guerich [14] presented detailed ﬁnite element model for the free-
vibration analysis of honeycomb sandwich panels. The proposed model consisted
of three layers: top and bottom face sheets and honeycomb core. These layers were
discretized using two-dimensional ﬁnite elements (S4R, Abaqus). Such a model
was subjected to experimental veriﬁcation, which for the unconstrained honeycomb
sandwich panel shown agreement for the ﬁrst mode shape (with a 0.59% relative
error of corresponding natural frequency).
In the summary of the review presented, it can be noted that the analyzed problem
is up-to-date and is the subject of study of many research centers. The paper presents
a method of modeling of the dynamic properties of a honeycomb core sandwich
panel. The proposed modeling method was developed based on the ﬁnite element
analysis. The panel model was established using a two-dimensional, quadrilateral,
isoparametric plane elements that reﬂected the exact geometry of aluminum parts
and the nature of the adhesive bounding between the core and the facing sheets.
The paper is structured as follows: in Sect. 2 the detailed description of analyzed
honeycomb core sandwich panel was presented. Section 3 describes the estab-
lished ﬁnite element model. The experimental veriﬁcation of the proposed model
was provided in Sect. 4. Section 5 contains the ﬁnal conclusions summarizing the
achievements of the article.

68
A. Charuk and P. Dunaj
face sheet, 0.7 mm  
adhesive layer, 0.1 mm 
honeycomb 
18 mm 
0.06 mm 
0.12 mm 
Fig. 1 Structure and a speciﬁc dimensions of analyzed panel
2
Analyzed Object
The analyzed object was a rectangular sandwich-structured composite panel manu-
factured by Potma Oy (Pello, Finland) with dimensions of 600 × 600 × 18 mm. The
analyzed panel consisted of a face sheets of a thickness of 0.7 mm made of EN AW
3005 aluminum alloy and a honeycomb core with cell size 12.8 mm and a 0.06 mm
wall thickness made of EN AW 3003. The face sheets and the core were bounded
together with an polyurethane adhesive. The structure and a speciﬁc dimensions of
analyzed panel were depicted in Fig. 1.
The values of material properties included in the analyzed panel are shown in the
Table 1.
3
Finite Element Model of a Honeycomb Core Sandwich
Panel
The ﬁnite element model of the analyzed panel was built using the Midas NFX
software [15]. Subsequent components of the analyzed panel were discretized using

Modal Analysis of Honeycomb Core Sandwich Panel …
69
Table 1 Material properties
Parameter
Value
Face sheets, EN AW 3005
Young’s modulus, Efs
69,000 MPa
Density, ρfs
2,730 kg/m3
Honeycomb core, EN AW 3003
Young’s modulus, Ehc
75,000 MPa
Density, ρhc
2,730 kg/m3
Polyurethane adhesive
Young’s modulus, Epa
2.1 MPa
Density, ρpa
1,100 kg/m3
a quadrilateral, four-node, isoparametric plane ﬁnite elements (CQUAD4) charac-
terized by linear shape functions and six degrees of freedom in each node (three
translational and three rotational). A linear, isotropic material model (MAT1) was
used to describe the material properties of subsequent elements.
The ﬁnite elements used to represent each of the components of the analyzed
panel were assigned appropriate thicknesses resulting from their actual geometry.
The contact between subsequent components were modeled as a nodes coincidence.
In summary, developed model was composed of 46,240 ﬁnite elements and had
250,110 degrees of freedom. This was shown in Fig. 2.
Then, the natural frequencies and corresponding mode shapes were determined for
the unconstrained model of the honeycomb core sandwich panel. This was realized
by solving the eigenproblem formulated in the following way:
CQUAD4
Thickness of CQUAD4:
face sheets – 0.7 mm
glue – 0.1 mm
core wall – 0.06 mm
core wall – 0.12 mm
Fig. 2 Finite element model of analyzed panel

70
A. Charuk and P. Dunaj

K −ω2
n M

n = 0
(1)
where: K—ﬁnite element model stiffness matrix; M—mass matrix; ωn—value of
the n-th natural frequency; n—eigenvector of the n-th mode shape. The calculations
were performed using Nastran Solver (SOL103).
4
Experimental Veriﬁcation
To verify the developed model, the experimental modal analysis in form of an impact
test was performed. To approximate the free boundary conditions the analyzed panel
was suspended on a nylon strings, the place of their attachment was selected in such
a way as to best match the nodes of the analyzed mode shapes.
The panel was excited using the PCB 086C01 modal hammer with a hard metal
tip in a direction perpendicular to the face sheet. The responses of the analyzed panel
were measured in the same direction in 81 points using the PCB 356A01 three-axis
piezoelectric accelerometers. Data acquisition was performed using Scadas Mobile
Vibco and Testlab 2019.1 software. The estimation of frequency response function
was performed with the use of H1 estimator. The remaining parameters of signal
acquisition were as follows: sampling rate 4,096 Hz, frequency resolution 0.5 Hz,
number of averages 10. The test stand with measurement point arrangement was
depicted in Fig. 3.
measurement points arrangement 
excitation 
data  
acquisition 
modal 
hammer 
accelerometer
nylon 
strings 
Fig. 3 Modal analysis test stand with measurement points arrangement

Modal Analysis of Honeycomb Core Sandwich Panel …
71
Table 2 Experimental
veriﬁcation of mode shapes
Mode shape
Value (Hz)
Relative error
(%)
Finite element
model
Experiment
1
207
204
1.5
2
324
324
0
3
396
398
0.5
4
485
502
3.4
5
486
510
4.7
6
762
Not identiﬁed
–
7
785
842
6.7
8
797
872
8.6
9
834
896
6.9
On average
3.7
As a result of the impact test conducted, 81 frequency response functions were
determined on the basis of which, using the Polymax algorithm [16, 17], the param-
eters of the modal model of analyzed panel were estimated. The obtained modal
model was validated using the MAC criterion, eliminating interdependent vectors in
the mode shape (the limit value of 10% was assumed) [18].
The comparison of the values of natural frequencies obtained by calculation and
experimentally supplemented with the relative error value were shown in Table 2.
Comparison of selected mode shapes was depicted in Fig. 4.
Analyzing the results obtained it can be seen that the developed model is char-
acterized by good agreement with the experimental results. In considered frequency
range eight mode shapes were correctly identiﬁed. The discrepancy occurred for the
sixth mode shape (at 762 Hz), which was not identiﬁed experimentally.
For the identiﬁed mode shapes, a high compliance of the natural frequency values
was obtained i.e., the mean relative error at the level of 3.7%, the maximum error
did not exceed 8.6%. Comparing the obtained results with the research cited in the
literature review, it can be noticed that the obtained discrepancies were at a level
similar to that presented in the paper [12].
5
Conclusions
The presented article presents the method of modeling the dynamic properties of the
honeycomb core sandwich panel using ﬁnite element method. The developed model
consisted of two-dimensional plane ﬁnite elements, enabled the reasonably accurate
prediction of natural frequencies and mode shapes.

72
A. Charuk and P. Dunaj
FEM
Experiment 
Mode 
1st 
3
th
8
th
Fig. 4 Modal analysis test stand with measurement points arrangement
Further work on the development of the model will include (i) considering the
damping to determine of frequency response functions and (ii) the sensitivity analysis
of the model parameters change to its dynamic properties.
Additionally, it is planned do conduct experimental modal analysis of analyzed
sandwich panel using Laser Doppler Vibrometer (LDV). This non-contact surface
vibration method will eliminate accelerometers mass inﬂuence on modal model,
which in the case of lightweight structures can have a signiﬁcant impact.
Acknowledgements Research carried out on research apparatus purchased as part of the project
No. RPZP.01.03.00-32-0004 / 17. Project co-ﬁnanced by the European Union from the European
Regional Development Fund under the Regional Operational Program of the West Pomeranian
Voivodeship 2014-2020. Project co-ﬁnanced by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education.

Modal Analysis of Honeycomb Core Sandwich Panel …
73
References
1. Boudjemai, A., Amri, R., Mankour, A., Salem, H., Bouanane, M.H., Boutchicha, D.: Modal
analysis and testing of hexagonal honeycomb plates used for satellite structural design. Mater.
Des. 35, 266–275 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2011.09.012
2. Crupi, V., Epasto, G., Guglielmino, E.: Comparison of aluminium sandwiches for lightweight
ship structures: honeycomb versus foam. Mar. Struct. 30, 74–96 (2013). https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.marstruc.2012.11.002
3. Sun, G., Huo, X., Wang, H., Hazell, P.J., Li, Q.: On the structural parameters of honeycomb-
core sandwich panels against low-velocity impact. Compos. Part B: Eng. 216, 108881 (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesb.2021.108881
4. Jin, Y., Shi, Y., Yu, G.-C., Wei, G.-T., Hu, B., Wu, L.-Z.: A multifunctional honeycomb metas-
tructure for vibration suppression. Int. J. Mech. Sci. 188, 105964 (2020). https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ijmecsci.2020.105964
5. Ng, C.F., Hui, C.K.: Low frequency sound insulation using stiffness control with honeycomb
panels. Appl. Acoust. 69(4), 293–301 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apacoust.2006.12.001
6. Rajkumar, S.: Strength and stiffness characteristics of A3003 aluminum honeycomb core sand-
wich panels. Mater. Today: Proc. 37, 1140–1145 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2020.
06.348
7. Ma, M., Yao, W., Jiang, W., Jin, W., Chen, Y., Li, P.: A multi-area fatigue damage model of
composite honeycomb sandwich panels under three-point bending load. Compos. Struct. 261,
113603 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compstruct.2021.113603
8. Khosravani, M.R., Weinberg, K.: Characterization of sandwich composite T-joints under
different ageing conditions. Compos. Struct. 197, 80–88 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.com
pstruct.2018.05.043
9. Kumar, R., Patel, S.: Failure analysis on octagonal honeycomb sandwich panel under air blast
loading. Mater. Today: Proc. (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2020.07.525
10. Zhou,Y.,Xu,Y.,Liu,H.,Guo,Y.,Yi,X.,Jia,Y.:DebondingidentiﬁcationofNomexhoneycomb
sandwich structures based on the increased vibration amplitude of debonded skin. Compos.
Part B: Eng. 200, 108233 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesb.2020.108233
11. Jiang, D., Zhang, D., Fei, Q., Wu, S.: An approach on identiﬁcation of equivalent properties
of honeycomb core using experimental modal data. Finite Elem. Anal. Des. 90, 84–92 (2014).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ﬁnel.2014.06.006
12. Luo, H., Wang, W., Fu, J., Jiao, L.: Finite element model updating of satellite sailboard based on
sensitivity analysis. Shock Vib.2019, 4547632 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/4547632
13. Bendada, A., Boutchicha, D., Miri, M., Chouiter, A.: Characterization of honeycomb sand-
wich composite panel using numerical methods and experimental modal analysis validation.
In: Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Numerical Modelling in Engineering,
pp. 408–416. Singapore (2019)
14. Benjeddou, A., Guerich, M.: Free vibration of actual aircraft and spacecraft hexagonal honey-
comb sandwich panels: a practical detailed FE approach. Adv. Aircr. Spacecr. Sci. 6(2), 169
(2019)
15. Midas, I.T.: User’s manual of midas NFX. MIDAS IT (2011)
16. Peeters, B., Van der Auweraer, H., Guillaume, P., Leuridan, J.: The PolyMAX frequency-
domain method: a new standard for modal parameter estimation? Shock Vib. 11(3, 4), 395–409
(2004)
17. Peeters, B., Van der Auweraer, H.: PolyMAX: a revolution in operational modal analysis. In:
1st International Operational Modal Analysis Conference, pp. 26–27, Copenhagen, Denmark
(2005)
18. Allemang, R.J.: The modal assurance criterion—Twenty years of use and abuse. Sound Vib.
37(8), 14–23 (2003)

Finite Element Modelling of Thin-Walled
Box Beams Partially Filled with Polymer
Concrete
Beata Niesterowicz
, Tomasz Okulik
, Stefan Berczy´nski
,
and Paweł Dunaj
Abstract Thin-walled, box section, steel beams are the basic components of
machine tools, vibratory machines, production lines and other structures subjected
to time-varying loads. Therefore, it is desirable to shape their dynamic properties.
It can be achieved by ﬁlling these components with polymer concrete. The polymer
concrete ﬁlling increases stiffness and damping of the steel structure. However, it
also causes a signiﬁcant increase in its weight. Therefore, it is reasonable to ﬁll such
beams only in selected regions in order to improve its dynamic properties while
maintaining relatively low mass. The paper presents the ﬁnite element modeling
of dynamic properties of thin-walled, box section, steel beams partially ﬁlled with
polymer concrete. Obtained numerical results i.e., natural frequencies, mode shapes
and frequency response functions were veriﬁed experimentally, showing the good
agreement.
Keywords Finite element model · Steel-polymer concrete beam · Composite
beam · Modal analysis · Passive damping
1
Introduction
The problem of vibration control is one of the most signiﬁcant issues in the analysis of
the machines subjected to time-varying load analysis [1]. Machine elements under-
going vibration can suffer from phenomena such as disturbances in machine working
or fatigue life shortening [2]. Therefore, to maintain a proper machine functionality
it is crucial to minimize or eliminate vibrations of its elements [3].
There are two main methods of vibration control: active [4] and passive [5]. The
ﬁrst requires the use of external sources implemented into the system in various
forms. The later relies on the occurrence of some types of movements [6]. While
there are active methods that exhibits signiﬁcantly better performance than the best
passive ones, they suffer from complexity, high cost, and lower reliability. Therefore,
B. Niesterowicz (B) · T. Okulik · S. Berczy´nski · P. Dunaj
Zachodniopomorski Uniwersytet Technologiczny W Szczecinie, al. Piastów 17, 70-310 Szczecin,
Poland
e-mail: beata.niesterowicz@zut.edu.pl
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
B. Powałka et al. (eds.), Mechatronics—Trending Future Industries, Lecture Notes
in Networks and Systems 377, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93377-7_7
74

Finite Element Modelling of Thin-Walled Box Beams …
75
the simplest and most common is to use the passive elements such as springs, shock
absorbers or additional masses.
Kulišek et al. [7] presented the use of particle composites for hybrid design
of machine tool structural parts to improve their damping properties. Based on
ﬁnite element modeling and experimental modal analysis, it was found that particle
composites could increase damping and provide lightweight design options only if
the original metal base part is redesigned.
Sonwane and Subramanian [7] presented a cast iron milling machine column
ﬁlled with a combination of elastomer and concrete. The ﬁlling was to increase the
damping of the structure. Based on the ﬁnite element analysis, it was estimated that
a signiﬁcant improvement in damping (up to thirty times) can be achieved. However,
ﬁlling the structure is associated with a signiﬁcant increase in the weight of the
structure.
Many numerical, analytical, and experimental studies conﬁrm that the use of
polymer concrete improves the dynamic properties of machine tool structural parts.
However, this solution signiﬁcantly increases the weight of the entire structure.
Therefore, it is reasonable to apply a polymer concrete ﬁlling only in selected areas,
in order to improve the damping properties while reasonably increasing the weight
of the structure. weight reduction.
The paper presents the ﬁnite element modeling of thin-walled, box section, steel
beams partially ﬁlled with polymer concrete dynamic properties. The proposed
method enables to accurately predict the dynamic properties of the analyzed beams.
This was conﬁrmed based on the results of experimental studies.
The structure of the paper is as follows: in Sect. 2 the concept of partially
ﬁlled steel-polymer concrete beams was presented; Sect. 3 contains ﬁnite element
modeling details; in Sect. 4 the experimental veriﬁcation was described. Section 5
and Sect. 6 contain results and conclusions respectively.
2
Research Object
The concept of analyzed beam is based on the synergic use of two materials: (i)
steel which ensures the assumed stiffness of the structure and (ii) polymer concrete
which causes the local increase in stiffness, damping and inertia. The appropriate
arrangement of polymer concrete ﬁlling in the steel beam enables shaping its
dynamic properties e.g., dynamic stiffness, damping, mode shapes or the resonance
frequencies.
The graphical representation of thin-walled box beam partially ﬁlled with polymer
concrete is depicted in Fig. 1.
The polymer concrete used consisted of epoxy resin and mineral aggregates of
various sizes. The mineral ﬁlling consisted of four fractions: ash, a small fraction of
mostly sand with a grain size 0.25–2 mm, medium fraction (2–10 mm) and coarse
fraction (8–16 mm) of mostly gravel. The polymer concrete was selected on the basis
of previous studies [8], its composition is shown in Table 1.

76
B. Niesterowicz et al.
Fig. 1 Concept of beam
partially ﬁlled with polymer
concrete
steel beam 
polymer concrete
filling 
Table 1 Percentage of polymer concrete components [9]
Component
Epoxy resin
Coarse grains
Medium grains
Fine grains
Ash
Percentage (%)
15
50
15
19
1
Four steel-polymer concrete beams were subjected to the analysis. The beams
were composed of 1,000 mm long steel proﬁle with a square hollow section dimen-
sions of 70 × 70 mm with a wall of 3 mm and mass of 6 kg and differed in the
arrangement of the polymer concrete ﬁlling. The analyzed beams, with the speciﬁ-
cation of the polymer concrete arrangement and corresponding masses, are shown
in Fig. 2.
3
Finite Element Model
The ﬁnite element models of deﬁned beams were built using Midas NFX soft-
ware [10]. Subsequent beams (both their steel and polymer concrete parts) were
discretized using structural mesh composed of eight-node, six-sided, isopara-
metric ﬁnite elements (CHEXA) and six node, ﬁve-sided, isoparametric elements
(CPENTA). The ﬁnite elements used were characterized by linear shape functions
and three translational degrees of freedom in each node [11].
A linear, isotropic material model (MAT1) was used to describe the material prop-
erties of both steel and polymer concrete. The material properties used are presented
in Table 2.
The contact of the steel proﬁle with the polymer concrete ﬁlling was modeled
using the nodes coincidence.
In summary, developed models were composed of 5,554 ﬁnite elements and
13,770 degrees of freedom in case of V1 and V3, 7,104 ﬁnite elements and 16,593
degrees of freedom in case of V2 and 8,724 ﬁnite elements and 19,482 degrees of
freedom in case of V4. Developed ﬁnite element models are shown in Fig. 3.

Finite Element Modelling of Thin-Walled Box Beams …
77
V1 
V2 
V3 
V4 
* dimensions in mm 
mass 8 kg 
mass 9 kg 
mass 10 kg 
mass 8 kg 
Fig. 2 Arrangement of ﬁllings in each conﬁguration
Table 2 Material properties of steel and polymer concrete [9]
Property
Steel
Polymer concrete
Young’s modulus, E
210 ± 5 GPa
17,2 ± 0,2 GPa
Poisson’s ratio, υ
0,28 ± 0,03
0,20 ± 0,05
Density, ρ
7812 ± 35 kg/m3
2200 ± 6 kg/m3
Equivalent loss factor, η
0,00,220 ± 0,00,005
0,00,480 ± 0,00,024
To describe the damping properties of the modeled beam, a complex stiffness
damping model [12, 13] was used, according to which the damping matrix C can be
expressed as:
C = iηK
(1)
where: K—model stiffness matrix, i—imaginary unit, η—loss factor.
Then, for such deﬁned, unconstrained models the natural frequencies and
corresponding mode shapes were determined. This was realized by solving the
eigenproblem formulated in the following way:

K −ω2
n M

n = 0
(2)

78
B. Niesterowicz et al.
V1 
V2 
V3 
V4 
Fig. 3 Finite element models of beams analyzed
where: M—mass matrix; ωn—value of the n-th natural frequency; n—eigenvector
of the n-th mode shape. The calculations were performed using Nastran Solver
(SOL103).
Next the frequency response functions were determined in form of recep-
tance functions. The calculation in this case were performed using Nastran Solver
(SOL108).
4
Experimental Veriﬁcation
To verify the developed model, the experimental modal analysis in form of an impact
test was performed. To approximate the free boundary conditions the analyzed beams
were subsequently suspended on a steel strings.
The analyzed beams were excited using the PCB 086C01 modal hammer in three
perpendicular directions. The responses were measured in 56 points using the PCB
356A01 three-axis piezoelectric accelerometers. Data acquisition was performed
using Scadas Mobile Vibco and Testlab 2019.1 software; the signal acquisition
parameters are presented in Table 3, the experimental setup with measurement point
arrangement is depicted in Fig. 4.
As a result of the impulse test conducted, 168 frequency response functions were
determined. Next, using the Polymax algorithm [14, 15], the parameters of the modal
models of beams analyzed were estimated. The obtained modal models were vali-
dated using the MAC criterion, eliminating interdependent vectors in the mode shape
(the limit value of 10% was assumed) [16].

Finite Element Modelling of Thin-Walled Box Beams …
79
Table 3 Parameters of signal
acquisition
Parameter
Value
Sampling rate
4,096 Hz
Frequency resolution
0.5 Hz
Signal acquisition time
2 s
Frequency response function estimator
H1
Number of averages
10
Scaling of the frequency response Function
Global
modal hammer
suspended beam
data acquisition
accelerometers
excitation points
measurement 
points
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4 Experimental setup (a) with measurement points arrangement (b)
5
Results
The comparison of the values of natural frequencies obtained numerically and exper-
imentally is shown in Table 4. As a measure of the results agreement a relative error
was adopted, which was deﬁned as follows:
δ =

ωexp −ωFEM
ωexp
 · 100%,
(3)
where:
ωexp—experimentally
determined
natural
frequency;
ωFEM—natural
frequency calculated for the ﬁnite element model.
The comparison of selected mode shapes determined numerically and experimen-
tally is depicted in Fig. 5.
Finally, the experimental veriﬁcation of receptance functions is presented in Fig. 6.
The frequency rage selected to compare receptance functions was narrowed to a range
including only a bending modes. It was dictated by the low receptance amplitude of
torsional vibration modes and thus their poor visibility on the frequency transition
functions.
When analyzing the data contained in the Table 4 and Fig. 6, it can be noticed
that, as expected, the dynamic properties of the beams change with the change of the
polymer concrete ﬁlling arrangement. It is visible both for the natural frequencies

80
B. Niesterowicz et al.
Table 4 Experimental veriﬁcation of the natural frequencies of the analyzed beams
Mode shape
Mode type
Experiment (Hz)
FEM (Hz)
Relative error δ (%)
V1
1
Bending
383
395
3.0
2
Bending
384
395
2.8
3
Bending
1,056
1,097
3.5
4
Bending
1,060
1,097
3.7
5
Torsional
1,280
1,313
3.3
On average
3.1
V2
1
Bending
359
385
6.8
2
Bending
360
385
6.5
3
Bending
1,065
1,107
3.8
4
Bending
1,066
1,107
3.7
5
Torsional
1,298
1,338
3.0
On average
4.7
V3
1
Bending
455
485
6.1
2
Bending
456
485
5.9
3
Bending
1,037
1,080
4.0
4
Bending
1,039
1,080
3.9
5
Torsional
1,416
1,438
1.5
On average
4.29
V4
1
Bending
353
368
4.0
2
Bending
354
368
3.8
3
Bending
971
957
1.5
4
Bending
971
957
1.5
5
Torsional
1,300
1,323
1.7
On average
2.5
and the amplitudes of the receptance function. This property indicates that partial
ﬁlling of steel beams with polymer concrete may be an effective tool for shaping
their dynamics.
Analyzing the modeling results obtained it can be seen that the developed model
is characterized by good agreement with the experimental results. In considered
frequency range ﬁve mode shapes (four bending and one torsional) were correctly
identiﬁed. Therefore, it can be stated that the full mode shape agreement was achieved
as was the structural compatibility of the model.

Finite Element Modelling of Thin-Walled Box Beams …
81
Experiment
Finite element model
Mode No. 1
Mode No. 3
Mode No. 5
Fig. 5 Comparison of selected mode shapes determined numerically and experimentally
For the identiﬁed mode shapes, a high compliance of the natural frequency values
was obtained i.e., for the V1 beam the maximum error did not exceed 3.7%, on
average 3.1%, for the V2 beam the maximum error did not exceed 6.8%, on average
4.7%, V3 beam the maximum error did not exceed 5.9%, on average 4.29% and for
V4: 4.0% and 2.5% respectively.
Additionally, a fair agreement of a receptance functions was achieved.

82
B. Niesterowicz et al.
Fig. 6 Experimental veriﬁcation of receptance functions for analyzed beams

Finite Element Modelling of Thin-Walled Box Beams …
83
6
Conclusions
This paper presents a results of ﬁnite element analysis of partially ﬁlled steel-polymer
concrete beams. The application of the ﬁlling made it possible to shape the dynamic
properties of a steel beam while slightly increasing its mass.
The proposed methodology of modelling such structures allowed for a reliable and
unambiguous determination of the dynamic properties of the beams under consider-
ation, thus providing tools necessary for designing beams fabricated in the presented
technology.
The aim of future research can be described as: selection of the distribution of
the polymer concrete ﬁlling in order to obtain the desired dynamic properties of the
machine tool frame structural elements.
Acknowledgements Research carried out on research apparatus purchased as part of the project
No. RPZP.01.03.00-32-0004/17. Project co-ﬁnanced by the European Union from the European
Regional Development Fund under the Regional Operational Program of the West Pomeranian
Voivodeship 2014-2020. Project co-ﬁnanced by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education.
References
1. Dhupia, J., Powalka, B., Katz, R., Ulsoy, A.G.: Dynamics of the arch-type reconﬁgurable
machine tool. Int. J. Mach. Tools Manuf. 47(2), 326–334 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijm
achtools.2006.03.017
2. Mi˛adlicki,K.,Jasiewicz,M.,Gołaszewski,M.,Królikowski,M.,Powałka,B.:Remanufacturing
system with chatter suppression for CNC turning. Sensors 20(18), 5070 (2020)
3. Aggogeri, F., Borboni, A., Merlo, A., Pellegrini, N., Ricatto, R.: Vibration damping analysis
of lightweight structures in machine tools. Materials 10(3), 297 (2017)
4. Parus, A., Powałka, B., Marchelek, K., Domek, S., Hoffmann, M.: Active vibration control in
milling ﬂexible workpieces. J. Vib. Control 19(7), 1103–1120 (2013)
5. Singh, R.K., et al.: Passive vibration damping using polymer pads with microchannel arrays.
J. Microelectromech. Syst. 22(3), 695–707 (2013)
6. Ahn, S., Jeon, E.-B., Yang, W., Koh, H.-I., Kim, H.-S., Park, J.: Dependence of polymer
concrete vibration characteristics on internal pipe and damper embedment. Compos. Struct.
143, 347–351 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compstruct.2016.02.031
7. Kulíšek, V., et al.: On passive damping in machine tool hybrid structural parts. Int. J. Adv.
Manuf. Technol. 114(7), 1925–1952 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-021-06865-2
8. Okulik, T., Dunaj, P., Chod´zko, M., Marchelek, K., Powałka, B.: Determination of dynamic
properties of a steel hollow section ﬁlled with composite mineral casting. In: International
Scientiﬁc-Technical Conference Manufacturing, pp. 561–571 (2019)
9. Dunaj, P., Berczy´nski, S., Chod´zko, M.: Method of modeling steel-polymer concrete frames
for machine tools. Compos. Struct. 242, 112197 (2020)
10. Midas, I.T.: User’s manual of midas NFX. MIDAS IT (2011)
11. Dunaj, P., Berczy´nski, S., Chod´zko, M., Niesterowicz, B.: Finite element modeling of the
dynamic properties of composite steel-polymer concrete beams. Materials 13(7), 1630 (2020)
12. Holanda, S.A., Silva, A.A., de Araújo, C.J., de Aquino, A.S.: Study of the complex stiffness of
a vibratory mechanical system with shape memory alloy coil spring actuator. Shock Vib. 2014
(2014)

84
B. Niesterowicz et al.
13. Neumark, S.: Concept of complex stiffness applied to problems of oscillations with viscous
and hysteretic damping. HM Stationery Ofﬁce (1962)
14. Peeters, B., Van der Auweraer, H., Guillaume, P., Leuridan, J.: The PolyMAX frequency-
domain method: a new standard for modal parameter estimation?. Shock Vib. 11(3, 4), 395–409
(2004)
15. Peeters, B., Van der Auweraer, H.: PolyMAX: a revolution in operational modal analysis. In:
1st International Operational Modal Analysis Conference, , pp. 26–27. Copenhagen, Denmark
(2005)
16. Allemang, R.J.: The modal assurance criterion—Twenty years of use and abuse. Sound Vib.
37(8), 14–23 (2003)

Uncertainty Budget for Static Stiffness
Measurement According to ISO 230-1
Paweł Majda
and Joanna Jastrz˛ebska
Abstract Static stiffness of machine tools is considered as a signiﬁcant factor as it
affects to machine performance and accuracy under load. The main purpose of this
paper is to present the uncertainty budgets for static stiffness measurement results.
The uncertainty budget has a very important practical aspect. It allows to isolate
some components that contribute the most to the combined measurement uncertainty.
This paper presents a measurement procedure to measure static stiffness which is in
line with ISO 230-1. The conditions that must be met to minimize the considered
uncertainty components in the budget of the complex uncertainty are described. The
comparison of the results shows that the uncertainty of typical sensors is not the main
component in uncertainty budgets. However, conducted analyses indicated some
crucial factors that should be taken into account: averaging method, type of signal
ﬁltration, inﬂuence of environmental conditions or conﬁrmations of the consistency
of measuring instruments.
Keywords Static stiffness · Machine tool · Uncertainty · Measurements
1
Introduction
Basically, there are two main reasons for conducting quasi-static stiffness of machine
tool (QSSMT) measurements. Firstly, to compare the stiffness of various machine
tools. Secondly, to obtain the values of stiffness coefﬁcients that, together with the
knowledge of the value and direction of the cutting force, are used for the prediction of
workpiece geometric errors. The former is of interest to machine tool manufacturers
and the latter to users. The method of measuring the static stiffness proposed in ISO
230-1 [1] is, owing to its advantages, completely sufﬁcient to carry out comparative
tests of machines within one company. The QSSMT measurement is performed under
quasi-staticloadconditions,forexampleunderalow-frequencyperiodicalwaveform.
P. Majda (B) · J. Jastrz˛ebska
West Pomeranian University of Technology in Szczecin, 70-310 Szczecin, Poland
e-mail: pawel.majda@zut.edu.pl
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
B. Powałka et al. (eds.), Mechatronics—Trending Future Industries, Lecture Notes
in Networks and Systems 377, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93377-7_8
85

86
P. Majda and J. Jastrz˛ebska
At low frequencies, the inﬂuence of inertia forces on displacement measurement
results can be neglected.
The development of QSSMT measurement methods based on torque and angle
of rotation measurements is not observed in the literature. Currently, the primary
used methods are based on using displacement sensor (DS) and force measurements
of a single axis (1-DoF). ISO 230-1 [1] includes methods that implement these
ideas. From the point of uncertainty analysis, this method is crucial as its simple
realizationallowslimitingthenumberoferrorsinmeasuringprocess.Itisparticularly
difﬁcult to identify in it the errors characteristic of the method. In this respect, the
budget of its uncertainty will have few components. Thus, it can be assumed that
the uncertainty of measurement of this method may be smaller compared to that
obtained for other (much more complex) methods. Hence, this approach should
be considered as a reference method. Any other measurement results should be
compared in reproducibility studies with those obtained by this method. ISO 23-1
[1] proposes two types of testing, i.e. by applying force externally and by applying
force internally. Archenti et al. in [2, 3] a lot of their attention paid to the validation of
the use of external force system in measurements of machine tools. Also, this paper
presents uncertainty budget for measurements conducted based on this approach.
The values obtained can be used to determine the benchmark for other methods.
The guidelines of the standard explicitly allow for the possibility of modifying
the method of load implementation. This means that the quasi-static one can be used
instead of the static one. The idea of measuring static stiffness by applying external
force according to ISO 230-1[1] is shown in Fig. 1. The distribution of internal forces
and loops of force and displacement in the structural loop (SL) of the machine tool
is shown in Fig. 2.
A characteristic feature of this measuring method is that the force loop and the
displacement loop have fragments of individual areas where they do not coincide
as shown in Fig. 2a, c. This property can undoubtedly be considered as an advan-
tage. Due to the fact that deformations of all elements of the force excitation system,
including the deformations of the actuator, do not interfere with the displacement
Fig. 1 Machine tool statistic
stiffness measurement
scheme by applying external
force in line with ISO 230-1,
where 1-displacement
sensor, 2-load cell,
3-actuator, 4-shank tools,
5-actuator mounting bracket,
6-spindle head,
7-displacement sensor
mounting bracket, 8-machine
table

Uncertainty Budget for Static Stiffness Measurement …
87
Fig. 2 Stiffness measurement according to ISO 230-1: a Displacement loop, b internal force
system, c force loop
measurement channel. This aspect simpliﬁes the uncertainty analysis of displace-
ment measurement. The visualization of the internal forces in Fig. 2b shows that the
machine tool is subject to a complex state of stress. Therefore, it is not possible for any
QSSMT measurements based on 1-DoF to be subjected to the uniaxial deformation
state of SL components. The measured displacement is the result of translational and
rotational displacement. Rotational displacements result from the bending moment
load on the system. It is obvious that different actuator extensions will cause different
bending moments. This means that testing the same machine tool with different actu-
ator types can give different stiffness measurement results. For this reason, it is very
difﬁcult to formulate criteria that the users of the standard [1] would have to adhere
to be able to compare the measurement results. The standard does not specify such
criteria either. Therefore, it could be stated that ﬁnding the solution to this issue is
still pending.
There are many different combinations and types of metrology equipment that
can be used to measure machine tool stiffness. Pneumatic and hydraulic actuators
[4] are used to generate force between the table and the spindle [5, 6]. This force
is measured using strain gauges [4, 6] or indirectly after calibration of the pressure
measurement results from the pneumatic actuator [7]. The displacements can be
measured using the following: inductive displacement sensors LVDT (Linear Vari-
able Differential Transformer) [4, 5], eddy current sensors [8], capacitance sensors
[9], Laser-Tracker [4] or a laser interferometer [10]. Noteworthy are the integrated
designs of the actuator in which the displacement sensor is placed inside [11]. Such
systems enable measuring the stiffness between the table and the element placed
in the tool holder of the spindle at a given point of the machining space. Measure-
ments are performed for a variable SL conﬁguration for different directions. Archenti
et al. [2, 7, 12–15] specialized in this technology and presented the novel method
called Loaded Double Ball Bar (LDBB) system. Measurement with such a device
resembles testing a machine tool according to the ISO 230-4 circularity test with the
difference that it is performed under load of force generated by a pneumatic actu-
ator. Undoubtedly, a compact design, possibility of quick change of the displacement
measurement direction, performing the measurement in motion and short testing time
are the advantages of this solution. LDBB type solutions are fundamentally different

88
P. Majda and J. Jastrz˛ebska
from the stiffness test proposal according to ISO 230-1 [1]. The force and displace-
ment loops have the same track. This causes errors in the stiffness measurement track
such as: friction (hysteresis) in joints working under quasi-static load and deforma-
bility of the actuator elements. Hence, from the point of view of implementing new
measurement methods the identiﬁcation and reliable assessment of their impact on
measurement uncertainty are crucial. The justiﬁcation and identiﬁcation of standard
uncertainty components for QSSMT measurements is presented in [16]. In this paper,
the same values of standard uncertainty components were used in conducted analyses
(presented in Sect. 3).
2
Stiffness Measurement of a Machine Tool
2.1
Measurement Procedure and Equipment
To perform of the QSSMT measurement according to ISO 231-1 [1] is possible only if
the concept is properly realized and relevant equipment is used. Hence, in Fig. 3, there
is shown the equipment used in experiments. The instrumentations and measuring
instruments are considered to be typical and meet the accuracy requirements that are
placed on the metrology equipment used in machine tools testing.
As all data provided by the manufacturer are available in catalogs and calibration
certiﬁcates, they are easy to obtain. These data can be used to estimate the uncertainty
components associated with errors of a method. The distinction between the concept
of error and uncertainty is crucial because metrology equipment manufacturers use
them interchangeably to describe accuracy measures. The error relates to a speciﬁc
source (cause), is measurable and can take speciﬁc values (minus, zero, plus). The
uncertainty should be understood as a range of values characterizing the dispersion of
measurement result. In this context, measured values also have their dispersion, i.e.
their uncertainties. Due to the availability of the uncertainty components estimated by
method B, a distinction between electrical and physical units for measured quantities
should be made. Therefore, the electrical units for the displacement are expressed in
V and the physical units in μm. For the strain gauge that is used in tests, these are
mV/V and N respectively. The QSSMT tests have a sampling rate of 10 kHz and less
for data acquisition. The pneumatic actuator generated a quasi-static sinusoidal force
of 1 Hz. The results of displacement and force were recorded in the time domain.
In this paper, a measurement model (1) is proposed based on an equivalent to a
linear model which is described in detail in [16]. The stiffness is calculated using:
F(t) = K · Q(t + τ) + B
(1)
where, F is the generalized forces vector with respect to time t, K is generalized
stiffness matrix, Q is a vector of generalized displacement and B represents vector
of constant terms.

Uncertainty Budget for Static Stiffness Measurement …
89
Fig. 3 Elements of the measuring system used for testing the quasi-static stiffness of machine
tools, where: 1-voltage signal generator, 2-power signal acquisition system NI PXI-e-1082, 3-force
DAQ [17], 4-displacement DAQ [18], 5-voltage displacement signal conditioning system [19], 6-
displacement sensor [19], 7-measurement plate, 8-ball joint, 9-load cell, 10-pneumatic actuator,
11-proportional directional control valve, 12-compressed air input, 13-single-angle standard collet
ER20 of tool diameter 16 mm, 14-DV40 shank tools
2.2
Measurements and Results
In the stiffness tests of machine tools according to ISO 230-1 [1], a simplifying
assumption is made that the direction of the force coincides with the direction of the
measured displacement and that the displacement is measured at the point of force
application. In addition, it should be noted that the assembly of the instrumenta-
tion components (load cell bracket, actuator and load cell screw connections, linear
displacement sensor holder positioning and the DS itself) can add further disper-
sion components to the measurement results. These mentioned types of errors are
identiﬁed in the reproducibility tests of the measurement methods. It is not a rule,
but it is a common phenomenon that when a human regulates the measuring system
individually, it generates the biggest errors in the measurement method.
Using the measuring instruments, a QSSMT test was carried out for a medium-
sized milling machine. The measurements were performed for 13 days. Every day
the entire instrumentation was disassembled (including the removal of all screw
connections). The position of the bracket (to which the actuator was attached) was

90
P. Majda and J. Jastrz˛ebska
marked on the table. Every day it was placed in the marked position. After the DAQ
self-calibration of displacement and zero balancing of the load cell, measurements
were taken for the tensile load (F > 0) and compressive load (F < 0) of the actuator
i.e. pulling and pushing of the tool tip. This means, that the head of a load vector
were changing. The view of the system is presented in Fig. 4. Exemplary stiffness
characteristics are presented in Fig. 5. The results of the stiffness measurement of the
milling machine, that were obtained in 13 consecutive days, are presented in Fig. 6.
In systems with applied force elements (such as pneumatic or hydraulic cylinders
etc.) the delay always occurs, τ is the time delay of linear displacement (rotational
displacement) relative to force (torque). It is proposed to include the delay. Table 1
shows a summary of the results of reproducibility tests of stiffness measurement in
the context of linearity and delay of the displacement signal in relation to force.
Obtaining the results presented in Table 1 was preceded by preliminary tests, in
which the method of trial and error was used to attempt to obtain the smallest possible
dispersion of measurement results. For example, immobilizing the spindle drive
using software results in a threefold increase in the reproducibility of the stiffness
measurement result, while non-parallel attachment of the actuator axis to the table
surface results in a ﬁvefold increase in reproducibility. The clamping forces of the
screw connections did not cause any signiﬁcant changes in the reproducibility of the
obtained results.
Fig. 4 Viewofmetrologyequipmentduringstiffnessmeasurementsofmillingmachinetool,where:
1-displacement sensor, 2-magnetic foot holder, 3-spindle head, 4-actuator, 5-load cell, 6-actuator
mounting bracket, 7-proportional directional control valve

Uncertainty Budget for Static Stiffness Measurement …
91
Fig. 5 Examples of stiffness
measurement characteristics
obtained according to ISO
230-1 (without hysteresis
compensation) for
compressive and tensile load
of the actuator during tests
Fig. 6 Example results of
the QSSMT stiffness tests of
a milling machine due to the
change in the measurement
time and disassembly of
metrological equipment
elements
Table 1 Results of measurement reproducibility tests (k = 2) of stiffness characteristics for a
medium-sized milling machine according to ISO 230-1
Stiffness K N/μm
Linearity L %
Delay τ ms
F* < 0
F** > 0
F* < 0
F** > 0
F* < 0
F** > 0
8.69 ± 0.21
8.68 ± 0.24
1.9 ± 0.9
2.3 ± 1.1
2.4 ± 1.7
3.3 ± 1.7
U <± 0.3
(1)
U <± 1.1
(2)
U <± 1.7
(3)
*For compression load, **For tension load
There is an interesting practical conclusion from the presented measurement
results: the stiffness of the machine tool (the one that was tested) does not show
any differences due to the change in the load force. However, the value of linearity
is of the same order as its reproducibility. This means that the machine shows the
properties of a linear object. The above statements are true within the limits of the
reproducibility of the measurement method (the values in Table 1).

92
P. Majda and J. Jastrz˛ebska
3
Stiffness Uncertainty Budget and Discussion
The cycle of measurement uncertainty analyses presented in this section were
performed for different variants. The assumptions made for the analyses of the next
variant resulted from the conclusions that were drawn after the analysis of results
of the previous variant. The uncertainty for the measurement results of stiffness K,
constant term B, linearity L and delay τ were calculated as a special case (i.e. only for
one generalized coordinate) with the MCM algorithm which is described in detail in
[16].
3.1
Variant 1
The analysis involved measurement uncertainties components according to [16].
The calculations take into account the minimum values of the uncertainty intervals
that occur in these equations. Therefore, this analysis assumes that the measuring
instruments used show traceability in terms of measurement with the units of quantity
to be measured (i.e. have valid calibration cards). Variant 1 corresponds to the most
favorable case, i.e. achieving the smallest uncertainty of measurement results. The
uncertainty budget is presented in Fig. 7.
Conclusions for Variant 1: the method errors related to the reproducibility of
assembly of metrological instrumentation elements are the weakest link of QSSMT
measurement according to ISO 230-1 [1]. This reproducibility is ≈100% contributor
in the measurement uncertainty budget K, L and τ. The metrological characteristics
of the measuring instruments used in the studies presented here do not contribute
signiﬁcantly to the measurement uncertainty of K, L and τ. This, at this stage it can
be stated that the use of measuring instruments with conﬁrmation of traceability for
stiffness measurement according to ISO 230-1 [1] allows to determine the stiffness
with uncertainty not worse than the dispersion achieved in reproducibility tests of
the method.
3.2
Variant 2
The analysis omitted the reproducibility components of the metrological instrumen-
tation assembly. The results show how much the components of the measuring instru-
ments contribute to the uncertainty budget of Variant 1. The budget for Variant 2 is
presented in Fig. 8.
Conclusions for Variant 2 (in compare with Variant 1): in the calculation of
Variant 1, an uncertainty of ±0.28 was achieved for stiffness K and for Variant 2 it
was ±0.014 N/μm. In relation to the measured value K it gives a relative error of
3.3 and 0.2% respectively. A similar improvement was achieved for linearity L and

Uncertainty Budget for Static Stiffness Measurement …
93
Fig. 7 Measurement uncertainty budget for Variant 1
delay τ. Therefore, when comparing the results, it can be concluded that minimizing
the reproducibility component (e.g. by designing special DS mounting brackets and
a load cell) can enable to signiﬁcantly reduce the QSSMT measurement uncertainty.
The dominant contributions to the uncertainty budget of Variant 2 are accordingly:
• For stiffness K, 49% uncertainty of the DAQ displacement gain, 49% uncertainty
of the load cell gain, 1.9% uncertainty of the DAQ force gain,
• For linearity L, 55% ﬁlter window size, 45% linearity uncertainty of the load cell,
• For delay τ, 100% linearity uncertainty of the load cell,

94
P. Majda and J. Jastrz˛ebska
Fig. 8 Measurement uncertainty budget for Variant 2
• For constant term B, 14% DAQ zero uncertainty of force measurement, 5.7%
cosine error of DS regulation, 36% DS thermal drift, 42% load cell thermal drift.
The latter two will be minimized under established temperature conditions.
Analyzing the above results, a characteristic trend was created, i.e. a ranking of
dominant budget contributors. This means that making changes in these contributors,
it can be a good way to reduce measurement uncertainty. On the other hand, the
opposite problem is: which contributors, for the applied method and conﬁguration
of the measurement system, can be omitted from the uncertainty analysis without

Uncertainty Budget for Static Stiffness Measurement …
95
losing the accuracy of the uncertainty estimation. Therefore, further analyses have
been made.
3.3
Variant 3
In this case, the calculations were made to investigate the effect of sampling and
ﬁltration frequencies on the results of obtained measurement uncertainties. Sampling
frequency of force and displacement measurement signal f sf = 100 and 1000 Hz was
assumed in the analysis and averaging ﬁltration was omitted (ﬁlter window size 1).
Other assumptions were made as for Variant 2.
• For f sf = 100 Hz the following was achieved; K = 8.43 ± 0.017 N/μm, B = 0 ±
8.3 N, L = 1.73 ± 0.0084%, τ = 2.52 ± 0.011 ms.
• For f sf = 1000 Hz the following was achieved; K = 8.44 ± 0.014 N/μm, B = 0
± 8.3 N, L = 1.84 ± 0.0082%, τ = 2.52 ± 0.011 ms.
An increase to 99.5% of the share of linearity of the load cell was observed in
the uncertainty budget of linearity L determination. For the remaining results, the
budgets looked very similar to those of Variant 2.
Conclusions for Variant 3: A comparison of the results of Variant 2 and Variant 3
allows to state that reducing the sampling frequency from 10 kHz to 100 and 1000 Hz
and omitting signal ﬁltration has no signiﬁcant impact on the determination of
measurement values K, B and τ and their uncertainty. However, it causes a signiﬁcant
reduction of the uncertainty of determining linearity L while overstating it. There
were also made same calculations for an increased averaging window size from 100
to 200. Then a decrease in linearity from 1.4 to 0.5% and an increase in uncertainty
of its determination from ±0.012 to ±0.079%. were obtained. It follows that there is
an interaction that is difﬁcult to intuitively interpret between the linearity of the load
cell and the signal ﬁltering effects. It should be noted that the linearity uncertainty
of the load cell was modelled under the most unfavorable assumption, i.e. that the
characteristics of its calibration are unknown. Therefore, a change in the sampling
frequency determines the occurrence of extreme points for linearity counting. This
would explain the results obtained. In particular, the effects of modelling the linearity
error with knowledge of its course (location) in the measuring range of the load cell
used in the measurements should be determined. The discussion leads to a very
important practical conclusion. The averaging of force and displacement signals in
the time domain in the QSSMT tests are factors that highly determining the value
of the systematic linearity error and its uncertainty. In other words, using the classic
deﬁnition of linearity error calculation in QSSMT testing allows for manipulation
its value and uncertainty by an appropriate selection of ﬁltration parameters and
modellingthelinearityerroroftheloadcell.Establishingacloserelationshipbetween
the discussed causes and their effects requires further research.

96
P. Majda and J. Jastrz˛ebska
In order not to introduce another variable in the comparative analysis, the 10 kHz
sampling rate and the size of the averaging ﬁlter window 100 were consistently
adopted for further calculations.
3.4
Variant 4
Calculations were made to examine the impact the impact of omitting the compo-
nents with low budget share on the results of obtained measurement uncertainties.
Previous analyses were made for a very strict requirement—being the assumption of
a temperature difference of ΔT = 5 °C that could occur during the measurements.
This was done for cognitive purposes, then ΔT = 1 °C was assumed to analysis.
In real measurements, this case is more likely to happen. In addition, the following
factors were omitted from the analysis: the components related to DAQ measurement
noise of the force and displacement and DS measurement noise and the load cell.
The following was obtained after the calculations: K = 8.44 ± 0.014 N/μm, B =
0 ± 6.5 N, L = 1.43 ± 0.012%, τ = 2.52 ± 0.011 ms.
Comparing the results obtained for Variant 2 and Variant 4, it should be stated that
for the measuring instruments used in these tests, the omission of the components
corresponding to the uncertainty of their noise (thus resolution) and thermal drifts
from the QSSMT measurement uncertainty analysis has no signiﬁcant impact on
the value or uncertainty of measurement results of stiffness K, linearity L and delay
τ. Also, additional calculations were performed. Then, it was concluded that the
measurement noise uncertainties would have to be 100 times greater to notice their
impact on the results of uncertainty budgeting.
The uncertainty of determination of constant term B decreased from 8.1 to 6.5 N.
This is because of the reduction of the temperature difference assumed for the
analysis.
3.5
Variant 5
The aim of the analysis of Variant 5 was to answer the question: how much the uncer-
tainty can increase if we use measuring instruments without current conﬁrmation of
measurement traceability. Such a situation would occur after a certain period of time
(e.g. 2 years) from the third-party calibrations of the measuring instruments. The
results together with histograms for the population of MCM results are presented in
Fig. 9.
Conclusions for Variant 5: the shapes of histograms presented in Fig. 9 differ
from the shape of normal decomposition. This is typical for cases where only one,
two or three components of the summarized uncertainties dominate in the system.
Therefore, there is no point to present an uncertainty budget for Variant 5. It does
not bring qualitative changes to the discussion. In this budget only the proportions

Uncertainty Budget for Static Stiffness Measurement …
97
Fig. 9 Histograms of the population of QSSMT results obtained by the Monte Carlo method
assuming that the uncertainties of measuring instruments do not have conﬁrmation of measurement
traceability
of the already determined dominant contributors of the budget changed, as had been
the case in the analysis of Variant 2.
Another conclusion is that when comparing the results obtained for Variant 2
and Variant 5 the design uncertainty values of the measurement results for Variant 5
increased. However, it should be noted that they have increased to the level which was
obtained for Variant 1. This means that the uncertainties only brought into the budget
by the uncertainties of the measuring instruments without current conﬁrmation of
traceability reach values similar to the reproducibility levels (see Table 1). Therefore,
the range of uncertainty of QSSMT results can be even greater than the range that
we obtained in the tests of their reproducibility (see Table 1). It should therefore
be concluded that the uncertainties of the measuring instruments, without current
conﬁrmationsoftraceability,makeasigniﬁcantcontributiontotheuncertaintybudget
for stiffness measurements. This conclusion follows directly from the claim about
summing up the standard deviations of the independent variables. For example, the
reproducibility of the stiffness measurement was U(K) = ± 0.25 (see Table 1) and
the uncertainty for Variant 5 U(K) = ± 0.22 N/μm. Therefore, it should be expected
in a measurement where instruments without conﬁrmation of traceability are applied
U(K) ≈2 · ((0.25/2)2 + (0.22/2)2)0.5 ≈0.33 N/μm.

98
P. Majda and J. Jastrz˛ebska
3.6
Variant 6
In the calculations of Variant 6, the uncertainty of displacement sensor indications
were changed from U = ± (0.013 μm + 13 μm/m) to much worse, i.e. U = ±
(3 μm + 1000 μm/m). This value corresponds to a typical value, e.g. for inductive
sensors. Therefore, the aim was to investigate the inﬂuence of using a less accurate
sensor on QSSMT measurement results.
After the calculations, we conclude that compared to the results of the calculations
obtained for Variant 5, only the linearity uncertainty changed signiﬁcantly from
±0.17 to ±0.33%. Moreover, the constant term from ±18 to ±34 N for which this
uncertainty prevailed in the budget reaching ≈50%. For stiffness K and delayτ, no
differences were observed for the values or for their uncertainty intervals at the level
of the second signiﬁcant digit.
Conclusion for Variant 6: the use in measurements of a sensor with better than
typical accuracy of indications (i.e. those found for eddy current, inductive sensors,
etc.) do not signiﬁcantly improve the uncertainty of stiffness measurement according
to ISO 230-1 [1].
4
Conclusions
The paper presents the uncertainty budgets for QSSMT measurement results for
the measurements conduct according to ISO 230-1 [1]. The conditions that must
be met to minimize the considered uncertainty components in the budget of the
complex uncertainty of QSSMT measurements are described. These conditions are:
averaging method, type of signal ﬁltration, inﬂuence of environmental conditions or
conﬁrmations of the consistency of measuring instruments.
The analysis of obtained results indicates that the use of: typical measurement
methods, typical (for machine tool tests) load and displacement sensors and measure-
ment cards with conﬁrmation of their measurement consistency (i.e. the current
expiry date of their calibration cards), does not provide an effective narrowing of
the uncertainty range of the results of quasi-static stiffness measurements. Based
on the performed analysis, it can be said that if the reproducibility and uncertainty
components of the method are taken into account, sensors and measurement cards
can be omitted in the analysis of the measurement uncertainty. This means that
they are consider as irrelevant components and their shares in complex uncertainty
are insigniﬁcantly small. On the other hand, the use of sensors and measuring cards
without conﬁrmation of consistency leads to obtaining values of uncertainty stiffness
measurement ranges that are comparable with the ranges that results from compo-
nents of reproducibility and uncertainty of the measurement method. This conclusion
concerns in particular the standardized method of static stiffness study of machine
tools according to ISO 230-1 [1].

Uncertainty Budget for Static Stiffness Measurement …
99
The use of special equipment could eliminate manual actions performed by
human during measurements. Therefore, it is recommended to make new attempts at
designing and testing special equipment to improve existing measurement methods.
The paper presents that this approach can be the most effective way to minimize the
uncertainty of a machine tools stiffness measurements. It can be seen that, in scientiﬁc
studies, only uncertainty components of the sensors are used in the measurements
and this is not sufﬁcient for reliable assessment of the obtained QSSMT measurement
results.
References
1. ISO 230-1:2012.: Test code for machine tools. Part 1: geometric accuracy of machines operation
under no-load or ﬁnishing conditions, ISO, Geneva (2017)
2. Archenti, A., Nicolescu, M., Casterman, G., Hjelm, S.: A new method for circular testing of
machine tools under loaded condition. Procedia CIRP 1, 575–580 (2012)
3. Archenti, A., Laspas, T.: Accuracy and performance analysis of machine tools. In: Gao, W.,
(eds.), Metrology Precision Manufacturing, pp. 215–244. Springer, Singapore (2019). https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-4938-5_7
4. Røsjordet, J.F., Hovland, G.: Methods for experimentally determining stiffness of a multi-axis
machining centre. Model. Identiﬁ. Control 40(1), 11–25 (2019). ISSN 1890-1328, https://doi.
org/10.4173/mic.2019.1.2
5. Gao, X., Li, B., Hong, J., Guo, J.: Stiffness modeling of machine tools based on machining
space analysis. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 86, 2093–2106 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00170-015-8336-z
6. www.rcmt.cvut.cz/zkuslab/en/text/36. Accessed 07 Oct 2019
7. Archenti, A.: A computational framework for control of machining system capability. Ph.D.
thesis. KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm Sweden (2011). ISBN 978-91-7501-
162-2
8. Salgado, M.A., López de Lacalle, L.N., Lamikiz, A., Muñoa, J., Sánchez, J.A.: Evaluation of
the stiffness chain on the deﬂection of end-mills under cutting forces. Int. J. Mach. Tool Manuf.
45(6), 727–739 (2005). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmachtools.2004.08.023
9. Sarhan, A.A.D., Matsubara, A.: Investigation about the characterization of machine tool spindle
stiffness for intelligent CNC end milling. Robot. Comput.-Integr. Manuf. (34), 133–139 (2015).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rcim.2014.12.001
10. Stejskal, T., Svetlík, J., Dovica, M., Demeˇc, P., Kráˇl, J.: Measurement of static stiffness after
motion on a three-axis CNC milling table. Appl. Sci. 8(1), 15 (2018). https://doi.org/10.3390/
app8010015
11. www.planlauf.com/en/measurement/stiffness-measurement. Accessed 07 Oct 2019
12. Archenti, A.: Prediction of machined part accuracy from machining system capability. Ann.
CIRP 63(1), 505–550 (2014)
13. Archenti, A., Nicolescu, M.: A top-down equivalent stiffness approach for prediction of
deviation sources in machine tool joints. Ann. CIRP 66(1), 487–490 (2017)
14. Archenti, A., Nicolescu, M.: Accuracy analysis of machine tools using elastically linked
systems. Ann. CIRP 62(1), 503–506 (2013)
15. Szipka, K., Dax, P., Archenti, A., et al.: Integration of machining system capability information
into CAx software environment for complex tool trajectory prediction. CIRP Procedia 72,
1239–1244 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2018.03.015
16. Majda, P., Jastrz˛ebska, J.: Measurement uncertainty of generalized stiffness of machine tools.
Measurement 170 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2020.108692

100
P. Majda and J. Jastrz˛ebska
17. www.ni.com/pdf/manuals/376022d.pdf. Accessed 20 Oct 2019
18. www.ni.com/pdf/manuals/372125f.pdf. Accessed 20 Oct 2019
19. www.lionprecision.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/CAP-CPL190-CPL290-Brochure.pdf.
Accessed 20 Oct 2019

Effect of Thermal Cycles
on the Microstructure and Mechanical
Properties of the Heat Affected Zone
for the HCT600C Advanced High
Strength Complex Phase Steel Used
for Car Body
M. Kawiak
and S. J. Krajewski
Abstract Today’s times dictate certain trends in research, among others thanks to the
use of devices, tools and programs to simulate the behavior of materials and structures
under various operating and manufacturing conditions. According to the Industry 4.0
concept, smart devices prompt the user how to produce the given element, with what
parameters. On the other hand, the performance of a welded joint involves, inter
alia, the use of adequate technology, time and costs, which can be avoided through
tests simulating various types of treatments on base materials without the need to
physically weld them. The so-called smart welding allows manufacturers to avoid
cracks, but machine learning requires research and experience. In line with this
approach, the advanced high strength complex-phase steel (CP steel) weldability
tests were carried out using the Gleble 3500 device. Based on the simulations of the
welding process thermal cycles, the impact of the t8/5 time on the microstructure and
mechanical properties that can be observed in the HCT600C steel’s heat-affected
zone was determined. The tests were carried out on the base material and on the
samples, following a simulated thermal welding process, where the t8/5 time was
examined within the 2 ÷ 200 s range. The samples were subjected to observation of
the microstructure using the optical microscope, as well as to the hardness and static
tensile tests. Based on the results obtained, images of the microstructure, dilatometric
diagrams, the results of the hardness, tensile strength and yield stress tests were
presented in the function of the t8/5 time, and based thereupon the optimal t8/5 time
interval was determined.
Keywords Smart welding · Advanced high strength steel (AHSS) · HCT600C
steel · Complex phase steel · Mechanical properties · CCT diagrams · t8/5 time ·
Weldability · Welding thermal cycles · Heat affected zone · Physical simulation
M. Kawiak · S. J. Krajewski (B)
Faculty of Mechanical Engineering and Mechatronics, West Pomeranian University of
Technology Szczecin, 71-310 Stettin, Poland
e-mail: skrajewski@zut.edu.pl
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
B. Powałka et al. (eds.), Mechatronics—Trending Future Industries, Lecture Notes
in Networks and Systems 377, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93377-7_9
101

102
M. Kawiak and S. J. Krajewski
1
Introduction
The current trend in materials research is to develop materials with a combination
of the high strength-to-weight ratio and good toughness properties for various auto-
motive applications. The advanced high strength steel (AHSS) is one such alloy that
has been considered for such automotive applications. The AHSS alloys are clas-
siﬁed into three generations based on their tensile strength and ductility. The ﬁrst
AHSS generation contains mainly ferrite phase in its microstructure; for example
dual phase (DP), transformation induced plasticity (TRIP) and martensitic (MART)
steel. It is used for various automotive applications due to its light weight and high
energy absorption capabilities [1, 3, 4, 9, 10, 16].
Improvements in fabrication routes and alloy design of steels have been important
for the development of microalloyed steels, but also have become a problem for
microstructure analysis because they have complex microconstituents, with the same
crystallographic arrangement, but with different degrees of defects in their cells. It
is possible to obtain microstructures with different amounts of martensite/austenite
(MA), polygonal ferrite (PF), quasi-polygonal ferrite (QF), acicular ferrite (AF)
and bainite (B), for the same steel, when submitted to different thermomechanical
processing [2, 5, 7, 14, 15].
The main problem related to the AHSS steels’ weldability is due to the
complex microstructure that can be composed of major constituents: polygonal
and/or quasi-polygonal ferrite, acicular ferrite, lath-like bainitic ferrite, martensite
(lath/plate), martensite (tempered/auto-tempered), lower and upper bainite, as well
as minor constituents: carbides, cementite, retained-austenite, martensite/austenite
(MA) constituents, mixture of incomplete transformation products and carbide-free
bainite. The welding process heat cycle destroys the AHSS microstructure in the
heat zone area which constitutes a lower strength area, and this is a problem in the
automotive industry [6, 8, 12]. The welding process involves, inter alia, the use of
adequate technology, time and costs, which can be avoided through simulation tests
performed various on base materials. Smart welding is based on the simulation of
weldability in order to develop optimal parameters ensuring quality.
In general, these grades are joined together using various joining (welding) tech-
niques, with the most common robotic methods including spot welding, arc welding
methods, such as Gas Metal Arc Welding (GMAW) and laser welding. In case of the
HSS and AHSS steels welded joints often exhibit lower mechanical parameters than
the parent materials, as the welding heat even destroys the primary microstructures
(created by the smelter) in the fusion line and in the heat-affected zone (HAZ). For
this reason, the AHSS grades are tested and developed not only to improve safety,
ecology, weight and price of car bodies, but also to reduce the negative impact
of the welding methods on the mechanical properties of car body parts, mainly in
terms of strength and relative elongation. Multi-phase steels such as the HCT600C
grade are a part of the low-alloy steels group due to their alloying additives with the
ferritic-bainitic-martensitic structure [9, 11, 12].

Effect of Thermal Cycles on the Microstructure and Mechanical Properties …
103
In case of welding unalloyed and low-alloy steels, the so-called t8/5 time (the time
it takes to cool down from 800 to 500 °C, expressed in seconds [s]) parameter plays
the most important role, during which most of the phase changes in the welded joint
and in the heat affected zone take place, and is thus responsible for the mechanical
properties. For different welding methods, the same t8/5 will determine the width
of the heat affected zone, while the phase transitions will not differ, therefore the
weldability is deﬁned by the t8/5 time. The desired properties of the joined car bodies
include strength ensuring passengers’ passive safety and the high Rp0.2/Rm ratio,
as these parameters change in the welded joint area, in the so-called heat affected
zone. In addition, the load bearing capacity of these elements largely depends on the
quality of the welded or fusion welded joints, for example the lack of cracks, holes
or adequate microstructure and mechanical properties. In order to verify the optimal
t8/5 time, tests were carried out to present the welding conditions [17, 18].
2
Materials and Methods
2.1
Basic Material
Complex phase microstructure consists of ferrite, martensite and bainite. Bainite is
a mixed structure consisting of lath-like bainitic ferrite with a small secondary phase
(martensite islands) on a microscale level and precipitates (carbides or carbonitrides)
on a nanoscale level. Due to the depletion of carbon to form precipitates, there is
not enough carbon left in the domain to stabilize the remaining austenite. Therefore,
no retained austenite exists in the CP steels. Because of the similar crystal structure
(body centered cubic) of three constituents (ferrite, martensite and bainite) and the
complexity of the bainite microstructure, the CP microstructures are difﬁcult to be
characterized experimentally [7, 13, 15].
The produced welded joints should have a higher yield and tensile strength than
those speciﬁed in the PN-EN 10,346 standard for the HCT600C (1.0953) steel,
respectively: Rp0.2 = 350–500 MPa; Rm min. = 600 MPa.
2.2
Base Material Properties
The tests were carried out on the Complex-Phase HCT600C Advanced High Strength
Steel (AHSS) as delivered. The chemical composition of the steel used for the tests
was determined using a LECO GDS 500A glow discharge spectrometer. The content
of the individual elements was determined spectrometrically and is presented in Table
1.
For the force values obtained, tensile stress Rm, yield strength Re/Rp0.2 and rela-
tive elongation A were determined. The tests were carried out using an Instron

104
M. Kawiak and S. J. Krajewski
Table 1 The content of the steel elements used in the tests, determined spectrometrically
Element content, in mass %
C, %
Mn, %
Si, %
Cr, %
Ni, %
Mo, %
V, %
0.06
1.77
0.27
0.52
0.03
0.01
0.02
W, %
Cu, %
Al, %
Ti, %
Co, %
Nb, %
Sb, %
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.04
0.01
Table 2 Mechanical
properties of the HCT600C
steel
Mechanical properties
Material
Rp0.2 (MPa)
Rm (MPa)
A (%)
HCT600C
488.0
747.1
21.8
Table 3 Vickers hardness of
the HCT600C steel
Vickers hardness, HV10
Material
1
2
3
HCT600C
232
224
232
5585H 250kN testing machine (see Table 2). Hardness HV10 measurements of the
welded joints were performed with a LECO LCR500 hardness tester. The tests were
performed using the Vickers method according to PN-EN 6507, at a load of 100 N
(HV10). The load duration was 13 s (see Table 3). The microscopic examination was
performed using a Nikon Epiphot 200 metallographic microscope at 500 × magni-
ﬁcation, and the microstructure was revealed by etching with a 3% Nital reagent
(Mi1Fe) (see Fig. 1).
Dilatometric tests were carried out using a Gleeble 3500 LVDT dilatometer. The
sample was normalized, then heated to 950 ˚C, held for 30 s and then cooled at
the speeds of 1 ÷ 200 °C/s. The accuracy of the dilatometer was 4 µm, a K-type
thermocouple was used. The CCT dilatometric graph is shown in Fig. 2.
2.3
Methodology of Research on the Effect of Welding
Thermal Cycles on the Material
The analysis of the welding thermal cycle was carried out using a Gleeble 3500 simu-
lator offered by DSI Inc. The simulation involves electric current ﬂowing through
the sample, and the Joule heating generates a heat ﬂow from the center of the sample
to the water-cooled copper jaws. The simulation allows for obtaining a temperature
gradient across the sample. The examination of the impact of the t8/5 time on the
heat affected zone is used to generate the same cycle as during welding using various
methods (for single and multibead layers), depending on the expected welding condi-
tions, such as the type of material, energy consumed, sheet thickness, etc. The device

Effect of Thermal Cycles on the Microstructure and Mechanical Properties …
105
Fig. 1 Image of the HCT600C steel microstructure etched with a 3% Nital. Ferritic-bainitic-
martensitic structure
heats the sample to a peak temperature Tmax and then cools it down based on the
expected cooling time t8/5 from 800 to 500 °C. As a result of this simulation, samples
for the Impact test (KV), Static tensile test Rp0.2/Rm, Microscopic and Hardness tests
can be created with the actual structure as in a welded joint.
The Gleeble 3500 system was used to simulate the welding process and the heat
affected zone on the actual samples (Fig. 3):
– Tmax = 1100 °˚C in 2 s.
– Cooling with the t8/5 time within the 2 ÷ 200 s range.
3
Results and Discussion
Based on the tests conducted, microstructures similar to typical hypoeutectoid steels
containing ferrite-perlite in their structure were obtained (see Table 4). As a result
of the phase changes taking place in the heat affected zone of the welded joint, local
stresses arise, which will cause cracks and welding incompatibilities. As mentioned
before, the structure of multi-phase steels mainly consists of acicular and/or polyg-
onal and/or quasi-polygonal ferrite, lath-like bainitic ferrite, martensite (lath/plate,
tempered/auto-tempered), lower and upper bainite, and they get destroyed in the

106
M. Kawiak and S. J. Krajewski
Fig. 2 CCT diagram for the HCT600C steel
welded joint area. Depending on the impact of the thermal cycle on the material
under examination, various structures are formed, from purely martensitic, through
bainitic-martensitic or ferritic-pearlitic. In case of the t8/5 time longer than 25 s, the
pearlitic structure begins to form, and after the t8/5 time of 50 s the grain starts to
grow, which is an unfavorable phenomenon (see Table 4).
Table 5 summarizes the results of the mechanical, hardness and the t8/5 time tests.
The results obtained allow for drawing the following conclusions: during the process
of welding the multi-phase steel, the microstructure in the HAZ degrades, which may
not ensure passive safety of passengers during a collision of the repaired vehicle. The
optimal t8/5 timefor suchsteel is: 14–25s, whichprevents theformationof coldcracks
in the HAZ and enables the achievement of satisfactory mechanical properties, while
the time when a large relative volume of martensite and bainite is forming should be
excluded. The highest tensile strength of 1253.1 MPa was obtained for the sample
with the t8/5 time of 2 s, additionally the hardness of 385HV10 proves the formation
of a martensitic/bainitic structure. The sample was characterized by a brittle fracture,
indicating low plastic properties. The maximum hardness values of 385 and 371 were
obtained for the t8/5 time of 2 and 4 s, when a brittle bainitic-martensitic structure
was formed. At the bottom of the list there is a sample with the t8/5 time of 200 s,
the mechanical properties of which are also sufﬁcient for the HCT600C steel grade,
which may indicate good quality as delivery steel. In case of this sample, grain growth
and the formation of a ferritic-pearlitic structure were observed. The formation of a
pearlitic structure is caused by an extension of the holding time at a high temperature

Effect of Thermal Cycles on the Microstructure and Mechanical Properties …
107
Fig. 3 Graph of the temperature recorded by the TC1 K-type thermocouple and the time of the
sample welding cycle for the t8/5 time of 16 s
(the t8/5 time of 200 s). At the same time, polygonal ferrite was formed in the coarse
austenite grains and at the grain boundaries, subsequently turning into perlite. It
should be noted that the results of the physical simulation of steel weldability provide
us with information and trends about what actually happens during welding.
In order to illustrate the results of the research, a graph with the values of Rp0.2,
Rm and HV changing in the function of the t8/5 time is presented (see Fig. 4).
4
Conclusions
By simulating the heat affected zone in the CP (complex phase) steel with different
times of cooling from 800 to 500 °C (the so-called t8/5 time), the structures formed in
the joint area were successfully veriﬁed and the mechanical properties were tested.
The hardening mechanism and the evolution of the microstructure were examined
and the main conclusions are as follows.
– Extending the t8/5 time during the welding process may contribute to the growth of
ferrite grain and precipitation of pearlite, which changes the mechanical properties
of the HAZ,

108
M. Kawiak and S. J. Krajewski
Table 4 Impact of the t8/5 cooling time on the microstructure of a simulated heat affected zone
T8/5 cooling time of 2s, martensitic-bainitic 
structure, HV10 of 385
T8/5 cooling time of 10s, bainitic-
martensite structure, HV10 of 354
T8/5 cooling time of 16s, bainitic structure,
HV10 of 270
T8/5 cooling time of 25s, ferritic-bainitic 
structure, HV10 of 267
T8/5 cooling time of 50s, ferritic-bainitic 
structure, HV10 of 264
T8/5 cooling time of 200s, ferritic-pearlitic
structure, HV10 of 231
– Shortening the t8/5 time creates a martensitic structure with high hardness and
tensile strength, but unfortunately at the expense of plasticity, these joints will be
brittle and prone to cold cracks,
– The optimal t8/5 time is within the 14–25 s range, during which a favorable
complex-phase structure is formed, similar to the base material.

Effect of Thermal Cycles on the Microstructure and Mechanical Properties …
109
Table 5 Impact of the t8/5
cooling time on the
mechanical properties of a
simulated heat affected zone
Time t8/5 (s)
Rp0.2 (MPa)
Rm (MPa)
Hardness (HV10)
2
632.6
1253.1
385
4
599.5
1235.1
371
6
597.6
1204.9
368
8
590.4
1192.9
366
10
586.2
897.7
354
12
584.4
795.3
346
14
494.0
765.1
283
16
482.0
762.1
270
25
469.9
759.1
267
50
463.9
704.9
264
100
415.7
674.8
246
150
391.6
638.6
238
200
391.6
638.6
231
Fig. 4 Graph of the change in the mechanical properties and hardness in the function of the t8/5
time
This paper presents the changes that occur in the process of welding the HCT600C
complex-phase steel. The results obtained for the optimal t8/5 time of 14–25 s provide
a hint for welding engineers what welding parameters for this steel should be applied.
The material tested in the publication is used in the automotive industry for car body
parts joined using the robotic laser welding methods, GMAW or Spot welding. In
case of welded joints made from the group of these steels, cracks most often appear

110
M. Kawiak and S. J. Krajewski
in the heat affected zone, as the degradation of the characteristic ferritic-bainitic-
martensitic microstructure occurs in the base material. The simulation of the HAZ
thermal cycle using the Gleeble 3500 simulator enables obtaining results that could
be useful in optimizing the welding and fusing parameters, as well as determining
the weldability of the given material.
The compiled list of the properties of the multi-phase AHSS steels, including
hardness, mechanical properties and the t8/5 time, is based on the results of the
actual tests obtained from the simulations of the thermal-deformation cycles carried
out using the Gleeble 3500 simulator. This data constitutes the basis for determining
generalized relationships between independent and dependent variables in the design
processes and the applications of steel in the automotive industry.
To understand the relationship between microstructure, mechanical properties and
processing parameters, a quantitative analysis of the ﬁnal microstructure is required.
References
1. Bhargava, Z.M., Chakrabarty, S., Barnwal, V.K., Tewari, A., Mishra, S.K.: Effect of microstruc-
ture evolutionduringplastic deformationonthe formabilityoftransformationinducedplasticity
and quenched & partitioned AHSS. Mater. Des. 152(15), 65–77 (2018)
2. Dai, J., Meng, Q., Zheng, H.: High-strength dual-phase steel produced through fast-heating
annealing method. Results Mater. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rinma.2020.100069
3. Efthymiadis, P., Hazra, S., Clough, A., Lakshmi, R., Alamoudi, A., Dashwood, R., Shollock,
B.: Revealing the mechanical and microstructural performance of multiphase steels during
tensile, forming and ﬂanging operations. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 701(31), 174–186 (2017)
4. Gao, Z., Niu, J.: Study on microstructure and impact ductility of simulated weld HAZ of
High-strength wear-resistant steel NM360. Rev. Adv. Mater. Sci. 33, 232–237 (2013)
5. Hajro, I., Tasi´c, P.: Properties mismatching and distribution on structural steels welded joints.
Adv. Technol. Mater. 43(2) (2018)
6. Li, S., Zhang, Y., Qi, L., Kang, Y.: Effect of single tensile overload on fatigue crack growth
behavior in DP780 dual phase steel. Int. J. Fatigue 106, 49–55 (2018)
7. Li,X.,Ramazani,A.,Prahl,U.,Bleck,W.:Quantiﬁcationofcomplex-phasesteelmicrostructure
by using combined EBSD and EPMA measurements. Mater. Charact. 142, 179–186 (2018)
8. Lisok, J.: Wpływ nowoczesnych technologii na rozwój tłoczenia elementów karoserii samo-
chodowej (2019). https://stal.elamed.pl/artykul/wplyw-nowoczesnych-technologii-na-rozwoj-
tloczenia-elementow-karoserii-samochodowej/47252
9. Májlinger, K., Kalácska, E., Spena, P.R.: Gas metal arc welding of dissimilar AHSS sheets.
Mater. Des. 109, 615–621 (2016)
10. Martin, P., Unruh, K., Chottin, J., Hug, E.: Damage mechanisms in multiphased steels with
a bainitic matrix under various mechanical loading paths. Procedia Manuf. 15, 1557–1564
(2018)
11. Piekarska, W., Goszczy´nska, D., Saternus, Z.: Application of analitycal methods for predicting
the structures of steel phase transformations in welded joints. J. Appl. Math. Comput. Mech.
14(2), 61–72 (2015)
12. Radwa´nski, A.K., Wró˙zyna, A., Kuziak, R.: Role of the advanced microstructures characteri-
zation in modeling of mechanical properties of AHSS steels. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 639, 567–574
(2015)
13. Sun, H., Wei, K., Yang, X., Xiao, Z., Wu, Y.: Effects of pre-strain and annealing on the fatigue
properties of complex phase steel CP800. Int. J. Fatigue 131, 105364 (2020)

Effect of Thermal Cycles on the Microstructure and Mechanical Properties …
111
14. Suppan, C., Hebesberger, T., Pichler, A., Rehrl, J., Kolednik, O.: On the microstructure control
of the bendability of advanced high strength steels. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 735(26), 89–98 (2018)
15. Tomaz, R.F., Santos, D.B., Camey, K., Barosa, R., Andrade, M.S., Escobar, D.P.: Complex
phase quantiﬁcation methodology using electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) on low
manganese high temperature processed steel (HTP) microalloyed steel. J. Market. Res. 8(2),
2423–2431 (2019)
16. Tumuluru, M.D.: Resistance Spot Welding of Coated High Strength Dual Phase Steels. United
States Steel Corporation Research and Technology Center Monroeville
17. W˛eglowski, M.S., Zeman, M., Łomozik, M.: Physical simulation of weldability of Weldox
1300 steel. Mater. Sci. Forum 762, 551–555 (2013)
18. W˛eglowski, M., St., Zeman, M., Grocholewski, A.: Effect of welding thermal cycles on
microstructure and mechanical properties of simulated heat effected zone for a Weldox 1300
ultra-high strength alloy steel. Arch. Metall. Mater. 61(1), 127–132 (2016)

Diagnostics of the Turbine Set Bearing
with the Use of Experimental Modal
Analysis
Marcin Chod´zko
and Bartosz Powałka
Abstract The article presents the results of modal tests of the bearing cover and
clamp of a turbine set in a coal-ﬁred power plant with a power of 222 MW. They
were carried out in order to indicate the cause of the observed, increased vibration
amplitudes in selected locations of the turbine set, which could lead to accelerated
wear or failure. The increased level of these vibrations was diagnosed thanks to the
measuring systems built into the facility. However, these data weren’t enough to
identify the causes of the increased vibration level. Modal analysis methods proved
to be helpful, which, however, required additional research.
Keywords Diagnostics · Turbine set · Modal analysis
1
Introduction
Increased vibration level of machines containing rotating elements mainly indicates
their malfunction. Vibrations are one of the most frequently used diagnostic signals
[1]. An extensive review of the methods used for this purpose was carried out by
Samuel et al. [2]. However, the indication of the cause of the increased vibration level
is not a trivial issue. This is due to the multitude of possible reasons for this behavior.
These may be the reasons resulting from the change of the mechanical properties of
the object as a result of the action of hydraulic or aerodynamic forcing or resulting
from electrodynamic interactions [3]. The reasons may also lie in improperly prede-
termined play between cooperating elements or its increase due to exploitation [4],
misalignment of elements [5, 6], cracks [7, 8], thermal inﬂuence. It is also possible
to change the resonant frequencies of the device or the so-called mode coupling
effect. This change, disturbing the originally functioning energy ﬂow, may result,
for example, from the implementation of scheduled inspections, repairs or replace-
ment of worn-out elements. In this situation, effective vibration diagnostics strongly
depends on the appropriate choice of the assessment method, also in terms of the
M. Chod´zko (B) · B. Powałka
West Pomeranian University of Technology, Szczecin, Poland
e-mail: mchodzko@zut.edu.pl
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
B. Powałka et al. (eds.), Mechatronics—Trending Future Industries, Lecture Notes
in Networks and Systems 377, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93377-7_10
112

Diagnostics of the Turbine Set Bearing …
113
type and availability of diagnostic signals and the technical possibility of performing
additional tests, e.g. modal. A skillful and accurate diagnosis (making a decision),
made on the basis of the recorded signals, is no less important. This inspires the
search for algorithms based on artiﬁcial intelligence [9, 10], supporting the decision-
making process. It is also an element of the industry 4.0 concept, based on a shared
diagnostic database, with the use of which, often remotely, it is possible to monitor
and diagnose the dynamic condition of structures. However, it should be emphasized
that the effective application of this type of solutions requires an accurate model [1].
However, as emphasized by the authors of [1] building such a model is most often
impossible due to practical difﬁculties, the required number of degrees of freedom
of the model, its variability and uncertainty. Despite this, attempts are made to build
and validate such models, conforming to the concept of a virtual twin [7, 11].
2
Purpose and Scope of Research
The presented research results are a consequence of practical problems with the
operation of a turbine set with a nominal power of 222 MW. It is an steam turbine
with a Curtis double ring as the regulating stage, with a two-plane structure of the
high pressure and medium pressure hulls. The increased level of vibrations, recorded
by sensors mounted on the bearing cover, was noticed shortly after the scheduled
renovation was carried out. They were also felt on other elements of the turbine set
and on the foundation. However, it was not possible, based on the available signals, to
determine the reasons for the increase of the vibration level. It remained to be decided
whether the reason was an incorrectly performed renovation, a revealed design defect,
or other factors. Incorrect diagnosis could be costly due to the consequences of taking
the turbine out of service or having to perform a new renovation. Additionally, other
turbine sets, which were part of the power plant, were also in operation during the
tests. For this reason, the research was designed as a two-stage study. In the ﬁrst stage,
the vibration levels in selected locations of the turbine set were analyzed, mainly in
the vicinity of the bearing node, where increased vibrations were observed. The
second stage was conditioned by the possibility of excluding the tested turbine set
from operation and it was planned as an impulse test, on the basis of which a modal
model was built and validated and the mode shapes were identiﬁed. The view of the
bearing arrangement (bearing cover and stiffening clamp) is shown in Fig. 1.
3
Testing Method
The measurements were carried out in two stages, keeping the same position and
orientation of the acceleration sensors. Their arrangement is schematically shown in
Fig.2.ICPPCBTLD356A32sensorswithasensitivityofabout100mV/g,measuring
range up to 50 g in the peak, compliant with the TEDS technology were used for the

114
M. Chod´zko and B. Powałka
Fig. 1 Research object—bearing arrangement
Fig. 2 Diagram of the arrangement of sensors on the bearing cover (14 points) and the clamp (7
points)—view from the turbine side
tests. Sensors were connected to the 40-channel Scadas Mobile Vibco SCM2E05V
signal analyzer, operating under the control of Siemens Simcenter Testlab 2019.1
software. During the modal tests, the excitation was performed using Kistler modal
hammer type 9728A20000 with a measuring range up to 1000 Hz and the peak value
of the generated force pulse of 20 kN.

Diagnostics of the Turbine Set Bearing …
115
Fig. 3 Velocity RMS values measured at individual points on the bearing cover
4
Results
4.1
Operating Turbine Set Test Results
RMS values of the vibration velocity recorded on the bearing cover are shown in
Fig. 3. The distribution of these values is characterized by high uniformity, i.e. there
is no direction with a dominant amplitude of vibrations.
The RMS values of the vibration velocities recorded on the clamp indicate the
dominant vibrations in the Y direction, along the turbine axis. It results directly from
the low stiffness of the clamp in this direction—Fig. 4.
The frequency analysis performed clearly showed the presence of the frequency
of 50 Hz and its harmonics resulting from the operation of the turbines. In the case of
the bearing cover, the spectrum showed the highest level at a frequency of 100 Hz—
Fig. 5. and in the case of vibration of the clamp at a frequency of 50 Hz—Fig. 6.
The recorded data did not make it possible to identify the structural element of the
turbine set responsible for the increased level of vibrations.
4.2
Modal Analysis Results
The impulse test was carried out for the turned off turbine set. However, the remaining
turbosetsoperatedundernominalload.Onthebasisoftheanalysisofthestabilization
diagrams, determined with the use of a multi-reference algorithm in the frequency
domain—Polymax [12], two mode shapes were identiﬁed. The ﬁrst at 104 Hz, the

116
M. Chod´zko and B. Powałka
Fig. 4 RMS velocity values measured at individual points on the clamp
Fig. 5 The spectrum of the bearing cover vibration velocity
second at 115.6 Hz. The mode shape at 104 Hz is shown as in phase motion of all
points, both on the bearing cover and in the clamp, along a direction at an angle of 45
degrees to each axis. The mode shape at the frequency of 115.6 Hz is characterized
by the phase motion of all points located on the bracket in the Y direction (see the
coordinate system in Fig. 2). Due to the small number of identiﬁed mode shapes, it
was necessary to perform additional analyzes. The receptance functions of a system

Diagnostics of the Turbine Set Bearing …
117
Fig. 6 The spectrum of the clamp vibration velocity
with one degree of freedom were ﬁtted to the experimentally determined receptance
functions for points 5 and 7 (Figs. 7 and 8).
Estimated resonant frequency was 103.7 Hz, 103.9 Hz, respectively for the FRF
at points 5 and 7. It can therefore be assumed that the resonant frequency is approxi-
mately 104 Hz. This mode shape may cause ampliﬁcation of the vibration amplitude
resulting from the effect of harmonic excitation with a frequency of 100 Hz. This is
Fig. 7 Identiﬁcation of the resonant frequency by ﬁtting a system with 1 degree of freedom—
measurements in the Z direction in point 5

118
M. Chod´zko and B. Powałka
Fig. 8 Identiﬁcation of the resonant frequency by ﬁtting a system with 1 degree of freedom—
measurements in the Z direction in point 7
due to the high values of the modal damping of this form, i.e. about 4%. Additionally,
the coherence function was analyzed—Fig. 9.
The value of this function also decreases when the source of vibrations is not the
device used in the experiment. It should therefore be concluded that the observed
“peak” at 100 Hz results from the from external sources, i.e. from other turbines and
not owned by the tested structure.
Fig. 9 Funkcja koherencji w pobli˙zu 100 Hz

Diagnostics of the Turbine Set Bearing …
119
5
Conclusions
Analysis of obtained result leads to following conclusions:
1.
Vibration of the bearing cover is dominated by a harmonic component with a
frequency of 100 Hz (the share of 50 Hz is much lower than 100 Hz).
2.
The resonant frequency of the clamp is 115.6 Hz.
3.
The resonant frequency of the bearing cover is about 104 Hz as shown by the
analysis of the transfer function and coherence.
4.
The high level of bearing cover vibrations associated with the second harmonic
(100 Hz) observed during the measurements of operating signals results from the
existing input and the inﬂuence of the mode shape of bearing cover vibrations
(104 Hz), which is characterized by high modal damping.
Signiﬁcant development of modal analysis methods, e.g. automatic selection of
model poles, does not release the expert from active participation in the interpretation
of the results. The article shows the interpretation difﬁculties related to the analysis of
the vibration modes of the object, especially in the conditions of external inﬂuences,
uncontrolled in the modal experiment of vibration sources. They constituted the
main obstacle in the direct interpretation of the results of experimental studies and,
consequently, in providing diagnostic information. The presented research pointing
to signiﬁcant problems related to the automation of diagnostic activities.
References
1. Lees, A.W., Sinha, J.K., Friswell, M.I.: Model-based identiﬁcation of rotating machines. Mech.
Syst. Signal Process. 23(6), 1884–1893 (2009)
2. Samuel, P.D., Pines, D.J.: A review of vibration-based techniques for helicopter transmission
diagnostics. J. Sound Vib. 282, 475–508 (2005)
3. Dekys, V.: Condition monitoring and fault diagnosis. In: XXI Polish-Slovak Scientiﬁc Confer-
ence Machine Modeling and Simulations MMS 2016, Procedia Engineering, vol. 177,
pp. 502–509, Elsevier (2017)
4. Xu, M., Han, Y., Sun, X., Shao, Y., Gu, F., Ball, A.D.: Vibration characteristics and condition
monitoring of internal radial clearance within a ball bearing in a gear-shaft-bearing system.
Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 165(108280) (2022)
5. Qu, L., Lin, J., Liao, Y., Zhao, M.: Changes in rotor response characteristics based diagnostic
method and its application to identiﬁcation of misalignment. Measurement 138, 91–105 (2019)
6. Lal, M.: Modeling and estimation of speed dependent bearing and coupling misalignment faults
in a turbine generator system. Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 151(107365) (2021)
7. Stoisser, C.M., Audebert, S.: A comprehensive theoretical, numerical and experimental
approach for crack detection in power plant rotating machinery. Mech. Syst. Signal Process.
22(4), 818–844 (2008)
8. Bansode, V.M., Billore, M.: Crack detection in a rotary shaft analytical and experimental
analyses: a review. Mater. Today: Proc. (2021)
9. Adamsab, K.: Machine learning algorithms for rotating machinery bearing fault diagnostics.
Mater. Today: Proc. 44(6), 4931–4933 (2021)
10. Liu, R., Yang, B., Zio, E., Chen, X.: Artiﬁcial intelligence for fault diagnosis of rotating
machinery: a review. Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 108, 33–47 (2018)

120
M. Chod´zko and B. Powałka
11. Pennacchi, P., Bachschmid, N., Vaniaa, A., Zanetta, G.A., Gregori, L.: Use of modal representa-
tion for the supporting structure inmodel-based fault identiﬁcation of large rotating machinery:
part 2—Application to a real machine. Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 20, 682–701 (2006)
12. Peeters B., El-kafafy M., Guillaume, P.: The new PolyMAX Plus method: conﬁdent modal
parameter estimation even in very noisy cases. In: Proceedings of ISMA2012-USD2012,
pp. 2801–2813 (2012)

Geometric Model of Ball-End Micro
Milling
Marcin Gołaszewski and Bartosz Powałka
Abstract Freeform surface machining is one of the most advanced issue of micro
milling. Presented research is an introduction to a development of a model including
the tool path, uncut surface roughness, static and dynamic tool deﬂection. This
work is an attempt to model ball-end groove micro machining. The thickness of
the cutting layer at any time can be determined. Geometric structure of the surface
after machining can be formed with the inﬂuence of the inclination angle of the tool.
The work considers the conditions of entry into the material, as well as modelling
the fully developed cutting.
1
Introduction
Machining is a very widely used technique for manufacturing machine parts. It is
mainly characterized by high process efﬁciency while maintaining high accuracy
[1]. Ball-end milling is a type of process mainly used to produce freeform surfaces.
Such surfaces are typical of parts such as dies and moulds [2]. Due to their complex
geometry these are some of the most difﬁcult surfaces to model and machine. This is
why ball-end milling is most often used as a ﬁnishing operation where high surface
quality is especially required [3].
One type of mould is micro injection moulds. With miniaturisation in industry,
the role of this type of products is increasing. In the production of injection moulds,
surface quality is very important [4]. One of the characteristics to determine the
surface quality until today is roughness. On the other hand, micro milling is one of
the leading techniques to produce micro-products with high surface quality [5, 6].
Moreover, unlike other micro-manufacturing techniques, micro milling allows the
use of a wide range of materials [7]. Therefore, the role of micro milling will increase
in the future [8].
M. Gołaszewski (B) · B. Powałka
Faculty of Mechanical Engineering and Mechatronics, Department of Manufacturing Technology,
West Pomeranian University of Technology, Aleja Piastów 19, 70-310 Szczecin, Poland
e-mail: marcin.golaszewski@zut.edu.pl
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
B. Powałka et al. (eds.), Mechatronics—Trending Future Industries, Lecture Notes
in Networks and Systems 377, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93377-7_11
121

122
M. Gołaszewski and B. Powałka
Modelling of machining is necessary to understand the nature of the process. Both
the material decohesion process itself and the whole system including the machine
tool can be modelled [9]. A correctly constructed model allows the values of cutting
forces and the condition of the surface after machining to be determined [10, 11].
Moreover, the process model makes it possible to determine optimal conditions of
tool operation, which allows to increase tool life, increase productivity or improve
the surface quality [12]. With machining models, it is possible to optimise the process
even before material trials.
Many researchers choose to model the cutting process using the Finite Element
Method (FEM). This method allows the determination of the stress state in the mate-
rial and the prediction of the chip formation [13, 14]. However, FEM often assumes
that the tool is non-deformable [15]. Furthermore, the method involves very large
computational power. Currently, it is not possible to perform an FEM simulation of
a process covering a large area of material due to the computational time required.
Nevertheless, FEM is a suitable method for modelling instantaneous machining.
Geometrical models are much less computationally intensive. Geometric models
are based on the geometry of the tool and the cross-sectional geometry of the cutting
layer. This type of modelling does not take into account the stress state or the chip
formation process, but allows the geometrical structure of the machined surface to be
determined [10]. Furthermore, the cutting forces can be determined from the surface
area of the cutting layer [16].
Macroscale cutting models cannot be easily scaled up to the micro-scale. In order
to initiate cutting, the minimum thickness of the cut layer must be exceeded [17].
Otherwise, decohesion of the material will not occur and the workpiece surface will
be ploughed [6, 18]. This leads to increased cutting forces and burr formation, which
negatively affects the surface quality [19].
This work is an introduction to the ball-end milling model. The presented model
illustrates the machining of a simple groove in a homogeneous workpiece. The thick-
ness of the machined layer and the geometric structure of the machined surface are
determined from the model. The model is designed to take into account the geometric
structure of the machined surface, the tool path, and the static and dynamic deﬂec-
tion of the tool. The model takes into account material entry conditions and fully
developed cutting conditions.
2
Materials and Methods
2.1
Tool Modelling
The cross-sectional area of the cutting layer is determined by the current position of
the cutting edge and the surface area formed in the material by the cutting edge in
previous passes.

Geometric Model of Ball-End Micro Milling
123
Fig. 1 Blade line construction method
A spherical cutter of diameter D = 2R = 1 mm with a right-handed blade line
and a blade plane inclination angle λ = 30◦was assumed in the considerations.
The tool was modelled by plotting the blade line. The blade line was determined by
intersecting a sphere of radius R with a plane of inclination angle λ. The method of
determining the blade line is shown in Fig. 1. All calculations were performed in
Matlab.
2.2
Material
The solid of material was modelled by bounding planes—face and surface.
The point (0, 0, 0) was established at the extreme point connecting face and surface,
in such a way that Surface is on the XY plane, while face is on the XZ plane. The
tool is treated as stationary, while movement between the material and the tool is
introduced by rotation and translation of the material. The material is stored as a
point cloud (1).

124
M. Gołaszewski and B. Powałka
Material =

x1 x2
y1 y2
. . . xn
. . . yn
z1 z2
1 1
. . . zn
. . . 1

(1)
The mutual position at moment t is determined by a homogeneous transformation.
In the case of the groove milling in question, only the movement along the X axis is
assumed. Furthermore, in the case of groove milling with a ball-end tool, only the
inclination of the tool in the axis perpendicular to the feed direction and the direction
of rotation (in the Y axis) is determined. This inclination avoids the occurrence of
zero cutting speed. The position at moment t is determined by expression (2).
MaterialTranslated = T (t) × Rz(t) × Ry × Material
(2)
where:
αt
y-axis tool til
ft
linear feed
ap
axial depth of cut
ae
radial depth of cut
ϕ(t)
angle of rotation at moment t
Therefore:
Ry =

cos(αt)
0 sin(αt) 0
0
1
0
0
−sin(−αl) 0 cos(αl) 0
0
0
0
1

(3)
Rz(t) =

cos(ϕ(t)) −sin(ϕ(t)) 0 0
sin(ϕ(t))
cos(ϕ(t))
0 0
0
0
1 0
0
0
0 1

(4)
T (t) =

1 0 0 x(t)
0 1 0 ae
0 0 1 ap
0 0 0
1

(5)
The position of the tool on the x-axis at moment t is determined from relation (6).
x(t) = ft · t + x0
(6)
where:

Geometric Model of Ball-End Micro Milling
125
Fig. 2 The mutual position of the material and the cutting edges at moment t = 0
x0 −initial tool of f set
The mutual position of the material and the cutting edges at moment t = 0 for
ϕt=0 = 0◦is shown in Fig. 2. The value of x0 was chosen in such a way that no
cutting was initiated for the ﬁrst cutting edge during the ﬁrst rotation.
2.3
Cutting
The area of the cutting layer in the plane of the blade is limited by the surface line
of the material plane and by the line of the cutting edge. The surface of the material
is formed by previous passes of the tool. The position of the material relative to the
cutting edge is determined for each moment t, as shown in Sect. 2.2. The angular
position is determined from formula (7) such that ϕ = 1◦
ϕ(t) = 2 · π · n · t
(7)
where:
n −tool rotational speed
Thus for n = 30000
 obr
min

:

126
M. Gołaszewski and B. Powałka
t = 3.1831 × 10−4[s]
(8)
The surface line of the workpiece material and the blade line can form a cutting
area in three different ways. The ﬁrst way is to cut unmachined material. Surface and
face form a sharp corner. The blade line cuts both face and Surface (Fig. 3a). The
second way is to cut an already machined material but the cutting is not yet fully
developed. This means that the blade line crosses both the face and the surface but
the blade is still plunging into the material. The blade line does not cross the surface
Fig. 3 Stages of ball-end milling

Geometric Model of Ball-End Micro Milling
127
Fig. 4 Area of the cut layer
created by the previous blade (Fig. 3b). The third way is a fully developed cutting.
The blade line does not cross the face line but the Surface of material and the surface
line from the k −1 pass (Fig. 3c). It is only in the fully developed cutting that the
bottom of the groove is shaped.
Once all the lines have been plotted according to the stage of cutting, the intersec-
tion points of the lines are determined. The intersection points are used to determine
the area of the cutting layer. The points are vertices of the polygon of the cut layer.
Depending on the stage, polygons with different number of vertices are plotted. For
stage one and for fully developed cutting it is a ﬁgure with three vertices, while for
stage two it is a ﬁgure with four vertices.
Each of the sides of the ﬁgure formed is created by projecting points from around
the blade plane. Each of the segments is then interpolated in such a way that the
density of the node vector X is dx = 1 1
μm . The area of the resulting polygon is then
calculated. For this purpose, the formula expressed by Eq. (9) is used. The formed
polygon is shown in Fig. 4.
Ak = abs
 A1,2 + A2,3 + . . . + Am−1,m + Am,1
2

(9)
where:
Ai, j =

xi · y j −x j · yi

(10)
k
blade pass number
m
number of interpolated points
The area of the cut layer is calculated for each position of the blade. It must be
taken into account that the ﬁrst blade cuts the material formed by the second blade.
In the range of angle ϕ, when the blade is not cutting, the value of the machined

128
M. Gołaszewski and B. Powałka
layer area is taken as zero. For each angular position the stage of ball-end milling is
determined from the coordinates of the intersection points. When the face-material
surface intersection point is found the ﬁrst stage of ball-end milling is realized. When
the intersection point of previous cutted face-tool is found the third stage is realized.
When any of the following points is not found, the second stage is realizing.
3
Results and Discussion
The simulation was performed for the following parameters::
αt = 10◦
ft = 5mm
min
n = 30000 obr
min
ap = 150 μm
fz = 5 μm
blade
D = 1mm
The result of the simulation is the geometric structure of the surface after a single
tool pass and a plot of the cut layer area. Colormap has been determined on the basis
of the values of deviations from a half-cylinder. Figure 5a shows the distribution of
deviations on the surface of the machined groove. Figure 5b shows the distribution
of deviations in the XY plane.
Figure. 5b shows the inclination of the contour furrows plotted by the blade, which
results from the set linear feed rate. Moreover, an axial cross-section of the machined
groove was generated as well. The cross-section is shown in Fig. 6. Both the axial
section and the deviation map clearly show the successive passes of the blades. From
the generated graphs it is possible to read the set feed value per blade based on the
distance between successive blade passes.
A plot of the machined layer ﬁeld in the angular position domain was generated.
Thegeneratedplotincludesmaterialentryandfullydevelopedcutting.Themaximum
cross-sectional area of the machined layer does not exceed 1000 μm2. The value of
the cross-sectional area of the machined layer can be used to determine the cutting
forces by using the cutting resistance coefﬁcients (Fig. 7).
The presented model operates correctly for groove milling operations. The model
will be extended in the future to include the possibility of introducing the geometric
structure of the workpiece surface and the possibility of changing the tool path.
Moreover, the model will be equipped with an algorithm taking into account the
static and dynamic tool deﬂection. The following stages of model creation will be
validated by experiments in the material.

Geometric Model of Ball-End Micro Milling
129
Fig. 5 Distribution of deviations
Fig. 6 Axial section of the groove

130
M. Gołaszewski and B. Powałka
Fig. 7 Area of the machined layer
References
1. Klauer, K., Eiﬂer, M., Kirsch, B., Seewig, J., Aurich, J.C.: Correlation between different cutting
conditions, surface roughness and dimensional accuracy when ball end micro milling material
measures with freeform surfaces. Mach. Sci. Technol. 24, 446–464 (2020)
2. Bouaziz, Z., Ben Younes, J., Zghal, A.: Cost estimation system of dies manufacturing based
on the complex machining features. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 28, 262–271 (2006)
3. Sonawane, H.A., Joshi, S.S.: Modeling of machined surface quality in high-speed ball-end
milling of Inconel-718 thin cantilevers. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 78, 1751–1768 (2015)
4. Whiteside, B.R., Martyn, M.T., Coates, P.D., Allan, P.S., Hornsby, P.R., Greenway, G.: Micro-
moulding: process characteristics and product properties. Plast. Rubber Compos. 32, 231–239
(2003)
5. Koklu, U., Basmaci, G.: Evaluation of tool path strategy and cooling condition effects on the
cutting force and surface quality in micromilling operations. Metals 7, 426 (2017)
6. Sun, Z., To, S.: Effect of machining parameters and tool wear on surface uniformity in micro-
milling. Micromachines 9, 268 (2018)
7. Câmara, M.A., Rubio, J.C.C., Abrão, A.M., Davim, J.P.: State of the art on micromilling of
materials, a review. J. Mater. Sci. Technol. 28, 673–685 (2012)
8. Adams, D.P., Vasile, M.J., Benavides, G., Campbell, A.N.: Micromilling of metal alloys with
focused ion beam—Fabricated tools. Precis. Eng. 25, 107–113 (2001)
9. Dunaj, P., Marchelek, K., Chod´zko, M.: Application of the ﬁnite element method in the milling
process stability diagnosis. J. Theor. Appl. Mech. (2019). https://doi.org/10.15632/jtam-pl/
104589
10. Zhu, R., Kapoor, S.G., DeVor, R.E.: Mechanistic modeling of the ball end milling process for
multi-axis machining of free-form surfaces. J. Manuf. Sci. Eng. 123, 369–379 (2000)
11. Pratap, T., Patra, K.: Micro ball-end milling—An emerging manufacturing technology for
micro-feature patterns. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 94, 2821–2845 (2018)
12. Thepsonthi, T., Özel, T.: Multi-objective process optimization for micro-end milling of Ti-6Al-
4V titanium alloy. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 63, 903–914 (2012)
13. Chen, W., Zheng, L., Teng, X., Yang, K., Huo, D.: Finite element simulation and experimental
investigation on cutting mechanism in vibration-assisted micro-milling. Int. J. Adv. Manuf.
Technol. 105, 4539–4549 (2019)
14. Özel, T., Olleak, A., Thepsonthi, T.: Micro milling of titanium alloy Ti-6Al-4V: 3-D ﬁnite
element modeling for prediction of chip ﬂow and burr formation. Prod. Eng. Res. Dev. 11,
435–444 (2017)

Geometric Model of Ball-End Micro Milling
131
15. Evdokimov, D.V., Skuratov, D.L.: Improved calculation of the cutting force in end milling.
Russ. Eng. Res. 37, 642–646 (2017)
16. Wojciechowski, S.: Methods of minimum uncut chip thickness estimation during cutting with
deﬁned geometry tools. Mechanik 91, 664–666 (2018)
17. Dib, M.H.M., Duduch, J.G., Jasinevicius, R.G.: Minimum chip thickness determination by
means of cutting force signal in micro endmilling. Precis. Eng. 51, 244–262 (2018)
18. Yun, H.T., Heo, S., Lee, M.K., Min, B.-K., Lee, S.J.: Ploughing detection in micromilling
processes using the cutting force signal. Int. J. Mach. Tools Manuf 51, 377–382 (2011)
19. Malekian, M., Mostofa, M.G., Park, S.S., Jun, M.B.G.: Modeling of minimum uncut chip
thickness in micro machining of aluminum. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 212, 553–559 (2012)

Analysis of the Possibility to Compensate
for Selected Tool Setting Errors
in the Lens Grinding Process
Michał Zarzeczny
Abstract Production of optical lenses requires the implementation of a pre-
treatment process that gives a spherical shape to the lens with allowances for
subsequent precision grinding and polishing. This process is carried out as abra-
sive machining with special cup wheels and in industrial practice it is called “lens
milling”. As part of the implementation doctorate, work is being carried out on the
construction of an intelligent machine tool for the pre-treatment shaping of spherical
surfaces of optical parts-lenses. The machine will have diagnostic systems that will
allow to observe the milling process of the lens. The system directly measure the
lens proﬁle using a laser distance sensor. The subject of the research presented in
the article is the analysis of selected errors in the position of the tool in relation
to the lens. In milling lenses process, tools are metal bonded milling diamond cup.
Classiﬁcation and precise analysis of various types of tool setting errors will allow
in future for automatically prediction tool position compensation depending on the
result of measurements of the current shape of the spherical surface.
Keywords Lens grinding · Optical parts · Tool setting
1
Introduction
The technological process of optical parts consists of many stages. Lenses with
looser technical requirements, such as cleanliness, internal inclusions and streaking,
are made of molding-type preparations. On the other hand, lenses with more stringent
requirements should be cut from a slab or block of optical glass. However, with both
types of these lenses a pre-shaping treatment for the beam is required. This process is
called radius milling. Below is an example of the technological process of a typical
lens with high technical requirements:
M. Zarzeczny (B)
West Pomeranian University of Technology, al. Piastów 19, 70-310 Szczecin, Poland
e-mail: zm05008@zut.edu.pl
Autocomp Management Sp. z o.o., al 1 Maja 36, 71-627 Szczecin, Poland
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
B. Powałka et al. (eds.), Mechatronics—Trending Future Industries, Lecture Notes
in Networks and Systems 377, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93377-7_12
132

Analysis of the Possibility to Compensate for Selected Tool …
133
10. Slit slab into squares
20. First surface grinding of squares
30. Second surface grinding with thickness control
40. Rounding
50. Radius no 1 milling + technological chamfer
60. Radius no 2 milling + technological chamfer
70. Radius no 1 grinding
80. Radius no 1 polishing
90. Radius no 2 grinding
100. Radius no 2 polishing
110. Centring
120. Chamfering
130. AR coating.
It is worth emphasizing that the milling process in the optical glass processing tech-
nology is in fact a grinding process. However, due to the distinction between shaping
processesandprecisiongrindingoperationsitwasdecidedtocallthisprocessmilling.
For the milling of the radius, the glass goes already in the form of round pellets. This
blank has a prepared diameter φd with an allowance for centering n2 and a thickness
s with an allowance for milling, grinding and polishing n1 (Figs. 1 and 2).
Making the sphere of the pellet can be carried out in several ways. In this paper,
the case of machining with a cup milling cutter will be described. This is done as
Fig. 1 Blank with machining allowances shown schematically

134
M. Zarzeczny
Fig. 2 Kinematic diagram of lens milling
follows. The blank is attached to the object spindle. The cup cutter set at the right
angle approaches the blank in a straight line along the lens axis. The resulting radius
is a function of the cutter diameter D and the setting angle α. The ﬁgure shows the
following relation [1]:
R =
D
2 sin α
(1)
Hence the formula for setting the cutter angle α is:
α = arc sin
 D
2R

(2)
If the cutting edge of the tool is rounded, the formula for calculating the angle α
is as follows [2]:
For concave lenses:
α = arc sin

D1
2(R −r)

(3)
For convex lenses:

Analysis of the Possibility to Compensate for Selected Tool …
135
α = arc sin

D1
2(R + r)

(4)
2
Classiﬁcation of Error Position of the Tool Regarding
the Workpiece
The condition for making the lens sphere is the correct positioning of the tool in
relation to the workpiece. Table 1 shows the correct tool-workpiece position and
typical setting errors. For the sake of simplicity, the case for a convex lens and the
cutting surface of the cup milling cutter without rounding was adopted (Fig. 3).
3
Measurement Tools for Measuring the Radius of the Lens
3.1
Measuring Tools Used in Industry
In industrial practice, the radius value during the milling process is measured with a
spherometer. It is a cup with a centrally located dial gauge (Fig. 4).
In order to obtain the required measurement accuracy, dial gauges with a 1μ scale
are used. Measurement with a spherometer is an indirect measurement. The tool
measures the arc arrow directly. The diagram of the arc arrow measurement is shown
in Fig. 5.
Parameter description:
h
arc arrow.
dk
measuring diameter of the socket..
The value of the radius R is [3]:
R = dk2
8h + h
2
(5)
The measurement procedure is as follows:
• Take an interference test of the radius of the lens being produced.
• Touch the spherometer to the measurement surface of the gauge.
• When the sensor touches the gauge, set it to 0.
• Measure the surface to be milled. Read the deviation of the arc arrow from the
gauge.
Ascanbeseenfromtheabovedescription,itisanindirectmeasurementperformed
manually, commonly used in the production of lenses. In addition, the manufac-
turer making the lenses must have a relatively extensive collection of tests for both

136
M. Zarzeczny
Table 1 Tool-workpiece setup cases
Diagram of the tool positioning in relation to the workpiece
Description of the error in the
position of the tool relative to the
workpiece
Setting the machine without
geometric error. The radius of
the Lens R is equal to the
theoretical radial Rt, which is
equal to:
Rt =
D
2sinα
D—diameter of the cup cutter
α—cup cutter tilt angle
Error in the position of the cup
milling cutter relative to the
workpiece (lens) consisting in
shifting the contact point of the
milling cutter by the value -e
(the tool contact point on the left
side of the workpiece axis). The
radius resulting from the
treatment R is smaller than the
theoretical radius Rt
R < Rt
Additionally, there is a
discontinuity in the beam with a
diameter of 2e in the center of
the lens
Error in the position of the cup
milling cutter in relation to the
workpiece (lens) consisting in
shifting the contact point of the
milling cutter by the value e (the
tool contact point on the right
side of the workpiece axis). The
radius resulting from the
treatment Ris greater than the
theoretical radius Rt
R > Rt
Additionally, there is a
discontinuity in the beam with a
diameter of 2e in the center of
the lens
(continued)

Analysis of the Possibility to Compensate for Selected Tool …
137
Table 1 (continued)
Diagram of the tool positioning in relation to the workpiece
Description of the error in the
position of the tool relative to the
workpiece
The error in the position of the
cup cutter in relation to the lens,
consisting in the shift of the axis
planes by the value f. The solid
surface is not a sphere I in the
previous cases. The surface
consists of many rays, the radius
of which at the edge R1 is the
largest and decreases towards the
center of the lens.
R1 > R2 > R3 > R4 > Rt
Fig. 3 Cup cutter with rounded cutting edge with radius r for concave and convex lenses

138
M. Zarzeczny
Fig. 4 View of the
spherometer
Fig. 5 Diagram of the arc
arrow measurement
positive and negative radius. It is worth emphasizing that performing the tests is
very time-consuming and costly. This measurement procedure is ineffective when
trying to automate the milling process and automatically determine the cutter setting
correction.

Analysis of the Possibility to Compensate for Selected Tool …
139
Fig. 6 The scan control BL
laser proﬁlometer by
micro-epsilon
Fig. 7 Example of
measuring a lens with a laser
sensor
3.2
Proposed Measurement Tool
As part of the implementation doctorate, a milling machine for pre-milling lenses
with numerical control is being built, with the procedure of automatic correction
of the machining tool setting error. For this reason, it has been proposed to use
the technique of direct radius measurement using a non-contact laser tool. Such a
measurement procedure will enable its automation and process control from the level
of the machine control system. Figure 6 shows the proposed laser proﬁlometer [4]
(Fig. 7).
4
Analysis of Measurement Methods
The measurement tools described above were analyzed. The measurements were
carried out on a lens with a radius nominal R40 mm with a tolerance of 5 interference
fringes. The lens was in the process of milling the radius during the measurements.

140
M. Zarzeczny
Ten measurements of the radius of one lens were made with the use of a spherom-
eter and a laser proﬁlometer. Below is a summary of the measurement results. The
results of the measurements with the spherometer are in column 2. This is directly
the difference of the arc arrow between the gauge with a radius of 40 mm and the
measured lens. The result of the radius value after conversion according to formula (5)
can be found in column no. 3. Column no. 4 summarizes the results of measurements
with a laser proﬁlometer Table 2.
The arithmetic mean values of the measurement results, both with a spherometer
and a laser proﬁlometer, are similar to each other. The difference is on average
0,027 mm. The relative error is:
0, 027
40
· 100% = 0, 07%
The obtained relative error is smaller by the assumed error of the interference
test: 0,1%, which proves that the proﬁlometer can be used to measure the radius
value. It is also worth to note that the standard deviation in measurements with a
laser proﬁlometer is 85% smaller than with a spherometer (Fig. 8).
Table 2 In this table summary of the measurement results of the radius value
1
Measurement
No
2
Measurement of the
difference of the arrow
arcs with a spherometer
(mm)
3
Radius value after
conversion (mm)
4
Measurement with a
laser proﬁlometer (mm)
1
0,009
40,441
40,616
2
0,014
40,691
40,610
3
0,008
40,392
40,586
4
0,012
40,591
40,568
5
0,013
40,641
40,612
6
0,013
40,641
40,562
7
0,011
40,541
40,592
8
0,015
40,741
40,608
9
0,012
40,591
40,598
10
0,008
40,392
40,576
Arithmetic mean
0,012
40,566
40,593
Standard deviation
0,002
0,123
0,019

Analysis of the Possibility to Compensate for Selected Tool …
141
40.200
40.300
40.400
40.500
40.600
40.700
40.800
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10
Radius value aŌer
conversion
Measurement with
a laser
proﬁlometer
Fig. 8 Graph showing the scatter of the results of measurements with the use of a spherometer and
a laser proﬁlometer
5
Correction of Machine Parameters
When analyzing the measured lens in terms of the milling process, the radius
allowance for ﬁne grinding and polishing should be determined. For a convex surface,
the radius is longer than the nominal, while for a concave surface the radius is shorter
than the nominal. A lens with a radius of R40 mm, tolerance of plus or minus 5 inter-
ference fringes and a diameter of 36 mm, the following technological allowances
should be assumed. First of all, the deviation of the interference fringes should be
converted into a mechanical deviation according to the formula [3]:
R = 4N · λ ·
 R
d
2
(6)
where;
N
number of interference fringes.
λ
average length of the visible wavelength. 0.00055 mm.
is assumed The mechanical deviation is:
R = 4 · 5 · 0, 00055 ·
40
36
2
= 0, 014 mm
Without going into the technological details for the lens of the above-mentioned
requirements at the milling stage, the radius value should be taken: 40, 150
−0,05 mm.
Taking into account the results of measurements with a laser proﬁlometer, it can be
seen that the milling machine was set incorrectly. We take the value of the radius

142
M. Zarzeczny
R40.593 mm. There was no characteristic discontinuity in the lens axis, which proves
that the cutter is correctly set in the “left–right” direction. On the other hand, the angle
of the cutter in relation to the lens axis is set incorrectly. Assuming the diameter of
the cutter ﬁ30. Using the formula (2), the angle should be corrected by:
αR40,593 −αR40,15 = 21, 686◦−21, 978◦= −0, 252◦
6
Conclusions
The preliminary analysis showed that the proposed method of measuring the laser
beam of the manufactured laser lens can potentially be applied in industrial condi-
tions. The use of such a measuring tool in conjunction with its coupling with an
intelligent machine tool can automate a large part of the machine tool setting process
and the control of the lens radius milling process parameters. This will translate
directly into a signiﬁcant increase in the efﬁciency of the process and its high ﬂex-
ibility. The integration of the tool with the system of the intelligent machine tool
under construction is a further part of the research.
Acknowledgements This study was supported by the Ministry of Education and Science, Poland
[Impelenatation Doctorate Programme]
References
1. Legun,Z.:Technologiaelementówoptycznych.WydawnictwoNaukowo-Techniczne,Warszawa
(1982)
2. Huang, C.-Y., Kuo, C.-H., Yu, Z.-R., Ho, C.-F., Wang, C.-Y., Hsu, W.-Y., Chen, F.-Z.: Develop-
ment of an intelligent griding system for fabricating aspheric glass lenses. Int. J. Adv. Manuf.
Technol. 111, 1351–1359 (2020)
3. Sojecki, A.: Optyka. Wydawnictwo Szkolne I Pedagogiczne Warszawa (1980)
4. Technical details and versions of Scan Control BL.: http://www.micro-epsilon.pl/download/
dax--scancontrol-29x0--en.pdf

The Treadmill Control System Based
on the SteamVR Tracking System
Kamil Stateczny
, Paweł Herbin
, Karol Mi˛adlicki
,
and Artur Górnostaj
Abstract The development of head-mounted displays for virtual and augmented
reality urges the creators of peripheral devices to create new solutions that boost the
immersion in the generated reality. One type of such devices are treadmills which
facilitate natural body movement. It allows a human to move in virtual reality in an
unlimited manner using only a fraction of real space. The paper presents work on
the treadmill mat speed control system using the commercially available SteamVR
tracking system. The proposed solutions enable a person to freely change the mode of
moving from standing to running while using the treadmill. On the basis of prelim-
inary studies testing the performance of systems measuring the movement of the
exercising person, control signals were selected for feedback in the treadmill mat
control system. A treadmill mat control system was designed and implemented in
a software environment. This paper provides a description of the designed system.
Functional tests of the designed system were carried out on a special test bench
equipped with a treadmill with controlled mat speed.
Keywords Treadmill control system · SteamVR tracking system
K. Stateczny (B) · P. Herbin · K. Mi˛adlicki · A. Górnostaj
West Pomeranian University of Technology in Szczecin, al. Piastów 17, 70-310 Szczecin, Poland
e-mail: kamil.stateczny@zut.edu.pl
P. Herbin
e-mail: pawel.herbin@zut.edu.pl
K. Mi˛adlicki
e-mail: karol.miadlicki@zut.edu.pl
A. Górnostaj
e-mail: ga42403@zut.edu.pl
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
B. Powałka et al. (eds.), Mechatronics—Trending Future Industries, Lecture Notes
in Networks and Systems 377, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93377-7_13
143

144
K. Stateczny et al.
1
Introduction
The development of display devices for virtual and augmented reality forces devel-
opers of collaborative devices to create new solutions to facilitate immersion in the
generated reality. Such devices include movement platforms that allow natural human
movement. Owing to them, it is possible to implement human movement in a virtual
reality with a practically unlimited area.
The results presented in this paper are part of Autocomp Serwis sp. platform
portability, application of VR technology including “full immersion” for the needs of
modern battleﬁeld simulators. One of the signiﬁcant challenges of today’s simulator
market is to respond to the need to model the heterogeneous environment of the
battleﬁeld site, which consists not only of interactions between participants, but
also of the complex military, micro- and macro-economic, social and infrastructural
conditions of the battleﬁeld environment [1]. This is connected with the need to
implement AI solutions into simulators, which is one of the fundamental challenges
of today’s military sector [2].
The movement platforms can divided into four groups. The ﬁrst group consists
of platforms that use servo mechanisms connected to sections of bearing transport
belts, allowing movement in all directions, for example [3, 4]. To a limited extent,
this is also implemented by the SpaceWalkerVR product [5]. The second group
are platforms that use a mechanical stop to keep the person being trained within
the platform’s working area. Motility in these platforms is possible by reducing the
friction force of the foot with the device or the bearing of the shoes [1, 6, 7]. The third
group of platforms uses moveable steps [8]. The fourth group uses transfer bearings
or electrically driven rollers—centering the person being trained in a zone located in
the middle of the movement zone on the device [9].
In order to meet the requirements for the simulator’s “Embody Interaction Intel-
ligence” Integrated System, a design was developed within the Alice project for a
servo-driven roller-belt mat using solutions applied in the ﬁrst group of movement
platforms. A treadmill mat speed control system had to be designed for it. In the
literature there are many different ways to control the speed of a treadmill mat in real
time, adapted to the user’s behaviour. This was done using, for example, measured
distance from a speciﬁc point on the treadmill using force measurement systems [3],
measured reaction force on the ground [10], determined treadmill speed from foot
pendulum speed [11] or measured position on the treadmill [12].
This paper presents the various stages of the design process for a treadmill mat
speed control system based on the commercially available SteamVR tracking system.
The ﬁrst stage involves carrying out preliminary experimental studies, the results of
which and their analysis are included in Section Two. Based on the test results, a
treadmill control system was designed. The control system was implemented in the
selected computer environment. In order to test the functionality of the treadmill
mat control system, a prototype test station was built. Section Three of the paper
describes all the components of the control system in detail. Section Four contains
the results of the control system tests.

The Treadmill Control System Based on the SteamVR Tracking System
145
2
Preliminary Studies
In the ﬁrst stage of design work, preliminary tests were carried out to verify the
correctness of operationof theXsens measurement systemandtocheckthesuitability
of the measurement system for the treadmill mat control system under construction.
2.1
Commissioning, Calibration and Data Recording
with the Xsens Measurement System
Fordatarecordingandanalysis,thesuitwasconnectedtotheXsenssensorsaccording
to the instructions provided by the manufacturer entitled “Xsens MVN User Manual”
[13] and video tutorials from the manufacturer’s website [14]. Once the device was
enabled for wireless communication, a new session was created in MVN Animate Pro
software, then the subject’s dimensions were measured and ﬁlled in. Figure 1 shows
the window for setting up a new session in the MVN Animation Pro environment.
The system was calibrated according to the instructions provided by the manu-
facturer. Using MVN Animation Pro, data were recorded and the results exported
Fig. 1 Setting up a new session in the MVN Animation Pro environment

146
K. Stateczny et al.
to a ﬁle with the *.mvnx extension allowing data import and analysis in the Matlab
environment.
2.2
Motion Measurement with Xsens System
InordertoanalysethedatareceivedfromtheXsenssystemintermsofitsapplicability
to the treadmill control system, motion measurement tests were carried out over a
distance of 3 m. A summary of the tests is shown in Table 1. The test environment
together with the person whose movement was analysed is shown in Fig. 2 (ﬂat
surface) and Fig. 3 (Elitum Laufband TX900 treadmill).
Figures 4, 5 and 6 show selected characteristics for a slow back and forth move-
ment on a ﬂat surface, while Figs. 7, 8 and 9 show a slow walk on a treadmill. Simi-
larly, Figs. 10, 11 and 12 show selected characteristics for variable speed motion on
a ﬂat surface, while Figs. 13, 14 and 15 show variable speed motion on a treadmill.
Table 1 Summary of movement tests of a person wearing an Xsens suit over a distance of 30 m
Flat surface
Elitum Laufband TX900 treadmill
Walking slowly back and forth (Figs. 4, 5 and 6)
Walking slowly—about 5 km/h (Figs. 7, 8
and 9)
Variable speed movement (Figs. 10, 11 and 12)
Variable speed movement—between
0–11 km/h (Figs. 13, 14 and 15)
Fig. 2 Xsens system tests on a ﬂat surface

The Treadmill Control System Based on the SteamVR Tracking System
147
Fig. 3 Testing the Xsens system on the Elitum Laufband TX900 treadmill
Fig. 4 Hip position in X, Y, Z directions—walking slowly on a ﬂat surface
From the analysis of the graphs, we can conclude that the Xsens system works in
the same way regardless of whether the person whose movement is being analysed
is moving on a ﬂat surface or on a sports treadmill. From the data analysed, it is
possible to estimate what phase of movement he or she is in (walking, running
or standing still). It is also possible to count steps and determine the direction of
movement. However, tests have also revealed a major ﬂaw in the system which is
that the readout of the X, Y, Z position changes over time. This is particularly evident
in the diagrams showing the position of the hip in the X, Y plane (Figs. 5, 8, 11, and
14). The difference between the actual trajectory and that measured by the Xsens
system is shown in Fig. 16. Differences between trajectories exceed ±0.15 m, which

148
K. Stateczny et al.
Fig. 5 Hip position in X, Y plane—walking slowly on a ﬂat surface
Fig. 6 Distances between feet in X, Y, Z directions and vector length in three directions—walking
slowly on a ﬂat surface
makes it virtually impossible to base the positioning system solely on the Xsens
solution.
On the basis of the preliminary tests carried out, it can be concluded that the use
of the Xsense system alone is not applicable, because in the step counting mode we

The Treadmill Control System Based on the SteamVR Tracking System
149
Fig. 7 Hip position in X, Y, Z directions—walking slowly on the treadmill
Fig. 8 Hip position in X, Y plane—walking slowly on the treadmill
obtain a continuous change in the position transmitted from the sensors, and a contin-
uous increase in position is noticeable. Furthermore, it is not possible to compensate
for the position of the person being trained based on the distance calculated from the
speed of the mat drive motor, as this may be subject to errors caused by its slippage.
The treadmill mat speed control system that is presented in the next section requires
the person trained to be in an absolute position in relation to the treadmill. Therefore,
in the proposed solution of the treadmill mat speed control system, the Xsense system
is used to visualise the person trained. The position of the person and the body tilt is
determined by the VIVE Trackers.

150
K. Stateczny et al.
Fig. 9 Distances between feet in X, Y, Z directions and vector length in three directions—walking
slowly on a ﬂat surface
Fig. 10 Hip position in X, Y, Z directions—walking with variable speed on a ﬂat surface
3
Treadmill Control System
A treadmill control system was designed to keep the person on the treadmill during
the 4 selected phases of movement. The system developed includes:

The Treadmill Control System Based on the SteamVR Tracking System
151
Fig. 11 Hip position in X, Y, Z directions—walking with variable speed on a ﬂat surface
Fig. 12 Distances between feet in X, Y, Z directions and vector length in three directions—variable
speed movement on a ﬂat surface
• Measurement systems:
– HTC VIVE system with SteamVR software version 1.10.32
Two 2.0 SteamVR™base stations
Three VIVE trackers

152
K. Stateczny et al.
Fig. 13 Hip position in X, Y, Z directions—variable speed movement on the treadmill
Fig. 14 Hip position in X, Y, Z directions—variable speed movement on the treadmill, walking
slowly
– Xsens MVN Link together with MVN Animate Pro software version 2019.2.1
• Implementation systems:
– A treadmill with a length of min. 4,500 mm and a width of 600 mm
– Servo drive with a B&R PLC
• Software
– MATLAB/Simulink software package

The Treadmill Control System Based on the SteamVR Tracking System
153
Fig. 15 Distances between feet in X, Y, Z directions and vector length in three directions—variable
speed movement on the treadmill
Fig. 16 The trajectory measured by the Xsens system and the actual one
• Computing systems:
– Computer for data acquisition from measurement systems
– Control computer.
Communication throughout the system is based on Ethernet with a central
router, while the UDP protocol is used for communication between the subsys-
tems. Figure 18 shows the communication diagram of the system. In order to adapt
the system to your own requirements, it is possible to change the IP addresses and
ports, but this requires modiﬁcation of the system code. Figure 17 shows the test and
calibration stand for the system under development.

154
K. Stateczny et al.
Fig. 17 Test and calibration stand for the system under development
Fig. 18 Diagram of the mat control system based on measurement systems

The Treadmill Control System Based on the SteamVR Tracking System
155
Fig. 19 Person trained with Xsens suit on and VIVE Trackers mounted
To simplify the system architecture it is possible to run the control subsystem and
the data acquisition subsystem on a single computer. Preparing the person trained to
use the system by appropriately placing sensors on the system is shown in Fig. 19.
It shows a person trained equipped with two Xsens motion tracking systems and a
VIVE Tracker of the SteamVR™Tracking system. The trackers should be attached
to the person’s back and to the upper part of the shoe as pictured using the dedicated
mounting straps.
3.1
SteamVR Tracking System
To track the person being trained, the SteamVR™Tracking system based on the
SteamVR™2.0 base stations is used, with which the HTC VIVE version Pro is
equipped. The system allows controllers, HMDs and VIVE Trackers to be tracked.
The minimum number of base stations required for proper use of the mat control
system is two. This ensures that VIVE Trackers are visible through at least one base
station at any given time. They should be deployed as recommended in the “VIVE
Pro HMD User guide” document [4] in particular (Fig. 20):
– Installation at least 2 m above the mat level

156
K. Stateczny et al.
Fig. 20 The window showing the room setup programme
– Each base station has a ﬁeld of view of 120°, so its angle of inclination must be
adjusted between 30 and 45° to fully cover the measurement area
– Base stations should be mounted diagonally across the test area. The base stations
were mounted on tripods.
3.2
Description of the Control Programme in Matlab
The main task of the control programme implemented in Matlab Simulink software is
to maintain the user in all phases of movement (i.e. standstill, walk, run and stop) on
a treadmill. The control software also includes a VRML-based visualisation system
for the person trained. The necessary data for the treadmill’s speed control system
is collected from four HTC VIVE Tracker sensors (satellites). Based on the tracers
that track the position of the operator’s pelvis, torso and both feet, the position of the
treadmill user and the phase of their movement are determined.
Based on preliminary tests, the usability of signals from satellites (HTC VIVE
tracker) was veriﬁed. The signals from the VIVE tracer sensor system are used to
detect the position of use relative to the treadmill, to detect the person’s stop and
to estimate the body’s tilt relative to the mat. The data sent from the Xsens system
serves as input to the human kinematic model. A schematic diagram of the treadmill
control system is presented in Fig. 21.
Speed control is based on the characteristics of the data with the following
equation:

The Treadmill Control System Based on the SteamVR Tracking System
157
Fig. 21 Schematic diagram of the control system
Vb(x, v, a, b, c) = x ∗a + b ∗x2 sign(x)
L2
t
+ c ∗v2 ∗sign(v)
(1)
where:
x
position of the user’s pelvis relative to the starting point (m),
v
user’s speed relative to the treadmill/body incline (km/h),
Lt
treadmill length (m),
a
coefﬁcient of linear response of treadmill speed to user movement,
b
coefﬁcient of non-linear response of the treadmill speed to user movement,
c
coefﬁcient of non-linear response to the user’s speed relative to the treadmill
or to the inclination of their body.
Based on the above equation, it is possible to achieve a smooth start of the treadmill
belt and to achieve high running speeds using the entire length of the treadmill. An
example of the characteristics determined using the equation is presented in Fig. 22.
Such shaping of the speed characteristics of the treadmill belt as a function of human
movement parameters results in the fact that acceleration and deceleration of the
running speed runs naturally, whereas sudden stopping from high running speed is
impossible. During a sudden stop, the treadmill maintains a high speed of movement
until the user moves close to the starting position. As a result of this behaviour of the
system, the user feels a large inertial force acting on their body in the X+ direction
then after a while the user feels an inertial force in the opposite direction created by
moving with the slowing treadmill belt. In order to minimise this type of experience,
an algorithm for detecting the stopping of human movement has been proposed.
Based on the human stop signal, the speed control system’s operating characteristic
is switched to a characteristic that slowly brings the human to the zero position. The
applied speed characteristics depending on the position of the runner on the treadmill
are presented in Fig. 23.
The control system also implements a function that determines the incline of the
treadmill user’s body based on the position of the chest relative to the hips. Based
on the mutual position of the above elements, the angle of inclination of the body is
determined:

158
K. Stateczny et al.
Fig. 22 Example of characteristics of preset speed depending on the parameters of position and
speed in relation to the treadmill or runner inclination
Fig. 23 Speed characteristics in relation to user position used during tests of the treadmill speed
control system
αk = atan2(Xk, Zk)
(2)
where:
αk
body inclination angle,
Xk, Zk
position of chest in relation to hip position.

The Treadmill Control System Based on the SteamVR Tracking System
159
The body inclination angle αk can be introduced into Eq. (2) instead of the param-
eter v. If the body leans in the direction of the run, the treadmill mat will accelerate
much faster.
Switching between characteristics was based on the mutual position of the feet
during running, walking and stopping. When the person being trained stops, their
feet move slightly in relation to each other, as presented in Sect. 3.2, so the detection
of stopping was implemented based on the following equations:
R(t) =

(X L(t) −X R(t))2 + (YL(t) −YR(t))2 + (ZL(t) −Z R(t))2
(3)
Rdiff(t, x) = (R(t) −R(t −t ∗delay
2 ∗|x| + 1)
(4)
STOP(t, x) =
 1, |Rdiff(t, x)| ≤tolerance)
0, |Rdiff(t, x)| > tolerance)
(5)
where:
R(t)
the distance of the treadmill user’s feet,
X L, YL, ZL, X R, YR, Z R
position of the VIVE tracker sensors placed on the feet
L-left, R-right, respectively,
t
time step,
delay
number of samples through which the feet must not move
in order to detect the stop,
tolerance
limit of foot movement at which feet are considered
stationary,
STOP(t, x)
a function to detect foot immobilisation.
The difference signal (4) is ﬁltered with a median ﬁlter with a window width of
10 samples. Effective stop detection requires a variable time step of the difference
in foot distance during control system operation. The use of variable deceleration
in the above equation is due to the need to make the deceleration dependent on the
speed of the person trained. At low speeds of movement, a person can have their
feet in contact with the ground for about 500 ms, so that such situations do not
cause the acceleration characteristic to switch to the stop characteristic, the time
after which the control system reacts to the low reciprocal speed of the feet must be
greater. During the experimental tests carried out, the maximum delay time was set at
700 ms. However, the introduction of a ﬁxed delay value of 700 ms prevents sudden
stops at high running speeds. To meet the stopping functionality even at high running
speeds, the delay is reduced to 70 ms for the trained person’s position corresponding
to the position at the end of the treadmill. As a result of this strategy, the control
system only changes the operating characteristics when the person is stopped in a
certain way.
When testing the control methods, it proved necessary to calibrate the user’s zero
position on the treadmill and the angle of rotation of the treadmill axis relative to

160
K. Stateczny et al.
Fig. 24 Assembly of photographs during experimental tests of the control system including the
coordinate system
the system adopted in the HTC Vive Pro system. For calibration, the operator has to
stand upright in the treadmill start position, then this position is stored in the control
system by changing the position of the zero switch. In the next step, the position
of the treadmill axis is calibrated by moving the user forward to the end of the belt
and changing the position of the position_plus1 switch. As a result of the above
calibration, the position of the origin of the treadmill coordinate system relative to
the HTC VIVE Pro system is stored in the system and the system is rotated to align
the X-axis of the HTC VIVE Pro tracker with the treadmill axis (Fig. 24).
Figure 25 shows the speed control system for the treadmill mat using signals from
the Xsense system and HTC VIVE.
4
Tests of the Mat Speed Control System
In order to test the functionality of the mat control system based on measurement
systems, a test was performed on a prepared speed-controlled treadmill. During the
study, user movement tests were carried out at different speeds corresponding to
four different movement phases, i.e. standstill, march, run and stop. Figure 24 shows
the trained person at standstill, walking, jogging and running. Appropriately shaped
speed characteristics depending on the position on the treadmill and the posture of
the person trained make it possible to achieve high speeds of movement of the person,
smooth changes, and smooth as well as sudden stops.

The Treadmill Control System Based on the SteamVR Tracking System
161
Fig. 25 Diagram of the treadmill speed control system
During the experimental tests, the person trained performed smooth changes of
movement speed and performed sudden changes of movement speed (Fig. 26). In
contrast, the treadmill’s speed control system effectively adjusted the speed of the
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 26 a Positionofthepersontrainedinrelationtothetreadmill,bspeciﬁedspeedofthetreadmill,
c deceleration of differentiation, d reciprocal speed of the person’s feet

162
K. Stateczny et al.
belt to keep the person trained in position to match the speed of the movement.
During a sudden stop, detected using the algorithm cited in this chapter. The treadmill
belt slows down considerably as a result of the switch to the emergency braking
characteristic and slowly moves the person trained to the starting position. At the
moment of re-run the control system switches to the acceleration characteristic.
Using the presented treadmill mat speed control system it is possible to maintain a
constant position of the person trained in relation to the treadmill at a constant speed
of movement which can be observed between 70 and 100 s of the above diagram,
while a change in the speed of movement results in the user moving to a new position
in relation to the environment. The use of non-linear speed characteristics relative to
the person’s position enables the mat to start smoothly and achieve signiﬁcant running
speeds of the person trained. Stopping of the person even at signiﬁcant speed causes
a change in speed characteristics and a sudden slowing of the mat speed. Emergency
braking tests can be observed in the 250–300 s range.
5
Summary
On the basis of preliminary studies included in the paper, testing the performance
of systems measuring the movement of the exercising person, control signals were
selected for feedback in the treadmill mat control system. A treadmill mat control
system was designed and implemented in a software environment. The paper presents
a description of the designed system. Functional tests of the designed system were
carried out on a special test bench equipped with a treadmill with controlled mat
speed. Functionality tests showed that the designed solution meets all the require-
ments for the system, including intuitive use. The designed solution of the system
allows a person to freely change the way of movement from walking to running.
6
Thanks
The work was carried out by the West Pomeranian University of Technology in
Szczecin on the basis of an agreement between Autocomp Serwis Spółka z o.o.,
based in Szczecin, ul. 1 Maja nr 36 and the West Pomeranian University of Tech-
nology in Szczecin, al. Piastów 17, 70-310 Szczecin. The work was carried out as
part of the project Implementation of industrial research and experimental develop-
ment aimed at developing a new product under the name of “Embody Interaction
Intelligence”IntegratedSystemNo.POIR.01.01.01-00-0285/17-00,implementedby
Autocomp Serwis sp. z o.o., co-ﬁnanced by the European Union, under the Opera-
tional Programme Intelligent Development 2014–2020, sub-measure 1.1.1 Industrial
Research and Development Works Performed by Enterprises—“Fast Track.”

The Treadmill Control System Based on the SteamVR Tracking System
163
References
1. Bello, P.: New challenges for AI in military simulation: are multilevel heterogeneous models
the solution? In: Conference: Between a Rock and a Hard Place: Cognitive Science Principles
Meet AI-Hard Problems, vol. 2 (2016)
2. AI Application in Military | PDF | Artiﬁcial Intelligence | Intelligence (AI) & Semantics. https://
www.scribd.com/doc/109329863/AI-application-in-Military. Accessed 23 Sep 2021
3. Christensen, et al.: Inertial-Force Feedback for the Treadport Locomoti.pdf (2000). https://
web.archive.org/web/20030321013558id_/http://www.cs.utah.edu:80/~jmh/Papers/Christens
enXet_al.pdf
4. 20180320_VIVE_Pro_HMD_user_guide_English.pdf.: https://developer.vive.com/resources/
wp-content/uploads/sites/8/2018/03/20180320_VIVE_Pro_HMD_user_guide_English.pdf
5. Products.: http://www.spacewalkervr.com/urunler/. Accessed 23 Sep 2021
6. CyberWalk: Giant Omni-directional treadmill to explore virtual worlds—IEEE Spec-
trum. https://spectrum.ieee.org/cyberwalk-giant-omnidirectional-treadmill-to-explore-virtual-
worlds. Accessed 23 Sep 2021
7. KAT Walk.: https://www.kat-vr.com/products/kat-walk-vr-treadmill. Accessed 23 Sep 2021
8. Crowell III, H.P., et al.: Improvements in the Omni-directional treadmill: summary report and
recommendations for future development. Army Research Lab Aberdeen Proving Ground MD
(2006)
9. De Luca, A., et al.: Motion control of the cybercarpet platform. IEEE Trans. Control Syst.
Technol. 21(2), 410–427 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1109/TCST.2012.2185051
10. Haiwei Dong, W., et al.: Real-time estimation of human’s intended walking speed for treadmill-
style locomotion interfaces. In: 2011 8th International Conference on Ubiquitous Robots and
Ambient Intelligence (URAI), pp. 14–19 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1109/URAI.2011.6145925
11. Yoon, J., et al.: A novel walking speed estimation scheme and its application to treadmill
control for gait rehabilitation. J. NeuroEng. Rehabil. 9(1), 62 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1186/
1743-0003-9-62
12. Asl, H.J., et al.: An intelligent control scheme to facilitate abrupt stopping on self-adjustable
treadmills. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
pp. 1639–1644 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2018.8462897
13. Xsens MVN User Manual User Guide Xsens MVN.: https://www.xsens.com/hubfs/Downlo
ads/usermanual/MVN_User_Manual.pdf. Accessed 22 July 2020
14. Home—Xsens Video Tutorials.: https://tutorial.xsens.com/?_ga=2.198506991.1114413440.
1586879218-1741972831.1585581204&_gac=1.21113801.1586887440.CjwKCAjwvtX0
BRAFEiwAGWJyZPsAK3kGrFBk-N5s_-9burK9EJeUGM_huqCOnImTjKjbX_TOPkh5cho
C4SoQAvD_BwE Accessed 23 Sep 2021

Author Index
B
Bajwoluk, Artur, 45
Berczy´nski, Stefan, 74
Boruci´nski, Maciej, 57
C
Charuk, Arkadiusz, 66
Chod´zko, Marcin, 112
Chudzi´nski, M., 26
D
Dunaj, Paweł, 66, 74
G
Górnostaj, Artur, 143
Gołaszewski, Marcin, 121
H
Herbin, Paweł, 143
J
Jastrz˛ebska, Joanna, 85
K
Kawiak, M., 11, 101
Krajewski, S. J., 11, 26, 101
M
Majda, Paweł, 85
Mendrok, Krzysztof, 1
Mi˛adlicki, Karol, 143
N
Niesterowicz, Beata, 74
O
Okulik, Tomasz, 74
Oskroba, Jarosław, 1
P
Powałka, Bartosz, 112, 121
S
Stateczny, Kamil, 143
Z
Zarzeczny, Michał, 132
Zmitrowicz, P., 26
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license
to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
B. Powałka et al. (eds.), Mechatronics—Trending Future Industries, Lecture Notes
in Networks and Systems 377, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93377-7
165

