POWER SYSTEM
ANALYSIS & DESIGN
Sixth Edition
J. Duncan Glover
Thomas J. Overbye
Mulukutla S. Sarma

POWER SYSTEM ANALYSIS  
& DESIGN
SIXTH EDITION
J. DUNCAN GLOVER
Failure Electrical, LLC
THOMAS J. OVERBYE
University of Illinois
MULUKUTLA S. SARMA
Northeastern University
Australia ● Brazil ● Japan ● Korea ● Mexico ● Singapore ● Spain ● United Kingdom ● United States

© 2017, 2012 Cengage Learning®
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the 
copyright herein may be reproduced or distributed in any form 
or by any means, except as permitted by U.S. copyright law, 
without the prior written permission of the copyright owner.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2015956452
ISBN:  978-1-305-63213-4
Cengage Learning 
20 Channel Center Street 
Boston, MA 02210 
USA
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning 
solutions with employees residing in nearly 40 different 
countries and sales in more than 125 countries around the 
world. Find your local representative at www.cengage.com.
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by 
Nelson Education Ltd.
To learn more about Cengage Learning Solutions, visit  
www.cengage.com/engineering.
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at 
our preferred online store www.cengagebrain.com.
Unless otherwise noted, all items © Cengage Learning.
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at  
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706. 
For permission to use material from this text or product,  
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions. 
Further permissions questions can be emailed to  
permissionrequest@cengage.com.
Power System Analysis & Design,  
Sixth Edition
J. Duncan Glover, Thomas J. Overbye, 
and Mulukutla S. Sarma
Product Director, Global Engineering:  
  Timothy L. Anderson
Senior Content Developer: Mona Zeftel 
Associate Media Content Developer:  
  Ashley Kaupert
Product Assistant: Alexander Sham
Marketing Manager: Kristin Stine
Director, Content and Media Production: 
  Sharon L. Smith
Content Project Manager: D. Jean Buttrom
Production Service: RPK Editorial  
  Services, Inc.
Copyeditor: Warren Hapke
Proofreaders: Martha McMaster and  
  Shelly Gerger-Knechtl
Indexer: RPK Editorial Services
Compositor: MPS Limited
Senior Art Director: Michelle Kunkler
Internal Designer: Carmela Pereira
Cover Designer: Itzhack Shelomi
Cover Image: High voltage power lines  
  and pylon, kstudija/ShutterStock.com; 
Picturesque Green Field and Blue Sky, 
AlinaMD/ShutterStock.com; Power 
high voltage tower, kstudija 
/ShutterStock.com
Intellectual Property
  Analyst: Christine Myaskovsky
  Project Manager: Sarah Shainwald
Text and Image Permissions Researcher: 
  Kristiina Paul
Senior Manufacturing Planner:  
  Doug Wilke
Printed in the United States of America
Print Number: 01    Print Year: 2015

In loving memory of my mentors Professor Fred C. Schweppe 
[1933–1988] and Dr. Alexander Kusko [1921–2013]. You taught 
me, you guided me, you set the bar for which I continue to 
strive.  You shall not be forgotten.
My Guardian Poet[s]
A guardian poet you have been to me
Much like an angel, there protecting me
When I was silent, lost in dark of night
You read my words and brought me back to light
You told me that my words were ever true
That in my writes were thoughts profound and new
You would not let me simply drift away
A word of hope you’d send to greet each day
Your name is there below each thing I write
To tear dimmed eyes you brought a vision bright
“The Queen of Passion,” how I love the name
You gave to me and life is not the same
To you, my Guardian Poet, thanks I bring
You fool me not; I see your angel wing
Eileen Manassian Ghali
To Jo, Tim, Hannah, and Amanda


v
Contents
Preface  xi
List of Symbols, Units, and Notation  xvii
CHAPTER 1	
Introduction  1
Case Study: How the Free Market Rocked the Grid  2
1.1	
History of Electric Power Systems  10
1.2	
Present and Future Trends  17
1.3	
Electric Utility Industry Structure  20
1.4	
Computers in Power System Engineering  21
1.5	
PowerWorld Simulator  22
CHAPTER 2	
Fundamentals  31
Case Study: Key Connections  32
2.1	
Phasors  40
2.2	
Instantaneous Power in Single-Phase AC Circuits  42
2.3	
Complex Power  47
2.4	
Network Equations  52
2.5	
Balanced Three-Phase Circuits  55
2.6	
Power in Balanced Three-Phase Circuits  63
2.7	
Advantages of Balanced Three-Phase versus  
Single-Phase Systems  68
CHAPTER 3	
Power Transformers  87
Case Study: Power Transformers—Life Management  
and Extension  88
3.1	
The Ideal Transformer  95
3.2	
Equivalent Circuits for Practical Transformers  101

vi	
Contents
3.3 	
The Per-Unit System  107
3.4	
Three-Phase Transformer Connections  
and Phase Shift  115
3.5	
Per-Unit Equivalent Circuits of Balanced Three-Phase 
Two-Winding Transformers  120
3.6	
Three-Winding Transformers  125
3.7	
Autotransformers  129
3.8	
Transformers with Off-Nominal Turns  
Ratios  131
CHAPTER 4	
Transmission Line Parameters  161
Case Study: Integrating North America’s Power Grid  162
Case Study: Grid Congestion - Unclogging the Arteries  
of North America’s Power Grid  167
4.1	
Transmission Line Design Considerations  173
4.2	
Resistance  178
4.3	
Conductance  181
4.4	
Inductance: Solid Cylindrical Conductor  181
4.5	
Inductance: Single-Phase Two-Wire Line  
and Three-Phase Three-Wire Line with Equal Phase 
Spacing  186
4.6	
Inductance: Composite Conductors, Unequal Phase 
Spacing, Bundled Conductors  188
4.7	
Series Impedances: Three-Phase Line with Neutral 
Conductors and Earth Return  196
4.8	
Electric Field and Voltage:  
Solid Cylindrical Conductor  201
4.9	
Capacitance: Single-Phase Two-Wire 
Line and Three-Phase Three-Wire Line with  
Equal Phase Spacing  204
4.10	 Capacitance: Stranded Conductors, Unequal Phase 
Spacing, Bundled Conductors  206
4.11	 Shunt Admittances: Lines with Neutral Conductors 
and Earth Return  210
4.12	 Electric Field Strength at Conductor Surfaces and  
at Ground Level  215
4.13	 Parallel Circuit Three-Phase Lines  218

	
Contents	
vii
CHAPTER 5	
Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation  237
Case Study: The ABCs of HVDC Transmission 
Technologies: An Overview of High Voltage Direct  
Current Systems and Applications  238
5.1	
Medium and Short Line Approximations  258
5.2	
Transmission-Line Differential Equations  265
5.3	
Equivalent p Circuit  271
5.4	
Lossless Lines  274
5.5	
Maximum Power Flow  282
5.6	
Line Loadability  284
5.7	
Reactive Compensation Techniques  289
CHAPTER 6	
Power Flows  309
Case Study: Finding Flexibility—Cycling the Conventional 
Fleet  310
6.1	
Direct Solutions to Linear Algebraic Equations: 
Gauss Elimination  330
6.2	
Iterative Solutions to Linear Algebraic Equations: 
Jacobi and Gauss-Seidel  334
6.3	
Iterative Solutions to Nonlinear  
Algebraic Equations: Newton-Raphson  340
6.4	
The Power Flow Problem  345
6.5	
Power Flow Solution by Gauss-Seidel  351
6.6	
Power Flow Solution by Newton-Raphson  353
6.7	
Control of Power Flow  363
6.8	
Sparsity Techniques  369
6.9	
Fast Decoupled Power Flow  372
6.10	 The “DC” Power Flow  372
6.11	 Power Flow Modeling of Wind Generation  374
6.12	 Economic Dispatch  376
6.13	 Optimal Power Flow  389
Design Projects 1–3  404–412
CHAPTER 7	
Symmetrical Faults  415
Case Study: Short-Circuit Modeling of a Wind Power 
Plant  416
7.1	
Series R–L Circuit Transients  435

viii	
Contents
7.2	
Three-Phase Short Circuit—Unloaded Synchronous 
Machine  438
7.3	
Power System Three-Phase Short Circuits  442
7.4	
Bus Impedance Matrix  445
7.5	
Circuit Breaker and Fuse Selection  455
Design Project 3 (continued )  472
CHAPTER 8	
Symmetrical Components  475
Case Study: Technological Progress in High-Voltage  
Gas-Insulated Substations  476
8.1	
Definition of Symmetrical Components  493
8.2	
Sequence Networks of Impedance Loads  499
8.3	
Sequence Networks of Series Impedances  506
8.4	
Sequence Networks of Three-Phase Lines  508
8.5	
Sequence Networks of Rotating Machines  510
8.6	
Per-Unit Sequence Models of Three-Phase 
Two-Winding Transformers  516
8.7	
Per-Unit Sequence Models of Three-Phase 
Three-Winding Transformers  522
8.8	
Power in Sequence Networks  524
CHAPTER 9	
Unsymmetrical Faults  539
Case Study: Innovative Medium Voltage Switchgear  
for Today’s Applications  540
9.1	
System Representation  547
9.2	
Single Line-to-Ground Fault  553
9.3	
Line-to-Line Fault  557
9.4	
Double Line-to-Ground Fault  560
9.5	
Sequence Bus Impedance Matrices  567
Design Project 3 (continued )  588
Design Project 4  589
CHAPTER 10	
System Protection  593
Case Study: Upgrading Relay Protection Be Prepared for the 
Next Replacement or Upgrade Project  594
10.1	 System Protection Components  612

	
Contents	
ix
10.2	 Instrument Transformers  614
10.3	 Overcurrent Relays  620
10.4	 Radial System Protection  625
10.5	 Reclosers and Fuses  629
10.6	 Directional Relays  633
10.7	 Protection of a Two-Source System with Directional 
Relays  634
10.8	 Zones of Protection  635
10.9	 Line Protection with Impedance (Distance)  
Relays  639
10.10	 Differential Relays  645
10.11	 Bus Protection with Differential Relays  647
10.12	 Transformer Protection with Differential  
Relays  648
10.13	 Pilot Relaying  653
10.14	 Numeric Relaying  654
CHAPTER 11	
Transient Stability  669
Case Study: Down, but Not Out  671
11.1	 The Swing Equation  689
11.2	 Simplified Synchronous Machine Model and System 
Equivalents  695
11.3	 The Equal-Area Criterion  697
11.4	 Numerical Integration of the Swing Equation  707
11.5	 Multimachine Stability  711
11.6	 A Two-Axis Synchronous Machine Model  719
11.7	 Wind Turbine Machine Models  724
11.8	 Design Methods for Improving Transient 
Stability  730
CHAPTER 12	
Power System Controls  739
Case Study: No Light in August: Power System Restoration 
Following the 2003 North American Blackout  742
12.1	 Generator-Voltage Control  757
12.2	 Turbine-Governor Control  761
12.3	 Load-Frequency Control  767

x	
Contents
CHAPTER 13	
Transmission Lines: Transient Operation  779
Case Study: Surge Arresters  780
Case Study: Emergency Response   794
13.1	 Traveling Waves on Single-Phase Lossless Lines  809
13.2	 Boundary Conditions for Single-Phase Lossless 
Lines  813
13.3	 Bewley Lattice Diagram  822
13.4	 Discrete-Time Models of Single-Phase Lossless Lines 
and Lumped RLC Elements  828
13.5	 Lossy Lines  834
13.6	 Multiconductor Lines  838
13.7	 Power System Overvoltages  841
13.8	 Insulation Coordination  847
CHAPTER 14	
Power Distribution  859
Case Study: It’s All in the Plans  860
14.1	 Introduction to Distribution  875
14.2	 Primary Distribution  878
14.3	 Secondary Distribution  885
14.4	 Transformers in Distribution Systems  890
14.5	 Shunt Capacitors in Distribution Systems  900
14.6	 Distribution Software  905
14.7	 Distribution Reliability  906
14.8	 Distribution Automation  910
14.9	 Smart Grids  913
Appendix  921
Index  925

xi
Preface
The objective of this book is to present methods of power system analysis and 
design, particularly with the aid of a personal computer, in sufficient depth to give 
the student the basic theory at the undergraduate level. The approach is designed to 
develop students’ thinking processes, enabling them to reach a sound understanding 
of a broad range of topics related to power system engineering, while motivating 
their interest in the electrical power industry. Because we believe that fundamen-
tal physical concepts underlie creative engineering and form the most valuable and 
permanent part of an engineering education, we highlight physical concepts while 
giving due attention to mathematical techniques. Both theory and modeling are 
developed from simple beginnings so that they can be readily extended to new and 
complex situations.
New To This Edition
New chapter-opening case studies bring principles to life for students by providing prac-
tical, real-world engineering applications for the material discussed in each chapter.
Comprehensively revised problem sets ensure students have the practice they 
need to master critical skills. 
Updated Instructor Resources
These resources include 
●
●
Instructor’s Solutions Manual with solutions to all problems
●
●
Comprehensive Test Bank offering additional problems
●
●
Annotated Lecture Note PowerPoint Slides
●
●
Lesson Plans that detail how to most effectively use this edition
●
●
Updated PowerWorld Simulator Software
●
●
Student PowerPoint Notes 
New design projects in this edition meet Accreditation Board for Engineering and 
Technology (ABET) requirements to provide valuable hands-on experience and to 
help ensure students are receiving an education that meets globally recognized ac-
creditation standards.
The latest version of the valuable PowerWorld Simulator (version 19) is included 
and integrated throughout the text.

xii	
Preface
Key Features
The text presents present-day, practical applications and new technologies along 
with ample coverage of the ongoing restructuring of the electric utility industry. It is 
supported by an ample number of worked examples, including illustrations, covering 
most of the theoretical points raised. It also includes PowerWorld Simulator version 19  
to extend fully worked examples into computer implementations of the solutions. 
Version 19 includes power flow, optimal power flow, contingency analysis, short 
circuit, and transient stability.
The text includes a chapter on Power Distribution with content on Smart Grids.
It also includes discussions on modeling of wind turbines in power flow and 
transient stability. 
Four design projects are included, all of which meet ABET requirements.
PowerWorld Simulator
One of the most challenging aspects of engineering education is giving students 
an intuitive feel for the systems they are studying. Engineering systems are, for 
the most part, complex. While paper-and-pencil exercises can be quite useful 
for highlighting the fundamentals, they often fall short in imparting the desired  
intuitive insight. To help provide this insight, the book uses PowerWorld Sim-
ulator version 19 to integrate computer-based examples, problems, and design 
projects throughout the text.
PowerWorld Simulator was originally developed at the University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign to teach the basics of power systems to nontechnical people  
involved in the electricity industry, with version 1.0 introduced in June 1994. The pro-
gram’s interactive and graphical design made it an immediate hit as an educational 
tool, but a funny thing happened—its interactive and graphical design also appealed 
to engineers doing analysis of real power systems. To meet the needs of a growing 
group of users, PowerWorld Simulator was commercialized in 1996 by the formation 
of PowerWorld Corporation. Thus while retaining its appeal for education, over the 
years PowerWorld Simulator has evolved into a top-notch analysis package, able to 
handle power systems of any size. PowerWorld Simulator is now used throughout the 
power industry, with a range of users encompassing universities, utilities of all sizes, 
government regulators, power marketers, and consulting firms.
In integrating PowerWorld Simulator with the text, our design philosophy has 
been to use the software to extend, rather than replace, the fully worked examples 
provided in previous editions. Therefore, except when the problem size makes it 
impractical, each PowerWorld Simulator example includes a fully worked hand 
solution of the problem along with a PowerWorld Simulator case. This format 
allows students to simultaneously see the details of how a problem is solved and 
a computer implementation of the solution. The added benefit from PowerWorld 
Simulator is its ability to easily extend the example. Through its interactive design, 
students can quickly vary example parameters and immediately see the impact such 
changes have on the solution. By reworking the examples with the new parameters, 
students get immediate feedback on whether they understand the solution process.  

	
Preface	
xiii
The interactive and visual design of PowerWorld Simulator also makes it an excel-
lent tool for instructors to use for in-class demonstrations. With numerous exam-
ples utilizing PowerWorld Simulator instructors can easily demonstrate many of 
the text topics. Additional PowerWorld Simulator functionality is introduced in the 
text problems and design projects.
Prerequisites
As background for this course, it is assumed that students have had courses in 
electric network theory (including transient analysis) and ordinary differential 
equations and have been exposed to linear systems, matrix algebra, and computer 
programming. In addition, it would be helpful, but not necessary, to have had an 
electric machines course.
Organization
The text is intended to be fully covered in a two-semester or three-quarter course 
offered to seniors and first-year graduate students. The organization of chapters 
and individual sections is flexible enough to give the instructor sufficient latitude in 
choosing topics to cover, especially in a one-semester course. The text is supported by 
an ample number of worked examples covering most of the theoretical points raised. 
The many problems to be worked with a calculator as well as problems to be worked 
using a personal computer have been revised in this edition.
After an introduction to the history of electric power systems along with present 
and future trends, Chapter 2 orients the students to the terminology and serves as 
a brief review of fundamentals. The chapter reviews phasor concepts, power, and 
single-phase as well as three-phase circuits.
Chapters 3 through 5 examine power transformers including the per-unit sys-
tem, transmission-line parameters, and steady-state operation of transmission lines. 
Chapter 6 examines power flows including the Newton-Raphson method, power-flow 
modeling of wind generation, economic dispatch, and optimal power flow. These 
chapters provide a basic understanding of power systems under balanced three-
phase, steady-state, normal operating conditions.
Chapters 7 through 10, which cover symmetrical faults, symmetrical components, 
unsymmetrical faults, and system protection, come under the general heading of 
power system short-circuit protection. Chapter 11 examines transient stability, which 
includes the swing equation, the equal-area criterion, and multi-machine stability 
with modeling of wind-energy systems. Chapter 12 covers power system controls, 
including generator-voltage control, turbine-governor control, and load-frequency 
control. Chapter 13 examines transient operation of transmission lines including 
power system overvoltages and surge protection. 
Chapter 14 introduces the basic features of primary and secondary distribution 
systems as well as basic distribution components including distribution substation 
transformers, distribution transformers, and shunt capacitors. We list some of the 
major distribution software vendors followed by an introduction to distribution  
reliability, distribution automation, and smart grids.

xiv	
Preface
Additional Resources
Companion websites for this book are available for both students and instructors. 
These websites provide useful links and other support material. 
Student Website 
The Student Companion Site includes a link to download the free student version 
of PowerWorld and Student PowerPoint Notes. 
Instructor Resource Center 
The Instructor Companion Site includes
●
●
Instructor’s Solutions Manual
●
●
Annotated PowerPoint Slides
●
●
Lecture Notes
●
●
Test Banks
To access the support material described here along with all additional course 
materials, please visit https://sso.cengage.com. 
MINDTAP ONLINE COURSE AND READER
This textbook is also available online through Cengage Learning’s MindTap, a per-
sonalized learning program. Students who purchase the MindTap have access to the 
book’s multimedia-rich electronic Reader and are able to complete homework and 
assessment material online, on their desktops, laptops, or iPads. Instructors who use 
a Learning Management System (such as Blackboard, Canvas, or Moodle) for track-
ing course content, assignments, and grading, can seamlessly access the MindTap 
suite of content and assessments for this course. 
With MindTap, instructors can
●
●
Personalize the Learning Path to match the course syllabus by rearranging 
content or appending original material to the online content  
●
●
Connect a Learning Management System portal to the online course and Reader
●
●
Customize online assessments and assignments
●
●
Track student engagement, progress and comprehension 
●
●
Promote student success through interactivity, multimedia, and exercises
Additionally, students can listen to the text through ReadSpeaker, take notes in the 
digital Reader, study from and create their own Flashcards, highlight content for 
easy reference, and check their understanding of the material through practice quiz-
zes and automatically-graded homework.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The material in this text was gradually developed to meet the needs of classes taught 
at universities in the United States and abroad over the past 35 years. The original 13 
chapters were written by the first author, J. Duncan Glover, Failure Electrical LLC, 

	
Preface	
xv
who is indebted to many people who helped during the planning and writing of this 
book. The profound influence of earlier texts written on power systems, particu-
larly by W. D. Stevenson, Jr., and the developments made by various outstanding 
engineers are gratefully acknowledged. Details of sources can only be made through 
references at the end of each chapter, as they are otherwise too numerous to mention.
Chapter 14 (Power Distribution) was a collaborative effort between Dr. Glover 
(Sections 14.1-14.7) and Co-author Thomas J. Overbye (Sections 14.8 & 14.9). Profes-
sor Overbye, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign updated Chapter 6 (Power 
Flows) and Chapter 11 (Transient Stability). He also provided the examples and 
problems using PowerWorld Simulator as well as three design projects. Co-author  
Mulukutla Sarma, Northeastern University, contributed to end-of-chapter multiple- 
choice questions and problems.
We commend the following Global Engineering team members at Cengage 
Learning: Timothy Anderson, Product Director; Mona Zeftel, Senior Content  
Developer; and Kristiina Paul, Freelance Permissions Researcher; as well as Rose  
Kernan of RPK Editorial Services, Inc. for their broad knowledge, skills, and ingenuity 
in publishing this edition. We also thank Jean Buttrom, Content Project Manager;  
Kristin Stine, Marketing Manager; Elizabeth Murphy, Engagement Specialist;  
Ashley Kaupert, Associate Media Content Developer; Teresa Versaggi and Alexander  
Sham, Product Assistants.
The reviewers for the sixth edition are as follows: Ross Baldick, University of 
Texas at Austin; François Bouffard, McGill University; Venkata Dinavahi, University 
of Alberta; Seyed Pouyan Jazayeri, University of Calgary; Bruno Osorno, California  
State University at Northridge, Zeb Tate, University of Toronto; and Mahyar  
Zarghami, California State University at Sacramento.
Substantial contributions to prior editions of this text were made by a number 
of invaluable reviewers, as follows:
Thomas L. Baldwin, Florida State University; Ali Emadi, Illinois Institute of 
Technology; Reza Iravani, University of Toronto; Surya Santoso, University of Texas 
at Austin; Ali Shaban, California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo; and 
Dennis O. Wiitanen, Michigan Technological University, and Hamid Jaffari, Danvers 
Electric.
Robert C. Degeneff, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute; Venkata Dina-vahi, Uni-
versity of Alberta; Richard G. Farmer, Arizona State University; Steven M. Hietpas, 
South Dakota State University; M. Hashem Nehrir, Montana State University; Anil 
Pahwa, Kansas State University; and Ghadir Radman, Tennessee Technical University.
Sohrab Asgarpoor, University of Nebraska-Lincoln; Mariesa L. Crow, Univer-
sity of Missouri-Rolla; Ilya Y. Grinberg, State University of New York, College at 
Buffalo; Iqbal Husain, The University of Akron; W. H. Kersting, New Mexico State 
University; John A. Palmer, Colorado School of Mines; Satish J. Ranada, New Mexico  
State University; and Shyama C. Tandon, California Polytechnic State University.
Max D. Anderson, University of Missouri-Rolla; Sohrab Asgarpoor, University 
of Nebraska-Lincoln; Kaveh Ashenayi, University of Tulsa; Richard D. Christie,  
Jr., University of Washington; Mariesa L. Crow, University of Missouri-Rolla; Rich-
ard G. Farmer, Arizona State University; Saul Goldberg, California Polytechnic 
Fifth Edition:
Fourth Edition:
Third Edition:
Second Edition:

University; Clifford H. Grigg, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology; Howard 
B. Hamilton, University of Pittsburgh; Leo Holzenthal, Jr., University of New Orleans;  
Walid Hubbi, New Jersey Institute of Technology; Charles W. Isherwood, Univer-
sity of Massachusetts-Dartmouth; W. H. Kersting, New Mexico State University; 
Wayne E. Knabach, South Dakota State University; Pierre-Jean Lagace, IREQ In-
stitut de Reserche a”Hydro-Quebec; James T. Lancaster, Alfred University; Kwang  
Y. Lee, Pennsylvania State University; Mohsen Lotfalian, University of Evansville; 
Rene B. Marxheimer, San Francisco State University, Lamine Mili, Virginia Poly-
technic Institute and State University; Osama A. Mohammed, Florida International 
University; Clifford C. Mosher, Washington State University, Anil Pahwa, Kansas  
State University; M. A. Pai, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; R. Ramakumar, 
Oklahoma State University; Teodoro C. Robles, Milwaukee School of Engineering, 
Ronald G. Schultz, Cleveland State University; Stephen A. Sebo, Ohio State Uni-
versity; Raymond Shoults, University of Texas at Arlington, Richard D. Shultz, 
University of Wisconsin at Platteville; Charles Slivinsky, University of Missouri- 
Columbia; John P. Stahl, Ohio Northern University; E. K. Stanek, University of 
Missouri-Rolla; Robert D. Strattan, University of Tulsa; Tian-Shen Tang, Texas 
A&M University-Kingsville; S. S. Venkata, University of Washington; Francis  
M. Wells, Vanderbilt University; Bill Wieserman, University of Pennsylvania-Johnstown;  
Stephen Williams, U.S. Naval Postgraduate School; and Salah M. Yousif, California 
State University-Sacramento.
Frederick C. Brockhurst, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology; Bell A. Cogbill. 
Northeastern University; Saul Goldberg, California Polytechnic State University; 
Mack Grady, University of Texas at Austin; Leonard F. Grigsby, Auburn University; 
Howard Hamilton, University of Pittsburgh; William F. Horton, California Polytech-
nic State University; W. H. Kersting, New Mexico State University; John Pavlat, Iowa 
State University; R. Ramakumar, Oklahoma State University; B. Don Russell, Texas 
A&M; Sheppard Salon, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute; Stephen A. Sebo, Ohio 
State University; and Dennis O. Wiitanen, Michigan Technological University.
In conclusion, the objective in writing this text and the accompanying software 
package will have been fulfilled if the book is considered to be student-oriented, 
comprehensive, and up to date, with consistent notation and necessary detailed ex-
planation at the level for which it is intended.
J. Duncan Glover
Thomas J. Overbye
Mulukutla S. Sarma
First Edition:
xvi	
Preface

xvii
List of Symbols, Units, 
and Notation
Symbol	
Description	
Symbol	
Description	
a	
operator 1/120°	
P	
real power	
at	
transformer turns ratio	
q	
Charge	
A	
area	
	
Q	
reactive power	
A	
transmission line parameter	
r	
radius	
A	
symmetrical components	
R	
resistance	
	
transformation matrix	
R	
turbine-governor regulation	
B	
	
	
constant	
B	
frequency bias constant	
R	
resistance matrix	
B	
phasor magnetic flux density	
s	
Laplace operator	
B	
transmission line parameter	
S	
apparent power	
C	
capacitance	
S	
complex power	
C	
transmission line parameter	
t	
time	
D	
damping	
T	
period	
	
	
D	
distance		
T	
temperature	
D	
transmission line parameter	
T	
torque	
E	
phasor source voltage	
v(t)	
instantaneous voltage	
E	
phasor electric field strength	
V	
voltage magnitude (rms unless
f	
frequency	
	
  otherwise indicated)
G	
conductance	
V	
phasor voltage	
G	
conductance matrix	
V	
vector of phasor voltages	
H	
normalized inertia constant	
X	
reactance	
H	
phasor magnetic field intensity	
X	
reactance matrix	
i(t)	
instantaneous current	
Y	
phasor admittance	
I	
current magnitude (rms unless	
Y	
admittance matrix	
	
otherwise indicated)	
Z	
phasor impedance	
I	
phasor current	
Z	
impedance matrix	
I	
vector of phasor currents	
a	
angular acceleration	
j	
operator 1/90°	
a	
transformer phase
J	
moment of inertia	
	
  shift angle
l	
length	 	
b	
current angle	

xviii	
List of Symbols, Units, and Notation
Symbol	
Description	
Symbol	
Description	
l	
length	 	
b	
area frequency response	
L	
inductance	
	
  characteristic	
L	
inductance matrix	
d	
voltage angle	
N	
number (of buses, lines, turns, etc.)	
d	
torque angle	
p.f.	
power factor	
«	
permittivity	
p(t)	
instantaneous power	
G	
reflection or refraction  
l	
magnetic flux linkage	
	
  coefficient	
l	
Penalty factor	
u	
impedance angle
F	
magnetic flux	
u	
angular position
r	
resistivity	
m	
permeability
t	
time in cycles	
y	
velocity of propagation
t	
transmission line transit time	
v	
radian frequency
	
SI Units	
English Units	
A	
ampere	 	
BTU	
British thermal unit
C	
coulomb	
Cmil	
circular mil
F	
farad	
	
ft	
foot
H	
henry	
	
hp	
horsepower
Hz	
hertz	
	
in	
inch
J	
joule	
	
mi	
mile
kg	
kilogram	
	
m	
meter	
	
N	
newton	 	
rad	
radian	
	
s	
second	 	
S	
siemen	 	
VA	
voltampere	
	
var	
voltampere reactive	
	
W	
watt	
	
Wb	
weber	
	
V	
ohm
Notation
Lowercase letters such as v(t) and i(t) indicate instantaneous values.
Uppercase letters such as V and I indicate rms values.
Uppercase letters in italic such as V and I indicate rms phasors.
Matrices and vectors with real components such as R and I are indicated by boldface type.
Matrices and vectors with complex components such as Z and I are indicated by 
boldface italic type.
Superscript T denotes vector or matrix transpose.
Asterisk (*) denotes complex conjugate.
PW  highlights problems that utilize PowerWorld Simulator.

1
1 Introduction
Blundell 
geothermal 
power plant near 
Milford, UT, 
USA. This  
38-MW plant 
consists of two 
generating units 
powered by 
geothermal steam.
Steam is created 
from water heated 
by magma at 
depths up to 6100 
meters below 
Earth’s surface. 
(Courtesy of 
PacifiCorp.)
E
lectrical engineers are concerned with every step in the process of generation, 
transmission, distribution, and utilization of electrical energy. The electric util-
ity industry is probably the largest and most complex industry in the world. The 
electrical engineer who works in that industry encounters challenging problems in 
designing future power systems to deliver increasing amounts of electrical energy in 
a safe, clean, and economical manner.
The objectives of this chapter are to review briefly the history of the electric utility 
industry, to discuss present and future trends in electric power systems, to describe  

2	
Chapter 1  |  Introduction
CASE STUDY
The following article describes the deregulation of the electric utility industry 
that has been taking place in the United States, including the benefits and 
problems that have been encountered with deregulation. During the last two 
decades, deregulation has had both good and bad effects. It has changed the 
mix of fuels in the U.S. generation fleet, shifting it away from coal and nuclear 
power toward natural gas and has opened the door to greener forms of elec-
tricity generation. It has also made many companies that provide electricity 
more efficient by increasing the reliability of power plants and reducing labor 
costs. However, wholesale prices of electricity have increased dramatically in 
some areas of the United States, market-based investments in transmission 
have been problematic, and rolling blackouts have been encountered [8]. 
How the Free Market Rocked the Grid*
Seth Blumsack Pennsylvania State University
It led to higher rates and rolling black-
outs, but it also opened the door to 
greener forms of electricity generation.
Most of us take for granted that 
the lights will work when we flip them 
on, without worrying too much about 
the staggeringly complex things needed 
to make that happen. Thank the  
engineers who designed and built the 
power grids for that—but don’t thank 
them too much. Their main goal was re-
liability; keeping the cost of electricity 
down was less of a concern. That’s in 
part why so many people in the United 
States complain about high electric-
ity prices. Some armchair economists 
(and a quite a few real ones) have long 
argued that the solution is deregula-
tion. After all, many other U.S. indus-
tries have been deregulated—take, for 
instance, oil, natural gas, or trucking— 
and greater competition in those sec-
tors swiftly brought prices down. Why 
not electricity?
Such arguments were compel-
ling enough to convince two dozen 
or so U.S. states to deregulate their 
electric industries. Most began in the 
mid-1990s, and problems emerged 
soon after, most famously in the roll-
ing blackouts that Californians suf-
fered through in the summer of 2000 
and the months that followed. At the 
root of these troubles is the fact that 
free markets can be messy and vola-
tile, something few took into account 
when deregulation began. But the 
consequences have since proved so 
the restructuring of the electric utility industry, and to introduce PowerWorld 
Simulator—a power system analysis and simulation software package.
*How the Free Market Rocked the Grid by Seth Blumsack, © 2010 IEEE. Reprinted, 
with permission, from IEEE Spectrum (December 2010), pg. 44–48, 57–59.
© 2010 IEEE. Reprinted, with permission, 
from Seth Blumsack,  “How the Free Market 
Rocked the Grid,” IEEE Spectrum, December 
2010, pp. 44–59.

	
Case Study	
3
chaotic that a quarter of these states 
have now suspended plans to revamp 
the way they manage their electric 
utilities, and few (if any) additional 
states are rushing to jump on the 
deregulation bandwagon.
The United States is far from 
being the only nation that has strug-
gled with electricity deregulation. 
But the U.S. experience is worth ex-
ploring because it highlights many 
of the challenges that can arise when 
complex industries such as electric 
power generation and distribution 
are subject to competition. 
Unlike many other nations grap-
pling with electricity deregulation, the 
United States has never had one gov-
ernmentowned electric utility running 
the whole country. Instead, a patch-
work of for-profit utilities, publicly 
owned municipal utilities, and electric 
cooperatives keeps the nation’s lights 
on. The story of how that mixture has 
evolved over the last 128 years helps to 
explain why deregulation hasn’t made 
electric power as cheap and plentiful 
as many had hoped.
The 1882 opening of Thomas 
Edison’s 
Pearl 
Street 
generation 
station in New York City marks the 
birth of the American electric utility 
industry. That station produced low-
voltage direct current, which had to 
be consumed close to the point of 
production, because sending it farther 
would have squandered most of the 
power as heat in the connecting wires.
Edison’s approach prevailed 
for a while, with different companies 
scrambling to build neighborhood 
power stations. They were regulated 
only to the extent that their owners 
had to obtain licenses from local 
officials. Municipalities handed these 
licenses out freely, showing the pre-
vailing laissez-faire attitude toward 
competition. Also, politicians wanted 
to see the cost of electricity drop.  
(A kilowatt-hour in the late 1800s 
cost about U.S. $5.00 in today’s 
dollars; now it averages just 12 cents.)
It didn’t take long, though, 
before Samuel Insull, a former Edison 
employee who became a utility 
entrepreneur in the Midwest, realized 
that the technology George Westing-
house was advocating—large steam 
or hydroelectric turbines linked to 
long-distance ac transmission lines—
could provide electricity at lower cost. 
Using such equipment, his company 
soon drove its competitors out of 
business. Other big utilities followed 
Insull’s lead and came to monopo-
lize the electricity markets in New 
York, New Jersey, and the Southeast. 
But the rise of these companies was 
ultimately a bane to consumers, who 
had to pay exorbitant prices after the 
competition had been quashed.
Angered by the steep rates, con-
sumers formed electricity cooperatives 
and municipal utilities. That in turn led 
Insull and his counterparts to plead 
with state officials for protection from 
this “ruinous” competition. Politicians 
complied, passing laws that granted 
the large electric power companies 
exclusive franchises in their areas in 
exchange for regulation of their prices 
and profits. The municipal utilities and 
electricity cooperatives continued to 
operate but in most cases never grew 
as large as the regulated for-profit 
(investor-owned) utilities.
This basic structure remained 
in place until the oil shocks of the 
1970s. Real electricity prices rose 
by almost 50 percent during that 

4	
Chapter 1  |  Introduction
troubled decade, despite having fallen 
virtually every year since the opening 
of Edison’s Pearl Street station. One 
culprit was the widespread use of im-
ported oil. The United States then 
generated almost 20 percent of its elec-
tricity using fuel oil; today that figure is 
less than 1 percent. And many utilities 
had made some poor investments— 
primarily in nuclear power—which 
their customers had to pay for.
The 1970s also exposed prob-
lems in how the electric power indus-
try was regulated. Power grids were 
growing in complexity as different 
utilities began interconnecting, and 
many regulators—particularly those 
whose appointments were political 
favors—didn’t understand the tech-
nical implications of their decisions. 
The combination of rising prices and 
obvious mismanagement led many 
large industrial consumers of elec-
tricity to push for deregulation.
The Public Utility Regulatory 
Policies Act of 1978 was the first shot 
fired in the ensuing battle. The new 
federal law allowed nonutility com-
panies to generate electricity from 
“alternative” fuel sources (mostly nat-
ural gas), and it required utilities to 
sign long-term supply contracts with 
these new generating companies. The 
Energy Policy Act of 1992 expanded 
the pool of players in the wholesale 
electricity market by allowing finan-
cial institutions—Morgan Stanley 
being the first—to buy and sell bulk 
electric power. Yet neither act was 
effective in curbing electricity prices.
Two states, California and Penn-
sylvania, then decided to take more 
drastic measures. They established  
centralized spot markets for elec-
tricity and allowed individual cus-
tomers to choose their electricity  
suppliers. 
While 
Pennsylvania’s 
experiment has largely run smoothly, 
California’s experience was quite  
different. After two years of rea-
sonably stable operation, wholesale 
prices exploded in 2000, from a few 
cents per kilowatt-hour to more than 
a dollar per kilowatt-hour. One rea-
son for those astronomical prices 
was that power-trading companies 
like Enron Corp. had figured out 
how to game the system. With retail 
prices capped by law at 6.7 cents per 
kilowatt-hour, two of the state’s three 
investor-owned utilities, Pacific Gas 
& Electric and Southern California 
Edison, ran out of money to pay for 
electricity. That triggered a second 
power crisis the following year, which 
forced the state to buy electricity from 
producers. The long-term contracts 
signed during that period of panic 
buying saddled California taxpayers 
with a debt of some $40 billion.
	
For Californians, at least, deregulation 
had lost its gloss. This turned out 
to be temporary: The state recently 
reintroduced centralized wholesale 
markets modeled after Pennsylva-
nia’s. But has deregulation on the 
whole made things better or worse? 
Dozens of studies have attempted 
to answer that question. But you 
can’t simply compare states that 
have aggressively deregulated with 
ones that haven’t. That would ig-
nore the fact that some states have 
built-in advantages that keep prices 
low: proximity to natural resources,  

	
Case Study	
5
a large base of generation capacity, 
and so forth. It also ignores what util-
ities and regulators would have done 
if deregulation had never happened.
To answer the question properly, 
you’d need to figure out what things 
would have been like in the absence 
of deregulation. And that’s well-nigh 
impossible. Of the various studies 
that have attempted to assess the  
impacts of deregulation, most have 
come from groups with a stake in  
the outcome of the regulatory reform 
process. So they tend to be either 
strongly for deregulation or strongly 
against it. In reality, deregulation has 
had both good and bad effects.
Consider a simple variable like 
the price of electricity. That competi-
tion will lead to lower prices is about 
as close to a universal truth as eco-
nomics gets. But electricity seems to 
be an exception.
Here’s why: Under regulation, 
each generating plant is paid for its 
electricity based on its average cost 
plus some prescribed rate of return. 
In a competitive market, supply and 
demand set the price. That means  
that the last plant coming online 
to handle the load determines the 
wholesale price of electricity. All 
generators in the system are then 
paid that same amount for each 
kilowatt-hour they inject into the grid.
That might seem only fair, 
but you have to remember that 
not all electricity generators are 
created equal. In most places, coal 
and nuclear plants, which can’t be 
ramped up and down easily, produce 
the roughly constant baseload power 
feeding the grid. If more is needed, 
natural gas turbines then kick in. 
So in deregulated markets, the price 
of gas, which has historically been 
higher than that of coal or nuclear 
fuel, ends up controlling the whole-
sale price of electricity—allowing the 
owners of nuclear plants and efficient 
coal plants to earn much higher prof-
its than they did under regulation. 
That’s why electricity prices in many 
places rose so sharply when natural 
gas prices skyrocketed at the turn of 
the millennium.
Other strange dynamics also 
come into play. For example, state 
political leaders realize that escalat-
ing or erratic electricity prices are 
bad for economic development (and 
their own chances of reelection). So 
they’ve fought hard to keep them 
low and stable by imposing rate caps 
and freezes. But many of these same 
states also compelled their electric 
utilities to divest themselves of gen-
erating capacity in an attempt to 
spur competition. And when elec-
tricity demand is high and the utili-
ties don’t have enough of their own 
generating capacity, they’re forced 
to buy more on the spot market, 
where prices are volatile. The re-
sults have not been pretty. In 2000, 
one of California’s two largest util-
ities went bankrupt, and the other 
nearly did. And when regulators 
in Maryland finally allowed retail 
electricity rates in Baltimore to float 
with wholesale electricity prices, the 
local utility immediately announced 
a rate increase of 72 percent, leading 
to consumer outrage and eventually 
to the summary firing of the entire 
public utility commission. 

6	
Chapter 1  |  Introduction
Argentina
Privatization of electricity generation 
in Argentina began in 1992, followed 
the next year by privatization of that 
nation’s six transmission companies. 
Argentine law did not allow any of the 
resultant for-profit power companies 
to control more than 10 percent of the 
country’s generation capacity, ensuring 
considerable competition among them.
United Kingdom
Electricity restructuring in the UK 
began under Margaret Thatcher, 
with the Electricity Act of 1983, 
which gave independent power pro-
ducers access to the national grid. 
Government-owned generators were 
then fully privatized in the 1990s.
France
France began a very modest pro-
gram of reform in 2001, but for the 
most part electricity supply remains 
completely dominated by the state 
electricity company, Électricité de 
France.
Germany
In response to a 1996 European 
directive, Germany abolished its 
law 
exempting 
electricity 
from 
competition in 1998. But most of 
that country’s electricity still comes 
from just a few vertically integrated 
power companies, with compara-
tively little electricity trading on 
open exchanges.
Australia
The Australian state of Victoria pri-
vatized its electricity sector in 1994. 
Some other Australian states soon 
followed suit. And Australia estab-
lished a national wholesale electricity 
market in December 1998.
ARGENTINA
AUSTRALIA
UNITED KINGDOM
GERMAN Y
FRANCE
DEREGULATION IS ALL OVER THE MAP
Countries have deregulated their electric power industries to different degrees, as 
these five examples show.

	
Case Study	
7
Clearly, deregulation hasn’t 
been at all successful in bringing 
prices down. But has it made the 
companies that provide electricity 
more efficient? Very probably. Their 
labor costs have fallen, mostly 
through reductions in staff, while the 
reliability of their power plants has 
improved. The champions in this 
regard are the nuclear power stations, 
whose uptimes have risen from around  
65 percent in the 1980s to over  
90 percent today. This shouldn’t be 
a surprise. Because the construction 
costs of most of these plants have 
been paid off and because nuclear 
generators have very low operating 
expenses, the plants have become 
extraordinarily profitable. So their 
owners strive to have them online as 
much as possible, investing as needed 
to keep them well maintained.
Maintaining some other parts 
of the grid infrastructure has, how-
ever, proved to be more of a strug-
gle. In the old days, investments in 
transmission lines and generating 
stations 
were 
determined 
by 
consensus between each utility and its 
regulator. Deregulation’s architects 
envisioned a different scenario—
that entrepreneurial firms would 
automatically make the needed 
investments in hopes of profiting 
from them. That didn’t exactly 
happen. One thing deregulation 
definitely did do, though, was to 
change the mix of fuels in the U.S. 
generation fleet, shifting it away 
from coal and nuclear power toward 
natural gas. That’s because gas units 
are quick to build, and many are 
flexible enough to operate only when 
prices are high enough to warrant 
throwing their switches on. It helps, 
too, that natural gas is a cleaner fuel 
than coal and less controversial than 
nuclear power, which helps with 
public approval. Also, because com-
panies generating electricity in a free 
market need to demonstrate a return 
on investment within 5 to 10 years, 
building big nuclear and coal plants, 
which usually take over a decade to 
complete, just isn’t an option. So 
more and more of the grid’s power 
comes from gas turbines, despite the 
high fuel costs.
The changing investment envi-
ronment has also inflated the cost of 
building new infrastructure. The rea-
son is obvious once you think about 
it. Regulated utilities can spread the 
burden of investment among all 
their customers, and the government 
guarantees that these companies can 
charge enough to recover their initial 
outlay and make a decent profit on 
it. So there’s little financial risk in 
building a new plant or transmission 
line, allowing the companies to attract 
low-priced capital. Not so with 
unregulated utilities, whose fortunes 
depend on an uncertain market. The 
greater risk they face means they 
must offer higher returns to attract 
investors, and these increased financ-
ing costs make capital projects more 
expensive.
Depending on market-based 
investment in transmission lines 
has proved especially problematic. 
Deregulation’s proponents believed 
that for-profit companies would re-
cover the money they invested in trans-
mission lines through “congestion 

8	
Chapter 1  |  Introduction
pricing”—charging 
more 
when 
demand for these lines is high. 
Instead, lucrative congestion reve- 
nues have only given the owners 
of existing transmission lines an 
incentive not to build more capac-
ity. And the general aversion people  
have to high-tension cables nearby—
the “not in my backyard” effect— 
has made it almost impossible to 
construct new lines.
No great wonder, then, that 
investment in transmission lines and 
equipment has mostly been falling 
since the 1970s. Many people paid lit-
tle notice to that fact, but the North-
east blackout of 2003 was a wake-up 
call. It began on a hot August after-
noon with several seemingly trivial 
outages of transmission lines in Ohio, 
but by nighttime a series of cascad-
ing failures grew to plunge more than 
50 million people in the Midwest, 
the Northeast, and Ontario into 
darkness. This episode convinced 
even skeptics that investment in the 
nation’s electricity grid was lagging.
	
Given deregulation’s checkered record, 
you have to wonder how well com-
petitive electricity markets will handle  
upcoming challenges. In particular, 
how will they reconcile the need for 
reliable, low-cost power with the envi-
ronmental costs of producing it?
One much-discussed way to use 
markets to benefit the environment is 
to put a price on emissions of carbon 
dioxide and other greenhouse gases. 
Many countries have already done 
this. But unless the price is set a lot 
higher than in Europe, U.S. utilities 
and generating companies aren’t  
going to be abandoning their carbon- 
spewing coal plants anytime soon—
they’re just too profitable. Putting 
a dollar value on greenhouse gases 
might encourage some generators to 
invest in less carbon-intensive power 
sources where they can, but only if 
proper laws and regulations are in 
place to lower the risk. And that 
won’t happen overnight.
In the meantime, 32 of the 50 
U.S. states are trying to boost the 
use of renewables by mandating 
“renewable portfolio standards.” 
These standards force utilities to buy 
considerable quantities of wind and 
solar power but also give them the 
freedom to shop for the least expen-
sive sources. Also, the U.S. Depart-
ment of Energy wants 20 percent 
of the nation’s electricity to come 
from wind power by 2030. Govern-
ment bodies are taking these actions 
because consumer demand alone 
hasn’t sparked much renewable 
generation. That’s not surprising. 
The wind and sun are notoriously 
fickle, which forces system opera-
tors to maintain plants that can fill 
in when necessary. Those backup 
generators are expensive, as are the 
transmission lines needed to link 
most renewable resources, which are 
located in sparsely populated areas, 
to the people using electricity. So the 
cost of generating “green” electric-
ity is generally higher than the price 
it can command.
Renewable portfolio standards 
create a not-so-free market (but a 
market nevertheless) for wind and 
solar power while also pressuring these 
producers to keep their prices down.  

	
Case Study	
9
Policymakers in both regulated and 
deregulated states are also hoping 
to 
harness 
other 
market-based 
approaches to reducing electricity con-
sumption. Using less electricity not 
only helps the environment, it can be 
just as effective as increasing supply in 
maintaining the reliability of the grid. 
And it’s less expensive to boot.
The 
most 
straightforward  
way to discourage electricity use is, 
of course, to charge a lot for it. But 
U.S. consumers, and the lawmakers 
who represent them, are never too 
keen on that. Another strategy now 
being explored—one that’s less of a 
political hot potato—is to have utility 
operators offer their customers com-
pensation for reducing their demand 
for electricity during times of peak 
use. A reduction in demand allows 
utilities to avoid having to buy so 
much electricity when wholesale costs 
are at their highest. This approach 
provides an enticement to consum-
ers to react to market signals, even if 
they are not yet ready to face them 
squarely in the form of higher prices.
Another advance that proba-
bly wouldn’t have come about with-
out deregulation is the emergence 
of small-scale, distributed genera-
tion, particularly from renewable 
sources such as rooftop solar panels. 
What’s happening in many places is 
that customers are producing some 
electricity on their own while still  
attached to the grid. So they can 
offset some of the electricity they 
would otherwise consume, perhaps 
even spinning their meters back-
ward at times. Although this prac-
tice competes with the electricity 
that the utility sells, more and more 
utilities are nevertheless allowing it 
to a greater or lesser degree.
	
In hindsight, the electricity crisis in 
California and the myriad problems 
with deregulation in other parts of 
the country could have been an-
ticipated. Given the complex mar-
ket rules, concentrated supply, and 
largely inelastic demand, it’s really 
no wonder that Enron, other energy-
trading companies, and the electric-
ity suppliers themselves found clever 
ways to manipulate markets.
Would U.S. consumers have 
been better off if the industry had 
remained strictly regulated? It all 
depends. If your goal is low electric-
ity rates, maybe the answer is yes—
but don’t forget that bad regulatory 
decisions helped drive up electricity 
prices in the first place. If, however, 
you want the ability to feed power 
from your rooftop solar panels into 
the grid, the answer is probably no.
The real question facing the 
United States now is whether it can 
maintain reliable electricity grids 
without building lots of new trans-
mission lines and big power plants. 
The only realistic alternative to 
such massive construction projects 
is for the generation of electricity 
to become more widely distributed, 
coupled with substantial efforts in 
energy efficiency. Electricity mar-
kets will surely have to become more 
expansive and open to accommo-
date that inevitable evolution. And 
they will also require new technical 
standards and, yes, some new forms 
of regulation.  ■

10	
Chapter 1  |  Introduction
I.I  HISTORY OF ELECTRIC POWER SYSTEMS
In 1878, Thomas A. Edison began work on the electric light and formulated the con-
cept of a centrally located power station with distributed lighting serving a surround-
ing area. He perfected his light by October 1879, and the opening of his historic Pearl 
Street Station in New York City on September 4, 1882, marked the beginning of the 
electric utility industry (see Figure 1.1). At Pearl Street, dc generators, then called 
dynamos, were driven by steam engines to supply an initial load of 30 kW for 110-V 
incandescent lighting to 59 customers in a one-square-mile area. From this begin-
ning in 1882 through 1972, the electric utility industry grew at a remarkable pace—a 
growth based on continuous reductions in the price of electricity due primarily to 
technological accomplishment and creative engineering.
The introduction of the practical dc motor by Sprague Electric, as well as the 
growth of incandescent lighting, promoted the expansion of Edison’s dc systems. The 
development of three-wire, 220-V dc systems allowed load to increase somewhat, but 
as transmission distances and loads continued to increase, voltage problems were 
FIGURE 1.1
Milestones of the early electric utility industry [1]. (H.M. Rustebakke et al., Electric Utility Systems Practice,  
4th Ed. (New York: Wiley, 1983). Reprinted with permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Photos courtesy of  
Westinghouse Historical Collection.) (Photos courtesy of Westinghouse Historical Collection.)
(Based on H.M. Rustebakke et al., Electric Utility Systems Practice, 4th. Ed. (New York: Wiley, 1983).)

	
Section 1.1 History of Electric Power Systems	
11
encountered. These limitations of maximum distance and load were overcome in 
1885 by William Stanley’s development of a commercially practical transformer. 
Stanley installed an ac distribution system in Great Barrington, Massachusetts, 
to supply 150 lamps. With the transformer, the ability to transmit power at high 
voltage with corresponding lower current and lower line-voltage drops made ac more 
attractive than dc. The first single-phase ac line in the United States operated in 1889 
in Oregon, between Oregon City and Portland—21 km at 4 kV.
The growth of ac systems, further encouraged in 1888 when Nikola Tesla 
presented a paper at a meeting of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers 
describing two-phase induction and synchronous motors, made evident the 
advantages of polyphase versus single-phase systems. The first three-phase line in 
Germany became operational in 1891, transmitting power 179 km at 12 kV. The first 
three-phase line in the United States (in California) became operational in 1893, 
transmitting power 12 km at 2.3 kV. The three-phase induction motor conceived by 
Tesla went on to become the workhorse of the industry.
In the same year that Edison’s steam-driven generators were inaugurated, a  
waterwheel-driven generator was installed in Appleton, Wisconsin. Since then, most 
electric energy has been generated in steam-powered and in water-powered (called 
hydro) turbine plants. Today, steam turbines account for more than 85% of U.S. electric 
energy generation, whereas hydro turbines account for about 7%. Gas turbines are 
used in some cases to meet peak loads. Also, the addition of wind turbines and solar  
cells into the bulk power system is expected to grow considerably in the near future.
Steam plants are fueled primarily by coal, gas, oil, and uranium. Of these, coal 
is the most widely used fuel in the United States due to its abundance in the country. 
Although many of these coal-fueled power plants were converted to oil during the early 
1970s, that trend reversed back to coal after the 1973–74 oil embargo, which caused an 
oil shortage and created a national desire to reduce dependency on foreign oil. More 
recently, electric companies have been retiring older, coal-fueled power plants. In 2012, 
approximately 37% of electricity in the United States was generated from coal [2].
In 1957, nuclear units with 90-MW steam-turbine capacity, fueled by uranium, 
were installed, and today nuclear units with 1312-MW steam-turbine capacity are in ser-
vice. In 2012, approximately 19% of electricity in the United States was generated from 
uranium from 104 nuclear power plants. However, the growth of nuclear capacity in the 
United States has been halted by rising construction costs, licensing delays, and public 
opinion. Although there are no emissions associated with nuclear power generation, 
there are safety issues and environmental issues, such as the disposal of used nuclear fuel 
and the impact of heated cooling-tower water on aquatic habitats. Future technologies 
for nuclear power are concentrated on safety and environmental issues [2, 3, 7].
Starting in the 1990s, the choice of fuel for new power plants in the United 
States has been natural gas due to its availability and low cost as well as the higher 
efficiency, lower emissions, shorter construction-lead times, safety, and lack of con-
troversy associated with power plants that use natural gas. Natural gas is used to 
generate electricity by the following processes:
1.	 Gas combustion turbines use natural gas directly to fire the turbine.
2.	 Steam turbines burn natural gas to create steam in a boiler, which is then 
run through the steam turbine.

12	
Chapter 1  |  Introduction
3.	 Combined cycle units use a gas combustion turbine by burning natural 
gas, and the hot exhaust gases from the combustion turbine are used to 
boil water that operates a steam turbine.
4.	 Fuel cells powered by natural gas generate electricity using electrochemical 
reactions by passing streams of natural gas and oxidants over electrodes 
that are separated by an electrolyte. In 2012, approximately 30% of 
electricity in the United States was generated from natural gas [2, 3, 7].
Renewable energy sources have the advantage of providing a more sustain-
able use of finite energy sources with little or no contribution to polluting emissions. 
Renewable sources include conventional hydroelectric (water power), geothermal, 
wood, wood waste, all municipal waste, landfill gas, other biomass, solar, and wind 
power. In 2012, in the United States, approximately 12% of electricity was generated 
by renewable sources [2, 3]. Germany, which has an official governmental goal to gen-
erate 100% of electricity from renewable sources by 2050, achieved 31% in 2014 [14].
Substantial research efforts have shown nuclear fusion energy to be a promising 
technology for producing safe, pollution-free, and economical electric energy later in 
the 21st century and beyond. The fuel consumed in a nuclear fusion reaction is deu-
terium, of which a virtually inexhaustible supply is present in seawater.
The early ac systems operated at various frequencies including 25, 50, 60, and 
133 Hz. In 1891, it was proposed that 60 Hz be the standard frequency in the United 
States. In 1893, 25-Hz systems were introduced with the synchronous converter. 
However, these systems were used primarily for railroad electrification (and many 
are now retired) because they had the disadvantage of causing incandescent lights to 
flicker. In California, the Los Angeles Department of Power and Water operated at 
50 Hz but converted to 60 Hz when power from the Hoover Dam became operational 
in 1937. In 1949, Southern California Edison also converted from 50 to 60 Hz. Today, 
the two standard frequencies for generation, transmission, and distribution of electric 
power in the world are 60 Hz (in the United States, Canada, Mexico, and Brazil) and 
50 Hz (in Europe, the former Soviet republics, China, South America, except Brazil, 
 and India). In Japan, the western part of the country, including Kyoto, uses 60 Hz, 
while the eastern part, including Tokyo, uses 50 Hz. The advantage of 60-Hz systems 
is that generators, motors, and transformers in these systems are generally smaller 
than 50-Hz equipment with the same ratings. The advantage of 50-Hz systems is that 
transmission lines and transformers have smaller reactances at 50 Hz than at 60 Hz.
As shown in Figure 1.2, the rate of growth of electric energy in the United 
States was approximately 7% per year from 1902 to 1972. This corresponds to a 
doubling of electric energy consumption every 10 years over the 70-year period. In 
other words, every 10 years, the industry installed a new electric system equal in 
energy-producing capacity to the total of what it had built since the industry began. 
The annual growth rate slowed after the oil embargo of 1973 to 1974. Kilowatt-hour 
consumption in the United States increased by 3.4% per year from 1972 to 1980, and 
by only 0.7% per year from 2000 to 2011. In 2012, total U.S. electricity generation 
was 4.05 3 1012 kilowatt-hours (kWh), a 1.3% decrease from 2011.
Along with increases in load growth, there have been continuing increases 
in the size of generating units (Table 1.1). The principal incentive to build larger 
units has been economy of scale—that is, a reduction in installed cost per kilowatt 

	
Section 1.1 History of Electric Power Systems	
13
of capacity for larger units. However, there have also been steady improvements in 
generation efficiency. For example, in 1934 the average heat rate for steam generation 
in the U.S. electric industry was 17,950 BTU/kWh, which corresponds to 19% effi-
ciency. By 1991, the average heat rate was 10,367 BTU/kWh, which corresponds to 
33% efficiency. These improvements in thermal efficiency due to increases in unit size 
and in steam temperature and pressure, as well as to the use of steam reheat, have 
resulted in savings in fuel costs and overall operating costs.
There have been continuing increases, too, in transmission voltages (Table 1.2). 
From Edison’s 220-V three-wire dc grid to 4-kV single-phase and 2.3-kV three-phase 
transmission, ac transmission voltages in the United States have risen progressively 
to 150, 230, 345, 500, and now 765 kV. And in 2009 in China, the first 1000 kV 
ultra-high voltage (UHV) ac transmission line, a 650-km line from Shaanxi Province 
Hydroelectric Generators
Generators Driven by Single-Shaft, 3600 r/min 
Fossil-Fueled Steam Turbines
Size (MVA)
Year of Installation
Size (MVA)
Year of Installation
4
1895
      5
1914
108
 1941
    50
1937
158
1966
  216
1953
232
1973
  506
1963
615
1975
  907
1969
718
1978
1120
1974
TABLE  1.1
Growth of generator sizes in the United States [1].
(Source: Based on H.M. Rustebakke et al., Electric Utility Systems Practice, 4th. Ed. (New York: Wiley, 1983).
5.0
U.S. Electric Energy Sales
kWh 3 1012
Forecast
Year
1900
1920
1940
1960
1980
2000
2010
2020
2030
2040
2.0
1.0
.4
.2
.1
FIGURE 1.2
Growth of U.S. 
electric energy 
consumption [3].  
(www.eia.gov, U.S. 
Energy Information 
Administration,  
Annual Energy 
Outlook 2010 Early 
Release Overview,  
M. P. Barhman and B.K. 
Johnson, “The ABC’s 
of HVDC Transmission 
Technologies” IEEE 
Power & Energy  
Magazine, 5, 2, 
(March/April 2007)  
pp. 33–44.)

14	
Chapter 1  |  Introduction
to Hubei Province, began commercial operation [15]. The incentives for increasing 
transmission voltages have been: (1) increases in transmission distance and trans-
mission capacity; (2) smaller line-voltage drops; (3) reduced line losses; (4) reduced 
right-of-way requirements per MW transfer; and (5) lower capital and operating 
costs of transmission. Today, one 765-kV three-phase line can transmit thousands 
of megawatts over hundreds of kilometers.
The technological developments that have occurred in conjunction with ac 
transmission, including developments in insulation, protection, and control, are in 
themselves important. The following examples are noteworthy:
1.	 The suspension insulator;
2.	 The high-speed relay system, currently capable of detecting short-circuit 
currents within one cycle (0.017 s);
3.	 High-speed, extra-high-voltage (EHV) circuit breakers, capable of 
interrupting up to 63-kA three-phase, short-circuit currents within two 
cycles (0.033 s);
4.	 High-speed reclosure of EHV lines, which enables automatic return to 
service within a fraction of a second after a fault has been cleared;
5.	 The EHV surge arrester, which provides protection against transient 
overvoltages due to lightning strikes and line-switching operations;
6.	 Power-line carrier, microwave, and fiber optics as communication 
mechanisms for protecting, controlling, and metering transmission lines;
7.	 The principle of insulation coordination applied to the design of an 
entire transmission system;
8.	 Energy control centers with supervisory control and data acquisition 
(SCADA) and with automatic generation control (AGC) for centralized 
computer monitoring and control of generation, transmission, and 
distribution;
9.	 Automated distribution features, including advanced metering infrastructure 
(AMI), reclosers, and remotely controlled sectionalizing switches with 
fault-indicating capability, along with automated mapping/facilities 
management (AM/FM) and geographic information systems (GIS) for 
quick isolation and identification of outages and for rapid restoration of 
customer services; and
10.	 Digital relays capable of circuit breaker control, data logging, fault 
locating, self-checking, fault analysis, remote query, and relay event 
monitoring/recording.
In 1954, the first modern high-voltage dc (HVDC) transmission line was put 
into commercial operation in Sweden between Vastervik and the island of Gotland in 
the Baltic Sea; it operated at 100 kV for a distance of 100 km. The first HVDC line in  
the United States was the 6400-kV (now 6500 kV), 1360-km Pacific Intertie line, 
installed between Oregon and California in 1970. As of 2014, seven other HVDC 
lines up to 6500 kV and 13 back-to-back ac-dc links had been installed in the  
Voltage 
(kV)
Year of 
Installation
 2.3
1893
  44
1897
150
1913
165
1922
230
1923
287
1935
345
1953
500
1965
765
1969
TABLE  1.2
History of increases  
in three-phase  
transmission voltages  
in the United States [1].
(Source: Based on H.M. 
Rustebakke et al., Electric 
Utility Systems Practice, 
4th. Ed. (New York: Wiley, 
1983).

	
Section 1.1 History of Electric Power Systems	
15
United States, and a total of 111 HVDC lines up to 6800 kV had been installed 
worldwide [4]. And in 2015 in China, the first 61000 kV UHVDC transmission line, 
a 2600-km line from Xingjiang Province to Sichuan Province, is planned for commer-
cial operation [16].
For an HVDC line embedded in an ac system, solid-state converters at both 
ends of the dc line operate as rectifiers and inverters. Since the cost of an HVDC 
transmission line is less than that of an ac line with the same capacity, the additional 
cost of converters for dc transmission is offset when the line is long enough. Studies 
have shown that overhead HVDC transmission is economical in the United States 
for transmission distances longer than about 600 km. However, HVDC also has the 
advantage that it may be the only feasible method to:
1.	 interconnect two asynchronous networks;
2.	 utilize long underground or underwater cable circuits;
3.	 bypass network congestion;
4.	 reduce fault currents;
5.	 share utility rights-of-way without degrading reliability; and mitigate 
environmental concerns [5].
In the United States, electric utilities grew first as isolated systems, with new 
ones continuously starting up throughout the country. Gradually, however, neigh-
boring electric utilities began to interconnect, to operate in parallel. This improved 
both reliability and economy. Figure 1.3 shows major 115-kV and higher-voltage, 
interconnected transmission in the United States. An interconnected system has 
many advantages. An interconnected utility can draw upon another’s rotating gen-
erator reserves during a time of need (such as a sudden generator outage or load 
increase), thereby maintaining continuity of service, increasing reliability, and 
reducing the total number of generators that need to be kept running under no-
load conditions. Also, interconnected utilities can schedule power transfers during 
normal periods to take advantage of energy-cost differences in respective areas, load 
diversity, time zone differences, and seasonal conditions. For example, utilities whose 
generation is primarily hydro can supply low-cost power during high-water periods 
in spring/summer and can receive power from the interconnection during low-water 
periods in fall/winter. Interconnections also allow shared ownership of larger, more 
efficient generating units.
While sharing the benefits of interconnected operation, each utility is obligated 
to help neighbors who are in trouble, to maintain scheduled intertie transfers during 
normal periods, and to participate in system frequency regulation.
In addition to the benefits and obligations of interconnected operation, there 
are disadvantages. Interconnections, for example, have increased fault currents that 
occur during short circuits, thus requiring the use of circuit breakers with higher 
interrupting capability. Furthermore, although overall system reliability and economy 
have improved dramatically through interconnection, there is a remote possibility 
that an initial disturbance may lead to a regional blackout, such as the one that 
occurred in August 2003 in the northeastern United States and Canada.

16	
Chapter 1  |  Introduction
FIGURE 1.3
Major transmission in the United States (FEMA).

	
Section 1.2 Present and Future Trends	
17
1.2  PRESENT AND FUTURE TRENDS
Present trends indicate that the United States is becoming more electrified as it 
shifts away from a dependence on the direct use of fossil fuels. The electric power 
industry advances economic growth, promotes business development and expansion, 
provides solid employment opportunities, enhances the quality of life for its users, 
and powers the world. Increasing electrification in the United States is evidenced 
in part by the ongoing digital revolution. Today the United States electric power 
industry is a robust, $840-billion-plus industry that employs nearly 500,000 workers. 
In the United States economy, the industry represents approximately 3% of real gross 
domestic product (GDP) [6].
As shown in Figure 1.2, the growth rate in the use of electricity in the United 
States is projected to increase by about 1% per year from 2012 to 2025 [2]. Although 
electricity forecasts for the next thirteen years are based on economic and social 
factors that are subject to change, 1% annual growth rate is considered necessary to 
generate the GDP anticipated over that period. Variations in longer-term forecasts 
of 0.7 to 1.3% annual growth from 2012 to 2040 are based on low-to-high ranges in 
economic growth. Average end-use price of electricity is projected to increase from 
9.8 cents to 11.1 cents per kilowatt-hour from 2012 to 2040 [2, 3].
Figure 1.4 shows the percentages of various fuels used to meet U.S. electric 
energy requirements for 2012 and those projected for 2025 and 2040. Several trends 
are apparent in the chart. One is the continuing use of coal. This trend is due primarily 
to the large amount of U.S. coal reserves, which, according to some estimates, is  
(0.57%)
2012
= coal
= gas
= oil
= nuclear
= renewable sources
2025
(forecast)
2040
(forecast)
(12%)
(19%)
(30%)
(37%)
(0.4%)
(15%)
(17%)
(30%)
(36%)
(100%)
(100%)
(0.3%)
(16%)
(15%)
(35%)
(32%)
(100%)
4.05 3 1012 kWh
4.66 3 1012 kWh
5.25 3 1012 kWh
1.51
1.24
0.77
0.51
0.02
1.69
1.42
0.78
0.72
0.02
1.68
1.86
0.81
0.86
0.02
FIGURE 1.4
Electric energy  
generation in the 
United States, by 
principal fuel types  
[2, 3]. Renewable 
sources include 
conventional  
hydroelectric, 
geothermal, wood, 
wood waste, all 
municipal waste, 
landfill gas, other 
biomass, solar, and 
wind power. (U.S. 
Energy Information 
Administration, 
Electric power annual 
2012, Dec 2013, U.S. 
Energy Information 
Administration,  
Annual Energy Outlook 
2014, www.eia.gov.)

18	
Chapter 1  |  Introduction
sufficient to meet U.S. energy needs for the next 500 years. Implementation of public 
policies that have been proposed to reduce carbon dioxide emissions and air pollu-
tion could reverse this trend. Another trend is the continuing consumption of natu-
ral gas in the long term with gas-fired turbines that are safe, clean, and more efficient 
than competing technologies. Regulatory policies to lower greenhouse gas emissions 
could accelerate a switchover from coal to gas, but that would require an increas-
ing supply of deliverable natural gas. A slight percentage decrease in nuclear fuel 
consumption is also evident. No new nuclear plant has been ordered in the United 
States for more than 30 years. The projected growth from 0.77 3 1012 kWh in 2012 to 
0.86 3 1012 kWh in 2040 in nuclear generation is based on uprates at existing plants 
and some new nuclear capacity that offsets early retirements. Safety concerns require 
passive or inherently safe reactor designs with standardized, modular construction 
of nuclear units. Also shown in Figure 1.4 is an accelerating increase in electricity 
generation from renewable resources in response to a variety of federal and state 
policies [2, 3].
Figure 1.5 shows the 2012 and projected 2025 U.S. generating capability by 
principal fuel type. As shown, total U.S. generating capacity is projected to reach 
1110 GW (1 GW 5 1000 MW) by the year 2025, which represents a 0.3% annual 
projected growth in generating capacity from 2013 to 2025. The projection assumes 
131 GW of new capacity additions and 87 GW of cumulative capacity retirements 
from 2013 to 2025 [2, 3, 7].
As of 2012, there were 476,247 circuit miles of existing transmission (above 
200 kV) in North America, which includes the continental United States, Canada, 
1066 GW
1110 GW
310
262
527
98
223
471
102
182
(100%)
(29%)
(44%)
(10%)
(17%)
(100%)
(24%)
(47%)
(9%)
(20%)
2012
2025
(forecast)
= renewable sources
= nuclear
= gas/oil
= coal
FIGURE 1.5
Installed generating 
capability in the 
United States by prin-
cipal fuel types [2, 3]. 
Net summer capacities 
of renewable sources 
include conventional 
and pumped storage 
hydroelectric, geo-
thermal, wood, wood 
waste, all municipal 
waste, landfill gas, 
other biomass, solar, 
and wind power.  
(U.S. Energy Information  
Administration, 
electric power annual 
2012, Dec 2013, U.S. 
Energy Information 
Administration, Annual 
Energy Outlook 2014, 
www.eia.gov.)

	
Section 1.2 Present and Future Trends	
19
and the northern portion of Baja California, Mexico. Currently, 5100 circuit-miles 
are under construction and expected to be in service before 2015, and an additional 
21,800 circuit-miles are planned with in-service dates before 2023. According to the 
North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC), new transmission proj-
ects are being driven primarily to enhance reliability. Other reasons include conges-
tion alleviation and integration of renewable energy sources [7].
According to NERC, building new transmission is an ongoing challenge for 
the electricity industry. Transmission right-of-way issues required in the siting of 
new transmission lines that span multiple states and provinces are highly visible and 
require increased coordination among multiple regulating agencies and authorities. 
A lack of coordination regarding cost allocation, coupled with public opposition due 
to land use and property valuation concerns, has often resulted in extended delays 
in transmission construction. Further, ongoing state and provincial policies require 
continued integration of renewable resources, including wind and solar. These vari-
able resources are most commonly built in remote areas where wind power densities 
and solar development are favorable. In many cases, the existing transmission net-
work needs to be expanded to integrate these renewable resources and meet other 
state-wide goals [7].
Growth in distribution construction roughly correlates with growth in electric 
energy consumption. During the last three decades, many U.S. utilities converted older 
2.4-, 4.1-, and 5-kV primary distribution systems to 12 or 15 kV. The 15-kV voltage 
class is widely preferred by U.S. utilities for new installations; higher primary distri-
bution voltages including 25 kV and 34.5 kV are also utilized. Secondary distribution 
reduces the voltage for utilization by commercial and residential customers. Common 
secondary distribution voltages in the United States are 240/120 V, single-phase, three-
wire; 208 Y/120 V, three-phase, four-wire; and 480 Y/277 V, three-phase, four-wire.
Transmission and distribution grids in the United States as well as other 
industrialized countries are aging and being stressed by operational uncertainties 
and challenges never envisioned when they were developed many decades ago. There 
is a growing consensus in the power industry and among many governments that 
smart grid technology is the answer to the uncertainties and challenges. A smart grid 
is characterized by the following attributes:
1.	 Self-healing from power system disturbances;
2.	 Enables active participation by consumers in demand response;
3.	 Operates resiliency against both physical and cyber attacks;
4.	 Provides quality power that meets 21st century needs;
5.	 Accommodates all generation and energy storage technologies;
6.	 Enables new products, services, and markets; and 
7.	 Optimizes asset utilization and operating efficiency.
The objective of a smart grid is to provide reliable, high-quality electric power 
to digital societies in an environmentally friendly and sustainable manner [11].
According to recent studies, almost 62% of electric utility employees in the United 
States have the potential to retire or leave over the ten-year period from 2014 to 2024.  

20	
Chapter 1  |  Introduction
According to the Power Engineering Society (PES) of the Institute of Electrical Engineers 
(IEEE), of the 170 engineering faculty working full time in power engineering education 
and research in the United States, some 50 senior faculty members have retired during the 
is a critical resource to ensure that transmission and distribution systems are maintained 
1.3  ELECTRIC UTILITY INDUSTRY STRUCTURE
The case study at the beginning of this chapter describes the restructuring of the 
electric utility industry that has been ongoing in the United States. The previous 
structure of large, vertically integrated monopolies that existed until the last decade 
of the twentieth century is being replaced by a horizontal structure with generating 
companies, transmission companies, and distribution companies as separate busi-
ness facilities.
In 1992, the United States Congress passed the Energy Policy Act, which has 
shifted and continues to further shift regulatory power from the state level to the federal 
level. The 1992 Energy Policy Act mandates the Federal Energy Regulatory Commis-
sion (FERC) to ensure that adequate transmission and distribution access is available 
to exempt wholesale generators (EWGs) and nonutility generation (NUG). In 1996, 
FERC issued the “MegaRule,” which regulates Transmission Open Access (TOA).
TOA was mandated in order to facilitate competition in wholesale generation. 
As a result, a broad range of independent power producers (IPPs) and cogenerators 
now submit bids and compete in energy markets to match electric energy supply and 
demand. Currently, the retail structure of power distribution is becoming similar to 
the existing structure of the telephone industry; that is, consumers choose which elec-
tric energy supplier to buy power from. Also, with demand-side metering, consumers 
know the retail price of electric energy at any given time and may choose when to 
purchase it.
Overall system reliability has become a major concern as the electric utility 
industry adapts to the new horizontal structure. The North American Electric 
Reliability Corporation (NERC) was created after the 1965 Northeast blackout and 
is responsible for maintaining system standards and reliability. NERC coordinates its 
efforts with FERC and governmental organizations in Canada [12].
As shown in Figure 1.3, the transmission system in North America is intercon-
nected in a large power grid known as the North American Power Systems Intercon-
nection. NERC divides this grid into eight regional entities including NPCC—the 
Northeast Power Coordinating Council, MRO—the Midwest Reliability Organiza-
tion, and SPP—the Southwest Power Pool. Members of the regional entities come 
from all segments of the electric industry: investor-owned utilities; federal power 
agencies; rural electric cooperatives; state, municipal, and provincial utilities; inde-
pendent power producers; power marketers; and end-use customers. These members 
jointly perform regional planning studies and operate jointly to schedule generation.
The basic premise of TOA is that transmission owners treat all transmission 
users on a nondiscriminatory and comparable basis. In December 1999, FERC issued 

	
Section 1.4 Computers in Power System Engineering	
21
Order 2000, which calls for companies owning transmission systems to put trans-
mission systems under the control of Regional Transmission Organizations (RTOs). 
Several of the NERC regions have either established independent system operators 
(ISOs) or planned for ISOs to operate the transmission system and facilitate trans-
mission services. Maintenance of the transmission system remains the responsibility 
of the transmission owners.
At the time of the August 14, 2003, blackout in the northeastern United States 
and Canada, NERC reliability standards were voluntary. In August 2005, the U.S. 
Federal government passed the Energy Policy Act of 2005, which authorizes the 
creation of an electric reliability organization (ERO) with the statutory authority to 
enforce compliance with reliability standards among all market participants. As of 
June 18, 2007, FERC granted NERC the legal authority to enforce reliability stan-
dards with all users, owners, and operators of the bulk power system in the United 
States, and made compliance with those standards mandatory and enforceable. 
Currently, the legislative framework to make standards enforceable exists through 
action of the regulatory authority in the Canadian provinces of Alberta, British 
Columbia, Nova Scotia, and Quebec. In addition, standards become enforceable 
upon NERC board action in the Canadian provinces of Manitoba (Manitoba Hydro 
only), New Brunswick, Ontario, and Saskatchewan [12].
The objectives of electric utility restructuring are to increase competition, 
decrease regulation, and in the long run lower consumer prices. There is a concern that 
the benefits from breaking up the old, vertically integrated utilities are unrealized if 
the new unbundled generation and transmission companies are able to exert market 
power. Market power refers to the ability of one seller or group of sellers to maintain 
prices above competitive levels for a significant period of time, which could be 
done via collusion or by taking advantage of operational anomalies that create and 
exploit transmission congestion. Market power can be eliminated by independent 
supervision of generation and transmission companies, by ensuring that there are 
an ample number of generation companies, by eliminating transmission congestion, 
and by creating a truly competitive market, where the spot price at each node (bus) 
in the transmission system equals the marginal cost of providing energy at that node, 
where the energy provider is any generator bidding into the system [12].
1.4  COMPUTERS IN POWER SYSTEM ENGINEERING
As electric utilities have grown in size and the number of interconnections has 
increased, planning for future expansion has become increasingly complex. The 
increasing cost of additions and modifications has made it imperative that utilities 
consider a range of design options and perform detailed studies of the effects on the 
system of each option, based on a number of assumptions: normal and abnormal 
operating conditions, peak and off-peak loadings, and present and future years of 
operation. A large volume of network data must also be collected and accurately 
handled. To assist the engineer in this power system planning, digital computers and 
highly developed computer programs are used. Such programs include power-flow, 
stability, short-circuit, and transients programs.

22	
Chapter 1  |  Introduction
Power-flow programs compute the voltage magnitudes, phase angles, and 
transmission-line power flows for a network under steady-state operating conditions. 
Other results, including transformer tap settings and generator reactive power 
outputs, are also computed. Today’s computers have sufficient storage and speed to 
efficiently compute power-flow solutions for networks with 100,000 buses and 150,000 
transmission lines. Results are usually viewed interactively on computer screens in 
the form of either tabular displays or single-line diagrams; the engineer uses these to 
modify the network with a mouse or from a keyboard and can readily visualize the 
results. The computer’s large storage and high-speed capabilities allow the engineer 
to run the many different cases necessary to analyze and design transmission and 
generation-expansion options.
Stability programs are used to study power systems under disturbance con-
ditions to determine whether synchronous generators and motors remain in syn-
chronization. System disturbances can be caused by the sudden loss of a generator 
or transmission line, by sudden load increases or decreases, and by short circuits 
and switching operations. The stability program combines power-flow equations and 
machine-dynamic equations to compute the angular swings of machines during dis-
turbances. The program also computes critical clearing times for network faults, and 
allows the engineer to investigate the effects of various machine parameters, network 
modifications, disturbance types, and control schemes.
Short-circuit programs are used to compute three-phase and line-to-ground 
faults in power system networks in order to select circuit breakers for fault interrup-
tion, select relays that detect faults and control circuit breakers, and determine relay 
settings. Short-circuit currents are computed for each relay and circuit-breaker loca-
tion and for various system-operating conditions such as lines or generating units out 
of service in order to determine minimum and maximum fault currents.
Transients programs compute the magnitudes and shapes of transient over-
voltages and currents that result from lightning strikes and line-switching operations. 
The planning engineer uses the results of a transients program to determine insula-
tion requirements for lines, transformers, and other equipment, and to select surge 
arresters that protect equipment against transient overvoltages.
Other computer programs for power system planning include relay-coordination 
programs and distribution-circuits programs. Computer programs for generation-
expansion planning include reliability analysis and loss-of-load probability (LOLP) 
programs, production cost programs, and investment cost programs.
1.5  POWERWORLD SIMULATOR
PowerWorld Simulator (PowerWorld) version 19 is a commercial-grade power sys-
tem analysis and simulation package that accompanies this text. The purposes of 
integrating PowerWorld with the text are to provide computer solutions to examples 
in the text, to extend the examples, to demonstrate topics covered in the text, to 
provide a software tool for more realistic design projects, and to provide the readers 
with experience using a commercial grade power system analysis package. To use this 
software package, you must first install PowerWorld, along with all of the necessary 

	
Section 1.5 PowerWorld Simulator	
23
case files onto your computer. The PowerWorld software and case files can be down-
loaded by going to the www.powerworld.com/gloversarmaoverbye Web page, and 
clicking on the DownLoad PowerWorld Software and Cases for the 6th Edition but-
ton. The remainder of this section provides the necessary details to get up and run-
ning with PowerWorld.
Introduction to PowerWorld Simulator
After installing PowerWorld, double-click on the PW icon to start the program. 
Power system analysis requires, of course, that the user provide the program with 
a model of the power system. With PowerWorld, you can either build a new case 
(model) from scratch or start from an existing case. Most of the examples in the 
book, as in this case, initially start from an existing case. PowerWorld uses the 
common ribbon user interface in which common commands, such as opening or 
saving a case, are available by clicking on the items on the top of the screen. So to 
open a case click File and then select Open Case. This displays the Open Dialog. 
Select the Example 1_1 case in the Chapter 1 directory, and then click Open. The 
display should look similar to Figure 1.6.
For users familiar with electric circuit schematics, it is readily apparent that 
Figure 1.6 does not look like a traditional schematic. This is because the sys-
tem is drawn in what is called a oneline diagram form. A brief explanation is 
in order. Electric power systems range in size from small dc systems with peak 
power demands of perhaps a few milliwatts (mW) to large continent-spanning 
EXAMPLE 1.1
FIGURE 1.6
Example power 
system
(Continued)

24	
Chapter 1  |  Introduction
interconnected ac systems with peak demands of hundreds of Giga-watts (GW)  
of demand (1 GW 5 1 3 109 Watt). The subject of this book and also PowerWorld 
are the high-voltage, high-power, interconnected ac systems. Almost without 
exception these systems operate using three-phase ac power at either 50 or 60 Hz. As 
discussed in Chapter 2, a full analysis of an arbitrary three-phase system requires 
consideration of each of the three phases. Drawing such systems in full schematic 
form quickly gets excessively complicated. Thankfully, during normal operation, 
three-phase systems are usually balanced. This permits the system to be accurately 
modeled as an equivalent single-phase system (the details are discussed in Chapter 8,  
“Symmetrical Components”), Most power system analysis packages, including 
PowerWorld, use this approach. Then connections between devices are drawn with 
a single line joining the system devices, hence the term oneline diagram. However, 
do keep in mind that the actual systems are three-phase.
Figure 1.6 illustrates how the major power system components are repre-
sented in PowerWorld. Generators are shown as a circle with a “dog-bone” rotor, 
large arrows represent loads, and transmission lines are simply drawn as lines. 
In power system terminology, the nodes at which two or more devices join are 
called buses. In PowerWorld, thicker lines usually represent buses; the bus voltages 
are shown in kilovolts (kV) in the fields immediately to the right of the buses. In 
addition to voltages, power engineers are also concerned with how power flows 
through the system (the solution of the power flow problem is covered in Chapter 6,  
“Power Flows”). In PowerWorld, power flows can be visualized with arrows 
superimposed on the generators, loads, and transmission lines. The size and 
speed of the arrows indicate the direction of flow. One of the unique aspects of 
PowerWorld is its ability to animate power systems. To start the animation, select 
the Tools tab on the ribbon and then click on the green and black arrow button 
above Solve (i.e., the “Play” button). The oneline should come to life! While the 
oneline is being animated, you can interact with the system. Figure 1.6 represents 
a simple power system in which a generator is supplying power to a load through 
a 16-kV distribution system feeder. The solid red blocks on the line and load rep-
resent circuit breakers. To open a circuit breaker, simply click on it. Since the load 
is series-connected to the generator, clicking on any of the circuit breakers isolates 
the load from the generator resulting in a blackout. To restore the system, click 
again on the circuit breaker to close it and then again select the Solve button on 
the Tools ribbon. To vary the load, click on the up or down arrows between the 
load value and its “MW” field. Note that because of the impedance of the line, the 
load’s voltage drops as its value is increased.
You can view additional information about most of the elements on the one-
line by right-clicking on them. For example right-clicking on the generator symbol 
brings up a local menu of additional information about the generator, while right-
clicking on the transmission line brings up local menu of information about the 
line. The meaning of many of these fields become clearer as you progress through 
the book. To modify the display itself, simply right-click on a blank area of the 

	
Section 1.5 PowerWorld Simulator	
25
oneline. This displays the Onelines local menu. Select Oneline Display Options to 
display the Oneline Display Options dialog. From this dialog you can customize 
many of the display features. For example, to change the animated flow arrow 
color, select Animated Flows from the options shown on the left side of the dia-
log. Then click on the green colored box next to the Actual MW field (towards the 
bottom of the dialog) to change its color.
There are several techniques for panning and/or zooming on the oneline. 
One method to pan is to first click in an empty portion of the display and then 
press the keyboard arrow keys in the direction you would like to move. To zoom, 
just hold down the Ctrl key while pressing the up arrow to zoom in or the down 
arrow to zoom out. Alternatively you can drag the oneline by clicking and holding 
the left mouse button down and then moving the mouse—the oneline should fol-
low. To go to a favorite view from the Onelines local menu, select the Go To View 
to view a list of saved views.
If you would like to retain your changes after you exit PowerWorld, you need 
to save the results. To do this, select File in the upper-left portion of the ribbon and 
then Save Case As; enter a different file name so as to not overwrite the initial case. 
One important note: PowerWorld actually saves the information associated with the 
power system model itself in a different file from the information associated with 
the oneline. The power system model is stored in *.pwb files (PowerWorld Binary 
file) while the Oneline Display information is stored in *.pwd files (PowerWorld 
Display file). For all the cases discussed in this book, the names of both files should 
be the same (except the different extensions). The reason for the dual file system is 
to provide flexibility. With large system models, it is quite common for a system to 
be displayed using multiple oneline diagrams. Furthermore, a single oneline dia-
gram might be used at different times to display information about different cases.
PowerWorld Simulator—Edit Mode
PowerWorld has two major modes of operations. The Run Mode, which was just 
introduced, is used for running simulations and performing analysis. The Edit 
Mode, which is used for modifying existing cases and building new cases, is intro-
duced in this example. To switch to the Edit Mode, click on the Edit Mode button, 
which is located in the upper-left portion of the display immediately below the 
PowerWorld icon. Use the Edit Mode to add an additional bus and load, as well 
as two new lines, to the Example 1_1 system.
When switching to the Edit Mode notice that the ribbon changes slightly, 
with several of the existing buttons and icons disabled and others enabled. Also, the 
EXAMPLE 1.2
(Continued)

26	
Chapter 1  |  Introduction
oneline now has a superimposed grid to help with alignment (the grid can be cus-
tomized using the Grid/Highlight Unlinked options category on the Oneline Display 
Options dialog). In the Edit Mode, first add a new bus to the system. This can be done 
graphically by first selecting the Draw tab, then clicking on the Network button and 
selecting Bus. Once this is done, move the mouse to the desired oneline location and  
click (note the Draw tab is only available in the Edit Mode). The Bus Options dialog 
then appears. This dialog is used to set the bus parameters. For now leave all the bus 
fields at their default values, except set Bus Name to “bus 3” and set the nominal 
voltage to 16.0; note that the number for this new bus was automatically set to the 
one greater than the highest bus number in the case. The oneline should look similar 
to Figure 1.7. You may wish to save your case now to avoid losing your changes.
By default, when a new bus is inserted, a bus field is also inserted. Bus fields 
are used to show information about buses on the onelines. In this case the new 
field shows the bus name, although initially in rather small fonts. To change the 
field’s font size, click on the field to select it, and then select the Format button (on 
the Draw ribbon) to display the Format dialog. Click on the Font tab and change  
the font’s size to a larger value to make it easier to see. You can also change the size 
of the bus itself using the Format dialog, Display/Size tab. To see the bus voltage 
magnitude, add an additional bus field. On the Draw ribbon select Field, Bus Field, 
and then click near bus 3. This displays the Bus Field Options dialog. Make sure 
the bus number is set to 3, and that the “Type of Field” is Bus Voltage. Again, 
resize with the Format, Font dialog.
Next, insert some load at bus 3. This can be done graphically by selecting 
Network, Load and then clicking on bus 3. The Load Options dialog appears, 
FIGURE 1.7
Example 1.2—
Edit Mode view 
with new bus

	
Section 1.5 PowerWorld Simulator	
27
allowing you to set the load parameters. Note that the load was automatically 
assigned to bus 3. Leave all the fields at their default values, except set the ori-
entation to “Down,” and enter 10.0 in the Constant Power column MW Value 
field. As the name implies, a constant power load treats the load power as being 
independent of bus voltage; constant power load models are commonly used in 
power system analysis. By default, PowerWorld “anchors” each load symbol to 
its bus. This is a handy feature when changing a drawing, since when you drag 
the bus, the load and all associated fields move as well. Note that two fields show-
ing the load’s real (MW) and reactive (Mvar) power were also auto-inserted with 
the load. Select the reactive field right now, and then choose one. Delete (located 
towards the right side of the Draw ribbon) to remove it. You should also resize the 
MW field using the Format, Font command.
Now join the bus 3 load to the rest of the system. Do this by adding a line 
from bus 2 to bus 3. Select Network, Transmission Line and then click on bus 2.  
This begins the line drawing. During line drawing, PowerWorld adds a new line 
segment for each mouse click. After adding several segments place the cursor 
on bus 3 and double-click. The Transmission Line/Transformer Options dialog 
appears, allowing you to set the line’s parameters. Note that PowerWorld should 
have automatically set the “from” and “to” bus numbers based upon the starting 
and ending buses (buses 2 and 3). If these values have not been set automatically, 
then you probably did not click exactly on bus 2 or bus 3; manually enter the val-
ues. Next, set the line’s Series Resistance (R) field to 0.3, the Series Reactance (X) 
field to 0.6, and the MVA Limits Limit (A) field to 20 (the details of transformer 
and transmission line modeling is covered in Chapters 3 through 5). Select OK to 
close the dialog. Note that PowerWorld also auto-inserted two circuit breakers 
and a round “pie chart” symbol. The pie charts are used to show the percentage 
loading of the line. You can change the display size for these objects by right-
clicking on them to display their option dialogs.
PowerWorld Simulator—Run Mode
Next, switch back to Run Mode to solve and animate the new system developed 
in Example 1.2. Click on the Run Mode button (immediately below the Edit Mode 
button), select the Tools on the ribbon, and then click the green-and-black button 
above Solve to start the simulation. You should see the arrows flow from bus 1 to 
bus 2 to bus 3. Note that the total generation is now about 15.4 MW, with 15 MW 
flowing to the two loads and 0.4 MW lost to the wire resistance. To add the load 
variation arrows to the bus 3 load, right click on the Load MW field (not the load 
EXAMPLE 1.3
(Continued)

28	
Chapter 1  |  Introduction
arrow itself) to display the field’s local menu. Select Load Field Information Dialog 
to view the Load Field Options dialog. Set the Delta per Mouse Click field to 1.0, 
which changes the load by one MW per click on the up/down arrows. You may 
also like to set the Digits to Right of Decimal to 2 to see more digits in the load 
field. Be sure to save your case. The new system now has one generator and two 
loads. The system is still radial, meaning that a break anywhere on the wire join-
ing bus 1 to bus 2 would result in a blackout of all the loads. Radial power systems 
are quite common in the lower voltage distribution systems. At higher voltage 
levels, networked systems are typically used. In a networked system, each load 
has at least two possible sources of power. Convert the system to a networked 
system simply by adding a new line from bus 1 to bus 3. To do this, switch back to 
Edit Mode, and then repeat the previous line insertion process except you should 
start at bus 1 and end at bus 3; use the same line parameters as for the bus 2 to  
3 line. Also before returning to Run Mode, right click on the blue Two Bus Power 
System title and change it to Three Bus Power System. Return to Run Mode 
and again solve. Your final system should look similar to the system shown in  
Figure 1.8. Note that now you can open any single line and still supply both 
loads—a nice increase in reliability!
FIGURE 1.8
Example 1.3—
New three-bus 
system
With this introduction, you now have the skills necessary to begin using 
PowerWorld to interactively learn about power systems. If you’d like to take a 
look at some of the larger systems you’ll be studying, in the Chapter 6 directory 
open PowerWorld case Example 6_13. This case models a power system with  
37 buses. Notice that when you open any line in the system, the flow of power imme-
diately redistributes to continue to meet the total load demand. While the education 
version of PowerWorld is limited to 42 buses, the commercial version can handle 
cases with the tens of thousands of buses common in utility studies.

	
References	
29
REFERENCES
1.	
H. M. Rustebakke et al., Electric Utility Systems Practice, 4th ed. 
(New York: Wiley. 1983). Photos courtesy of Westinghouse Historical 
Collection.
2.	
U.S. Energy Information Administration, Electric Power Annual 2012—
December 2013, www.eia.gov.
3.	
U.S. Energy Information Administration, Annual Energy Outlook 2014, 
April 2014, www.eia.gov.
4.	
Wikipedia Encyclopedia, List of HVDC Projects, en.wikipedia.org.
5.	
M. P. Bahrman and B. K. Johnson, “The ABCs of HVDC Transmission 
Technologies,” IEEE Power & Energy Magazine, 5,2 (March/April 2007), 
pp. 33–44.
6.	
Edison Electric Institute, Key Facts about the Electric Power Industry, 
May 2013, www.eei.org.
7.	
North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC), 2013 Long-
Term Reliability Assessment (Atlanta, GA: www.nerc.com, December 
2013).
8.	
Seth Blumsack, “How the Free Market Rocked the Grid,” IEEE Spec-
trum, 47, 12 (December, 2010), pp. 44–48, 57–59.
9.	
Utility Analytics Institute, Aging Utility Workforce: Business Impacts and 
Strategies, November 27, 2013, www.inin.com
10.	
IEEE Power & Energy Society, Preparing the Foundation for Future Elec-
tric Energy Systems: A Strong Power and Energy Engineering Workforce, 
U.S. Power & Energy Engineering Workforce Collaborative, April 2009, 
www.ieee-pes.org
11.	
E. Santacana, G. Rackliffe, L. Tang, and X. Feng, “Getting Smart,” 
IEEE Power & Energy Magazine, 8,2 (March/April 2010), pp. 41–48.
12.	
North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC), About NERC 
(Princeton, NJ: www.nerc.com).
13.	
T.J. Overbye and J. Weber, “Visualizing the Electric Grid,” IEEE Spec-
trum, 38,2 (February 2001), pp. 52–58.
14.	
Solar Power in Germany, en.wikipedia.com
15.	
“Focus on UHV AC: China shows the way by energising 1,000 kV line,” 
Global Transmission Report, www.globaltransmission.info, March 2, 
2009.
16.	
J. Cao and J.Y. Cai, “HVDC in China,” EPRI 2013 HVDC & Facts 
Conference, Palo Alto, CA, www.cepri.com, August 28, and 29, 2013.


31
Fundamentals
2
T
he objective of this chapter is to review basic concepts and establish termi-
nology and notation. In particular, we review phasors, instantaneous power, 
complex power, network equations, and elementary aspects of balanced three-
phase circuits. Students who have already had courses in electric network theory and 
basic electric machines should find this chapter to be primarily refresher material.
Operations 
Center at PJM. 
PJM is a regional 
transmission 
organization (RTO) 
that coordinates 
the movement of 
wholesale electricity 
and ensures the 
reliability of the 
high-voltage electric 
power system 
serving 61 million 
people in all or parts 
of Delaware, Illinois, 
Indiana, Kentucky, 
Maryland, 
Michigan, New 
Jersey, North 
Carolina, Ohio, 
Pennsylvania, 
Tennessee, Virginia, 
West Virginia and 
the District of 
Columbia, USA 
(Courtesy of PJM 
Interconnection, 
LLC.)

32	
Chapter 2  |  Fundamentals
CASE STUDY
Throughout most of the 20th century, electric utility companies built 
increasingly larger generation plants, primarily hydro or thermal (using coal, 
gas, oil, or nuclear fuel). At the end of the 20th century, following the ongo-
ing deregulation of the electric utility industry with increased competition 
in the United States and in other countries, smaller generation sources 
that connect directly to distribution systems have emerged. Distributed 
energy resources are sources of energy including generation and storage 
devices that are located near local loads. Distributed generation sources 
include renewable technologies (including geothermal, ocean tides, solar, 
and wind) and nonrenewable technologies (including internal combustion 
engines, combustion turbines, combined cycle, microturbines, and fuel 
cells). Microgrids are systems that have distributed energy resources and 
associated loads that can form intentional islands in distribution systems. 
The following article provides an overview of ongoing microgrid activities 
undertaken by the Office of Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability of the 
U.S. Department of Energy [5].
Key Connections
By Merrill Smith and Dan Ton
U.S. Department of Energy
Microgrids have been identified as key 
components of the smart grid for im-
proving power reliability and quality, 
increasing system energy efficiency, 
and providing the possibility of grid 
independence to individual end-
user sites. The Microgrid Exchange 
Group, an ad hoc group of experts 
and implementers of microgrid tech-
nology, has defined a microgrid as “a 
group of interconnected loads and 
distributed energy resources within 
clearly defined electrical boundaries 
that acts as a single controllable entity 
with respect to the grid. A microgrid 
can connect and disconnect from the 
grid to enable it to operate in both 
grid-connected or island mode.”
Microgrids have been described 
by other organizations using similar 
definitions, including the key con-
cepts of a system made up of multi-
ple loads along with generation and 
the ability to island from the grid. 
Microgrids provide multiple benefits 
that include:
●
●
Enabling grid modernization 
and the integration of multiple 
smart grid technologies; 
(Merrill Smith and Dan Ton, “Key 
Connections,” U.S. Deptartment of  
Energy, Washington DC, USA)

	
Case Study	
33
●
●
Enhancing 
and 
easing 
the 
integration of distributed and 
renewable energy sources that 
help reduce peak load and also 
reduce losses by locating gener-
ation near demand;
●
●
Meeting end-user needs by 
ensuring energy supply for crit-
ical loads, controlling power 
quality and reliability at the 
local level, and promoting cus-
tomer participation through 
demand-side management and 
community involvement in elec-
tricity supply; and
●
●
Supporting the macrogrid by 
handling sensitive loads and 
the variability of renewables 
locally and supplying ancil-
lary services to the bulk power 
system.
Within the Office of Electricity 
Delivery and Energy Reliability (OE) 
of the U.S. Department of Energy 
(DOE), the Smart Grid R&D Pro-
gram was established to accelerate the 
deployment and integration of the ad-
vanced communication, control, and 
information technologies needed to 
modernize the nation’s electric delivery  
network. This modernization in-
cludes preparing the U.S. electric in-
frastructure to meet the challenges of 
the 21st-century economy. The Smart 
Grid R&D Program has two goals: 
to dynamically optimize grid opera-
tions and resources for a robust, flex-
ible, and secure electric grid; and to 
fully integrate demand response and 
consumer participation into grid 
resource planning and operations. 
The program’s microgrid activities 
support the achievement of both of 
these goals.
According to the DOE’s Sep-
tember 2011 update of the Smart Grid 
Research and Development Multi- 
Year Program Plan: 2010–2014 (avail-
able at http://events.energetics.com 
/SmartGridPeerReview2012/pdfs 
/SG_MYPP_2011.pdf), the microgrid 
initiative has established the following 
2020 performance targets for costs, 
reliability, system energy efficiencies, 
and emissions to advance these grid 
modernization goals: “to develop 
commercial-scale microgrid systems 
(capacity <10 MW) capable of re-
ducing [the] outage time of required 
loads by >98% at a cost comparable 
to nonintegrated baseline solutions 
(uninterrupted power supply…plus 
diesel genset) while reducing emis-
sions by >20% and improving system 
energy efficiencies by >20%.”
This article provides an over-
view of ongoing microgrid activi-
ties being undertaken by OE and its 
Smart Grid R&D Program. In ad-
dition, it discusses the process OE 
has undertaken to engage microgrid 
stakeholders to jointly identify the 
remaining areas in which there are 
R&D gaps and develop a plan to  
address those gaps.
Ongoing Microgrid Activities
The bulk of the DOE’s microgrid 
R&D efforts to date have focused 
on demonstration activities to meet 
niche application needs, such as 
those for meeting peak load reduc-
tion, renewable energy mandates 
and directives, and energy surety and  
reliability at certain critical facilities,  

34	
Chapter 2  |  Fundamentals
including 
military 
installations. 
These ongoing microgrid demon-
stration projects consist of lab- and 
field-scale R&D test beds, renewable 
and distributed systems integration 
(RDSI) projects for peak load re-
duction, select Smart Grid Demon-
stration Program (SGDP) projects 
funded under the American Recov-
ery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 
(ARRA) as part of OE’s imple-
mentation of grid modernization, 
and assessment and demonstration 
projects jointly supported by the  
U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) 
and the DOE.
OE is currently supporting nine 
RDSI projects with a total value  
exceeding U.S.$100 million (with  
approximately U.S.$55 million com-
ing from the DOE). The two primary 
goals of these projects are to demon-
strate at least 15% peak demand  
reduction at the distribution feeder or 
substation level through integrating 
distributed energy resources (DERs) 
and to demonstrate microgrids that 
can operate in both grid-parallel and 
islanded modes. These projects are 
proving out systems that can defer 
transmission and distribution invest-
ments and upgrades by utilizing local 
assets (generation and load reduc-
tion) in an integrated fashion. They 
are also increasing the reliability of 
the local distribution system by add-
ing elements that make it more stable 
and reconfigurable. Other benefits 
being realized from these projects 
include 
addressing 
vulnerabilities 
in critical infrastructure, managing 
peak loads, lowering emissions, using 
fuel resources more efficiently, and 
helping customers manage energy 
costs. These RDSI projects are pro-
gressing toward achieving the goals 
of at least 15% in peak demand re-
ductions and the ability to island. 
Some, such as the Illinois Institute of 
Technology, Chevron/Santa Rita Jail, 
and Ft. Collins FortZED projects, 
have already realized or exceeded the  
15% reduction goal.
Under ARRA, SGDP has funded 
16 smart grid regional demonstration 
projects to demonstrate emerging 
smart grid technologies and alterna-
tive architectures to validate business 
models and address regulatory and 
scalability issues. Among them, sev-
eral projects are conducting demon-
strations involving combinations of 
the following elements: renewable  
energy resources, distributed gener-
ation, energy storage, demand-side 
management, and charging schemes 
for plug-in electric vehicles. These  
projects include (but are not limited 
to) the Pacific Northwest Smart Grid 
Demonstration by Battelle Memorial 
Institute, which includes Portland Gen-
eral Electric’s High Reliability Zone  
(a microgrid); the Energy Internet 
Demonstration by Pecan Street Proj-
ect Inc. in Texas; and the Irvine Smart 
Grid Demonstration by Southern  
California Edison. Further information 
on the SGDP projects is available at 
http://www.smartgrid.gov/recovery_act 
/project_information?keys=&project 
%5B%5D=2.
There has also been a significant 
effort by national laboratories to pro-
duce microgrid designs, analyses, and 
demonstrations at test facilities and 
military bases. Lawrence Berkeley  

National Laboratory (LBNL) is 
teaming with American Electric 
Power (AEP), the University of Wis-
consin, and Sandia National Labora-
tories (SNL) to apply Consortium for 
Electric Reliability Technology Solu-
tions (CERTS) microgrid concepts in 
AEP’s Dolan Technology Center at the 
Walnut Station Test Facility in Grove-
port, Ohio. The Sacramento Muni­
cipal Utility District, the Chevron  
Energy 
Solutions 
RDSI 
project 
(shown in Figure 1), and the DOD at 
Fort Sill and Maxwell Air Force Bases 
are also applying CERTS microgrid 
concepts in field demonstrations. 
LBNL has developed the distributed 
energy resources customer adoption 
model (DER-CAM), an economic 
model for predicting and optimizing 
the capacity and minimizing the cost 
of operating distributed generation in 
microgrids.
SNL has developed its energy 
surety microgrid (ESM) methodo­
logy, which uses cost and performance 
data from military bases to develop 
approaches for implementing high-
reliability microgrids and to assist in 
planning for and analysis of the po-
tential risks in future military and com­
mercial projects. To date, 14 military 
bases have received assessments and/
or conceptual microgrid designs using  
SNL’s ESM methodology. From  
this work, SNL has developed a set 
of valuable lessons learned that, com-
bined with its design methodology, 
provide a blueprint for future ESM 
microgrid implementation.
The ESM design work was 
the springboard for a larger joint 
micro­grid deployment effort on the 
part of the DOE, the DOD, and 
the U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security (DHS). This joint effort, 
When a disturbance to the utility grid occurs, the
automatic disconnect switch enables the facility to
“Island” itself from the main utility grid and
independently generate and store its own energy
PG&E utility
interconnection or
“point of common
coupling” and static
disconnect switch
Utility power enters the facility at 
the“point of common coupling” 
Five 2.3-kW
wind turbines
1.2-MW rooftop solar
photovoltaic system
Two 1.2-MW
backup diesel
generators
2-MW
advanced
energy
storage
system
Facility
Electric
Load
Facility
Electric
Load
1-MW fuel cell
Distributed energy
resources management
system (DERMS)
The DERMS serves to reduce
peak demands during normal
grid-connected operation or
during a demand response event
Figure 1  Chevron Energy Solutions’ project at the Santa Rita Jail in Dublin, Califor-
nia, to demonstrate commercial application of a CERTS microgrid (used 
with permission) (Based on Chevron Energy Solutions.)
	
Case Study	
35

36	
Chapter 2  |  Fundamentals
known as a joint capabilities tech-
nology demonstration (JCTD), is 
the first of its kind for the DOE and 
will ultimately deploy three smart 
power infrastructure demonstration 
for energy reliability and security  
(SPIDERS) microgrids. Five national  
laboratories—Idaho, National Re-
newable Energy Laboratory, Oak 
Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL), 
Pacific Northwest National Labora-
tory (PNNL), and SNL—supported 
by the DOE are playing a pivotal role 
in the SPIDERS deployment through 
their work on the microgrid designs, 
the cyber designs, and the develop-
ment of a transition plan that can 
be used to design and deploy micro-
grids at additional military facilities 
and in the private sector. The three 
SPIDERS microgrids will be de-
ployed in phases at Joint Base Pearl  
Harbor-Hickam (Hawaii), Fort Car-
son (Colorado), and Camp Smith  
(Hawaii), respectively. The first phase,  
at Pearl Harbor-Hickam, has com-
pleted successful technical and opera-
tional demonstrations. A key element 
of SPIDERS is standardization of 
the design approach, contracting, in-
stallation, security, and operation of 
these microgrids to support future  
applications.
Other work at the national lab-
oratories is also supporting the micro-
grid effort. ORNL’s Distributed Energy 
Communications & Controls labora-
tory is developing controls for inverter- 
based DERs to provide local voltage,  
power, and power quality support for 
the ORNL campus distribution sys-
tem. On the simulation side, PNNL 
has been developing GridLAB-D  
as a distribution system simulation tool 
that integrates grid operations at sev-
eral levels, including microgrids.
As OE moves forward with  
microgrid R&D, it is coordinating 
the national laboratories’ efforts on 
microgrids so they will be more co-
hesive and unified. The labs will be 
working on three major tasks. The 
focus will be on:
●
●
Developing use cases (based on 
existing microgrids) to define 
the performance requirements 
and technology specifications 
of microgrids;
●
●
Performing cost and benefit 
analysis to identify high-impact 
R&D for additional invest-
ments; and
●
●
Creating integrated tool sets for 
developing conceptual and pre-
liminary designs and controls 
and operations architectures.
In addition to meeting indi-
vidual niche applications, the var-
ious DOE demonstrations also 
field-prove capabilities of current 
technologies and unveil lessons 
learned, challenges, and needed but 
unmet capabilities. Current tech-
nologies will clearly not be enough 
to meet the 2020 performance tar-
gets established by the DOE for 
microgrids. As part of its continu-
ing effort to engage stakeholders in 
joint planning and implementation 
of R&D activities, the Smart Grid 
R&D Program convened two micro-
grid workshops, in 2011 and 2012, 
to seek stakeholder input on key 
areas for R&D and performance 

baselines, targets, and actionable 
plans. This input was incorporated 
into the DOE’s 2012 Smart Grid  
Research and Development Multi-
Year Program Plan to guide current 
and future DOE R&D efforts in  
microgrids (see Figure 2).
Microgrid Workshops
The DOE held its first microgrid 
workshop on August 30–31, 2011 in 
San Diego, California; a follow-up 
workshop was held on July 30–31, 
2012 in Chicago. The purpose of 
the first workshop was to convene 
experts and practitioners to assist 
the DOE in identifying and prior-
itizing R&D areas in the field of  
microgrids. The second workshop 
was held in response to path-forward 
discussions that called for sharing 
lessons learned and best practices 
for system integration from existing  
projects 
in 
the 
United 
States  
Workshops to
Engage
Stakeholders for
R&D Planning
Rescoping Lab
AOPs to Address
Workshop
Priority R&D
Topics
FY14 Microgrid
R&D FOA
In synergy with Lab AOPs to achieve cost
parity for the identified microgrid use case
2011 workshop affirmed DOE 2020 targets
and defined R&D areas for component and
system integration technologies
2012 workshop integrated R&D areas
(from 2011) into planning/design and
operations/control and prioritized R&D
topics in each
Use case development to define
performance requirements and technology
specifications
Cost and benefit analysis to ID high-impact
R&D for investments
Integrated tool sets for conceptual/
preliminary designs
Integrated tool sets for controls and
operations architecture
Figure 2  R&D pathway toward the DOE’s 2020 microgrid performance targets
	
Case Study	
37

38	
Chapter 2  |  Fundamentals
(including military microgrids) and 
elsewhere. In addition, the purpose 
of the second workshop was to delve 
more deeply into R&D topics gath-
ered from the first workshop and 
subsequently determine system in-
tegration gap areas and functional 
requirements.
The 2011 Workshop
Two tracks were organized to address 
the potential cost reduction of ma-
jor microgrid components and sub-
components. One track focused on 
microgrid components, with separate 
sessions on switch technologies, con-
trol and protection technologies, and 
inverters and converters. The second 
track focused on microgrid systems, 
with separate sessions on standards 
and protocols, system design and 
economic analysis tools, and system 
integration.
The 2012 Workshop
A working list of system integration 
issues, categorized in the two areas of 
planning and design and operations 
and control, was presented for input 
from the attendees, based on their ex-
perience. This brainstorming session 
resulted in 12 R&D topics for discus-
sion. For each topic, participants dis-
cussed four aspects: the current status 
of the technology, needs and chal-
lenges, the scope of the needed R&D, 
and R&D metrics.
Conclusions from the breakout 
session discussions and the report-out 
presentations from the 2011 work-
shop were documented in the DOE 
Microgrid Workshop Report, available  
at 
http://energy.gov/sites/prod/files 
/Microgrid%20Workshop%20Report 
%20August%202011.pdf. The 2012 
workshop program agenda with  em-
bedded presentation links is available at 
http://e2rg.com/events/agenda/. Table 1  
lists the key R&D areas identified from 
the two workshops.
Conclusions and  
the Path Forward
The DOE’s Smart Grid R&D Pro-
gram considers microgrids to be 
key building blocks for smart grids 
and has established microgrid R&D 
as a key area of focus. A significant 
number of R&D needs and chal-
lenges have been identified for micro-
grids during the two workshops 
described above, with input from 
more than 170 experts and practi-
tioners, representing a broad group 
of stakeholders in the United States, 
Canada, Europe, Japan, and Korea. 
At the two workshops, the scope of 
the R&D necessary to address the 
identified needs and challenges was 
outlined. The technical, economical, 
social, and environmental benefits 
that can result from successful devel-
opment and deployment of micro-
grids became evident in the course 
of the workshop discussions and 
presentations.
Engaging 
stakeholders 
and 
knowledgeable practitioners to obtain 
input on R&D needs is a key part of 
the R&D topic development process. 
With the input collected, the Smart 
Grid R&D Program will further re-
fine R&D requirements so as to plan 
and develop a competitive funding 
opportunity announcement, subject 
to available DOE funds. The DOE’s 

2011 Workshop
2012 Workshop
R&D Areas
Components
Systems
Planning  
and Design
Operations  
and Controls
Switch Technologies
Standards and 
Protocols
System Architecture 
Development
Steady-State 
Control and 
Coordination
Legacy grid-connection 
technologies to 
enable connection and 
disconnection from the grid
Universal microgrid 
communications and 
control standards
Definition of microgrid 
applications, interfaces, 
and services
Internal services 
within the microgrid
Requirements based 
on customer and utility 
needs
Microgrid protection, 
coordination, and 
safety
Open architectures 
that promote flexibility, 
scalability, and security
Interaction of the 
microgrid with 
utilities or other 
microgrids
Control and Protection 
Technologies
System Design  
and Economic 
Analysis Tools
Modeling  
and Analysis
Transient State 
Control and 
Protection
Best practices and 
specifications for 
protection and controls; 
information models
Microgrid 
multiobjective 
optimization 
framework
Performance optimization 
methods and uncertainty 
in the modeling and 
design process
Transient state 
control and 
protection
Reliable, low-cost 
protection
Designing an 
operations 
optimization 
methodology that 
takes uncertainty into 
account
Switches to handle full 
fault current
Inverters/Converters
System Integration
Power System Design
Operational 
Optimization
Topologies and control 
algorithms so that 
multiple inverters can 
operate in a microgrid
A common 
integration 
framework
DC power
Operational 
optimization of a 
single microgrid
Advanced power 
electronics technologies
Microgrid integration
Operational 
optimization of 
multiple microgrids
Table 1
Key R&D Areas Identified from the DOE’s 2011 and 2012 Microgrid Workshops
	
Case Study	
39

40	
Chapter 2  |  Fundamentals
microgrid R&D initiative hopes to ad-
vance microgrids, in partnership with 
industry and research experts, from 
conception through R&D execution.
For Further Reading
U.S. Department of Energy. In-
formation/fact sheets on the smart 
grid projects (including the smart 
grid demon­stration projects) funded 
through the American Recovery and 
Reinvestment Act of 2009. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.smartgrid.gov 
/recovery_act/project_information
U.S. Department of Energy. 
(2012, May 10). Smart grid R&D 
Program peer review June 7–8, 2012.  
[Online]. Available: http://energy.gov/oe 
/articles/smart-grid-rd-program-peer 
-review-june-7-8-2012
U.S. Department of Energy. Smart 
grid research & development multi-year 
program plan: 2010–2014. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://energy.gov/sites/prod 
/files/SG_MYPP_2012%20Update.pdf
U.S. Department of Energy. 
(2011). Microgrid workshop report. 
[Online]. Available: http://energy.gov 
/sites/prod/files/Microgrid%20 
Workshop%20Report%20August 
%202011.pdf
U.S. Department of Energy. 
(2012). Microgrid workshop agenda 
and presentations. [Online]. Avail-
able: http://e2rg.com/microgrid-2012 
/Workshop_Agenda-08092012.pdf
Sandia National Laboratories. 
SPIDERS: The smart power infra-
structure demonstration for energy 
reliability and security. [Online]. Avail-
able: 
http://energy.sandia.gov/wp/wp 
-content/gallery/uploads/SPIDERS_
Fact_Sheet_2012-1431P.pdf
Biographies
Merrill Smith is with the U.S. Depart-
ment of Energy, Washington, D.C.
Dan Ton is with the U.S. Department 
of Energy, Washington, D.C.  ■
2.1  Phasors
A sinusoidal voltage or current at constant frequency is characterized by two param-
eters: a maximum value and a phase angle. A voltage
v(t) 5 Vmax cos(vt 1 d)
(2.1.1)
has a maximum value Vmax and a phase angle d when referenced to cos(vt). The root-
mean-square (rms) value, also called effective value, of the sinusoidal voltage is
V 5 Vmax
Ï2 
(2.1.2)
Euler’s identity, ejf 5 cos f 1 j sin f, can be used to express a sinusoid in terms 
of a phasor. For the above voltage,

	
Section 2.1 Phasors	
41
vstd 5 Re fVmaxejsvt1ddg
	
5 Re fÏ2sVejddejvtg
(2.1.3)
where j 5 Ï21 and Re denotes “real part of.” The rms phasor representation of the 
voltage is given in three forms—exponential, polar, and rectangular:
V 5 Ve  jd 5 V/d 5 V cos d 1 jV sin d
(2.1.4)
A phasor can be easily converted from one form to another. Conversion from 
polar to rectangular is shown in the phasor diagram of Figure 2.1. Euler’s identity 
can be used to convert from exponential to rectangular form. As an example, the 
voltage
v(t) 5 169.7 cos(vt 1 608) volts
(2.1.5)
has a maximum value Vmax 5 169.7 volts, a phase angle d 5 608 when referenced to 
cos(vt), and an rms phasor representation in polar form of
V 5 120/608  volts
(2.1.6)
Also, the current
i(t) 5 100 cos(vt 1 458) A
(2.1.7)
has a maximum value Imax 5 100 A, an rms value I 5 100/Ï2 5 70.7 A, a phase angle 
of 458, and a phasor representation
I 5 70.7/458 5 70.7ej45 5 50 1 j50   A
(2.1.8)
The relationships between the voltage and current phasors for the three passive 
elements—resistor, inductor, and capacitor—are summarized in Figure 2.2, where 
sinusoidal-steady-state excitation and constant values of R, L, and C are assumed.
When voltages and currents are discussed in this text, lowercase letters such as 
v(t) and i(t) indicate instantaneous values, uppercase letters such as V and I indicate 
rms values, and uppercase letters in italics such as V and I indicate rms phasors. 
When voltage or current values are specified, they shall be rms values unless other-
wise indicated.
exponential
polar
rectangular
FIGURE 2.1
Phasor diagram for 
converting from polar 
to rectangular form

42	
Chapter 2  |  Fundamentals
2.2  Instantaneous Power in Single-Phase 
AC Circuits
Power is the rate of change of energy with respect to time. The unit of power is a 
watt, which is a joule per second. Instead of saying that a load absorbs energy at a 
rate given by the power, it is common practice to say that a load absorbs power. The 
instantaneous power in watts absorbed by an electrical load is the product of the 
instantaneous voltage across the load in volts and the instantaneous current into  
the load in amperes. Assume that the load voltage is
v(t) 5 Vmax cos(vt 1 d) volts
(2.2.1)
We now investigate the instantaneous power absorbed by purely resistive, 
purely inductive, purely capacitive, and general RLC loads. We also introduce the 
concepts of real power, power factor, and reactive power. The physical significance 
of real and reactive power is also discussed.
PURELY RESISTIVE LOAD
For a purely resistive load, the current into the load is in phase with the load voltage, 
I 5 V/R, and the current into the resistive load is
iRstd 5 IRmax cossvt 1 dd   A
(2.2.2)
where IRmax 5 Vmax/R. The instantaneous power absorbed by the resistor is
pRstd 5 vstdiRstd 5 Vmax IRmax cos2svt 1 dd
	
5 1
2VmaxIRmax{1 1 cos[2(vt 1 d)]}
	
5 VIRh1 1 cosf2svt 1 ddgj   W
(2.2.3)
As indicated by (2.2.3), the instantaneous power absorbed by the resistor has 
an average value
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
FIGURE 2.2
Summary of relation-
ships between phasors 
V and I for constant R, 
L, and C elements with 
sinusoidal-steady-state 
excitation

	
Section 2.2 Instantaneous Power in Single-Phase AC Circuits	
43
PR 5 VIR 5 V2
R 5 I2
RR    W
(2.2.4)
plus a double-frequency term VIR cos[2(vt 1 d)].
PURELY INDUCTIVE LOAD
For a purely inductive load, the current lags the voltage by 908, IL 5 V/(jXL), and
iLstd 5 ILmax cossvt 1 d 2 908d   A
(2.2.5)
where ILmax 5 Vmax/XL, and XL 5 vL is the inductive reactance. The instantaneous 
power absorbed by the inductor is*
pLstd 5 vstdiLstd 5 Vmax ILmax cossvt 1 dd cossvt 1 d 2 908d
	
5 1
2Vmax ILmax cos[2svt 1 dd 2 908]
	
5 VIL sin[2svt 1 dd]   W
(2.2.6)
As indicated by (2.2.6), the instantaneous power absorbed by the inductor is a 
double-frequency sinusoid with zero average value.
PURELY CAPACITIVE LOAD
For a purely capacitive load, the current leads the voltage by 908, Ic 5 V/(2jXC), and
iCstd 5 ICmax cossvt 1 d 1 908d   A
(2.2.7)
where ICmax 5 Vmax/XC, and XC 5 1/(vC) is the capacitive reactance. The instanta-
neous power absorbed by the capacitor is
pCstd 5 vstdiCstd 5 Vmax ICmax cossvt 1 dd cossvt 1 d 1 908d
	
 5 1
2Vmax ICmax cosf2svt 1 dd 1 908dg
	
 5 2VIC  sin[2svt 1 dd]     W
(2.2.8)
The instantaneous power absorbed by a capacitor is also a double-frequency sinus-
oid with zero average value.
GENERAL RLC LOAD
For a general load composed of RLC elements under sinusoidal-steady-state excita-
tion, the load current is of the form
istd 5 Imax cossvt 1 bd   A
(2.2.9)

44	
Chapter 2  |  Fundamentals
The instantaneous power absorbed by the load is then*
pstd 5 vstdistd 5 Vmax Imax cossvt 1 dd cossvt 1 bd
	
5 1
2Vmax Imax{cossd 2 bd 1 cos[2svt 1 dd 2 sd 2 bd]}
	
5 VI cossd 2 bd 1 VI cossd 2 bd cos[2svt 1 dd]
	
1 VI sinsd 2 bd sinf2svt 2 ddg
pstd 5 VI cossd 2 bd{1 1 cos[2svt 1 dd]} 1 VI sinsd 2 bd
Letting I cossd 2 bd 5 IR and I sinsd 2 bd 5 IX gives
pstd 5 VIR{1 1 cos[2svt 1 dd]} 1 VIX sin[2svt 1 dd]
(2.2.10)
As indicated by (2.2.10), the instantaneous power absorbed by the load has 
two components: One can be associated with the power pR(t) absorbed by the re-
sistive component of the load, and the other can be associated with the power pX(t) 
absorbed by the reactive (inductive or capacitive) component of the load. The first 
component pR(t) in (2.2.10) is identical to (2.2.3), where IR 5 I cos(d 2 b) is the 
component of the load current in phase with the load voltage. The phase angle  
(d 2 b) represents the angle between the voltage and current. The second component 
pX(t) in (2.2.10) is identical to (2.2.6) or (2.2.8), where Ix 5 I sin(d 2 b) is the compo-
nent of load current 908 out of phase with the voltage.
REAL POWER
Equation (2.2.10) shows that the instantaneous power pR(t) absorbed by the resistive 
component of the load is a double-frequency sinusoid with average value P given by
P 5 VIR 5 VI cos(d 2 b) W
(2.2.11)
The average power P is also called real power or active power. All three terms indicate 
the same quantity P given by (2.2.11).
POWER FACTOR
The term cos(d 2 b) in (2.2.11) is called the power factor. The phase angle (d 2 b), 
which is the angle between the voltage and current, is called the power factor angle. 
For dc circuits, the power absorbed by a load is the product of the dc load voltage and 
the dc load current; for ac circuits, the average power absorbed by a load is the prod-
uct of the rms load voltage V, rms load current I, and the power factor cos(d 2 b), 
as shown by (2.2.11). For inductive loads, the current lags the voltage, which means 
b is less than d, and the power factor is said to be lagging. For capacitive loads, the 
current leads the voltage, which means b is greater than d, and the power factor is 
said to be leading. By convention, the power factor cos(d 2 b) is positive. If |d 2 b| 
pR(t)
px(t)
*Use the identity: cos A cos B 5 1
2 [cos(A 2 B) 1 cos(A 1 B)].

is greater than 908, then the reference direction for current may be reversed, resulting 
in a positive value of cos(d 2 b).
REACTIVE POWER
The instantaneous power absorbed by the reactive part of the load, given by the 
component pX(t) in (2.2.10), is a double-frequency sinusoid with zero average value 
and with amplitude Q given by
Q 5 VIX 5 VI sinsd 2 bd  var
(2.2.12)
The term Q is given the name reactive power. Although it has the same units as real power, 
the usual practice is to define units of reactive power as volt-amperes reactive, or var. 
Instantaneous, real, and reactive power and the power factor
The voltage v(t) 5 141.4 cos(vt) is applied to a load consisting of a 10-V resistor 
in parallel with an inductive reactance XL 5 vL 5 3.77 V. Calculate the instanta-
neous power absorbed by the resistor and by the inductor. Also calculate the real 
and reactive power absorbed by the load, and the power factor.
SOLUTION
The circuit and phasor diagram are shown in Figure 2.3(a). The load voltage is
V 5 141.4
Ï2 /08 5 100 /08   volts
The resistor current is
IR 5 V
R 5 100
10 /08 5 10/08  A
The inductor current is
IL 5 V
jXL
5
100
s  j3.77d/08 5 26.53/2908   A
The total load current is
I 5 IR 1 IL 5 10 2 j26.53 5 28.35/269.348   A
The instantaneous power absorbed by the resistor is, from (2.2.3),
pRstd 5 s100d s10d[1 1 coss2vtd]
	
5 1000 [1 1 coss2vtd] W
EXAMPLE 2.1
(Continued)
	
Section 2.2 Instantaneous Power in Single-Phase AC Circuits	
45

46	
Chapter 2  |  Fundamentals
The instantaneous power absorbed by the inductor is, from (2.2.6),
pLstd 5 s100ds26.53d sins2vtd
	
5 2653 sinsvtd   W
The real power absorbed by the load is, from (2.2.11),
P 5 VI cos(d 2 b) 5 (100)(28.53) cos(08 1 69.348)
	
5 1000 W
(Note: P is also equal to VIR 5 V2/R.)
The reactive power absorbed by the load is, from (2.2.12),
Q 5 VI sin(d 2 b) 5 (100)(28.53) sin(08 1 69.348)
	 5 2653 var
(Note: Q is also equal to VIL 5 V2/XL.)
FIGURE 2.3
Circuit and phasor  
diagram for Example 2.1

	
Section 2.3 Complex Power	
47
The power factor is
p.f. 5 cos(d 2 b) 5 cos(69.348) 5 0.3528 lagging
Voltage, current, and power waveforms are shown in Figure 2.3(b).
As shown for this parallel RL load, the resistor absorbs real power (1000 W) 
and the inductor absorbs reactive power (2653 vars). The resistor current iR(t) is 
in phase with the load voltage, and the inductor current iL(t) lags the load voltage 
by 908. The power factor is lagging for an RL load.
Note pR(t) and px(t), given by (2.2.10), are strictly valid only for a parallel 
R-X load. For a general RLC load, the voltages across the resistive and reactive 
components may not be in phase with the source voltage v(t), resulting in addi-
tional phase shifts in pR(t) and px(t) (see Problem 2.13). However, (2.2.11) and 
(2.2.12) for P and Q are valid for a general RLC load.
PHYSICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF REAL AND REACTIVE POWER
The physical significance of real power P is easily understood. The total energy ab-
sorbed by a load during a time interval T, consisting of one cycle of the sinusoidal 
voltage, is PT watt-seconds (Ws). During a time interval of n cycles, the energy ab-
sorbed is P(nT) watt-seconds, all of which is absorbed by the resistive component 
of the load. A kilowatt-hour meter is designed to measure the energy absorbed by a 
load during a time interval (t2 2 t1), consisting of an integral number of cycles, by 
integrating the real power P over the time interval (t2 2 t1).
The physical significance of reactive power Q is not as easily understood. Q refers 
to the maximum value of the instantaneous power absorbed by the reactive component 
of the load. The instantaneous reactive power, given by the second term px(t) in (2.2.10), 
is alternately positive and negative, and it expresses the reversible flow of energy to and 
from the reactive component of the load. Q may be positive or negative, depending on 
the sign of (d 2 b) in (2.2.12). Reactive power Q is a useful quantity when describing the 
operation of power systems (this will become evident in later chapters). As one exam-
ple, shunt capacitors can be used in transmission systems to deliver reactive power and 
thereby increase voltage magnitudes during heavy load periods (see Chapter 5).
2.3  Complex Power
For circuits operating in sinusoidal-steady-state, real and reactive power are conve-
niently calculated from complex power, defined below. Let the voltage across a circuit 
element be V 5 V/d, and the current into the element be I 5 I/b. Then the complex 
power S is the product of the voltage and the conjugate of the current:
S 5 VI * 5 [V/d] [I/b]* 5 VI/d 2 b
	 5 VI cossd 2 bd 1 jVI sinsd 2 bd
(2.3.1)

48	
Chapter 2  |  Fundamentals
where (d – b) is the angle between the voltage and current. Comparing (2.3.1) with 
(2.2.11) and (2.2.12), S is recognized as
S 5 P 1 jQ
(2.3.2)
The magnitude S 5 VI of the complex power S is called the apparent power.  
Although it has the same units as P and Q, it is common practice to define the units 
of apparent power S as volt-amperes or VA. The real power P is obtained by multi-
plying the apparent power S 5 VI by the power factor p.f. 5 cos(d 2 b).
The procedure for determining whether a circuit element absorbs or delivers 
power is summarized in Figure 2.4. Figure 2.4(a) shows the load convention, where 
the current enters the positive terminal of the circuit element, and the complex power 
absorbed by the circuit element is calculated from (2.3.1). This equation shows that, 
depending on the value of (d 2 b), P may have either a positive or negative value. If 
P is positive, then the circuit element absorbs positive real power.
However, if P is negative, the circuit element absorbs negative real power, or 
alternatively, it delivers positive real power. Similarly, if Q is positive, the circuit ele-
ment in Figure 2.4(a) absorbs positive reactive power. However, if Q is negative, the 
circuit element absorbs negative reactive power, or it delivers positive reactive power.
Figure 2.4(b) shows the generator convention, where the current leaves the pos-
itive terminal of the circuit element, and the complex power delivered is calculated 
from (2.3.1). When P is positive (negative) the circuit element delivers positive (neg-
ative) real power. Similarly, when Q is positive (negative), the circuit element delivers 
positive (negative) reactive power.
FIGURE 2.4
Load and generator 
conventions
Real and reactive power, delivered or absorbed
A single-phase voltage source with V 5 100/1308 volts delivers a current 
I 5 10/108   A, which leaves the positive terminal of the source. Calculate the 
source real and reactive power, and state whether the source delivers or absorbs 
each of these.
EXAMPLE 2.2

	
Section 2.3 Complex Power	
49
The load convention is used for the RLC elements shown in Figure 2.2. There-
fore, the complex power absorbed by any of these three elements can be calculated as 
follows. Assume a load voltage V 5 V/d. Then, from (2.3.1),
resistor:     SR 5 VI*
R 5 [V/d]3
V
R/2d4 5 V2
R 
(2.3.3) 
indicator:  SL 5 VIL
* 5 [V/d] 3
V
2jXL/2d4 5 1 jV2
XL

(2.3.4)
capacitor: SC 5 VIC
* 5 [V/d] 3
V
2jXC/2d4 5 2jV2
XC

(2.3.5) 
From these complex power expressions, the following can be stated:
A (positive-valued) resistor absorbs (positive) real power, PR 5 V2/R W, and 
zero reactive power, QR 5 0 var.
An inductor absorbs zero real power, PL 5 0 W, and positive reactive power, 
QL 5 V2/XL var.
A capacitor absorbs zero real power, PC 5 0 W, and negative reactive power, 
QC 5 2V2/XC var. Alternatively, a capacitor delivers positive reactive power, 
1 V2/XC.
For a general load composed of RLC elements, complex power S is also cal-
culated from (2.3.1). The real power P 5 Re(S) absorbed by a passive load is always 
positive. The reactive power Q5 Im(S) absorbed by a load may be either positive or 
negative. When the load is inductive, the current lags the voltage, which means b is 
less than d in (2.3.1), and the reactive power absorbed is positive. When the load is 
SOLUTION 
Since I leaves the positive terminal of the source, the generator convention is as-
sumed, and the complex power delivered is, from (2.3.1),
S 5 VI* 5 [100/1308] [10/108]*
S 5 1000/1208 5 2500 1 j866
P 5 Re[S] 5 2500   W
Q 5 Im[S] 5 1866  var
where Im denotes “imaginary part of.” The source absorbs 500 W and delivers 
866 var. Readers familiar with electric machines will recognize that one example 
of this source is a synchronous motor. When a synchronous motor operates at a 
leading power factor, it absorbs real power and delivers reactive power.

50	
Chapter 2  |  Fundamentals
capacitive, the current leads the voltage, which means b is greater than d, and the 
reactive power absorbed is negative; or, alternatively, the capacitive load delivers pos-
itive reactive power.
Complex power can be summarized graphically by use of the power triangle 
shown in Figure 2.5. As shown, the apparent power S, real power P, and reactive 
power Q form the three sides of the power triangle. The power factor angle (d 2 b) 
is also shown, and the following expressions can be obtained:
	
S 5 ÏP2 1 Q2
(2.3.6)
sd 2 bd 5 tan21sQ/Pd
(2.3.7)
	
Q 5 P tansd 2 bd
(2.3.8)
	
p.f. 5 cossd 2 bd 5 P
S 5
P
ÏP2 1 Q2
(2.3.9)
Power triangle and power factor correction
A single-phase source delivers 100 kW to a load operating at a power factor of 
0.8 lagging. Calculate the reactive power to be delivered by a capacitor connected 
in parallel with the load in order to raise the source power factor to 0.95 lagging. 
Also draw the power triangle for the source and load. Assume that the source 
voltage is constant, and neglect the line impedance between the source and load.
SOLUTION
The circuit and power triangle are shown in Figure 2.6. The real power P 5 PS 5 
PR delivered by the source and absorbed by the load is not changed when the 
capacitor is connected in parallel with the load, since the capacitor delivers only 
reactive power QC. For the load, the power factor angle, reactive power absorbed, 
and apparent power are
uL 5 sd 2 bLd 5 cos21s0.8d 5 36.878
QL 5 P tan uL 5 100 tans36.878d 5 75 kvar
SL 5
P
cos uL
5 125 kVA
EXAMPLE 2.3
FIGURE 2.5
Power triangle

	
Section 2.3 Complex Power	
51
After the capacitor is connected, the power factor angle, reactive power de-
livered, and apparent power of the source are
uS 5 sd 2 bSd 5 cos21s0.95d 5 18.198
QS 5 P tan uS 5 100 tans18.198d 5 32.87 kvar
SS 5
P
cos uS
5 100
0.95 5 105.6 kVA
The capacitor delivers
QC 5 QL 2 QS 5 75 2 32.87 5 42.13 kVA
The method of connecting a capacitor in parallel with an inductive load 
is known as power factor correction. The effect of the capacitor is to increase 
the power factor of the source that delivers power to the load. Also, the source 
apparent power SS decreases. As shown in Figure 2.6, the source apparent 
power for this example decreases from 125 kVA without the capacitor to  
105.3 kVA with the capacitor. The source current IS 5 SS/V also decreases. 
When line impedance between the source and load is included, the decrease in 
source current results in lower line losses and lower line-voltage drops. The end 
result of power factor correction is improved efficiency and improved voltage  
regulation.
To see an animated view of this example, open PowerWorld Simulator 
case Example 2_3 (see Figure 2.7). From the ribbon select the green-and-black 
Play button to begin the simulation. The speed and size of the green arrows are  
FIGURE 2.6
Circuit and power 
triangle for 
Example 2.3
(Continued)

52	
Chapter 2  |  Fundamentals
2.4  Network Equations
For circuits operating in sinusoidal-steady-state, Kirchhoff’s current law (KCL) and 
voltage law (KVL) apply to phasor currents and voltages. Thus the sum of all pha-
sor currents entering any node is zero and the sum of the phasor voltage drops 
around any closed path is zero. Network analysis techniques based on Kirchhoff’s 
laws, including nodal analysis, mesh or loop analysis, superposition, source trans-
formations, and Thevenin’s theorem or Norton’s theorem, are useful for analyzing 
such circuits.
proportional to the real power supplied to the load bus, and the blue arrows are 
proportional to the reactive power. Here, reactive compensation can be supplied 
in discrete 20-kvar steps by clicking on the arrows in the capacitor’s kvar field, 
and the load can be varied by clicking on the arrows in the load field. Notice that 
increasing the reactive compensation decreases both the reactive power flow on 
the supply line and the kVA power supplied by the generator; the real power flow 
is unchanged.
FIGURE 2.7
Screen for  
Example 2.3

	
Section 2.4 Network Equations	
53
Various computer solutions of power system problems are formulated from 
nodal equations, which can be systematically applied to circuits. The circuit shown 
in Figure 2.8, which is used here to review nodal analysis, is assumed to be operating 
in sinusoidal-steady-state; source voltages are represented by phasors ES1, ES2, and 
ES3; circuit impedances are specified in ohms. Nodal equations are written in the 
following three steps:
STEP 1	 For a circuit with (N 1 1) nodes (also called buses), select one bus as 
the reference bus and define the voltages at the remaining buses with 
respect to the reference bus.
The circuit in Figure 2.8 has four buses—that is, N 1 1 5 4 or 
N 5 3. Bus 0 is selected as the reference bus, and bus voltages V10, V20, 
and V30 are then defined with respect to bus 0.
STEP 2	 Transform each voltage source in series with an impedance to an 
equivalent current source in parallel with that impedance. Also, 
show admittance values instead of impedance values on the circuit 
diagram. Each current source is equal to the voltage source divided 
by the source impedance.
In Figure 2.9, equivalent current sources I1, I2, and I3 are shown, 
and all impedances are converted to corresponding admittances.
STEP 3	 Write nodal equations in matrix format as follows:
	
3
Y11
Y12
Y13
Á
Y1N
Y21
Y22
Y23
Á
Y2N
Y31
Y32
Y33
Á
Y3N
o
o
o
o
YN1
YN2
YN3
Á
YNN4
 3
V10
V20
V30
o
VN04
53
I1
I2
I3
o
IN4

(2.4.1)
FIGURE 2.8
Circuit diagram for 
reviewing nodal 
analysis

54	
Chapter 2  |  Fundamentals
Using matrix notation, (2.4.1) becomes
	
YV 5 I
(2.4.2)
where Y is the N 3 N bus admittance matrix, V is the column vector 
of N bus voltages, and I is the column vector of N current sources. The 
elements Ykn, of the bus admittance matrix Y are formed as follows:
	
diagonal elements: 	 Ykk 5 sum of admittances  
connected to bus k  
(k 5 1, 2, ..., N) 	

(2.4.3) 
	
off-diagonal elements:	 Ykn 5 2(sum of admittances  
connected between buses k  
and n) (k Þ n) 	

(2.4.4) 
The diagonal element Ykk is called the self-admittance or the driv-
ing-point admittance of bus k, and the off-diagonal element Ykn for 
k Þ n is called the mutual admittance or the transfer admittance  
between buses k and n. Since Ykn 5 Ykn, the matrix Y is symmetric.
For the circuit of Figure 2.9, (2.4.1) becomes
3
s j3 2 j10d
2s j3d
0
2s j3d
s j3 2 j1 1 j1 2 j2d
2s j1 2 j2d
0
2s j1 2 j2d
s j1 2 j2 2 j4d4
 3
V10
V20
V304
	
53
I1
I2
I34
j 3
27
23
0
23
1
1
0
1
254
 3
V10
V20
V304
 53
I1
I2 
I34

(2.4.5)
FIGURE 2.9
Circuit of Figure 2.8 
with equivalent 
current sources 
replacing voltage 
sources. Admittance 
values are also shown.

	
Section 2.5 Balanced Three-Phase Circuits	
55
The advantage of this method of writing nodal equations is that a digital com-
puter can be used both to generate the admittance matrix Y and to solve (2.4.2) for 
the unknown bus voltage vector V. Once a circuit is specified with the reference bus 
and other buses identified, the circuit admittances and their bus connections become 
computer input data for calculating the elements Ykn via (2.4.3) and (2.4.4). After 
Y is calculated and the current source vector I is given as input, standard computer 
programs for solving simultaneous linear equations can then be used to determine 
the bus voltage vector V.
When double subscripts are used to denote a voltage in this text, the voltage 
shall be that at the node identified by the first subscript with respect to the node iden-
tified by the second subscript. For example, the voltage V10 in Figure 2.9 is the volt-
age at node 1 with respect to node 0. Also, a current Iab shall indicate the current from 
node a to node b. Voltage polarity marks (1/2) and current reference arrows (→) 
are not required when double subscript notation is employed. The polarity marks 
in Figure 2.9 for V10, V20, and V30, although not required, are shown for clarity. The 
reference arrows for sources I1, I2, and I3 in Figure 2.9 are required, however, since 
single subscripts are used for these currents. Matrices and vectors shall be indicated 
in this text by boldface type (for example, Y or V ).
2.5  Balanced Three-Phase Circuits
In this section, we introduce the following topics for balanced three-phase circuits: 
Y connections, line-to-neutral voltages, line-to-line voltages, line currents, D loads, 
D2Y conversions, and equivalent line-to-neutral diagrams.
BALANCED Y CONNECTIONS
Figure 2.10 shows a three-phase, Y-connected (or “wye-connected”) voltage  
source feeding a balanced-Y-connected load. For a Y connection, the neutrals of 
each phase are connected. In Figure 2.10 the source neutral connection is labeled 
bus n and the load neutral connection is labeled bus N. The three-phase source is 
assumed to be ideal since source impedances are neglected. Also neglected are the 
FIGURE 2.10
Circuit diagram  
of a three-phase 
Y-connected source 
feeding a balanced-Y 
load

56	
Chapter 2  |  Fundamentals
line impedances between the source and load terminals, and the neutral impedance 
between buses n and N. The three-phase load is balanced, which means the load  
impedances in all three phases are identical.
BALANCED LINE-TO-NEUTRAL VOLTAGES
In Figure 2.10, the terminal buses of the three-phase source are labeled a, b, and c, 
and the source line-to-neutral voltages are labeled Ean, Ebn, and Ecn. The source is 
balanced when these voltages have equal magnitudes and an equal 1208-phase differ-
ence between any two phases. An example of balanced three-phase line-to-neutral 
voltages is
Ean 5 10/08
Ebn 5 10/21208 5 10/12408
(2.5.1)
Ecn 5 10/11208 5 10/22408  volts
where the line-to-neutral voltage magnitude is 10 volts and Ean is the reference pha-
sor. The phase sequence is called positive sequence or abc sequence when Ean leads 
Ebn by 1208 and Ebn leads Ecn by 1208. The phase sequence is called negative sequence 
or acb sequence when Ean leads Ecn by 1208 and Ecn leads Ebn by 1208. The voltages in 
(2.5.1) are positive-sequence voltages, since Ean leads Ebn by 1208. The corresponding 
phasor diagram is shown in Figure 2.11. 
BALANCED LINE-TO-LINE VOLTAGES
The voltages Eab, Ebc, and Eca between phases are called line-to-line voltages. Writing 
a KVL equation for a closed path around buses a, b, and n in Figure 2.10.
Eab 5 Ean 2 Ebn
(2.5.2)
For the line-to-neutral voltages of (2.5.1),
Eab 5 10/08 2 10/21208 5 10 2 103
21 2 jÏ3
2
4
Eab 5 Ï3s10d 1
Ï3 1 j1
2 2 5 Ï3s10/308d volts
(2.5.3)
Similarly, the line-to-line voltages Ebc and Eca are
Ebc 5 Ebn 2 Ecn 5 10/21208 2 10/11208
	
5 Ï3s10/2908d volts
(2.5.4)
Eca 5 Ecn 2 Ean 5 10/11208 2 10/08
	
5 Ï3s10/1508d  volts
(2.5.5)
The line-to-line voltages of (2.5.3) through (2.5.5) are also balanced, since they 
have equal magnitudes of Ï3 (10) volts and 1208 displacement between any two 
FIGURE 2.11
Phasor diagram  
of balanced positive-
sequence line-to-
neutral voltages with 
Ean as the reference

	
Section 2.5 Balanced Three-Phase Circuits	
57
phases. Comparison of these line-to-line voltages with the line-to-neutral voltages of 
(2.5.1) leads to the following conclusion:
In a balanced three-phase Y-connected system with positive-sequence sources, 
the line-to-line voltages are Ï3 times the line-to-neutral voltages and lead by 
308. That is,
Eab 5 Ï3Ean/1308
Ebc 5 Ï3Ebn/1308
Eca 5 Ï3Ecn/1308
(2.5.6)
This very important result is summarized in Figure 2.12. In Figure 2.12(a) each 
phasor begins at the origin of the phasor diagram. In Figure 2.12(b) the line-to-line  
voltages form an equilateral triangle with vertices labeled a, b, c corresponding to 
buses a, b, and c of the system; the line-to-neutral voltages begin at the vertices and 
end at the center of the triangle, which is labeled n for neutral bus n. Also, the clock-
wise sequence of the vertices abc in Figure 2.12(b) indicates positive-sequence volt-
ages. In both diagrams, Ean is the reference. However, the diagrams could be rotated 
to align with any other reference.
Since the balanced line-to-line voltages form a closed triangle in Figure 2.12, 
their sum is zero. In fact, the sum of line-to-line voltages (Eab 1 Ebc 1 Eca) is always 
zero, even if the system is unbalanced, since these voltages form a closed path around 
buses a, b, and c. Also, in a balanced system, the sum of the line-to-neutral voltages 
(Ean 1 Ebn 1 Ecn) equals zero.
BALANCED LINE CURRENTS
Since the impedance between the source and load neutrals in Figure 2.10 is neglected, 
buses n and N are at the same potential, EnN 5 0. Accordingly, a separate KVL equa-
tion can be written for each phase, and the line currents can be written by inspection:
Ia 5 EanyZY
Ib 5 EbnyZY
(2.5.7)
Ic 5 EcnyZY
FIGURE 2.12
Positive-sequence 
line-to-neutral and 
line-to-line voltages 
in a balanced three-
phase, Y-connected 
system

58	
Chapter 2  |  Fundamentals
For example, if each phase of the Y-connected load has an impedance  
ZY 5 2/308 V, then
Ia 5
10/08
2/308 5 5/2308  A
Ib 5
10/21208
2/308
5 5/21508  A
(2.5.8)
Ic 5
10/11208
2/308
5 5/908  A
The line currents are also balanced, since they have equal magnitudes of 5 A 
and 1208 displacement between any two phases. The neutral current In is determined 
by writing a KCL equation at bus N in Figure 2.10.
In 5 Ia1Ib 1 Ic
(2.5.9)
Using the line currents of (2.5.8),
In 5 5/2308 1 5/21508 1 5/908
In 5 51
Ï3 2 j1
2 2 1 51
2Ï3 2 j1
2
2 1 j5 5 0
(2.5.10)
The phasor diagram of the line currents is shown in Figure 2.13. Since these line 
currents form a closed triangle, their sum, which is the neutral current In, is zero. In 
general, the sum of any balanced three-phase set of phasors is zero, since balanced 
phasors form a closed triangle. Thus, although the impedance between neutrals n and 
N in Figure 2.10 is assumed to be zero, the neutral current will be zero for any neutral 
impedance ranging from short circuit (0 V) to open circuit (` V), as long as the system 
is balanced. If the system is not balanced—which could occur if the source voltages, 
load impedances, or line impedances were unbalanced—then the line currents will not 
be balanced, and a neutral current In may flow between buses n and N.
BALANCED-D LOADS
Figure 2.14 shows a three-phase Y-connected source feeding a balanced-D-connected 
(or “delta-connected”) load. For a balanced-D connection, equal load impedances 
ZD are connected in a triangle whose vertices form the buses, labeled A, B, and C in 
Figure 2.14. The D connection does not have a neutral bus.
Since the line impedances are neglected in Figure 2.14, the source line-to-line  
voltages are equal to the load line-to-line voltages, and the D-load currents  
IAB, IBC and ICA are
IAB 5 EabyZD
IBC 5 EbcyZD
(2.5.11)
ICA 5 EcayZD
FIGURE 2.13
Phasor diagram of 
line currents in a 
balanced three-phase 
system

	
Section 2.5 Balanced Three-Phase Circuits	
59
For example, if the line-to-line voltages are given by (2.5.3) through (2.5.5) and if  
ZD 5 5/308 V, then the D-load currents are
IAB 5 Ï31
10/2308
5/308 2 5 3.464/08  A
IBC 5 Ï31
10/2908
5/308 2 5 3.464/21208  A
(2.5.12)
ICA 5 Ï31
10/1508
5/308 2 5 3.464/11208  A
Also, the line currents can be determined by writing a KCL equation at each bus of 
the D load, as follows:
Ia 5 IAB 2 ICA 5 3.464/08 2 3.464/1208 5 Ï3s3.464/2308d
Ib 5 IBC 2 IAB 5 3.464/21208 2 3.464/08 5 Ï3s3.464/21508d
(2.5.13)
Ic 5 ICA 2 IBC 5 3.464/1208 2 3.464/21208 5 Ï3s3.464/1908d
Both the D-load currents given by (2.5.12) and the line currents given by (2.5.13) are 
balanced. Thus the sum of balanced D-load currents (IAB 1 IBC 1 ICA) equals zero. 
The sum of line currents (Ia 1 Ib 1 Ic) is always zero for a D-connected load, even if 
the system is unbalanced, since there is no neutral wire. Comparison of (2.5.12) and 
(2.5.13) leads to the following conclusion:
For a balanced-D load supplied by a balanced positive-sequence source, the line 
currents into the load are Ï3 times the D-load currents and lag by 308. That is,
Ia 5 Ï3IAB/2308
Ib 5 Ï3IBC/2308
(2.5.14)
Ic 5 Ï3ICA/2308
This result is summarized in Figure 2.15. 
FIGURE 2.14
Circuit diagram of a 
Y-connected source 
feeding a balanced-D 
load

60	
Chapter 2  |  Fundamentals
D2Y CONVERSION FOR BALANCED LOADS
Figure 2.16 shows the conversion of a balanced-D load to a balanced-Y load. If bal-
anced voltages are applied, then these loads will be equivalent as viewed from their 
terminal buses A, B, and C when the line currents into the D load are the same as the 
line currents into the Y load. For the D load,
IA 5 Ï3IAB/2308 5
Ï3EAB/2308
ZD

(2.5.15)
and for the Y load,
IA 5 EAN
ZY
5
EAB/2308
Ï3ZY

(2.5.16)
Comparison of (2.5.15) and (2.5.16) indicates that IA will be the same for both the D 
and Y loads when
ZY 5 ZD
3 
(2.5.17)
Also, the other line currents IB and IC into the Y load will equal those into the D 
load when ZY 5 ZD/3, since these loads are balanced. Thus a balanced-D load can 
FIGURE 2.15
Phasor diagram of 
line currents and 
load currents for a 
balanced-D load
FIGURE 2.16
D-Y conversion for 
balanced loads

	
Section 2.5 Balanced Three-Phase Circuits	
61
be converted to an equivalent balanced-Y load by dividing the D-load impedance  
by 3. The angles of these D- and equivalent Y-load impedances are the same.  
Similarly, a balanced-Y load can be converted to an equivalent balanced-D load 
using ZD 5 3ZY.
Balanced-D and-Y loads
A balanced, positive-sequence, Y-connected voltage source with Eab 5 480/08
volts is applied to a balanced-D load with ZD 5 30/408 V. The line impedance 
between the source and load is ZL 5 1/858 V for each phase. Calculate the line 
currents, the D-load currents, and the voltages at the load terminals.
SOLUTION
The solution is most easily obtained as follows. First, convert the D load to an 
equivalent Y. Then connect the source and Y-load neutrals with a zero-ohm neu-
tral wire. The connection of the neutral wire has no effect on the circuit, since 
the neutral current In 5 0 in a balanced system. The resulting circuit is shown in 
Figure 2.17. The line currents are
IA 5
Ean
ZL 1 ZY
5
480
Ï3/2308
1/858 1 30
3 /408
	
5
277.1/2308
s0.0872 1 j0.9962d 1 s7.660 1 j6.428d
(2.5.18)
	
5
277.1/2308
s7.748 1 j 7.424d 5
277.1/2308
10.73/43.788 5 25.83/273.788  A
IB 5 25.83/166.228  A
IC 5 25.83/46.228  A
The D-load currents are, from (2.5.14),
IAB 5 Ia
Ï3/1308 5 25.83
Ï3 /273.788 1 308 5 14.91/243.788  A
IBC 5 14.91/2163.788   A
(2.5.19)
ICA 5 14.91/176.228   A
EXAMPLE 2.4

62	
Chapter 2  |  Fundamentals
EQUIVALENT LINE-TO-NEUTRAL DIAGRAMS
When working with balanced three-phase circuits, only one phase need be analyzed.  
D loads can be converted to Y loads, and all source and load neutrals can be con-
nected with a zero-ohm neutral wire without changing the solution. Then one phase 
of the circuit can be solved. The voltages and currents in the other two phases are 
equal in magnitude to and 61208 out of phase with those of the solved phase.  
Figure 2.18 shows an equivalent line-to-neutral diagram for one phase of the circuit in  
Example 2.4.
When discussing three-phase systems in this text, voltages shall be rms  
line-to-line voltages unless otherwise indicated. This is standard industry practice.
The voltages at the load terminals are
EAB 5 ZDIAB 5 s30/408ds14.91/243.788d 5 447.3/23.788
EBC 5 447.3/2123.788
(2.5.20)
ECA 5 447.3/116.228  volts
FIGURE 2.18
Equivalent line-to-
neutral diagram for the 
circuit of Example 2.4
FIGURE 2.17
Circuit diagram for 
Example 2.4

	
Section 2.6 Power in Balanced Three-Phase Circuits	
63
2.6  Power in Balanced Three-Phase Circuits
In this section, we discuss instantaneous power and complex power for bal-
anced three-phase generators and motors and for balanced-Y and D-impedance 
loads.
INSTANTANEOUS POWER: BALANCED THREE-PHASE GENERATORS
Figure 2.19 shows a Y-connected generator represented by three voltage sources with 
their neutrals connected at bus n and by three identical generator impedances Zg. 
Assume that the generator is operating under balanced steady-state conditions with 
the instantaneous generator terminal voltage given by
vanstd 5 Ï2VLN cossvt 1 dd volts
(2.6.1)
and with the instantaneous current leaving the positive terminal of phase a given by
iastd 5 Ï2IL cossvt 1 bd  A
(2.6.2)
where Vln is the rms line-to-neutral voltage and IL is the rms line current. The instan-
taneous power pa(t) delivered by phase a of the generator is
pastd 5 vanstdiastd
	
5 2VLNIL cossvt 1 dd cos(vt 1 b)
	
5 VLNIL cossd 2 bd 1 VLNIL coss2vt 1 d 1 bd W
(2.6.3)
Assuming balanced operating conditions, the voltages and currents of phases b 
and c have the same magnitudes as those of phase a and are 11208 out of phase with 
phase a. Therefore the instantaneous power delivered by phase b is
FIGURE 2.19
Y-connected generator

64	
Chapter 2  |  Fundamentals
pbstd 5 2VLNILcossvt 1 d 2 1208d cossvt 1 b 2 1208d 
	
5 VLNIL cossd 2 bd 1 VLNIL coss2vt 1 d 1 b 2 2408d W
(2.6.4)
and by phase c,
pcstd 5 2VLNILcossvt 1 d 1 1208d cossvt 1 b 1 1208d
	
5 VLNIL cossd 2 bd 1 VLNIL coss2vt 1 d 1 b 1 2408d W
(2.6.5)
The total instantaneous power p3f(t) delivered by the three-phase gen-
erator is the sum of the instantaneous powers delivered by each phase. Using 
(2.6.3) through (2.6.5):
p3fstd 5 pastd 1 pbstd 1 pcstd
	
5 3VLNIL cossd 2 bd 1 VLNILfcoss2vt 1 d 1 bd
	
1 coss2vt 1 d 1 b 2 2408d
	
1 coss2vt 1 d 1 b 1 2408dg  W
(2.6.6)
The three cosine terms within the brackets of (2.6.6) can be represented by a balanced 
set of three phasors. Therefore, the sum of these three terms is zero for any value of 
d, for any value of b, and for all values of t. Equation (2.6.6) then reduces to
p3fstd 5 P3f 5 3VLNILcossd 2 bd W
(2.6.7)
Equation (2.6.7) can be written in terms of the line-to-line voltage VLL instead of the 
line-to-neutral voltage VLN. Under balanced operating conditions.
VLN 5 VLLyÏ3    and   P3f 5 Ï3VLLIL cossd 2 bd W
(2.6.8)
Inspection of (2.6.8) leads to the following conclusion:
The total instantaneous power delivered by a three-phase generator under bal-
anced operating conditions is not a function of time, but a constant, p3f(t) 5 P3f.
INSTANTANEOUS POWER: BALANCED THREE-PHASE MOTORS  
AND IMPEDANCE LOADS
The total instantaneous power absorbed by a three-phase motor under balanced 
steady-state conditions is also a constant. Figure 2.19 can be used to represent a 
three-phase motor by reversing the line currents to enter rather than leave the posi-
tive terminals. Then (2.6.1) through (2.6.8), valid for power delivered by a generator, 
are also valid for power absorbed by a motor. These equations are also valid for the 
instantaneous power absorbed by a balanced three-phase impedance load.
COMPLEX POWER: BALANCED THREE-PHASE GENERATORS
The phasor representations of the voltage and current in (2.6.1) and (2.6.2) are
Van 5 VLN/d volts
(2.6.9)
Ia 5 IL/b A
(2.6.10)

	
Section 2.6 Power in Balanced Three-Phase Circuits	
65
where Ia leaves positive terminal “a” of the generator. The complex power Sa deliv-
ered by phase a of the generator is
Sa 5 VanI a
* 5 VLNIL/sd 2 bd
	
5 VLNIL cossd 2 bd 1 jVLNIL sinsd 2 bd
(2.6.11)
Under balanced operating conditions, the complex powers delivered by phases  
b and c are identical to Sa, and the total complex power S3f delivered by the generator is
S3f 5 Sa 1 Sb 1 Sc 5 3Sa
	
5 3VLNIL/sd 2 bd
	
5 3VLNIL cossd 2 bd 1 j3VLNIL sinsd 2 bd
(2.6.12)
In terms of the total real and reactive powers,
S3f 5 P3f 1 jQ3f
(2.6.13)
where
P3f 5 ResS3fd 5 3VLNIL cossd 2 bd
	
5 Ï3VLLIL cossd 2 bd W
(2.6.14)
and
Q3f 5 ImsS3fd 5 3VLNIL sinsd 2 bd
	
5 Ï3VLLIL sinsd 2 bd var
(2.6.15)
Also, the total apparent power is
S3f 5 uS3fu 5 3VLNIL 5 Ï3VLLIL   VA
(2.6.16)
COMPLEX POWER: BALANCED THREE-PHASE MOTORS
The preceding expressions for complex, real, reactive, and apparent power delivered 
by a three-phase generator are also valid for the complex, real, reactive, and apparent 
power absorbed by a three-phase motor.
COMPLEX POWER: BALANCED-Y AND BALANCED-D  
IMPEDANCE LOADS
Equations (2.6.13) through (2.6.16) are also valid for balanced-Y and -D impedance 
loads. For a balanced-Y load, the line-to-neutral voltage across the phase a load 
impedance and the current entering the positive terminal of that load impedance can 
be represented by (2.6.9) and (2.6.10). Then (2.6.11) through (2.6.16) are valid for the 
power absorbed by the balanced-Y load.
For a balanced-D load, the line-to-line voltage across the phase a-b load im-
pedance and the current into the positive terminal of that load impedance can be 
represented by

66	
Chapter 2  |  Fundamentals
Vab 5 VLL/d volts
(2.6.17)
Iab 5 ID/b  A
(2.6.18)
where VLL is the rms line-to-line voltage and ID is the rms D-load current. The com-
plex power Sab absorbed by the phase a2b load impedance is then
Sab 5 VabI ab
* 5 VLLID/sd 2 bd
(2.6.19)
The total complex power absorbed by the D load is
S3f 5 Sab 1 Sbc 1 Sca 5 3Sab
	
5 3VLLID/sd 2 bd
	
5 3VLLID cossd 2 bd 1 j3VLLID sinsd 2 bd
(2.6.20)
Rewriting (2.6.19) in terms of the total real and reactive power,
S3f 5 P3f 1 jQ3f
(2.6.21)
P3f 5 ResS3fd 5 3VLLID cossd 2 bd
	
5 Ï3VLLIL cossd 2 bd  W
(2.6.22) 
Q3f 5 ImsS3fd 5 3VLLID sinsd 2 bd
	
5 Ï3VLLIL sinsd 2 bd var
(2.6.23)
where the D-load current ID is expressed in terms of the line current IL 5 Ï3ID in 
(2.6.22) and (2.6.23). Also, the total apparent power is
S3f 5 uS3fu 5 3VLLID 5 Ï3VLLIL  VA
(2.6.24)
Equations (2.6.21) through (2.6.24) developed for the balanced-D load are identical 
to (2.6.13) through (2.6.16).
Power in a balanced three-phase system
Two balanced three-phase motors in parallel, an induction motor drawing  
400 kW at 0.8 power factor lagging and a synchronous motor drawing 150 kVA 
at 0.9 power factor leading, are supplied by a balanced, three-phase 4160-volt 
source. Cable impedances between the source and load are neglected. (a) Draw 
the power triangle for each motor and for the combined-motor load. (b) Deter-
mine the power factor of the combined-motor load. (c) Determine the magnitude 
of the line current delivered by the source. (d) A delta-connected capacitor bank 
is now installed in parallel with the combined-motor load. What value of capac-
itive reactance is required in each leg of the capacitor bank to make the source 
power factor unity? (e) Determine the magnitude of the line current delivered by 
the source with the capacitor bank installed.
EXAMPLE 2.5

	
Section 2.6 Power in Balanced Three-Phase Circuits	
67
SOLUTION 
(a) For the induction motor, P 5 400 kW and
S 5 P/p.f. 5 400/0.8 5 500 kVA
Q 5 ÏS2 2 P2 5 Ïs500d2 2 s400d2 5 300  kvar absorbed
For the synchronous motor, S 5 150 kVA and
P 5 S(p.f.) 5 150(0.9) 5 135 kW
Q 5 ÏS2 2 P2 5 Ïs150d2 2 s135d2 5 65.4  kvar delivered
For the combined-motor load,
P 5 400 1 135 5 535 kW
Q 5 300 – 65.4 5 234.6 kvar absorbed
S 5 ÏP2 1 Q2 5 Ïs535d2 1 s234.6d2 5 584.2  kVA
a.	 The power triangles for each motor and the combined-motor load are 
shown in Figure 2.20. 
b.	 The power factor of the combined-motor load is p.f. 5 P/S 5 535/ 584.2 5 
0.916 lagging.
c.	 The line current delivered by the source is I 5 SysÏ3 Vd, where S is the 
three-phase apparent power of the combined-motor load and V is the mag-
nitude of the line-to-line load voltage, which is the same as the source volt-
age for this example. I 5 584.2/(Ï3 4160 V) 5 0.0811 kA 5 81.1 per phase.
d.	 For unity power factor, the three-phase reactive power supplied by the 
capacitor bank should equal the three-phase reactive power absorbed by 
the combined-motor load. That is, Qc 5 234.6 kvar. For a D-connected  
capacitor bank, Qc 5 3V2/XD where V is the line-to-line voltage across 
the bank and XD the capacitive reactance of each leg of the bank. The 
capacitive reactance of each leg is
	
XD 5 3V2/Qc 5 3(41602)/234.6 3 103 5 221.3 V.
(Continued)
P = 400 kW
Induction Motor
Q = 300 kvar
S = 500 kVA
P = 135 kW
S = 150 kVA
Q = 65.4 kvar
Synchronous Motor
P = 535 kW
Q = 234.6 kvar
S = 584.2 kVA
Combined-Motor Load
FIGURE 2.20
Power triangles for 
Example 2.5

68	
Chapter 2  |  Fundamentals
2.7  Advantages of Balanced Three-Phase 
versus Single-Phase Systems
Figure 2.21 shows three separate single-phase systems. Each single-phase system 
consists of the following identical components: (1) a generator represented by a volt-
age source and a generator impedance Zg; (2) a forward and return conductor rep-
resented by two series line impedances ZL; (3) a load represented by an impedance 
ZY. The three single-phase systems, although completely separated, are drawn in a  
Y configuration in the figure to illustrate two advantages of three-phase systems.
Each separate single-phase system requires that both the forward and return 
conductors have a current capacity (or ampacity) equal to or greater than the 
load current. However, if the source and load neutrals in Figure 2.21 are con-
nected to form a three-phase system, and if the source voltages are balanced with 
equal magnitudes and with 1208 displacement between phases, then the neutral 
current will be zero [see (2.5.10)] and the three neutral conductors can be re-
moved. Thus, the balanced three-phase system, while delivering the same power 
to the three load impedances ZY, requires only half the number of conductors 
needed for the three separate single-phase systems. Also, the total I2R line losses 
in the three-phase system are only half those of the three separate single-phase 
systems, and the line-voltage drop between the source and load in the three-phase 
system is half that of each single-phase system. Therefore, one advantage of bal-
anced three-phase systems over separate single-phase systems is reduced capital 
and operating costs of transmission and distribution, as well as better voltage 
regulation.
e.	 With the capacitor bank installed, the source power factor is unity, and 
the apparent power S delivered by the source is the same as the real 
power P delivered by the source. The line current magnitude is
I 5 S/(Ï3 V) 5 P/(Ï3V) 5 535/(Ï3 4160) 5 0.0743kA 5 74.3 A per phase.
In this example, the source voltage of 4160 V is not specified as a line-to-line 
voltage or line-to-neutral voltage, RMS or peak. Therefore, it is assumed to be an 
RMS line-to-line voltage, which is the convention throughout this text and a stan-
dard practice in the electric power industry. The combined-motor load absorbs 
535 kW of real power. The induction motor, which operates at lagging power 
factor, absorbs reactive power (300 kvar) and the synchronous motor, which op-
erates at leading power factor, delivers reactive power (65.4 kvar). The capacitor 
bank also delivers reactive power (234.6 kvar). Note that the line current delivered 
by the source is reduced from 81.1 A without the capacitor bank to 74.3 A with 
the capacitor bank. Any I2R losses due to cable resistances and voltage drops due 
to cable reactances between the source and loads (not included in this example) 
would also be reduced.

	
Section 2.7 Advantages of Balanced Three-Phase versus Single-Phase Systems	
69
Some three-phase systems such as D-connected systems and three-wire  
Y-connected systems do not have any neutral conductor. However, the majority of 
three-phase systems are four-wire Y-connected systems, where a grounded neutral 
conductor is used. Neutral conductors are used to reduce transient overvoltages, 
which can be caused by lightning strikes and by line-switching operations, and to 
carry unbalanced currents, which can occur during unsymmetrical short-circuit 
conditions. Neutral conductors for transmission lines are typically smaller in size 
and ampacity than the phase conductors because the neutral current is nearly 
zero under normal operating conditions. Thus, the cost of a neutral conductor is 
substantially less than that of a phase conductor. The capital and operating costs 
of three-phase transmission and distribution systems with or without neutral con-
ductors are substantially less than those of separate single-phase systems.
A second advantage of three-phase systems is that the total instantaneous  
electric power delivered by a three-phase generator under balanced steady-state 
conditions is (nearly) constant, as shown in Section 2.6. A three-phase generator  
(constructed with its field winding on one shaft and with its three-phase windings 
equally displaced by 1208 on the stator core) will also have a nearly constant mechan-
ical input power under balanced steady-state conditions, since the mechanical input 
power equals the electrical output power plus the small generator losses. Further-
more, the mechanical shaft torque, which equals mechanical input power divided by 
mechanical radian frequency (Tmech 5 Pmech/vm) is nearly constant.
On the other hand, the equation for the instantaneous electric power delivered 
by a single-phase generator under balanced steady-state conditions is the same as 
the instantaneous power delivered by one phase of a three-phase generator, given by 
pa(t) in (2.6.3). As shown in that equation, pa(t) has two components: a constant and 
a double-frequency sinusoid. Both the mechanical input power and the mechanical 
shaft torque of the single-phase generator will have corresponding double-frequency 
components that create shaft vibration and noise, which could cause shaft failure in 
large machines. Accordingly, most electric generators and motors rated 5 kVA and 
higher are constructed as three-phase machines in order to produce nearly constant 
torque and thereby minimize shaft vibration and noise.
FIGURE 2.21
Three single-phase 
systems

70	
Chapter 2  |  Fundamentals
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS
SECTION 2.1
2.1	
The rms value of v(t) 5 Vmax cos(vt 1 d) is given by
(a) Vmax	
(b)  Vmax/ Ï2	
(c)  2Vmax	
(d)  Ï2Vmax
2.2	
If the rms phasor of a voltage is given by V 5 120/608 volts, then the 
corresponding v(t) is given by
(a) 120 Ï2 cos(vt 1 608)
(b) 120 cos(vt 1 608)
(c) 120 Ï2 sin(vr 1 608)
2.3	
If a phasor representation of a current is given by I 5 70.7/458 A, it is 
equivalent to
(a) 100 e 
j45°	
(b) 100 1 j100	
(c) 50 1 j50
2.4	
With sinusoidal-steady-state excitation, for a purely resistive circuit, the 
voltage and current phasors are
(a) In phase
(b) Perpendicular with each other with V leading I
(v) Perpendicular with each other with I leading V.
2.5	
For a purely inductive circuit, with sinusoidal-steady-state excitation, the 
voltage and current phasors are
(a) In phase
(b) Perpendicular to each other with V leading I
(c) Perpendicular to each other with I leading V.
2.6	
For a purely capacitive circuit, with sinusoidal-steady-state excitation, 
the voltage and current phasors are
(a) In phase
(b) Perpendicular to each other with V leading I
(c) Perpendicular to each other with I leading V.
SECTION 2.2
2.7	
With sinusoidal-steady-state excitation, the average power in a single-
phase ac circuit with a purely resistive load is given by
(a) I
 2
rmsR	
(b) V
 2
maxyR	
(c) Zero
2.8	
The average power in a single-phase ac circuit with a purely inductive 
load, for sinusoidal-steady-state excitation, is
(a) I2 XL	
(b) V
 2
maxyXL	
(c) Zero
[Note: XL 5 (vL) is the inductive reactance]
2.9	
The average power in a single-phase ac circuit with a purely capacitive 
load, for sinusoidal-steady-state excitation, is
(a) Zero	
(b) V
 2
maxyXC	
(c) I
 2
rmsXC
[Note: XC 5 1/(vC) is the capacitive reactance]

	
Multiple Choice Questions	
71
2.10	
The average value of a double-frequency sinusoid, sin 2(vt 1 d), is given by
(a) 1	
(b) d	
(c) Zero
2.11	
The power factor for an inductive circuit (R-L load), in which the current 
lags the voltage, is said to be
(a) Lagging	
(b) Leading	
(c) Zero
2.12	
The power factor for a capacitive circuit (R-C load), in which the current 
leads the voltage, is said to be
(a) Lagging	
(b) Leading	
(c) One
SECTION 2.3
2.13	
In a single-phase ac circuit, for a general load composed of RLC ele-
ments under sinusoidal-steady-state excitation, the average reactive 
power is given by
(a) Vrms Irms cos f	
(b) Vrms Irms sin f	
(c) Zero
[Note: f is the power-factor angle]
2.14	
The instantaneous power absorbed by the load in a single-phase ac cir-
cuit, for a general RLC load under sinusoidal-steady-state excitation, is
(a) Nonzero constant	
(b) Zero
(c) Containing double-frequency components
2.15	
With load convention, where the current enters the positive terminal 
of the circuit element, if Ω is positive then positive reactive power is 
absorbed.
(a) True	
(b) False
2.16	
With generator convention, where the current leaves the positive terminal  
of the circuit element, if P is positive then positive real power is 
delivered.
(a) False	
(b) True
2.17	
Consider the load convention that is used for the RLC elements shown 
in Figure 2.2 of the text.
A.	
If one says that an inductor absorbs zero real power and positive 
reactive power, is it
(a) True	
(b) False
B.	
If one says that a capacitor absorbs zero real power and negative 
reactive power (or delivers positive reactive power), is it
(a) False	
(b) True
C.	
If one says that a (positive-valued) resistor absorbs (positive) real 
power and zero reactive power, is it
(a) True	
(b) False
2.18	
In an ac circuit, power factor improvement is achieved by
(a) Connecting a resistor in parallel with the inductive load.
(b) Connecting an inductor in parallel with the inductive load.
(c) Connecting a capacitor in parallel with the inductive load.

72	
Chapter 2  |  Fundamentals
SECTION 2.4
2.19	
The admittance of the impedance 2j1
2
 V is given by
(a) 2j2S	
(b) j2S 2	
(c) 2j4S
2.20	
Consider Figure 2.9 of the text. Let the nodal equations in matrix form 
be given by Eq. (2.4.1) of the text.
A. The element Y11 is given by
(a) 0	
(b) jl3	
(c)2j7
B. The element Y31 is given by
(a) 0	
(b) 2j5	
(c) j1
C. The admittance matrix is always symmetric square.
(a) False	
(b) True
SECTIONS 2.5 AND 2.6
2.21	
The three-phase source line-to-neutral voltages are given by Ean 5 10/08, 
Ebn 5 10/12408, and Ecn 5 10/22408 volts. 
Is the source balanced?
(a) Yes	
(b) No
2.22	
In a balanced three-phase Y-connected system with a positive-sequence 
source, the line-to-line voltages are Ï3 times the line-to-neutral voltages 
and lend by 30°.
(a) True	
(b) False
2.23	
In a balanced system, the phasor sum of the line-to-line voltages and the 
phasor sum of the line-to-neutral voltages are always equal to zero.
(a) False	
(b) True
2.24	
Consider a three-phase Y-connected source feeding a balanced-D load. 
The phasor sum of the line currents as well as the neutral current are 
always zero.
(a) True	
(b) False
2.25	
For a balanced-D load supplied by a balanced positive-sequence source, 
the line currents into the load are Ï3 times the D-load currents and lag 
by 30°.
(a) True	
(b) False
2.26	
A balanced D-load can be converted to an equivalent balanced-Y load by 
dividing the D-load impedance by
(a) Ï3	
(b) 3	
(c) 1/3
2.27	
When working with balanced three-phase circuits, per-phase analysis is 
commonly done after converting D loads to Y loads, thereby solving only 
one phase of the circuit.
(a) True	
(b) False
2.28	
The total instantaneous power delivered by a three-phase generator 
under balanced operating conditions is
(a) A function of time	
(b) A constant

	
Problems	
73
2.29	
The total instantaneous power absorbed by a three-phase motor (under 
balanced steady-state conditions) as well as a balanced three-phase 
impedance load is
(a) A constant	
(b) A function of time
2.30	
Under balanced operating conditions, consider the three-phase complex 
power delivered by the three-phase source to the three-phase load. Match 
the following expressions, those on the left to those on the right.
(i)	 Real power, P3f	
(a) (Ï3 VLL IL)VA
(ii)	 Reactive power, Q3f	
(b) (Ï3 VLL IL sin f) var
(iii)	Total apparent power, S3f	
(c) (Ï3 VLL IL cos f) W
(iv)	Complex power, S3f	
(d) P3f 1 jQ3f
Note that VLL is the rms line-to-line voltage, IL is the rms line current, and 
f is the power-factor angle.
2.31	
One advantage of balanced three-phase systems over separate single-
phase systems is reduced capital and operating costs of transmission and 
distribution.
(a) True	
(b) False
2.32	
While the instantaneous electric power delivered by a single-phase gen-
erator under balanced steady-state conditions is a function of time hav-
ing two components of a constant and a double-frequency sinusoid, the 
total instantaneous electric power delivered by a three-phase generator 
under balanced steady-state conditions is a constant.
(a) True	
(b) False
PROBLEMS
SECTION 2.1
2.1	
Given the complex numbers A1 5 6/30 and A2 5 4 1 j5, (a) convert A1 to 
rectangular form; (b) convert A2 to polar and exponential form; (c) calcu-
late A3 5 (A1 1A2), giving your answer in polar form; (d) calculate A4 5 
A1A2, giving your answer in rectangular form; (e) calculate A5 5 A1ysA*
2d,  
giving your answer in exponential form.
2.2	
Convert the following instantaneous currents to phasors, using cos(vt) 
as the reference. Give your answers in both rectangular and polar form.
(a) istd 5 500Ï2 cossvt 2 30d
(b) istd 5 4 sinsvt 1 30d
(c) istd 5 5 cossvt 2 15d 1 4Ï2 sinsvt 1 30d
2.3	
The instantaneous voltage across a circuit element is v(t) 5 
400 sin (vt 1 30°) volts, and the instantaneous current entering the 

74	
Chapter 2  |  Fundamentals
positive terminal of the circuit element is i(t) 5100 cos(vt 1 10°) A. For 
both the current and voltage, determine (a) the maximum value, (b) the 
rms value, and (c) the phasor expression, using cos(vt) as the reference.
2.4	
For the single-phase circuit shown in Figure 2.22, I 5 10/08A. (a) Com-
pute the phasors I1, I2, and V. (b) Draw a phasor diagram showing I, I1, 
I2, and V.
2.5	
A 60-Hz, single-phase source with V 5 277/308 volts is applied to a 
circuit element. (a) Determine the instantaneous source voltage. Also 
determine the phasor and instantaneous currents entering the positive 
terminal if the circuit element is (b) a 20-Ω resistor, (c) a 10-mH inductor, 
and (d) a capacitor with 25-Ω reactance.
2.6	
(a) Transform v(t) 5 75 cos(377t 2 15°) to phasor form. Comment on 
whether v 5 377 appears in your answer. (b) Transform V 5 50/108 to 
instantaneous form. Assume that v 5 377. (c) Add the two sinusoidal 
functions a(t) and b(t) of the same frequency given as follows: a(t) 5 
AÏ2 cos(vt 1 a) and b(t) 5 BÏ2 cos(vt 1b). Use phasor methods and 
obtain the resultant c(t). Does the resultant have the same frequency?
2.7	
Let a 100-V sinusoidal source be connected to a series combination of 
a 3-Ω resistor, an 8-Ω inductor, and a 4-Ω capacitor. (a) Draw the circuit 
diagram. (b) Compute the series impedance. (c) Determine the current I 
delivered by the source. Is the current lagging or leading the source volt-
age? What is the power factor of this circuit?
2.8	
Consider the circuit shown in Figure 2.23 in time domain. Convert the 
entire circuit into phasor domain.
v
C
FIGURE 2.23
Circuit for Problem 2.8
FIGURE 2.22
Circuit for Problem 2.4

2.9	
For the circuit shown in Figure 2.24, compute the voltage across the load 
terminals.
V
I
FIGURE 2.24
Circuit for Problem 2.9
SECTION 2.2
2.10	
For the circuit element of Problem 2.3, calculate (a) the instantaneous 
power absorbed, (b) the real power (state whether it is delivered or 
absorbed), (c) the reactive power (state whether delivered or absorbed), 
(d) the power factor (state whether lagging or leading).
[Note: By convention the power factor cos(d 2 b) is positive. If |d 2 b| is 
greater than 90°, then the reference direction for current may be reversed, 
resulting in a positive value of cos(d 2b)].
2.11	
Referring to Problem 2.5, determine the instantaneous power, real power, 
and reactive power absorbed by (a) the 20-Ω resistor, (b) the 10-mH 
inductor, (c) the capacitor with 25-Ω reactance. Also determine the source 
power factor and state whether lagging or leading.
2.12	
The voltage v(t) 5 359.3 cos(vt) volts is applied to a load consisting of a 
10- resistor in parallel with a capacitive reactance XC 5 25 Ω. Calculate 
(a) the instantaneous power absorbed by the resistor, (b) the instanta-
neous power absorbed by the capacitor, (c) the real power absorbed by 
the resistor, (d) the reactive power delivered by the capacitor, and (e) the 
load power factor.
2.13	
Repeat Problem 2.12 if the resistor and capacitor are connected in series.
2.14	
A single-phase source is applied to a two-terminal, passive circuit with 
equivalent impedance Z 5 3.0/2458 V, measured from the terminals. 
The source current is i(t) 5 2 Ï2 cos (vt) kA. Determine the (a) instan-
taneous power, (b) real power, (c) reactive power delivered by the source, 
and (d) source power factor.
2.15	
Let a voltage source v(t) 5 4 cos(vt 1 60°) be connected to an impedance 
Z 5 2/308 V. (a) Given the operating frequency to be 60 Hz, determine 
the expressions for the current and instantaneous power delivered by the 
source as functions of time. (b) Plot these functions along with v(t) on a 
single graph for comparison. (c) Find the frequency and average value of 
the instantaneous power.
	
Problems	
75

76	
Chapter 2  |  Fundamentals
2.16	
A single-phase, 120-V (rms), 60-Hz source supplies power to a series 
R-L circuit consisting of R 5 10 Ω and L 5 40 mH. (a) Determine 
the power factor of the circuit and state whether it is lagging or lead-
ing. (b) Determine the real and reactive power absorbed by the load. 
(c) Calculate the peak magnetic energy Wint stored in the inductor 
by using the expression Wint 5 L(Irms)2 and check whether the reac-
tive power Q 5 vWint is satisfied. (Note: The instantaneous magnetic 
energy storage fluctuates between zero and the peak energy. This 
energy must be sent twice each cycle to the load from the source by 
means of reactive power flows.)
SECTION 2.3
2.17	
Consider a load impedance of Z 5 jvL connected to a voltage and V let 
the current drawn be I.
(a) Develop an expression for the reactive power Q in terms of v, L, and 
I, from complex power considerations.
(b) Let the instantaneous current be istd 5 Ï2I cossvt 1 ud. Obtain an 
expression for the instantaneous power p(t) into L, and then express it in 
terms of Q.
(c) Comment on the average real power P supplied to the inductor and 
the instantaneous power supplied.
2.18	
Let a series RLC network be connected to a source voltage V, drawing a 
current I.
(a) In terms of the load impedance Z 5 Z /Z, find expressions for P and 
Q, from complex power considerations.
(b) Express p(t) in terms of P and Q, by choosing i(t) 5 Ï2I cos vt.
(c) For the case of Z 5 R 1 jvL 1 1 /jvC, interpret the result of part (b) 
in terms of P, Ql, and QC. In particular, if v2LC 5 1, when the inductive 
and capacitive reactances cancel, comment on what happens.
2.19	
Consider a single-phase load with an applied voltage v(t) 5150 cos(vt 1 
10°) volts and load current i(t) 5 5 cos(vt 2 50°) A. (a) Determine the 
power triangle. (b) Find the power factor and specify whether it is lagging 
or leading. (c) Calculate the reactive power supplied by capacitors in par-
allel with the load that correct the power factor to 0.9 lagging.
2.20	
A circuit consists of two impedances, Z1 5 20/308Ω and Z2 5 25/608Ω, 
in parallel, supplied by a source voltage V 5 100/608volts. Determine the 
power triangle for each of the impedances and for the source.
2.21	
An industrial plant consisting primarily of induction motor loads absorbs 
500 kW at 0.6 power factor lagging. (a) Compute the required kVA  
rating of a shunt capacitor to improve the power factor to 0.9 lagging.  
(b) Calculate the resulting power factor if a synchronous motor rated at 
500 hp with 90% efficiency operating at rated load and at unity power  

factor is added to the plant instead of the capacitor. Assume constant 
voltage (1 hp 5 0.746 kW).
2.22	
The real power delivered by a source to two impedances, Z1 5 4 1 j5 Ω 
and Z2 5 10 Ω, connected in parallel, is 1000 W. Determine (a) the real 
power absorbed by each of the impedances and (b) the source current.
2.23	
A single-phase source has a terminal voltage V 5 120/08 volts and a 
current I 5 15/308 A, which leaves the positive terminal of the source. 
Determine the real and reactive power, and state whether the source is 
delivering or absorbing each.
2.24	
A source supplies power to the following three loads connected in par-
allel: (1) a lighting load drawing 10 kW, (2) an induction motor drawing  
10 kVA at 0.90 power factor lagging, and (3) a synchronous motor  
operating at 10 hp, 85% efficiency and 0.95 power factor leading (1 hp 5 
0.746 kW). Determine the real, reactive, and apparent power delivered by 
the source. Also, draw the source power triangle.
2.25	
Consider the series RLC circuit of Problem 2.7 and calculate the com-
plex power absorbed by each of the R, L, and C elements, as well as the 
complex power absorbed by the total load. Draw the resultant power tri-
angle. Check whether the complex power delivered by the source equals 
the total complex power absorbed by the load.
2.26	
A small manufacturing plant is located 2 km down a transmission 
line, which has a series reactance of 0.5 Ω/km. The line resistance 
is negligible. The line voltage at the plant is 480/08 V (rms), and  
the plant consumes 120 kW at 0.85 power factor lagging. Determine 
the voltage and power factor at the sending end of the transmission 
line by using (a) a complex power approach and (b) a circuit analysis 
approach.
2.27	
An industrial load consisting of a bank of induction motors con-
sumes 50 kW at a power factor of 0.8 lagging from a 220-V, 60-Hz, 
single-phase source. By placing a bank of capacitors in parallel 
with the load, the resultant power factor is to be raised to 0.95 lag-
ging. Find the net capacitance of the capacitor bank in mF that  
is required.
2.28	
Three loads are connected in parallel across a single-phase source voltage 
of 240 V (RMS).
Load 1 absorbs 15 kW and 6.667 kvar;
Load 2 absorbs 3 kVA at 0.96PF leading;
Load 3 absorbs 15 kW at unity power factor.
Calculate the equivalent impedance, Z, for the three parallel loads, for 
two cases:
(i) Series combination of R and X, and (ii) parallel combination of  
R and X.
	
Problems	
77

78	
Chapter 2  |  Fundamentals
2.30	
Figure 2.26 shows three loads connected in parallel across a 1000-V 
(RMS), 60-Hz single-phase source.
  Load 1: Inductive load, 125 kVA, 0.28PF lagging. 
  Load 2: Capacitive load, 10 kW, 40 kvar. 
  Load 3: Resistive load, 15 kW.
(a) Determine the total kW, kvar, kva, and supply power factor.
(b) In order to improve the power factor to 0.8 lagging, a capacitor of 
negligible resistance is connected in parallel with the above loads. Find 
the kvar rating of that capacitor and the capacitance in mF.
Comment on the magnitude of the supply current after adding the capacitor.
Bus
Bus
Number
FIGURE 2.25
System diagram for 
Problem 2.29
FIGURE 2.26
Circuit for Problem 2.30
2.31	
Consider two interconnected voltage sources connected by a line of 
impedance Z 5 j X Ω, as shown in Figure 2.27.
(a) Obtain expressions for P12 and Q12.
2.29	
Modeling the transmission lines as inductors, with Sij 5 S
 *
ji, Compute S13, 
S31, S23, S32, and SG3 in Figure 2.25. (Hint: complex power balance holds 
good at each bus, satisfying KCL.)

2.32	
In PowerWorld Simulator case Problem 2_32 (see Figure 2.28) a 8 MW 
and 4 Mvar load is supplied at 13.8 kV through a feeder with an imped-
ance of 1 1 j2 Ω. The load is compensated with a capacitor whose out-
put, Ωcap, can be varied in 0.5 Mvar steps between 0 and 10.0 Mvars. 
What value of Ωcap minimizes the real power line losses? What value of 
Ωcap minimizes the MVA power flow into the feeder?
Z = jX
FIGURE 2.27
Circuit for Problem 2.31
FIGURE 2.28
Screen for Problem 2.32
2.33	
For the system from Problem 2.32, plot the real and reactive line losses as 
Ωcap is varied between 0 and 10.0 Mvars.
2.34	
For the system from Problem 2.32, assume that half the time the load 
is 10 MW and 5 Mvar, and for the other half it is 20 MW and 10 Mvar. 
What single value of Qcap would minimize the average losses? Assume 
that Qcap can only be varied in 0.5 Mvar steps.
	
Problems	
79
(b) Determine the maximum power transfer and the condition for it to 
occur.

80	
Chapter 2  |  Fundamentals
SECTION 2.4
2.35	
For the circuit shown in Figure 2.29, convert the voltage sources to equiv-
alent current sources and write nodal equations in matrix format using 
bus 0 as the reference bus. Do not solve the equations.
FIGURE 2.29
Circuit diagram for 
Problems 2.35  
and 2.36
FIGURE 2.30
Circuit for Problem 2.37
2.38	
Given the impedance diagram of a simple system as shown in  
Figure 2.31, draw the admittance diagram for the system and develop the 
4 3 4 bus admittance matrix Ybus by inspection.
2.36	
For the circuit shown in Figure 2.29,  (a) determine the 2 3 2 bus admit-
tance matrix Ybus, (b) convert the voltage sources to current sources and 
determine the vector of source currents into buses 1 and 2.
2.37	
Determine the 4 3 4 bus admittance matrix Ybus and write nodal equa-
tions in matrix format for the circuit shown in Figure 2.30. Do not solve 
the equations.

2.39	
(a) Given the circuit diagram in Figure 2.32 showing admittances and 
current sources at nodes 3 and 4, set up the nodal equations in matrix 
format. (b) If the parameters are given by: Ya 5 2j0.8 S, Yb 5 2j4.0 S, 
Yc 5 2j4.0 S, Yd5 2j8.0 S, Ye 5 2j5.0 S, Yf 5 2j2.5 S, Yg 5 2j0.8 S, 
I3 5 1.0/2908 A, and I4 5 0.62/21358 A, set up the nodal equations and 
suggest how you would go about solving for the voltages at the nodes.
FIGURE 2.31
System diagram  
for Problem 2.38
Yb
Yd
Ye
Yf
Yg
Yc
Ya
FIGURE 2.32
Circuit diagram  
for Problem 2.39
	
Problems	
81

82	
Chapter 2  |  Fundamentals
SECTIONS 2.5 AND 2.6
2.40	
A balanced three-phase 240-V source supplies a balanced three-phase 
load. If the line current IA is measured to be 15 A and is in phase with the 
line-to-line voltage, VBC, find the per-phase load impedance if the load is 
(a) Y-connected, (b) D-connected.
2.41	
A three-phase 25-kVA, 480-V, 60-Hz alternator, operating under bal-
anced steady-state conditions, supplies a line current of 20 A per phase 
at a 0.8 lagging power factor and at rated voltage. Determine the power 
triangle for this operating condition.
2.42	
A balanced D-connected impedance load with (12 1 j9) Ω per phase is 
supplied by a balanced three-phase 60-Hz, 208-V source, (a) Calculate 
the line current, the total real and reactive power absorbed by the load, 
the load power factor, and the apparent load power, (b) Sketch a phasor 
diagram showing the line currents, the line-to-line source voltages, and the 
D-load currents. Use Vab as the reference.
2.43	
A three-phase line, which has an impedance of (2 1 j4) Ω per phase, 
feeds two balanced three-phase loads that are connected in parallel. 
One of the loads is Y-connected with an impedance of (30 1 j40) Ω per 
phase, and the other is D-connected with an impedance of (60 2 j45) Ω 
per phase. The line is energized at the sending end from a 60-Hz, three-
phase, balanced voltage source of 120 Ï3 V (rms, line-to-line). Deter-
mine (a) the current, real power, and reactive power delivered by the 
sending-end source; (b) the line-to-line voltage at the load; (c) the current 
per phase in each load; and (d) the total three-phase real and reactive 
powers absorbed by each load and by the line. Check that the total three-
phase complex power delivered by the source equals the total three-phase 
power absorbed by the line and loads.
2.44	
Two balanced three-phase loads that are connected in parallel are fed by 
a three-phase line having a series impedance of (0.4 1 j2.7) Ω per phase. 
One of the loads absorbs 560 kVA at 0.707 power factor lagging, and the 
other 132 kW at unity power factor. The line-to-line voltage at the load 
end of the line is 2200 Ï3 V. Compute (a) the line-to-line voltage at the 
source end of the line, (b) the total real and reactive power losses in the 
three-phase line, and (c) the total three-phase real and reactive power 
supplied at the sending end of the line. Check that the total three-phase 
complex power delivered by the source equals the total three-phase com-
plex power absorbed by the line and loads.
2.45	
Two balanced Y-connected loads, one drawing 10 kW at 0.8 power factor 
lagging and the other 15 kW at 0.9 power factor leading, are connected 
in parallel and supplied by a balanced three-phase Y-connected, 480-V 
source. (a) Determine the source current. (b) If the load neutrals are 
connected to the source neutral by a zero-ohm neutral wire through an 
ammeter, what will the ammeter read?
2.46	
Three identical impedances ZD 5 30/308Ω are connected in D to a bal-
anced three-phase 208-V source by three identical line conductors with 

impedance ZL 5 (0.8 1 j0.6) Ω per line. (a) Calculate the line-to-line  
voltage at the load terminals. (b) Repeat part (a) when a D-connected 
capacitor bank with reactance (2j60) Ω per phase is connected in parallel 
with the load.
2.47	
Two three-phase generators supply a three-phase load through separate 
three-phase lines. The load absorbs 30 kW at 0.8 power factor lagging. 
The line impedance is (1.4 1 j1.6) Ω per phase between generator Gl and 
the load, and (0.8 1 j1) Ω per phase between generator G2 and the load.  
If generator Gl supplies 15 kW at 0.8 power factor lagging, with a terminal 
voltage of 460 V line-to-line, determine (a) the voltage at the load termi-
nals, (b) the voltage at the terminals of generator G2, and (c) the real and 
reactive power supplied by generator G2. Assume balanced operation.
2.48	
Two balanced Y-connected loads in parallel, one drawing 15 kW at 0.6 
power factor lagging and the other drawing 10 kVA at 0.8 power fac-
tor leading, are supplied by a balanced, three-phase, 480-volt source.  
(a) Draw the power triangle for each load and for the combined load.  
(b) Determine the power factor of the combined load and state whether 
lagging or leading. (c) Determine the magnitude of the line current from 
the source. (d) D-connected capacitors are now installed in parallel with 
the combined load. What value of capacitive reactance is needed in each 
leg of the A to make the source power factor unity? Give your answer in Ω.  
(e) Compute the magnitude of the current in each capacitor and the line 
current from the source.
2.49	
Figure 2.33 gives the general D-Y transformation. (a) Show that the gen-
eral transformation reduces to that given in Figure 2.16 for a balanced 
three-phase load. (b) Determine the impedances of the equivalent Y for 
the following D impedances: ZAB 5 j10, ZBC 5 j20, and ZCA 5 2j25 Ω.
FIGURE 2.33
General D-Y  
transformation
	
Problems	
83

84	
Chapter 2  |  Fundamentals
2.50	
Consider the balanced three-phase system shown in Figure 2.34. Deter-
mine v1(t) and i2(t). Assume positive phase sequence.
v
FIGURE 2.34
Circuit for Problem 2.50
2.51	
A three-phase line with an impedance of (0.2 1 j1.0) Ω /phase feeds three 
balanced three-phase loads connected in parallel.
  Load 1: Absorbs a total of 150 kW and 120 kvar. 
  Load 2: Delta connected with an impedance of (150 2 j48) Ω /phase.  
  Load 3: 120 kVA at 0.6 PF leading. 
If the line-to-neutral voltage at the load end of the line is 2000 v (rms), 
determine the magnitude of the line-to-line voltage at the source end of 
the line.
2.52	
A balanced three-phase load is connected to a 4.16-kV, three-phase, four-
wire, grounded-wye dedicated distribution feeder. The load can be mod-
eled by an impedance of ZL 5 (4.7 1 j9) Ω /phase, wye-connected. The 
impedance of the phase conductors is (0.3 1 jl) Ω. Determine the follow-
ing by using the phase A to neutral voltage as a reference and assume 
positive phase sequence:
(a) Line currents for phases A, B, and C.
(b) Line-to-neutral voltages for all three phases at the load.
(c) Apparent, active, and reactive power dissipated per phase, and for all 
three phases in the load.
(d) Active power losses per phase and for all three phases in the phase 
conductors.
CASE STUDY QUESTIONS
a.	
What is a microgrid?
b.	
What are the benefits of microgrids?

	
References	
85
c.	
What are the two primary goals of the U.S. Department of Energy’s 
Smart Grid Research & Development Program?
d.	
Can smart grids defer transmission and distribution investments? If  
so, how?
REFERENCES
1.	
W. H. Hayt, Jr. and J. E. Kemmerly, Engineering Circuit Analysis, 7th ed. 
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006).
2.	
W. A. Blackwell and L. L. Grigsby, Introductory Network Theory (Boston:  
PWS, 1985).
3.	
A. E. Fitzgerald, D. E. Higginbotham, and A. Grabel, Basic Electrical 
Engineering (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1981).
4.	
W. D. Stevenson, Jr., Elements of Power System Analysis, 4th ed. (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1982).
5.	
M. Smith and D. Tan, “Key Connections,” IEEE Power and Energy  
Magazine, 11,4 (July/August 2013), pp. 22–27.


87
T
he power transformer is a major power system component that permits eco-
nomical power transmission with high efficiency and low series voltage drops. 
Since electric power is proportional to the product of voltage and current, 
low current levels (and therefore low I2R losses and low IZ voltage drops) can be 
maintained for given power levels via high voltages. Power transformers transform 
ac voltage and current to optimum levels for generation, transmission, distribution, 
and utilization of electric power.
The development in 1885 by William Stanley of a commercially practical 
transformer was what made ac power systems more attractive than dc power systems.  
3 Power Transformers
Core and coil 
assemblies 
of a three-phase 
20.3 kVD/345kVY 
step-up trans-
former. This 
oil-immersed 
transformer is 
rated 325 MVA 
self-cooled 
(OA)/542 MVA 
forced oil, forced 
air-cooled (FOA)/ 
607 MVA forced 
oil, forced air-
cooled (FOA) 
(Courtesy of  
General Electric.)

88	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
The ac system with a transformer overcame voltage problems encountered in 
dc systems as load levels and transmission distances increased. Today’s modern 
power transformers have nearly 100% efficiency, with ratings up to and beyond 
1300 MVA.
In this chapter, basic transformer theory is reviewed and equivalent circuits 
for practical transformers operating under sinusoidal steady-state conditions are 
developed. Models of single-phase two-winding, three-phase two-winding, and 
three-phase three-winding transformers, as well as auto-transformers and regulat-
ing transformers are introduced. Also, the per-unit system, which simplifies power 
system analysis by eliminating the ideal transformer winding in transformer equiv-
alent circuits, is introduced in this chapter and used throughout the remainder of 
the text. 
CASE STUDY
The following article reviews methods of extending the life of a power trans-
former. Starting with specifying and purchasing; then manufacturing, install-
ing, and commissioning; and finally operating and maintaining a transformer; 
options for extending life with the best cost-to-benefit ratio are explored [8].
POWER TRANSFORMERS
—Life Management and Extension
Carlos Gamez
TxMonitor 
How Long is a Transformer 
Supposed to Last?
In this case study, the options to man-
age and, as far as possible, extend 
the life of these important assets in 
your system are explored. How long 
should a transformer last?
The life of a particular trans-
former depends on many factors, some 
of which are unpredictable in nature. 
In most circumstances there is not 
enough information to accurately pre-
dict the remaining life of a particular 
unit with any significant confidence. 
Current national and international 
standards and publications [1],[2],[3] 
and [4] favor the definition of life in 
“per unit” terms.
However, 
enough 
statistical 
data might be available in a particular 
system to be able to ascertain an esti-
mated “average” life for a transformer 
in that system. An average life of 35 
to 40 years is a reasonable number to 
be expected for transformers manu-
factured before the ’90s and working 
under nominal conditions with some 
Reprinted with permission from Carlos 
Gamez, “Power transformer life Part 3: Life 
management and extension,” Transformers 
Magazine Vol. 1 Issue 3.

transformers, in very isolated cases, 
reaching into the 70 to 100 years of 
age mark [5].
So, if a transformer is to last  
40 or more years of active service, 
what can you do to give it the best 
chances to do so?
The Life Cycle View  
of Life Extension
You might be tempted to think of 
the term life extension as something 
that is executed towards the end  
of the life of the asset in an attempt 
to extend its life. However, this would 
be a very shortsighted view of the 
topic. Life extension starts before the 
transformer is even manufactured. 
A holistic view of the complete life  
cycle of the unit will allow making 
the right decisions and putting the 
appropriate measures in place at ev-
ery step of the way, from purchasing 
to disposal of the asset.
Just as with your own life and 
health, the most effective way of pre-
venting a premature death is with pre-
vention more than remediation. In the 
case of transformers this is not only 
logical, but considerably less costly. On 
a dollar per year of service of a par-
ticular asset, investing in prevention is 
almost always the wisest decision.
In this case study, the most im-
portant actions you can take to max-
imize the benefit that you get for your 
investment are laid out.
Specifying and Purchasing
A good start in life leads to a 
good-performing transformer during 
operation. By investing the time and 
resources in correctly specifying and 
sourcing the transformer most suit-
able for your application, you will 
save an incredible amount of money 
in the long run and a lot of head-
aches to your operations and mainte-
nance team. A properly documented 
specification that adequately reflects 
your needs is essential to ensure that 
you are getting the right asset for the 
intended function. In many instances 
I have seen asset owners and buyers 
content with buying transformers 
that merely stick to the existing stan-
dards. While standards should be the 
starting point of any specification, 
they are certainly not sufficient in 
most cases. Standards are just the 
bare minimum that a transformer 
should comply with. By their very 
nature, standards cannot cater for 
the specific requirements that you 
might have in your specific opera-
tional context and circumstances.
Buying a transformer that sim-
ply meets the standards is like buying 
a car only specifying that you want it 
to have an engine, a body, and four 
wheels. The point is that you are 
likely to require certain characteris-
tics in your transformers that are not 
listed or spelled out in the standards 
and that you will need to be explicit 
about when requesting a new unit. 
Things like specific types of bushing 
terminals, connection boxes, control 
wiring, and protective devices are 
but a few of the elements of your 
transformer design that you might 
want to stipulate to ensure compat-
ibility with your environment. A 
well-crafted specification will also al-
low you to compare apples to apples 
when evaluating offers from vari-
ous manufacturers. The best way to  
	
Case Study	
89

90	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
avoid unexpected outcomes is to be 
explicit about what you want.
Manufacturing
You have now ordered a new unit 
with a proper specification and from 
a manufacturer you feel comfortable 
with. Well, the next step is building 
the transformer. A good manufacture 
is made up of many small details that 
add up to a properly built and good 
quality finished transformer. From 
the quality of the raw materials, to 
the expertise and skill of the people 
manufacturing these machines, to 
the attention to detail on every step 
of the manufacturing process, it all 
counts.
The process of building a 
transformer is complex and hand- 
labor intensive where a lot of things 
can go wrong. In fact, almost always 
something will not go exactly as 
planned. In essence you will want to 
associate with a manufacturer that 
is not shy in acknowledging and cor-
recting the issues that will inevita-
bly arise during the manufacturing 
process.
In the realm of client-to-manu-
facturer relations, each company will 
have its own preference in how these 
are handled. Some customers pre-
fer a pre-approval process to select 
the manufacturer or manufacturers 
with whom they plan to establish a 
long-term relationship. Others prefer 
to witness key milestones at the fac-
tory during the manufacturing pro-
cess like tanking or final testing. It 
is in your best interest to ensure that  
you have a mechanism to guaran-
tee that the manufacturing quality 
of your transformer is adequate 
and the final product fulfills your  
expectations.
Installation and Commissioning
Most power transformers of a cer-
tain size and above are like flat-
packed furniture—some assembly 
is required. The level of assembly 
required varies with the size and 
manufacturer of the transformer. In 
some cases it is only necessary to fit 
a few of the components like radia-
tors and conservator tanks and then 
“top up” the oil. In other cases a full 
assembly is required that finishes 
with the vacuum dry-out and hot  
oil-fill process.
In any case, executing the 
assembly procedure according to 
the 
manufacturer’s 
recommenda-
tions will not only insure the unit 
is put together properly but also 
ensure your warranty is in full ef-
fect by the time the unit is placed in 
service. There are many factors that 
need to be taken care of during the 
final field assembly of the unit. You 
would want to ensure that a qualified 
team of technicians perform this as-
sembly. Investing in the right service 
provider at this stage will increase 
your chances to avoid issues like oil 
leaks or any other type of assembly 
related malfunctions after energizing  
the transformer.
It is at this stage in the life of a 
transformer that the initial moisture 
level in the insulation system is estab-
lished. It might be tempting to take 
shortcuts in this process. Sometimes 
the dry-out might take days to bring 
down the moisture to acceptable  

Specification &
Sourcing
Manufacturing
Installation &
Commissioning
Operation &
Maintenance
Disposal &
Recycling
Refurbish or
 Rewind
Figure 1 Typical transformer lifecycle
Figure 2  Good quality coils are essential to ensure the longevity of your  
transformer
	
Case Study	
91

92	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
levels (typically 0.5% by dry weight). 
But water is one of the main catalysts 
that accelerate the aging processes 
of the solid insulation of the trans-
former. Saving a few days or even a 
few hours of work at this stage has 
the potential to reduce the life by 
years in the long run. The economy 
is simply not there unless you want to 
operate your plant on a very short-
term basis.
Operation and Maintenance
Since this stage in the life of a trans-
former is the longest (or at least it is 
supposed to be), much of your atten-
tion and day-to-day efforts will be 
spent in maintaining the unit in an 
adequate condition.
What you should focus your 
preventive maintenance efforts on 
during this period:
	
●	 Keep the transformer dry. 
Water is one of the main aging 
accelerating factors. In order 
to keep the transformer dry, 
you would want to ensure that 
there are no oil leaks (if oil can 
come out, moisture can come 
in). You will want to make sure 
that the oil preservation sys-
tem is operating as the design 
intended. If silica gels are used, 
they should be dry and with 
enough capacity to dry the air 
that the transformer breathes. 
If diaphragms are used to sep-
arate the oil in the conservator 
tank from the ambient air, you 
want to make sure they are in 
good condition and free of 
ruptures. If automatic nitrogen 
equipment is used, it should be 
kept in good working order, 
with sufficient nitrogen in the  
Figure 3  Different environments  
require different specifications

supply and that the regulating 
system always ensures ade-
quate positive pressure in the 
nitrogen chamber. In summary, 
ensure that water does not find 
its way into the coils of the  
unit.
	
●	 Keep the oxygen to a min-
imum. Similar to the point 
above, you would want to min-
imize the exposure of the oil to 
oxygen, which obviously accel-
erates the oxidation processes 
in the transformer. The same 
recommendations given above 
to keep the water out of the 
unit are applicable to keep the 
oxygen out, although in some 
cases, like a conservator tank 
without diaphragm, it is not 
always possible.
	
●	 Ensure 
nominal 
operating 
conditions. Temperature plays 
a major role in the aging pro-
cesses. The unit is designed to 
operate within a certain tem-
perature range, and the more 
you can do to keep it within 
that range, the better chances 
you are giving the unit a long 
useful life. Situations like over-
loading are sometimes unavoid-
able, and in these cases, there 
are clear guidelines available in 
the technical literature to allow 
you to estimate the impact of 
overloading in the life of a par-
ticular transformer. On a main-
tenance basis, you can help by 
ensuring that the cooling sys-
tem is operating adequately 
and that the top oil or winding 
hot-spot temperature has not 
reached alarm levels. If you 
find that this has happened, 
you need to investigate the root 
cause so you can address it as 
soon as possible.
Now, what if you are not 
the person who has watched the 
transformer its entire life, and 
you just got handed a fleet of old 
transformers to maintain? (Hard 
to imagine right?) In this case you 
are in corrective maintenance terri-
tory, where the best course of action 
would be:
	
●	 Establish the condition of each 
unit in your fleet. You have 
many tools at your disposal 
for this purpose. Try to gather 
as much information as possi-
ble on each unit, and establish 
an effective information stor-
age and retrieval mechanism. 
Include 
oil-analysis 
history 
and any other test and inspec-
tion performed on each trans-
former. This information will 
allow you to establish a pre-
liminary condition ranking for 
each asset in the fleet.
	
●	 Once the above has been estab-
lished, you will have a clearer 
idea of which units are priori-
ties and which units can wait.
	
●	 Depending on the state of each 
unit, a number of actions can 
be taken in order to amelio-
rate the current condition or 
remove some of the agents that 
might be causing the acceler-
ated aging.
	
Case Study	
93

94	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
	
●	 The oil can be processed 
to remove water and acids, 
which contribute to the aging 
processes.
	
●	 If any, more serious, failure 
modes are suspected, these 
need to be addressed on a case-
by-case basis until you have 
satisfied the risk management 
policies of your company and 
you are aware of the condition 
of each unit.
Last but not least, an adequate 
condition monitoring program is 
essential to give you as much re-
action time as possible if a failure 
mode starts to affect any particular 
transformer.
The 
condition 
monitoring 
method most commonly used is oil 
sampling and analysis. The anal-
ysis of the oil is a well-established 
technique that allows the early de-
tection of incipient failures in the 
transformers. A suitable condition 
monitoring strategy will minimize 
the probability of unexpected fail-
ures and therefore minimize the 
overall operational risk of your 
transformer fleet.
References
[1] Institute of Electrical and Electronic  
Engineers (IEEE), C57.91-2011, IEEE  
Guide for Loading Mineral-Oil-Immersed 
Transformers and Step-Voltage Regulators. 
2011. C57.91-2011.
[2] International Electrotechnical  
Commission (IEC), IEC 60076-7  
ed1.0 - Power transformers—Part 7:  
Loading guide for oil-immersed power  
transformers. 2005. IEC 60076-7 ed1.0.
[3] Standards Australia, AS/NZS 60076.7: 
2013 - Power Transformers—Loading  
guide for oil-immersed power transformers.  
s.l.: Standards Australia, Committee  
EL-008, 2013.
Figure 4  Example of a condition monitoring and maintenance program

	
Section 3.1 The Ideal Transformer	
95
3.1  The Ideal Transformer
Figure 3.1 shows a basic single-phase two-winding transformer, where the two 
windings are wrapped around a magnetic core [1, 2, 3]. It is assumed here that 
the transformer is operating under sinusoidal steady-state excitation. Shown in 
the figure are the phasor voltages E1 and E2 across the windings, and the phasor 
FIGURE 3.1
Basic single-phase 
two-winding  
transformer
[4] CIGRE, Cigré 227, guide for life management 
techniques for power transformer. 2003. 227.
[5] ABB, Three workhorses retired after  
100 years of active service in Australia! ABB, 
http://www.abbaustralia.com.au/cawp/seitp 
202/95613170ca5ec79dc1257cca001471b7. 
aspx., current 08.09.2014.
Author
After graduating in Electrical and 
Mechanical Engineering in 1996, Car-
los started working as a Transformer 
Design Engineer at PROLEC-GE, 
the biggest transformer factory for 
General Electric on the American 
continent. 
Over the course of the following 
years, he gained expertise working in 
various roles such as product develop-
ment, manufacturing improvements, 
technology and software development, 
field engineering, and customer service.
In early 2007, Carlos was sec-
onded by General Electric to move to 
Perth, WA, to start up the Transformer 
Division to provide field and work-
shop maintenance and repair services 
to customers across Australia. 
Having fulfilled this mission, in 
early 2011, Carlos accepted a princi-
pal consultant position with Assetiv-
ity, a consultancy firm leader in asset 
management. 
In early 2013, he moved to 
TxMonitor, part of MM Group 
Holdings, where he currently works 
as a principal consultant and prod-
uct manager in developing innovative 
solutions for the electrical asset man-
agement industry using both his tech-
nical and business acumen.  ■

96	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
currents I1 entering winding 1, which has N1 turns, and I2 leaving winding 2, 
which has N2 turns. A phasor flux Fc set up in the core and a magnetic field inten-
sity phasor Hc are also shown. The core has a cross-sectional area denoted Ac, a 
mean length of the magnetic circuit lc, and a magnetic permeability mc, assumed 
constant.
For an ideal transformer, the following are assumed:
1.	 The windings have zero resistance; therefore, the I2R losses in the wind-
ings are zero.
2.	 The core permeability mc is infinite, which corresponds to zero core  
reluctance.
3.	 There is no leakage flux; that is, the entire flux Fc is confined to the core 
and links both windings.
4.	 There are no core losses.
A schematic representation of a two-winding transformer is shown in Figure 3.2.  
Ampere’s and Faraday’s laws can be used along with the preceding assumptions to 
derive the ideal transformer relationships. Ampere’s law states that the tangential 
component of the magnetic field intensity vector integrated along a closed path 
equals the net current enclosed by that path; that is,
$Htan dl 5 Ienclosed
(3.1.1)
If the core center line shown in Figure 3.1 is selected as the closed path,  
and if Hc is constant along the path as well as tangent to the path, then (3.1.1)  
becomes
Hclc 5 N1I1 2 N2I2
(3.1.2)
Note that the current I1 is enclosed N1 times and I2 is enclosed N2 times, one 
time for each turn of the coils. Also, using the right-hand rule*, current I1 contributes 
to clockwise flux, but current I2 contributes to counterclockwise flux. Thus, in (3.1.2) 
FIGURE 3.2
Schematic 
representation 
of a single-phase 
two-winding 
transformer
*The right-hand rule for a coil is as follows: Wrap the fingers of your right hand around the 
coil in the direction of the current. Your right thumb then points in the direction of the flux.

	
Section 3.1 The Ideal Transformer	
97
the net current enclosed is N1I1 2 N2I2. For constant core permeability mc, the mag-
netic flux density Bc within the core, also constant, is
Bc 5 µcHc    Wb/m2
(3.1.3)
and the core flux Fc is
Fc 5 BcAc    Wb
(3.1.4)
Using (3.1.3) and (3.1.4) in (3.1.2) yields
N1I1 2 N2I2 5 lcBcyµc 51
lc
µcAc2Fc
(3.1.5)
Core reluctance Rc is defined as
Rc 5
lc
µcAc

(3.1.6)
Then (3.1.5) becomes
N1I1 2 N2I2 5 RcFc
(3.1.7)
Equation (3.1.7) can be called Ohm’s law for the magnetic circuit, wherein the 
net magnetomotive force mmf 5 N1I1 2 N2I2 equals the product of the core reluctance  
Rc and the core flux Fc. Reluctance Rc, which impedes the establishment of flux in a 
magnetic circuit, is analogous to resistance in an electric circuit. For an ideal trans-
former, mc is assumed infinite, which from (3.1.6) means that Rc is 0, and (3.1.7) becomes
N1I1 5 N2I2
(3.1.8)
In practice, power transformer windings and cores are contained within enclosures, 
and the winding directions are not visible. One way of conveying winding information 
is to place a dot at one end of each winding such that when current enters a winding at 
the dot, it produces an mmf acting in the same direction. This dot convention is shown 
in the schematic of Figure 3.2. The dots are conventionally called polarity marks.
Equation (3.1.8) is written for current I1 entering its dotted terminal and cur-
rent I2 leaving its dotted terminal. As such, I1 and I2 are in phase, since I1 5 (N2/N1)I2, 
If the direction chosen for I2 were reversed, such that both currents entered their 
dotted terminals, then I1 would be 180° out of phase with I2.
Faraday’s law states that the voltage e(t) induced across an N-turn winding by 
a time-varying flux f(t) linking the winding is
estd 5 N dfstd
dt 
(3.1.9)
Assuming a sinusoidal steady-state flux with constant frequency v, and representing 
e(t) and f(t) by their phasors E and F, (3.1.9) becomes
E 5 NsjvdF
(3.1.10)

98	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
For an ideal transformer, the entire flux is assumed to be confined to the core, 
linking both windings. From Faraday’s law, the induced voltages across the windings 
of Figure 3.1 are
E1 5 N1sjvdFc
(3.1.11)
E2 5 N2sjvdFc
(3.1.12)
Dividing (3.1.11) by (3.1.12) yields
E1
E2
5 N1
N2

(3.1.13)
or
E1
N1
5 E2
N2

(3.1.14)
The dots shown in Figure 3.2 indicate that the voltages E1 and E2, both of which  
have their 1 polarities at the dotted terminals, are in phase. If the polarity chosen for 
one of the voltages in Figure 3.1 were reversed, then E1 would be 180° out of phase 
with E2.
The turns ratio at is defined as follows:
at 5 N1
N2

(3.1.15)
Using at in (3.1.8) and (3.1.14), the basic relations for an ideal single-phase two-winding 
transformer are
E1 51
N1
N22
 
E2 5 atE2
(3.1.16)
I1 51
N2
N12 I2 5 I2
at

(3.1.17)
Two additional relations concerning complex power and impedance can be de-
rived from (3.1.16) and (3.1.17) as follows. The complex power entering winding 1 in 
Figure 3.2 is
S1 5 E1I1 
*
(3.1.18)
Using (3.1.16) and (3.1.17),
S1 5 E1I1
* 5 satE2d1
I2
at2
*
5 E2I2
*5 S2
(3.1.19)
As shown by (3.1.19), the complex power S1 entering winding 1 equals the complex 
power S2 leaving winding 2. That is, an ideal transformer has no real or reactive 
power loss.

	
Section 3.1 The Ideal Transformer	
99
If an impedance Z2 is connected across winding 2 of the ideal transformer in 
Figure 3.2, then
Z2 5 E2
I2

(3.1.20)
This impedance, when measured from winding 1, is
Z92 5 E1
I1
5 atE2
I2yat
5 a2
tZ2 51
N1
N22
2
Z2
(3.1.21)
Thus, the impedance Z2 connected to winding 2 is referred to winding 1 by multiplying  
 Z2 by a2
t, which is the square of the turns ratio.
Ideal, single-phase two-winding transformer
A single-phase two-winding transformer is rated 20 kVA, 480/120 V, and 60 Hz. 
A source connected to the 480-V winding supplies an impedance load connected 
to the 120-V winding. The load absorbs 15 kVA at 0.8 p.f. lagging when the load 
voltage is 118 V. Assume that the transformer is ideal and calculate the following:
a.	 The voltage across the 480-V winding.
b.	 The load impedance.
c.	 The load impedance referred to the 480-V winding.
d.	 The real and reactive power supplied to the 480-V winding.
SOLUTION
a.  The circuit is shown in Figure 3.3, where winding 1 denotes the 480-V wind-
ing and winding 2 denotes the 120-V winding. Selecting the load voltage E2 as the 
reference,
E2 5 118/08   V
FIGURE 3.3
Circuit for 
Example 3.1
(Continued)
EXAMPLE 3.1

100	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
Figure 3.4 shows a schematic of a conceptual single-phase, phase-shifting 
transformer. This transformer is not an idealization of an actual transformer since it 
is physically impossible to obtain a complex turns ratio. It is used later in this chapter 
as a mathematical model for representing phase shift of three-phase transformers. 
As shown in Figure 3.4, the complex turns ratio at is defined for the phase-shifting 
transformer as
at 5 e jf
1 5 e jf
(3.1.22)
where f is the phase-shift angle. The transformer relations are then
E1 5 at E2 5 e jfE2
(3.1.23)
The turns ratio is, from (3.1.13),
at 5 N1
N2
5 E1rated
E2rated
5 480
120 5 4
and the voltage across winding 1 is
E1 5 at E2 5 4s118/08 d 5 472/08   V
b.  The complex power S2 absorbed by the load is
S2 5 E2I2 
* 5 118I *
2 5 15,000/cos21
 s0.8d 5 15,000/36.878   VA
Solving, the load current I2 is
I2 5 127.12/236.878   A
The load impedance Z2 is
Z2 5 E2
I2
5
118/08
127.12/236.878 5 0.9283/36.878   V
c.  From (3.1.21), the load impedance referred to the 480-V winding is
Z92 5 a2
tZ2 5 s4d2 s0.9283/36.878 d 5 14.85/36.878   V
d.  From (3.1.19)
S1 5 S2 5 15,000/36.878 5 12,000 1 j 9000
Thus, the real and reactive powers supplied to the 480-V winding are
P1 5 Re S1 5 12,000 W 5 12 kW
Q1 5 Im S1 5 9000 var 5 9 kvar

	
Section 3.2 Equivalent Circuits for Practical Transformers	
101
I1 5 I2
a*t
5 e jfI2
(3.1.24)
Note that the phase angle of E1 leads the phase angle of E2 by f. Similarly, I1 leads I2 by 
the angle f. However, the magnitudes are unchanged; that is, |E1| 5 |E2| and |I1| 5 |I2|.
From these two relations, the following two additional relations are derived:
S1 5 E1I *
1 5 sat E2d1
I2
a*t2
*
5 E2I *
2 5 S2
(3.1.25)
Z92 5 E1
I1
5 atE2
1
at*I2
5 |at|2Z2 5 Z2
(3.1.26)
Thus, impedance is unchanged when it is referred from one side of an ideal phase-
shifting transformer to the other. Also, the ideal phase-shifting transformer has no 
real or reactive power losses since S1 5 S2.
Note that (3.1.23) and (3.1.24) for the phase-shifting transformer are the same 
as (3.1.16) and (3.1.17) for the ideal physical transformer except for the complex 
conjugate (*) in (3.1.24). The complex conjugate for the phase-shifting transformer is 
required to make S1 5 S2 (complex power into winding 1 equals complex power out 
of winding 2), as shown in (3.1.25).
3.2  Equivalent Circuits for Practical 
Transformers
Figure 3.5 shows an equivalent circuit for a practical single-phase two-winding trans-
former, which differs from the ideal transformer as follows:
1.	 The windings have resistance.
2.	 The core permeability mc is finite.
FIGURE 3.4
Schematic represen-
tation of a conceptual 
single-phase, phase-
shifting transformer

102	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
3.	 The magnetic flux is not entirely confined to the core.
4.	 There are real and reactive power losses in the core.
The resistance R1 is included in series with winding 1 of the figure to account for 
I2R losses in this winding. A reactance X1, called the leakage reactance of winding 1,  
is also included in series with winding 1 to account for the leakage flux of winding 1. 
This leakage flux is the component of the flux that links winding 1 but does not link 
winding 2; it causes a voltage drop I1(  j X1), which is proportional to I1 and leads I1 
by 908. There is also a reactive power loss I1
2X1 associated with this leakage reactance. 
Similarly, there is a resistance R2 and a leakage reactance X2 in series with winding 2.
Equation (3.1.7) shows that for finite core permeability mc, the total mmf is not 
zero. Dividing (3.1.7) by N1 and using (3.1.11), the result is
I1 21
N2
N12
 I2 5 Rc
N1
 Fc 5 Rc
N1
 1
E1
jvN12 5 2j 1
Rc
vN2
12E1
(3.2.1)
Defining the term on the right-hand side of (3.2.1) to be Im, called magnetizing cur-
rent, it is evident that Im lags E1 by 90°, and can be represented by a shunt induc-
tor with susceptance Bm 51
Rc
vN 2
12 mhos.* However, in reality, there is an additional 
shunt branch, represented by a resistor with conductance Gc mhos, which carries a 
current Ic, called the core loss current. Ic is in phase with E1. When the core loss cur-
rent Ic is included, (3.2.1) becomes
I1 21
N2
N12
 I2 5 Ic 1 Im 5 sGc 2 jBmdE1
(3.2.2)
The equivalent circuit of Figure 3.5, which includes the shunt branch with ad-
mittance (Gc 2 j Bm) mhos, satisfies the KCL equation (3.2.2). Note that when wind-
ing 2 is open (I2 5 0) and when a sinusoidal voltage V1 is applied to winding 1, then 
(3.2.2) indicates that the current I1 will have two components: the core loss current Ic 
and the magnetizing current Im. Associated with Ic is a real power loss I2
cyGc 5 E2
1 Gc W. 
This real power loss accounts for both hysteresis and eddy current losses within the 
core. Hysteresis loss occurs because a cyclic variation of flux within the core requires 
FIGURE 3.5
Equivalent circuit  
of a practical 
single-phase 
two-winding 
transformer
*The units of admittance, conductance, and susceptance, which in the SI system are siemens 
(with symbol S), are also called mhos (with symbol 
V
) or ohms21 (with symbol V21).

	
Section 3.2 Equivalent Circuits for Practical Transformers	
103
energy dissipated as heat. As such, hysteresis loss can be reduced by the use of special 
high grades of alloy steel as core material. Eddy current loss occurs because induced 
currents called eddy currents flow within the magnetic core perpendicular to the flux. 
As such, eddy current loss can be reduced by constructing the core with laminated 
sheets of alloy steel. Associated with Im is a reactive power loss Im
2 yBm 5 E1
2Bm var. 
This reactive power is required to magnetize the core. The phasor sum sIc 1 Imd is 
called the exciting current Ie.
Figure 3.6 shows three alternative equivalent circuits for a practical single-phase 
two-winding transformer. In Figure 3.6(a), the resistance R2 and leakage reactance 
X2 of winding 2 are referred to winding 1 via (3.1.21).
In Figure 3.6(b), the shunt branch is omitted, which corresponds to neglecting 
the exciting current. Since the exciting current is usually less than 5% of rated cur-
rent, neglecting it in power system studies is often valid unless transformer efficiency 
or exciting current phenomena are of particular concern. For large power transform-
ers rated more than 500 kVA, the winding resistances, which are small compared to 
the leakage reactances, often can be neglected, as shown in Figure 3.6(c).
Thus, a practical transformer operating in sinusoidal steady state is equivalent 
to an ideal transformer with external impedance and admittance branches, as shown 
in Figure 3.6. The external branches can be evaluated from short-circuit and open-
circuit tests, as illustrated by the following example.
FIGURE 3.6
Equivalent circuits  
for a practical 
single-phase  
two-winding 
transformer

104	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
Transformer short-circuit and open-circuit tests
A single-phase two-winding transformer is rated 20 kVA, 480/120 volts, and 
60 Hz. During a short-circuit test, where rated current at rated frequency is 
applied to the 480-volt winding (denoted winding 1), with the 120-volt winding  
(winding 2) shorted, the following readings are obtained: V1 5 35 volts, P1 5 300 W.  
During an open-circuit test, where rated voltage is applied to winding 2, with 
winding 1 open, the following readings are obtained: I2 5 12 A, P2 5 200 W.
a.	 From the short-circuit test, determine the equivalent series impedance 
Zeq1 5 Req11 jXeq1 referred to winding 1. Neglect the shunt admittance.
b.	 From the open-circuit test, determine the shunt admittance Ym 5 Gc 2 jBm 
referred to winding 1. Neglect the series impedance.
SOLUTION
a.  The equivalent circuit for the short-circuit test is shown in Figure 3.7(a), 
where the shunt admittance branch is neglected. Rated current for winding 1 is
I1rated 5 Srated
V1rated
5 20 3 10 3
480
5 41.667   A
Req1, Zeq1, and Xeq1 are then determined as follows:
Req1 5
P1
I2
1rated
5
300
s41.667d2 5 0.1728   V
uZeq1u 5 V1
I1rated
5
35
41.667 5 0.8400   V
Xeq1 5 ÏZ2
eq1 2 R2
eq1 5 0.8220   V
Zeq1 5 Req1 1 j Xeq1 1 0.1728 1 j 0.8220 5 0.8400/78.138   V
b.  The equivalent circuit for the open-circuit test is shown in Figure 3.7(b), 
where the series impedance is neglected. From (3.1.16),
V1 5 E1 5 at E2 5 N1
N2
V2rated 5 480
120
 s120d 5 480   volts
Gc, Ym, and Bm are then determined as follows:
Gc 5 P2
V2
1
5 200
s480d2 5 0.000868   S
uYmu 51
N2
N12I2
V1
51
120
4802s12d
480
5 0.00625   S
EXAMPLE 3.2

	
Section 3.2 Equivalent Circuits for Practical Transformers	
105
The following are not represented by the equivalent circuit of Figure 3.5:
1.	 Saturation
2.	 Inrush current
3.	 Nonsinusoidal exciting current
4.	 Surge phenomena
They are briefly discussed in the following sections.
SATURATION
In deriving the equivalent circuit of the ideal and practical transformers, constant 
core permeability mc and the linear relationship Bc 5 mcHc of (3.1.3) were assumed. 
However, the relationship between B and H for ferromagnetic materials used for trans-
former cores is nonlinear and multivalued. Figure 3.8 shows a set of B–H curves for 
a grain-oriented electrical steel typically used in transformers. As shown, each curve 
is multivalued, which is caused by hysteresis. For many engineering applications, the 
Bm 5 ÏY 2
m 2 G 2
c 5 Ïs0.00625d2 2 s0.000868d2 5 0.00619   S
Ym 5 Gc 2 j Bm 5 0.000868 2 j0.00619 5 0.00625/2 82.028   S
Note that the equivalent series impedance is usually evaluated at rated 
current from a short-circuit test, and the shunt admittance is evaluated at rated 
voltage from an open-circuit test. For small variations in transformer operation 
near rated conditions, the impedance and admittance values are often assumed 
constant.
FIGURE 3.7
Circuits for  
Example 3.2

106	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
B–H curves can be adequately described by the dashed line drawn through the curves 
in Figure 3.8. Note that as H increases, the core becomes saturated; that is, the curves 
flatten out as B increases above 1 Wb/m2. If the magnitude of the voltage applied to 
a transformer is too large, the core will saturate and a high magnetizing current will 
flow. In a well-designed transformer, the applied peak voltage causes the peak flux 
density in steady state to occur at the knee of the B–H curve, with a corresponding 
low value of magnetizing current.
INRUSH CURRENT
When a transformer is first energized, a transient current much larger than rated 
transformer current can flow for several cycles. This current, called inrush current, 
is nonsinusoidal and has a large dc component. To understand the cause of inrush, 
assume that before energization, the transformer core is magnetized with a residual 
flux density B(0) 5 1.5 Wb/m2 (near the knee of the dotted curve in Figure 3.8). If 
the transformer is then energized when the source voltage is positive and increasing, 
Faraday’s law, (3.1.9), will cause the flux density B(t) to increase further, since
Bstd 5 fstd
A 5
1
NA#
t
0
estd dt 1 Bs0d
As B(t) moves into the saturation region of the B–H curve, large values of H(t) will 
occur, and, from Ampere’s law, (3.1.1), corresponding large values of current i(t) will 
flow for several cycles until it has dissipated. Since normal inrush currents can be 
as large as abnormal short-circuit currents in transformers, transformer protection 
schemes must be able to distinguish between these two types of currents.
FIGURE 3.8
B–H curves for 
M-5 grain-oriented 
electrical steel  
0.012 in. thick  
(Reprinted with  
permission of AK 
Steel Corporation.) 

	
Section 3.3 The Per-Unit System	
107
NONSINUSOIDAL EXCITING CURRENT
When a sinusoidal voltage is applied to one winding of a transformer with the other 
winding open, the flux f(t) and flux density B(t) will, from Faraday’s law, (3.1.9), be 
very nearly sinusoidal in steady state. However, the magnetic field intensity H(t) and 
the resulting exciting current is not sinusoidal in steady state, due to the nonlinear 
B–H curve. If the exciting current is measured and analyzed by Fourier analysis tech-
niques, one finds that it has a fundamental component and a set of odd harmonics. 
The principal harmonic is the third, whose rms value is typically about 40% of the 
total rms exciting current. However, the nonsinusoidal nature of exciting current is 
usually neglected unless harmonic effects are of direct concern, because the exciting 
current itself is usually less than 5% of rated current for power transformers.
SURGE PHENOMENA
When power transformers are subjected to transient overvoltages caused by lightning 
or switching surges, the capacitances of the transformer windings have important 
effects on transient response. Transformer winding capacitances and response to 
surges are discussed in Chapter 13.
3.3   The Per-Unit System
Power-system quantities such as voltage, current, power, and impedance are often 
expressed in per-unit or percent of specified base values. For example, if a base volt-
age of 20 kV is specified, then the voltage 18 kV is (18/20) 5 0.9 per unit or 90%. 
Calculations then can be made with per-unit quantities rather than with the actual 
quantities.
One advantage of the per-unit system is that by properly specifying base quan-
tities, the transformer equivalent circuit can be simplified. The ideal transformer 
winding can be eliminated, such that voltages, currents, and external impedances 
and admittances expressed in per-unit do not change when they are referred from 
one side of a transformer to the other. This can be a significant advantage even in 
a power system of moderate size, where hundreds of transformers may be encoun-
tered. Using the per-unit system avoids the possibility of making serious calculation 
errors when referring quantities from one side of a transformer to the other. Another 
advantage of the per-unit system is that the per-unit impedances of electrical equip-
ment of similar type usually lie within a narrow numerical range when the equip-
ment ratings are used as base values. Because of this, per-unit impedance data can 
be checked rapidly for gross errors by someone familiar with per-unit quantities. In 
addition, manufacturers usually specify the impedances of machines and transform-
ers in per-unit or percent of nameplate rating.
Per-unit quantities are calculated as follows:
per{unit quantity 5
actual quantity
base value of quantity
(3.3.1)

108	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
where actual quantity is the value of the quantity in the actual units. The base value 
has the same units as the actual quantity, thus making the per-unit quantity dimen-
sionless. Also, the base value is always a real number. Therefore, the angle of the 
per-unit quantity is the same as the angle of the actual quantity.
Two independent base values can be arbitrarily selected at one point in a power 
system. Usually the base voltage VbaseLN and base complex power Sbase1f are selected 
for either a single-phase circuit or for one phase of a three-phase circuit. Then, in or-
der for electrical laws to be valid in the per-unit system, the following relations must 
be used for other base values:
Pbase1f 5 Qbase1f 5 Sbase1f
(3.3.2)
Ibase 5
Sbase1f
VbaseLN

(3.3.3)
Zbase 5 Rbase 5 Xbase 5 VbaseLN
Ibase
5 V 2
baseLN
Sbase1f

(3.3.4)
Ybase 5 Gbase 5 Bbase 5
1
Zbase

(3.3.5)
In (3.3.2) through (3.3.5), the subscripts LN and 1f denote “line-to-neutral” and 
“per-phase,” respectively, for three-phase circuits. These equations are also valid for 
single-phase circuits, where subscripts can be omitted.
Convention requires adoption of the following two rules for base quantities:
1.	 The value of Sbase1f is the same for the entire power system of concern.
2.	 The ratio of the voltage bases on either side of a transformer is selected 
to be the same as the ratio of the transformer voltage ratings.
With these two rules, a per-unit impedance remains unchanged when referred from 
one side of a transformer to the other.
Per-unit impedance: single-phase transformer
A single-phase two-winding transformer is rated 20 kVA, 480/120 volts, and  
60 Hz. The equivalent leakage impedance of the transformer referred to the  
120-volt winding, denoted winding 2, is Zeq2 5 0.0525/78.138   V. Using the trans-
former ratings as base values, determine the per-unit leakage impedance referred 
to winding 2 and referred to winding 1.
SOLUTION
The values of Sbase, Vbase1, and Vbase2 are, from the transformer ratings,
Sbase 5 20 kVA,   Vbase1 5 480 volts,   Vbase2 5 120 volts
EXAMPLE 3.3

	
Section 3.3 The Per-Unit System	
109
Using (3.3.4), the base impedance on the 120-volt side of the transformer is
Zbase2 5 V 2
base2
Sbase
5 s120d2
20,000 5 0.72   V
Then, using (3.3.1), the per-unit leakage impedance referred to winding 2 is
Zeq2p.u. 5
Zeq2
Zbase2
5
0.0525/78.138
0.72
5 0.0729/78.138   per unit
If Zeq2 is referred to winding 1,
Zeq1 5 a 2
tZeq2 51
N1
N22
2
Zeq2 51
480
1202
2
s0.0525/78.138d
5 0.84/78.138   V
The base impedance on the 480 volt side of the transformer is 
Zbase1 5 V2
base1
Sbase
5 s480d2
20,000 5 11.52   V
and the per-unit leakage reactance referred to winding 1 is
Zeq1p.u. 5
Zeq1
Zbase1
5
0.84/78.138
11.52
5 0.0729 /78.138 per unit 5 Zeq2p.u.
Thus, the per-unit leakage impedance remains unchanged when referred from 
winding 2 to winding 1. This has been achieved by specifying
Vbase1
Vbase2
5 Vrated1
Vrated2
51
480
1202
Figure 3.9 shows three per-unit circuits of a single-phase two-winding trans-
former. The ideal transformer, shown in Figure 3.9(a), satisfies the per-unit relations 
E1p.u. 5 E2p.u. and I1p.u. 5 I2p.u., which can be derived as follows. First divide (3.1.16) 
by Vbase1:
E1p.u. 5
E1
Vbase1
5 N1
N2
3
E2
Vbase1

(3.3.6)
Then, using Vbase1/ Vbase2 5 Vrated1 / Vrated 2 5 N1/N2,
E1p.u. 5 N1
N2
 
E2
1
N1
N22Vbase2
5
E2
Vbase2
5 E2p.u.
(3.3.7)

110	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
Similarly, divide (3.1.17) by Ibase1:
I1p.u. 5
I1
Ibase1
5 N2
N1
 I2
Ibase1

(3.3.8)
Then, using Ibase1 5 Sbase ∙ Vbase1 5 Sbase ∙ [(N1 ∙ N2)Vbase2] 5 (N2 ∙ N1)Ibase2
I1p.u. 5 N2
N1
 
I2
1
N2
N12Ibase2
5
I2
Ibase2
5 I2p.u.
(3.3.9)
Thus, the ideal transformer winding in Figure 3.2 is eliminated from the  
per-unit circuit in Figure 3.9(a). The per-unit leakage impedance is included in  
Figure 3.9(b), and the per-unit shunt admittance branch is added in Figure 3.9(c)  
to obtain the complete representation.
When only one component, such as a transformer, is considered, the name-
plate ratings of that component are usually selected as base values. When several 
components are involved, however, the system base values may be different from 
the nameplate ratings of any particular device. It is then necessary to convert the  
per-unit impedance of a device from its nameplate ratings to the system base values. 
To convert a per-unit impedance from “old” to “new” base values, use
Zp.u.new 5 Zactual
Zbasenew
5
Zp.u.old Zbaseold
Zbasenew

(3.3.10)
FIGURE 3.9
Per-unit equivalent 
circuits of a 
single-phase 
two-winding 
transformer

	
Section 3.3 The Per-Unit System	
111
or, from (3.3.4),
Zp.u.new 5 Zp.u.old 1
Vbaseold
Vbasenew2
2 1
Sbasenew
Sbaseold2
(3.3.11)
Per-unit circuit: three-zone single-phase network
Three zones of a single-phase circuit are identified in Figure 3.10(a). The zones 
are connected by transformers T1 and T2, whose ratings are also shown. Using 
base values of 30 kVA and 240 volts in zone 1, draw the per-unit circuit and de-
termine the per-unit impedances and the per-unit source voltage. Then calculate 
the load current both in per-unit and in amperes. Transformer winding resistances 
and shunt admittance branches are neglected.
EXAMPLE 3.4
FIGURE 3.10
Circuit for  
Example 3.4 
(Continued)

112	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
SOLUTION
First the base values in each zone are determined. Sbase 5 30 kVA is the same for 
the entire network. Also, Vbase1 5 240 volts, as specified for zone 1. When moving 
across a transformer, the voltage base is changed in proportion to the transformer 
voltage ratings. Thus,
Vbase2 51
480
2402s240d 5 480   volts
and
Vbase3 51
115
4602s480d 5 120   volts
The base impedances in zones 2 and 3 are
Zbase2 5 V2
base2
Sbase
5 4802
30,000 5 7.86   V
and
Zbase3 5 V2
base3
Sbase
5 1202
30,000 5 0.48   V
and the base current in zone 3 is
Ibase3 5 Sbase
Vbase3
5 30,000
120
5 250   A
Next, the per-unit circuit impedances are calculated using the system base val-
ues. Since Sbase 5 30 kVA is the same as the kVA rating of transformer T1, and Vbase1 5 
240 volts is the same as the voltage rating of the zone 1 side of transformer T1, the 
per-unit leakage reactance of T1 is the same as its nameplate value, XT1p.u. 5 0.1 per 
unit. However, the per-unit leakage reactance of transformer T2 must be converted 
from its nameplate rating to the system base. Using (3.3.11) and Vbase2 5 480 volts,
XT2p.u. 5 s0.10d1
460
4802
2 1
30,000
20,0002 5 0.1378  per unit
Alternatively, using Vbase3 5 120 volts,
XT2p.u. 5 s0.10d1
115
1202
2 1
30,000
20,0002 5 0.1378  per unit
which gives the same result. The line, which is located in zone 2, has a per-unit 
reactance
Xlinep.u. 5 Xline
Zbase2
5
2
7.68 5 0.2604   per unit

	
Section 3.3 The Per-Unit System	
113
Balanced three-phase circuits can be solved in per-unit on a per-phase basis after 
converting Δ-load impedances to equivalent Y impedances. Base values can be selected 
either on a per-phase basis or on a three-phase basis. Equations (3.3.1) through (3.3.5) 
remain valid for three-phase circuits on a per-phase basis. Usually Sbase3f and VbaseLL 
are selected, where the subscripts 3f and LL denote “three-phase” and “line-to-line,” 
respectively. Then the following relations must be used for other base values:
Sbase1f 5
Sbase3f
3

(3.3.12)
VbaseLN 5 VbaseLL
Ï3 
(3.3.13)
Sbase3f 5 Pbase3f 5 Qbase3f
(3.3.14)
Ibase 5
Sbase1f
VbaseLN
5
Sbase3f
Ï3VbaseLL

(3.3.15)
Zbase 5 VbaseLN
Ibase
5 V2
baseLN
Sbase1f
5 V2
baseLL
Sbase3f

(3.3.16)
Rbase 5 Xbase 5 Zbase 5
1
Ybase

(3.3.17)
and the load, which is located in zone 3, has a per-unit impedance
Zloadp.u. 5 Zload
Zbase3
5 0.9 1 j 0.2
0.48
5 1.875 1 j 0.4167   per unit
The per-unit circuit is shown in Figure 3.10(b), where the base values for 
each zone, per-unit impedances, and the per-unit source voltage are shown. The 
per-unit load current is then easily calculated from Figure 3.10(b) as follows:
Iloadp.u. 5 Isp.u. 5
Vsp.u.
jsXT1p.u. 1 Xlinep.u. 1 XT2p.u.d 1 Zloadp.u.
5
0.9167/08
js0.10 1 0.2604 1 0.1378d 1 s1.875 1 j0.4167d
5
0.9167/08
1.875 1 j 0.9149 5
0.9167/08
2.086/26.018
5 0.4395/226.018    per unit
The actual load current is
Iload 5 sIloadp.u.dIbase3 5 s0.4395/226.018d s250d 5 109.9/226.018   A
Note that the per-unit equivalent circuit of Figure 3.10(b) is relatively easy to an-
alyze, since ideal transformer windings have been eliminated by proper selection 
of base values.

114	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
Per-unit and actual currents in balanced  
three-phase networks
As in Example 2.5, a balanced-Y-connected voltage source with Eab 5  480/08
volts is applied to a balanced-D load with ZD 5  30/408 V. The line impedance 
between the source and load is ZL 5 1/858 V for each phase. Calculate the per-
unit and actual current in phase a of the line using Sbase3f 510 kVA and VbaseLL 5 
480 volts.
SOLUTION 
First, convert ZD to an equivalent ZY; the equivalent line-to-neutral diagram is 
shown in Figure 2.17. The base impedance is, from (3.3.16),
Zbase 5 V2
baseLL
Sbase3f
5 s480d2
10,000 5 23.04   V
The per-unit line and load impedances are
ZLp.u. 5 ZL
Zbase
5
10/858
23.04 5 0.04340/858   per unit
and
ZYp.u. 5 ZY
Zbase
5
10/408
23.04 5 0.4340/408   per unit
Also,
VbaseLN 5 VbaseLL
Ï3
5 480
Ï3 5 277   volts
and
Eanp.u. 5
Ean
VbaseLN
5
277/2308
277
5 1.0/2308   per unit
The per-unit equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 3.11. The per-unit line current 
in phase a is then
EXAMPLE 3.5
FIGURE 3.11
Circuit for 
Example 3.5

	
Section 3.4 Three-Phase Transformer Connections and Phase Shift	
115
3.4  Three-Phase Transformer Connections 
and Phase Shift
Three identical single-phase two-winding transformers may be connected to form a 
three-phase bank. Four ways to connect the windings are Y–Y, Y–D, D–Y, and D–D. 
For example, Figure 3.12 shows a three-phase Y–Y bank. Figure 3.12(a) shows the 
core and coil arrangements. The American standard for marking three-phase trans-
formers substitutes H1, H2, and H3 on the high-voltage terminals and X1, X2, and 
X3 on the low-voltage terminals in place of the polarity dots. Also, this text uses 
uppercase letters ABC to identify phases on the high-voltage side of the transformer 
and lowercase letters abc to identify phases on the low-voltage side of the trans-
former. In Figure 3.12(a), the transformer high-voltage terminals H1, H2, and H3 
are connected to phases A, B, and C, and the low-voltage terminals X1, X2, and X3 
are connected to phases a, b, and c, respectively.
Figure 3.12(b) shows a schematic representation of the three-phase Y–Y 
transformer. Windings on the same core are drawn in parallel, and the phasor re-
lationship for balanced positive-sequence operation is shown. For example, high-
voltage winding Hl–N is on the same magnetic core as low-voltage winding Xl–n in 
Figure 3.12(b). Also, VAN is in phase with Van. Figure 3.12(c) shows a single-line dia-
gram of a Y–Y transformer. A single-line diagram shows one phase of a three-phase 
network with the neutral wire omitted and with components represented by symbols 
rather than equivalent circuits.
Iap.u. 5
Eanp.u.
ZLp.u. 1 ZYp.u.
5
1.0/2308
0.04340/858 1 0.4340/408
5
1.0/2308
s0.00378 1 j 0.04323d 1 s0.3325 1 j 0.2790d
5
1.0/2308
0.3362 1 j 0.3222 5
1.0/2308
0.4657/43.788
5 2.147/273.788   per unit
The base current is
Ibase 5
Sbase3f 5
Ï3VbaseLL
5 10,000
Ï3s480d 5 12.03   A
and the actual phase a line current is
Ia 5  s2.147/273.788d s12.03d 5  25.83/273.788   A

116	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
The phases of a Y–Y or a D–D transformer can be labeled so there is no 
phase shift between corresponding quantities on the low- and high-voltage wind-
ings. However, for Y–D and D–Y transformers, there is always a phase shift. 
Figure 3.13 shows a Y–D transformer. The labeling of the windings and the sche-
matic representation are in accordance with the American standard, which is as 
follows:
In either a Y–D or D–Y transformer, positive-sequence quantities on the  
high-voltage side shall lead their corresponding quantities on the low-voltage 
side by 30°.
As shown in Figure 3.13(b), VAN leads Van by 30°.
The positive-sequence phasor diagram shown in Figure 3.13(b) can be con-
structed via the following five steps, which are also indicated in Figure 3.13.
FIGURE 3.12
Three-phase 
two-winding Y–Y 
transformer bank

	
Section 3.4 Three-Phase Transformer Connections and Phase Shift	
117
STEP 1	 Assume that balanced positive-sequence voltages are applied to the 
Y winding. Draw the positive-sequence phasor diagram for these 
voltages.
STEP 2	 Move phasor A–N next to terminals A–N in Figure 3.13(a). Identify 
the ends of this line in the same manner as in the phasor diagram. 
Similarly, move phasors B–N and C–N next to terminals B–N and 
C–N in Figure 3.13(a).
STEP 3	 For each single-phase transformer, the voltage across the low-voltage 
winding must be in phase with the voltage across the high-voltage 
winding, assuming an ideal transformer. Therefore, draw a line 
FIGURE 3.13
Three-phase 
two-winding Y–D 
transformer bank

118	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
next to each low-voltage winding parallel to the corresponding line 
already drawn next to the high-voltage winding.
STEP 4	 Label the ends of the lines drawn in Step 3 by inspecting the polarity 
marks. For example, phase A is connected to dotted terminal H1, 
and A appears on the right side of line A–N. Therefore, phase a, 
which is connected to dotted terminal X1, must be on the right side, 
and b on the left side of line a–b. Similarly, phase B is connected to 
dotted terminal H2, and B is down on line B–N. Therefore, phase b, 
connected to dotted terminal X2, must be down on line b–c. Simi-
larly, c is up on line c–a.
STEP 5	 Bring the three lines labeled in Step 4 together to complete the pha-
sor diagram for the low-voltage A winding. Note that VAN leads Van 
by 30° in accordance with the American standard.
Phase shift in D–Y transformers
Assume that balanced negative-sequence voltages are applied to the high- 
voltage windings of the Y–D transformer shown in Figure 3.13. Determine the 
negative-sequence phase shift of this transformer.
SOLUTION
The negative-sequence diagram, shown in Figure 3.14, is constructed from the 
following five steps, as outlined previously:
STEP 1	 Draw the phasor diagram of balanced negative-sequence voltages, 
which are applied to the Y winding.
STEP 2	 Move the phasors A–N, B–N, and C–N next to the high-voltage  
Y windings.
STEP 3	 For each single-phase transformer, draw a line next to the low- 
voltage winding that is parallel to the line drawn in Step 2 next to 
the high-voltage winding.
STEP 4	 Label the lines drawn in Step 3. For example, phase B, which is 
connected to dotted terminal H2, is shown up on line B–N; therefore 
phase b, which is connected to dotted terminal X2, must be up on 
line b–c.
STEP 5	 Bring the lines drawn in Step 4 together to form the negative- 
sequence phasor diagram for the low-voltage D winding.
As shown in Figure 3.14, the high-voltage phasors lag the low-voltage phasors 
by 30°. Thus the negative-sequence phase shift is the reverse of the positive-  
sequence phase shift.
EXAMPLE 3.6

	
Section 3.4 Three-Phase Transformer Connections and Phase Shift	
119
The D–Y transformer is commonly used as a generator step-up transformer, where the 
D winding is connected to the generator terminals and the Y winding is connected to 
a transmission line. One advantage of a high-voltage Y winding is that a neutral point 
N is provided for grounding on the high-voltage side. With a permanently grounded 
neutral, the insulation requirements for the high-voltage transformer windings are 
reduced. The high-voltage insulation can be graded or tapered from maximum insula-
tion at terminals ABC to minimum insulation at grounded terminal N. One advantage 
of the D winding is that the undesirable third harmonic magnetizing current, caused 
by the nonlinear core B–H characteristic, remains trapped inside the D winding. Third 
harmonic currents are (triple-frequency) zero-sequence currents, which cannot enter 
or leave a D connection, but can flow within the D. The Y–Y transformer is seldom 
used because of difficulties with third harmonic exciting current.
FIGURE 3.14
Example 3.6—
Construction of 
negative-sequence 
phasor diagram for 
Y–D transformer  
bank

120	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
The D–D transformer has the advantage that one phase can be removed for re-
pair or maintenance while the remaining phases continue to operate as a three-phase 
bank. This open-D connection permits balanced three-phase operation with the kVA 
rating reduced to 58% of the original bank (see Problem 3.36).
Instead of a bank of three single-phase transformers, all six windings may be 
placed on a common three-phase core to form a three-phase transformer, as shown 
in Figure 3.15. The three-phase core contains less iron than the three single-phase 
units; therefore it costs less, weighs less, requires less floor space, and has a slightly 
higher efficiency. However, a winding failure would require replacement of an entire 
three-phase transformer, compared to replacement of only one phase of a three-
phase bank.
3.5  Per-Unit Equivalent Circuits of Balanced 
Three-Phase Two-Winding Transformers
Figure 3.16(a) is a schematic representation of an ideal Y–Y transformer grounded 
through neutral impedances ZN and Zn. Figure 3.16(b) shows the per-unit equiva-
lent circuit of this ideal transformer for balanced three-phase operation. Through-
out the remainder of this text, per-unit quantities are used unless otherwise 
indicated. Also, the subscript “p.u.,” used to indicate a per-unit quantity, is omit-
ted in most cases.
FIGURE 3.15
Transformer core 
configurations

	Section 3.5 Per-Unit Equivalent Circuits of Balanced Three-Phase Two-Winding Transformers	
121
The following are two conventional rules for selecting base quantities:
1.	 A common Sbase is selected for both the H and X terminals.
2.	 The ratio of the voltage bases VbaseH/VbaseX is selected to be equal to the 
ratio of the rated line-to-line voltages VratedHLL/VratedXLL.
When balanced three-phase currents are applied to the transformer, the neutral cur-
rents are zero, and there are no voltage drops across the neutral impedances. There-
fore, the per-unit equivalent circuit of the ideal Y–Y transformer, Figure 3.16(b), is 
the same as the per-unit single-phase ideal transformer, Figure 3.9(a).
The per-unit equivalent circuit of a practical Y–Y transformer is shown in  
Figure 3.17(a). This network is obtained by adding external impedances to the equiv-
alent circuit of the ideal transformer, as in Figure 3.9(c).
The per-unit equivalent circuit of the Y–D transformer, shown in Figure 3.17(b),  
includes a phase shift. For the American standard, the positive-sequence voltages 
and currents on the high-voltage side of the Y–D transformer lead the corre-
sponding quantities on the low-voltage side by 30°. The phase shift in the equiv-
alent circuit of Figure 3.17(b) is represented by the phase-shifting transformer of 
Figure 3.4.
The per-unit equivalent circuit of the D–D transformer, shown in Figure 3.17(c),  
is the same as that of the Y–Y transformer. It is assumed that the windings are la-
beled so there is no phase shift. Also, the per-unit impedances do not depend on the 
winding connections, but the base voltages do.
FIGURE 3.16
Ideal Y–Y transformer

122	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
FIGURE 3.17
Per-unit equivalent circuits of practical Y–Y, Y–D, and D–D transformers for balanced three-phase operation
Voltage calculations: balanced Y–Y and D–Y transformers
Three single-phase two-winding transformers, each rated 400 MVA, 13.8/199.2 kV,  
with leakage reactance Xeq 5 0.10 per unit, are connected to form a three-phase 
bank. Winding resistances and exciting current are neglected. The high-voltage 
windings are connected in Y. A three-phase load operating under balanced posi-
tive-sequence conditions on the high-voltage side absorbs 1000 MVA at 0.90 p.f. 
lagging, with VAN 5  199.2/08 kV. Determine the voltage Van at the low-voltage 
bus if the low-voltage windings are connected (a) in Y and (b) in D.
SOLUTION 
The per-unit network is shown in Figure 3.18. Using the transformer bank 
ratings as base quantities, Sbase3f 5 1200 MVA, VbaseHLL 5 345 kV, and 
IbaseH 5 1200ys345Ï3d 5 2.008 kA. The per-unit load voltage and load current 
are then
VAN 5 1.0/08   per unit
IA 5 1000ys345Ï3d
2.008
/2cos21 0.9 5 0.8333/225.848   per unit
a.  For the Y–Y transformer, Figure 3.18(a), 
Ia 5 IA 5 0.8333/225.848   per unit
EXAMPLE 3.7

	Section 3.5 Per-Unit Equivalent Circuits of Balanced Three-Phase Two-Winding Transformers	
123
Van 5 VAN 1 s  jXeqdIA
5 1.0/08 1 s j0.10ds0.8333/225.848d
5 1.0 1 0.08333/64.168 5 1.0363 1 j0.0750 5 1.039/4.1398
5 1.039/4.1398 per unit
Further, since VbaseXLN 513.8 kV for the low-voltage Y windings, Van 5 1.039(13.8) 
5 14.34 kV, and
Van 5 14.34/4.1398   kV
b.  For the D–Y transformer, Figure 3.18(b),
Ean 5 e2j308VAN 5 1.0/2308   per unit
Ia 5 e2j308IA 5 0.8333/225.848 2 308 5 0.8333/255.848   per unit
Van 5 Ean 1 s jXeqdIa 5 1.0/2308 1 s j0.10ds0.8333/255.848d
Van 5 1.039/225.8618   per unit
Further, since VbaseXLN 5 13.8yÏ3 5 7.967 kV for the low-voltage D windings, 
Van 5 s1.039ds7.967d 5 8.278 kV, and
Van 5 8.278/225.8618   kV
FIGURE 3.18
Per-unit network 
for Example 3.7

124	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
Per-unit voltage drop and per-unit fault current:  
balanced three-phase transformer
A 200-MVA, 345-kVD/34.5-kV Y substation transformer has an 8% leakage re-
actance. The transformer acts as a connecting link between 345-kV transmission 
and 34.5-kV distribution. Transformer winding resistances and exciting current 
are neglected. The high-voltage bus connected to the transformer is assumed to 
be an ideal 345-kV positive-sequence source with negligible source impedance. 
Using the transformer ratings as base values, determine:
a.	 The per-unit magnitudes of transformer voltage drop and voltage at the 
low-voltage terminals when rated transformer current at 0.8 p.f. lagging 
enters the high-voltage terminals.
b.	 The per-unit magnitude of the fault current when a three-phase-to- 
ground bolted short circuit occurs at the low-voltage terminals.
SOLUTION 
In both parts (a) and (b), only balanced positive-sequence current will flow, since 
there are no imbalances. Because the only interest is in voltage and current mag-
nitudes, the D–Y transformer phase shift can be omitted.
a.  As shown in Figure 3.19(a),
Vdrop 5 IratedXeq 5 s1.0ds0.08d 5 0.08   per unit and
Van 5 VAN 2 s jXeqdIrated
5 1.0/08 2 (  j0.08ds1.0/236.878d
5 1.0 2 s j 0.08ds0.8 2 j 0.6d 5 0.952 2 j 0.064
5 0.954/23.858   per unit
b.  As shown in Figure 3.19(b),
ISC 5 VAN
Xeq
5 1.0
0.08 5 12.5   per unit
Under rated current conditions [part (a)], the 0.08 per-unit voltage drop across the 
transformer leakage reactance causes the voltage at the low-voltage terminals to be 
0.954 per unit. Also, under three-phase short-circuit conditions [part (b)], the fault 
current is 12.5 times the rated transformer current. This example illustrates a com-
promise in the design or specification of transformer leakage reactance. A low value 
is desired to minimize voltage drops, but a high value is desired to limit fault currents. 
Typical transformer leakage reactances are given in Table A.2 in the Appendix.
EXAMPLE 3.8

	
Section 3.6 Three-Winding Transformers	
125
3.6  Three-Winding Transformers
Figure 3.20(a) shows a basic single-phase three-winding transformer. The ideal trans-
former relations for a two-winding transformer, (3.1.8) and (3.1.14), easily can be 
extended to obtain corresponding relations for an ideal three-winding transformer. 
In actual units, these relations are
N1I1 5 N2I2 1 N3I3
(3.6.1)
E1
N1
5 E2
N2
5 E3
N3

(3.6.2)
where I1 enters the dotted terminal, I2 and I3 leave dotted terminals, and E1, E2, and 
E3 have their 1 polarities at dotted terminals. In per-unit, (3.6.1) and (3.6.2) are
I1p.u. 5 I2p.u. 1 I3p.u.
(3.6.3)
E1p.u. 5 E2p.u. 5 E3p.u.
(3.6.4)
where a common Sbase is selected for all three windings, and voltage bases are se-
lected in proportion to the rated voltages of the windings. These two per-unit 
relations are satisfied by the per-unit equivalent circuit shown in Figure 3.20(b). 
Also, external series impedance and shunt admittance branches are included in 
the practical three-winding transformer circuit shown in Figure 3.20(c). The shunt 
FIGURE 3.19
Circuits for  
Example 3.8

126	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
admittance branch, a core loss resistor in parallel with a magnetizing inductor, can 
be evaluated from an open-circuit test. Also, when one winding is left open, the 
three-winding transformer behaves as a two-winding transformer, and standard 
short-circuit tests can be used to evaluate per-unit leakage impedances, which are 
defined as follows:
Z12 5 per-unit leakage impedance measured from winding 1, with winding 2 
shorted and winding 3 open
Z13 5 per-unit leakage impedance measured from winding 1, with winding 3 
shorted and winding 2 open
Z23 5 per-unit leakage impedance measured from winding 2, with winding 3 
shorted and winding 1 open
From Figure 3.20(c), with winding 2 shorted and winding 3 open, the leakage imped-
ance measured from winding 1 is, neglecting the shunt admittance branch,
Z12 5  Z1 1  Z2
(3.6.5)
Similarly,
Z13 5  Z1 1  Z3
(3.6.6)
and
Z23 5  Z2 1 Z3
(3.6.7)
FIGURE 3.20
Single-phase 
three-winding 
transformer

	
Section 3.6 Three-Winding Transformers	
127
Solving (3.6.5) through (3.6.7),
Z1 5 1
2sZ12 1 Z13 2 Z23d
(3.6.8)
Z2 5 1
2sZ12 1 Z23 2 Z13d
(3.6.9)
Z3 5 1
2sZ13 1 Z23 2 Z12d
(3.6.10)
Equations (3.6.8) through (3.6.10) can be used to evaluate the per-unit series imped-
ances Z1, Z2, and Z3 of the three-winding transformer equivalent circuit from the 
per-unit leakage impedances Z12, Z13, and Z23, which, in turn, are determined from 
short-circuit tests.
Note that each of the windings on a three-winding transformer may have a 
different kVA rating. If the leakage impedances from short-circuit tests are expressed 
in per-unit based on winding ratings, they must first be converted to per-unit on a 
common Sbase before they are used in (3.6.8) through (3.6.10).
Three-winding single-phase transformer:  
per-unit impedances
The ratings of a single-phase three-winding transformer are
winding 1: 300 MVA, 13.8 kV
winding 2: 300 MVA, 199.2 kV
winding 3: 50 MVA, 19.92 kV
The leakage reactances, from short-circuit tests, are
X12 5 0.10 per unit on a 300-MVA, 13.8-kV base
X13 5 0.16 per unit on a 50-MVA, 13.8-kV base
X23 5 0.14 per unit on a 50-MVA, 199.2-kV base
Winding resistances and exciting current are neglected. Calculate the imped-
ances of the per-unit equivalent circuit using a base of 300 MVA and 13.8 kV 
for terminal 1.
SOLUTION 
Sbase 5 300 MVA is the same for all three terminals. Also, the specified voltage base 
for terminal 1 is Vbase1 5 13.8 kV. The base voltages for terminals 2 and 3 are then 
Vbase2 5 199.2 kV and Vbase3 5 19.92 kV, which are the rated voltages of these wind-
ings. From the data given, X12 5 0.10 per unit was measured from terminal 1 using 
the same base values as those specified for the circuit. However, X13 5 0.16 and  
X23 5 0.14 per unit on a 50-MVA base are first converted to the 300-MVA circuit base.
EXAMPLE 3.9
(Continued)

128	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
X13 5 s0.16d1
300
502 5  0.96   per unit
X23 5 s0.14d1
300
502 5  0.84   per unit
Then, from (3.6.8) through (3.6.10),
X1 5 1
2s0.10 1 0.96 2 0.84d 5    0.11   per unit
X2 5 1
2s0.10 1 0.84 2 0.96d 5 20.01   per unit
X3 5 1
2s0.84 1 0.96 2 0.10d 5     0.85   per unit
The per-unit equivalent circuit of this three-winding transformer is shown 
in Figure 3.21. Note that X2 is negative. This illustrates the fact that X1, X2, and X3 
are not leakage reactances, but instead are equivalent reactances derived from the 
leakage reactances. Leakage reactances are always positive.
Note also that the node where the three equivalent circuit reactances are 
connected does not correspond to any physical location within the transformer. 
Rather, it is simply part of the equivalent circuit representation. 
FIGURE 3.21
Circuit for 
Example 3.9
Three-winding three-phase transformer: balanced operation
Three transformers, each identical to that described in Example 3.9, are con-
nected as a three-phase bank in order to feed power from a 900-MVA, 13.8-kV 
generator to a 345-kV transmission line and to a 34.5-kV distribution line. The 
transformer windings are connected as follows:
13.8-kV windings (X): D, to generator
199.2-kV windings (H): solidly grounded Y, to 345-kV line
19.92-kV windings (M): grounded Y through Zn 5 j0.10 V, to 34.5-kV line
EXAMPLE 3.10

	
Section 3.7 Autotransformers	
129
3.7  Autotransformers
A single-phase two-winding transformer is shown in Figure 3.23(a) with two sepa-
rate windings, which is the usual two-winding transformer; the same transformer is 
shown in Figure 3.23(b) with the two windings connected in series, which is called an 
autotransformer. For the usual transformer [Figure 3.23(a)], the two windings are cou-
pled magnetically via the mutual core flux. For the autotransformer [Figure 3.23(b)],  
the windings are both electrically and magnetically coupled. The autotransformer 
has smaller per-unit leakage impedances than the usual transformer; this results in 
both smaller series-voltage drops (an advantage) and higher short-circuit currents 
The positive-sequence voltages and currents of the high- and medium-voltage Y 
windings lead the corresponding quantities of the low-voltage D winding by 30°. 
Draw the per-unit network, using a three-phase base of 900 MVA and 13.8 kV for 
terminal X. Assume balanced positive-sequence operation.
SOLUTION 
The per-unit network is shown in Figure 3.22. VbaseX 5 13.8 kV, which is the rated 
line-to-line voltage of terminal X. Since the M and H windings are Y-connected, 
VbaseM 5 Ï3s19.92d 5 34.5 kV, and VbaseH 5 Ï3s199.2d 5 345 kV, which are the 
rated line-to-line voltages of the M and H windings. Also, a phase-shifting trans-
former is included in the network. The neutral impedance is not included in the 
network, since there is no neutral current under balanced operation.
FIGURE 3.22
Per-unit network 
for Example 3.10
FIGURE 3.23
Ideal single-phase 
transformers

130	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
(a disadvantage). The autotransformer also has lower per-unit losses (higher effi-
ciency), lower exciting current, and lower cost if the turns ratio is not too large. The 
electrical connection of the windings, however, allows transient overvoltages to pass 
through the autotransformer more easily.
Autotransformer: single-phase
The single-phase two-winding 20-kVA, 480/120-volt transformer of Example 3.3  
is connected as an autotransformer, as in Figure 3.23(b), where winding 1 is the 
120-volt winding. For this autotransformer, determine (a) the voltage ratings  
EX and EH of the low- and high-voltage terminals, (b) the kVA rating, and (c) the 
per-unit leakage impedance.
SOLUTION
a.  Since the 120-volt winding is connected to the low-voltage terminal, EX 5 
120 volts. When EX 5 E1 5 120 volts is applied to the low-voltage terminal, E2 5 
480 volts is induced across the 480-volt winding, neglecting the voltage drop 
across the leakage impedance. Therefore, EH 5 E1 1 E2 5 120 1 480 5 600 volts.
b.  As a normal two-winding transformer rated 20 kVA, the rated current of the 
480-volt winding is I2 5 IH 5 20,000/480 5 41.667 A. As an autotransformer, 
the 480-volt winding can carry the same current. Therefore, the kVA rating SH 5 
EHIH 5 (600) (41.667) 5 25 kVA. Note also that when IH 5 I2 5 41.667 A, a 
current I1 5 (480/120)(41.667) 5 166.7 A is induced in the 120-volt winding. 
Therefore, Ix 5 I1 1I2 5 208.3 A (neglecting exciting current) and SX 5 EXIX 5 
(120)(208.3) 5 25 kVA, which is the same rating as calculated for the high-voltage 
terminal.
c.  From Example 3.3, the leakage impedance is 0.0729y/78.138 per unit as a 
normal, two-winding transformer. As an autotransformer, the leakage impedance 
in ohms is the same as for the normal transformer, since the core and windings are 
the same for both (only the external winding connections are different). However, 
the base impedances are different. For the high-voltage terminal, using (3.3.4),
ZbaseHold 5 s480d2
20,000 5 11.52 V  as a normal transformer
ZbaseHnew 5 s600d2
25,000 5 14.4   V  as an autotransformer
Therefore, using (3.3.10),
Zp.u.new 5 s0.0729/78.138d1
11.52
14.42 5 0.05832/78.138   per unit
EXAMPLE 3.11

	
Section 3.8 Transformers with Off-Nominal Turns Ratios	
131
3.8  Transformers with Off-Nominal 
Turns Ratios
It has been shown that models of transformers that use per-unit quantities are simpler 
than those that use actual quantities. The ideal transformer winding is eliminated when 
the ratio of the selected voltage bases equals the ratio of the voltage ratings of the 
windings. In some cases, however, it is impossible to select voltage bases in this man-
ner. For example, consider the two transformers connected in parallel in Figure 3.24. 
Transformer T1 is rated 13.8/345 kV and T2 is rated 13.2/345 kV. If VbaseH 5 345 kV is 
selected, then transformer T1 requires VbaseX 5 13.8 kV and T2 requires VbaseX 5 13.2 kV. 
It is clearly impossible to select the appropriate voltage bases for both transformers.
To accommodate this situation, develop a per-unit model of a transformer 
whose voltage ratings are not in proportion to the selected base voltages. Such a 
transformer is said to have an off-nominal turns ratio. Figure 3.25(a) shows a trans-
former with rated voltages V1rated and V2rated, which satisfy
V1rated 5 atV2rated
(3.8.1)
where at is assumed, in general, to be either real or complex. Suppose the selected 
voltage bases satisfy
Vbase1 5 bVbase2
(3.8.2)
Defining c 5 at
b, (3.8.1) can be rewritten as
V1rated 5 b1
at
b2 V2rated 5 bc V2rated
(3.8.3)
For this example, the rating is 25 kVA, 120/600 volts as an autotransformer versus 
20 kVA, 120/480 volts as a normal transformer. The autotransformer has both 
a larger kVA rating and a larger voltage ratio for the same cost. Also, the per-
unit leakage impedance of the autotransformer is smaller. However, the increased 
high-voltage rating as well as the electrical connection of the windings may  
require more insulation for both windings. 
FIGURE 3.24
Two transformers 
connected in parallel

132	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
Equation (3.8.3) can be represented by two transformers in series, as shown in 
Figure 3.25(b). The first transformer has the same ratio of rated winding voltages as 
the ratio of the selected base voltages, b. Therefore, this transformer has a standard 
per-unit model, as shown in Figure 3.9 or 3.17. Assume that the second transformer 
is ideal, and all real and reactive losses are associated with the first transformer. The 
resulting per-unit model is shown in Figure 3.25(c), where, for simplicity, the shunt-
exciting branch is neglected. Note that if at 5 b, then the ideal transformer winding 
shown in this figure can be eliminated, since its turns ratio c 5 (at/b) 5 1.
The per-unit model shown in Figure 3.25(c) is perfectly valid, but it is not suit-
able for some of the computer programs presented in later chapters because these 
programs do not accommodate ideal transformer windings. An alternative repre-
sentation can be developed, however, by writing nodal equations for this figure as 
follows:
3
I1
2I24 53
Y11
Y21
 Y12
Y224 3
V1
V24
(3.8.4)
where both I1 and –I2 are referenced into their nodes in accordance with the nodal 
equation method (Section 2.4). Recalling two-port network theory, the admittance 
parameters of (3.8.4) are, from Figure 3.23(c)
FIGURE 3.25
Transformer with 
off-nominal turns 
ratio

	
Section 3.8 Transformers with Off-Nominal Turns Ratios	
133
Y11 5 I1
V1*V2 5 0 5 1
Zeq
5 Yeq
(3.8.5)
Y22 5 2I2
V2*V1 5 0 5
1
Zeqyucu2 5 ucu2Yeq
(3.8.6)
Y12 5 I1
V2*V1 5 0 5
2cV2yZeq
V2
5 2cYeq
(3.8.7)
Y21 5 2I2
V1*V2 5 0 5 2c *I1
V1
5 2c *Yeq
(3.8.8)
Equations (3.8.4) through (3.8.8) with real or complex c are convenient for rep-
resenting transformers with off-nominal turns ratios in the computer programs pre-
sented later. Note that when c is complex, Y12 is not equal to Y21, and the preceding 
admittance parameters cannot be synthesized with a passive RLC circuit. However, 
the p network shown in Figure 3.25(d), which has the same admittance parameters 
as (3.8.4) through (3.8.8), can be synthesized for real c. Note also that when c 5 1, 
the shunt branches in this figure become open circuits (zero per unit mhos), and the 
series branch becomes Yeq per unit mhos (or Zeq per unit ohms).
Tap-changing three-phase transformer: per-unit positive- 
sequence network
A three-phase generator step-up transformer is rated 1000 MVA, 13.8 kV D/345 kV 
Y with Zeq 5 j0.10 per unit. The transformer high-voltage winding has ±10% 
taps. The system base quantities are
Sbase3f 5 500   MVA
VbaseXLL 5 13.8   kV
VbaseHLL 5 345   kV
Determine the per-unit equivalent circuit for the following tap settings:
a.	 Rated tap
b.	 –10% tap (providing a 10% voltage decrease for the high-voltage  
winding)
Assume balanced positive-sequence operation. Neglect transformer winding  
resistance, exciting current, and phase shift.
EXAMPLE 3.12
(Continued)

134	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
SOLUTION
a.  Using (3.8.1) and (3.8.2) with the low-voltage winding denoted winding 1,
at 5 13.8
345 5 0.04      b 5 VbaseXLL
VbaseHLL
5 13.8
345 5 at      c 5 1
From (3.3.11),
Zp.u.new 5 s j 0.10d 1
500
10002 5 j0.05   per unit
The per-unit equivalent circuit, not including winding resistance, exciting current, 
and phase shift is
b.  Using (3.8.1) and (3.8.2),
at 5
13.8
345s0.9d 5 0.04444        b 5 13.8
345 5 0.04
c 5 at
b 5 0.04444
0.04
5 1.1111
From Figure 3.23(d),
cYeq 5 1.11111
1
 j0.052 5 2j22.22   per unit
s1 2 cdYeq 5 s20.11111ds2j20d 5 1j 2.222   per unit
sucu2 2 cdYeq 5 s1.2346 2 1.1ds2j20d 5 2j2.469   per unit
The per-unit positive-sequence network is

	
Section 3.8 Transformers with Off-Nominal Turns Ratios	
135
Open PowerWorld Simulator case Example 3_12 (see Figure 3.26) and 
select Tools, Play to see an animated view of this LTC transformer example.  
Initially the generator/step-up transformer feeds a 500 MW/100 Mvar load. 
As is typical in practice, the transformer’s taps are adjusted in discrete 
steps, with each step changing the tap ratio by 0.625% (hence a 10% change  
requires 16 steps). Click on arrows next to the transformer’s tap to manually 
adjust the tap by one step. Note that changing the tap directly changes the 
load voltage.
Because of the varying voltage drops caused by changing loads, LTCs 
are often operated to automatically regulate a bus voltage. This is particu-
larly true when they are used as step-down transformers. To place the example 
transformer on automatic control, click on the LTC Control Status “No” field. 
This toggles the transformer control mode to automatic. Now the transformer 
manually changes its tap ratio to maintain the load voltage within a specified 
voltage range, between 0.995 and 1.005 per unit (343.3 to 346.7 kV) in this 
case. To see the LTC in automatic operation, use the load arrows to vary the 
load, particularly the Mvar field, noting that the LTC changes to keep the 
load’s voltage within the specified deadband. 
FIGURE 3.26
Screen for Example 3.12

136	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
The three-phase regulating transformers shown in Figures 3.27 and 3.28 can be 
modeled as transformers with off-nominal turns ratios. For the voltage-magnitude- 
regulating transformer shown in Figure 3.27, adjustable voltages DVan, DVbn, and 
DVcn which have equal magnitudes DV and which are in phase with the phase volt-
ages Van, Vbn, and Vcn are placed in the series link between buses a–a9, b–b9, and c–c9. 
Modeled as a transformer with an off-nominal turns ratio (see Figure 3.25), c 5 
(1 1 DV) for a voltage-magnitude increase toward bus abc, or c 5 (1 1 DV)–1 for an 
increase toward bus a9b9c9.
FIGURE 3.27
An example  
of a voltage- 
magnitude- 
regulating 
transformer
FIGURE 3.28
An example of a phase-angle-regulating transformer. Windings drawn in parallel are on the same core

	
Section 3.8 Transformers with Off-Nominal Turns Ratios	
137
For the phase-angle-regulating transformer in Figure 3.28, the series voltages 
DVan, DVbn, and DVcn, are ±90° out of phase with the phase voltages DVan, Vbn, and 
Vcn. The phasor diagram in Figure 3.28 indicates that each of the bus voltages Va’n, 
Vb’n, and Vc’n, has a phase shift that is approximately proportional to the magnitude 
of the added series voltage. Modeled as a transformer with an off-nominal turns ra-
tio (see Figure 3.25), c < 1/a for a phase increase toward bus abc or c < 1/2a for 
a phase increase toward bus a9b9c9.
Voltage-regulating and phase-shifting three-phase  
transformers
Two buses abc and a9b9c9 are connected by two parallel lines L1 and L2 with pos-
itive-sequence series reactances XL1 5 0.25 and XL2 5 0.20 per unit. A regulating 
transformer is placed in series with line L1 at bus a9b9c9. Determine the 2 3 2 bus 
admittance matrix when the regulating transformer (a) provides a 0.05 per-unit 
increase in voltage magnitude toward bus a9b9c9and (b) advances the phase 3° to-
ward bus a9b9c9. Assume that the regulating transformer is ideal. Also, the series 
resistance and shunt admittance of the lines are neglected.
SOLUTION 
The circuit is shown in Figure 3.29.
a.  For the voltage-magnitude-regulating transformer, c 5 (l 1 DV)21 5 (1.05)21 5 
0.9524 per unit. From (3.8.5) through (3.8.8), the admittance parameters of the 
regulating transformer in series with line L1 are
Y11L1 5
1
j0.25 5 2j4.0
Y22L1 5 s0.9524d2s2j4.0d 5 2j3.628
Y12L1 5 Y21L1 5 s20.9524ds2j4.0d 5 j3.810
For line L2 alone,
Y11L2 5 Y22L2 5
1
j0.20 5 2j5.0
Y12L2 5 Y21L2 5 2s2j5.0d 5 j5.0
Combining the above admittances in parallel,
Y11 5 Y11L1 1 Y11L2 5 2j4.0 2 j5.0 5 2j9.0
Y22 5 Y22L1 1 Y22L2 5 2j3.628 2 j5.0 5 2j8.628
Y12 5 Y21 5 Y12L1 1 Y12L2 5 j3.810 1 j5.0 5 j8.810   per unit
EXAMPLE 3.13
(Continued)

138	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
FIGURE 3.29
Positive-sequence 
circuit for 
Example 3.13
b.  For the phase-angle-regulating transformer, c 5 1/2a 5 1/238. Then, for 
this regulating transformer in series with line L1,
Y11L1 5
1
j0.25 5 2j4.0
Y22L1 5 u1.0/238u2s2j4.0d 5 2j4.0
Y12L1 5 2s1.0/238ds2j 4.0d 5 4.0/878 5 0.2093 1 j 3.9945
Y21L1 5 2s1.0/238d*s2j4.0d 5 4.0/938 5 20.2093 1 j3.9945
The admittance parameters for line L2 alone are given in part (a). Combining the 
admittances in parallel,
Y11 5 Y22 5 2j4.0 2 j5.0 5 2j9.0
Y12 5 0.2093 1 j3.9945 1 j5.0 5 0.2093 1 j8.9945
Y21 5 20.2093 1 j 3.9945 1 j 5.0 5 20.2093 1 j 8.9945   per unit
To see this example in the PowerWorld Simulator, open case Example 3_13 
(see Figure 3.30). In this case, the transformer and a parallel transmission 
line are assumed to be supplying power from a 345-kV generator to a 345-kV 
load. Initially, the off-nominal turns ratio is set to the value in part (a) of the 
example (PowerWorld has the off-nominal turns ratio on the load side [right-
hand] so its tap value of 1.05 5 c_1). To view the PowerWorld Simulator bus 
admittance matrix, select the Case Information ribbon, then Solution Details, 
Ybus. To see how the system flows vary with changes to the tap, select Tools, 
Play, and then click on the arrows next to the tap field to change the LTC 
tap in 0.625% steps. Next, to verify the results from part (b), change the tap 

	
Section 3.8 Transformers with Off-Nominal Turns Ratios	
139
field to 1.0 and the deg field to 3.0 degrees, and then again look at the bus 
admittance matrix. Click on the deg field arrow to vary the phase shift angle 
in one-degree steps. Notice that changing the phase angle primarily changes 
the real power flow, whereas changing the LTC tap changes the reactive power 
flow. In this example, the line flow fields show the absolute value of the real 
or reactive power flow; the direction of the flow is indicated with arrows. 
Traditional power flow programs usually indicate power flow direction using 
a convention that flow into a transmission line or transformer is assumed to 
be positive. You can display results in PowerWorld Simulator using this con-
vention by first clicking on the Onelines ribbon and then selecting Oneline 
Options. Then on the Display Options tab uncheck the Use Absolute Values 
for MW/Mvar Line Flows fields. 
Note that a voltage-magnitude-regulating transformer controls the reactive 
power flow in the series link in which it is installed, whereas a phase-angle-regulating 
transformer controls the real power flow (see Problem 3.59).
FIGURE 3.30
Screen for Example 3.13

140	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS
SECTION 3.1
	3.1	
The “Ohm’s law” for the magnetic circuit states that the net magneto-
motive force (mmf) equals the product of the core reluctance and the 
core flux.
(a) True                 (b) False
	3.2	
For an ideal transformer, the efficiency is
(a) 0%                  (b) 100%                  (c) 50%
	3.3	
For an ideal 2-winding transformer, the ampere-turns of the primary 
winding, N1 I1, is equal to the ampere-turns of the secondary winding,  
N2 I2
(a) True                 (b) False
	3.4	
An ideal transformer has no real or reactive power loss.
(a) True                 (b) False
	3.5	
For an ideal 2-winding transformer, an impedance Z2 connected across 
winding 2 (secondary) is referred to winding 1 (primary) by multiplying 
Z2 by
(a) The turns ratio (N1/N2)
(b) The square of the turns ratio (N1/N2)2
(c) The cubed turns ratio (N1/N2)3
	3.6	
Consider Figure 3.4. For an ideal phase-shifting transformer, the imped-
ance is unchanged when it is referred from one side to the other.
(a) True                 (b) False
SECTION 3.2
	3.7	
Consider Figure 3.5. Match the following, those on the left to those on 
the right.
(i)	 Im	
(a) Exciting current
(ii)	 Ic	
(b) Magnetizing current
(iii) Ie	
(c)  Core loss current
	3.8	
The units of admittance, conductance, and susceptance are siemens.
(a) True                 (b) False
	3.9	
Match the following:
(i)  Hysteresis loss	
    (a) Can be reduced by constructing the core 
with laminated sheets of alloy steel
(ii) Eddy current loss	     (b) Can be reduced by the use of special high 
grades of alloy steel as core material.
	3.10	 For large power transformers rated more than 500 kVA, the winding 
resistances, which are small compared with the leakage reactances, can 
often be neglected.
	
(a) True                 (b) False

3.11	 For a short-circuit test on a 2-winding transformer, with one winding 
shorted, can you apply the rated voltage on the other winding?
(a) Yes                   (b) No
SECTION 3.3
3.12	 The per-unit quantity is always dimensionless.
(a) True                 (b) False
3.13	 Consider the adopted per-unit system for the transformers. Specify true 
or false for each of the following statements:
(a) For the entire power system of concern, the value of Sbase is not the same.
(b) The ratio of the voltage bases on either side of a transformer is 
selected to be the same as the ratio of the transformer voltage ratings.
	
(c) Per-unit impedance remains unchanged when referred from one side 
of a transformer to the other.
3.14	 The ideal transformer windings are eliminated from the per-unit equiva-
lent circuit of a transformer.
	
(a) True                 (b) False
3.15	 To convert a per-unit impedance from “old” to “new” base values, the 
equation to be used is
sad Zp.u.new 5 Zp.u.old 1
Vbaseold
Vbasenew2
2 1
Sbasenew
Sbaseold2
sbd Zp.u.new 5 Zp.u.old 1
Vbaseold
Vbasenew2
2 1
Sbasenew
Sbaseold2
scd Zp.u.new 5 Zp.u.old 1
Vbaseold
Vbasenew2
2 1
Sbaseold
Sbasenew2
3.16	 In developing per-unit circuits of systems such as the one shown in  
Figure 3.10, when moving across a transformer, the voltage base is 
changed in proportion to the transformer voltage ratings.
	
(a) True                 (b) False
3.17	 Consider Figure 3.10 of the text. The per-unit leakage reactance of trans-
former T1, given as 0.1 p.u., is based on the name plate ratings of trans-
former T1.
	
(a) True                 (b) False
3.18	 For balanced three-phase systems, Zbase is given by
Zbase 5 V2
baseLL
Sbase3
	
(a) True                 (b) False
	
Multiple Choice Questions	
141

142	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
SECTION 3.4
3.19	 With the American Standard notation, in either a Y–D or D–Y trans-
former, positive- sequence quantities on the high-voltage side shall lead 
their corresponding quantities on the low-voltage side by 308.
	
(a) True                 (b) False
3.20	 In either a Y–D or D–Y transformer, as per the American Standard 
notation, the negative-sequence phase shift is the reverse of the positive- 
sequence phase shift.
	
(a) True                 (b) False
3.21	 In order to avoid difficulties with third-harmonic exciting current, which 
three-phase transformer connection is seldom used for step-up trans-
formers between a generator and a transmission line in power systems.
	
(a) Y–D                 (b) D–Y                   (c) Y–Y
3.22	 Does an open-D connection permit balanced three-phase operation?
	
(a) Yes                   (b) No
3.23	 Does an open-D operation, the kVA rating compared to that of the orig-
inal three-phase bank is
	
(a) 2/3                    (b) 58%                   (c) 1
SECTION 3.5
3.24	 It is stated that
(i)  balanced three-phase circuits can be solved in per unit on a per-phase 
basis after converting D-load impedances to equivalent Y impedances.
(ii) Base values can be selected either on a per-phase basis or on a three-
phase basis.
(a) Both statements are true.
(b) Neither is true.
(c) Only one of the above is true.
3.25	 In developing per-unit equivalent circuits for three-phase transformers, 
under balanced three-phase operation.
(i)   A common Sbase is selected for both the H and X terminals.
(ii) The ratio of the voltage bases VbaseH/VbaseX is selected to be equal to the 
ratio of the rated line-to-line voltages VratedHLL/VratedXLL.
(a) Only one of the above is true.
(b) Neither is true.
(c) Both statements are true.
3.26	 In per-unit equivalent circuits of practical three-phase transformers, 
under balanced three-phase operation, in which of the following connec-
tions would a phase-shifting transformer come up?
	
(a) Y–Y                   (b) Y–D                    (c) D–D
3.27	 A low value of transformer leakage reactance is desired to minimize the 
voltage drop, but a high value is desired to limit the fault current, thereby 
leading to a compromise in the design specification.
	
(a) True                 (b) False

SECTION 3.6
3.28	 Consider a single-phase three-winding transformer with the primary 
excited winding of N1 turns carrying a current I1 and two secondary 
windings of N2 and N3 turns, delivering currents of I2 and I3 respectively. 
For an ideal case, how are the ampere-turns balanced?
(a) N1I1 5 N2I2 2 N3I3	    (b) N1I1 5 N2I2 1 N3I3
(c) N1I1 5 2(N2I2 2 N3I3)
3.29	 For developing per-unit equivalent circuits of single-phase three-winding 
transformer, a common Sbase is selected for all three windings, and voltage 
bases are selected in proportion to the rated voltage of the windings.
	
(a) True                 (b) False
3.30	 Consider the equivalent circuit of Figure 3.20(c) in the text. After neglect-
ing the winding resistances and exciting current, could X1, X2, or X3 
become negative, even though the leakage reactance are always positive?
	
(a) Yes                   (b) No
SECTION 3.7
3.31	 Consider an ideal single-phase 2-winding transformer of turns ratio 
N1/N2 5 a. If it is converted to an autotransformer arrangement with 
a transformation ratio of VH/VX 5 1 1 a, (the autotransformer rating/
two-winding transformer rating) would then be
(a) 1 1 a                  (b) 1 1 1
a                 (c) a
3.32	 For the same output, the autotransformer (with not too large a turns 
ratio) is smaller in size than a two-winding transformer and has high  
efficiency as well as superior voltage regulation.
	
(a) True                 (b) False
3.33	 The direct electrical connection of the windings allows transient over 
voltages to pass through the autotransformer more easily, and that is an 
important disadvantage of the autotransformer.
	
(a) True                 (b) False
SECTION 3.8
3.34	 Consider Figure 3.25 of the text for a transformer with off-nominal turns 
ratio.
(i)   The per-unit equivalent circuit shown in part (c) contains an ideal trans-
former which cannot be accommodated by some computer programs.
(a) True              (b) False
(ii)  In the p-circuit representation for real c in part (d), the admittance 
parameters Y11 and Y12 would be unequal.
(a) True              (b) False
(iii) For complex c, can the admittance parameters be synthesized with a 
passive RLC circuit?
(a) Yes              (b) No
	
Multiple Choice Questions	
143

144	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
PROBLEMS
SECTION 3.1
3.1	
(a) An ideal single-phase two-winding transformer with turns ratio at 5 
N1/N2 is connected with a series impedance Z2 across winding 2. If 
one wants to replace Z2, with a series impedance Z1 across winding 1 
and keep the terminal behavior of the two circuits to be identical, find  
Z1 in terms of Z2.
	
(b) Would the above result be true if instead of a series impedance there 
is a shunt impedance?
	
(c) Can one refer a ladder network on the secondary (2) side to the pri-
mary (1) side simply by multiplying every impendance bya2
t ?
3.2	
An ideal transformer with N1 5 1000 and N2 5 250 is connected with an 
impedance Z22 across winding 2. If V1 5 1000 /08 V and I1 5 5 /2308 
A, determine V2, I2, Z2, and the impedance Z92, which is the value of Z2 
referred to the primary side of the transformer.
3.3	
Consider an ideal transformer with N1 5 3000 and N2 5 1000 turns. Let 
winding 1 be connected to a source whose voltage is e1 (t) 5 100(1 2 |t|) 
volts for 21 # t # 1 and e1 (t) 5 0 for |t| . 1 second. A 2-farad capacitor 
is connected across winding 2. Sketch e1 (t), e2 (t), i1(t), and i2(t) versus 
time t.
3.4	
A single-phase 100-kVA, 2400/240-volt, 60-Hz distribution transformer 
is used as a step-down transformer. The load, which is connected to the 
240-volt secondary winding, absorbs 60 kVA at 0.8 power factor lagging 
and is at 230 volts. Assuming an ideal transformer, calculate the follow-
ing: (a) primary voltage, (b) load impedance, (c) load impedance referred 
to the primary, and (d) the real and reactive power supplied to the pri-
mary winding.
3.5	
Rework Problem 3.4 if the load connected to the 240-V secondary 
winding absorbs 110 kVA under short-term overload conditions at an 
0.8 power factor leading and at 230 volts.
3.6	
For a conceptual single-phase phase-shifting transformer, the primary 
voltage leads the secondary voltage by 308. A load connected to the sec-
ondary winding absorbs 110 kVA at an 0.8 power factor leading and at a 
voltage E2 5 277/08 volts. Determine (a) the primary voltage, (b) primary 
and secondary currents, (c) load impedance referred to the primary wind-
ing, and (d) complex power supplied to the primary winding.
3.7	
Consider a source of voltage v(t) 5 10Ï2 sin(2t)V, with an internal 
resistance of 1800 V. A transformer that can be considered as ideal is 
used to couple a 50-V resistive load to the source. (a) Determine the 
transformer primary-to-secondary turns ratio required to ensure max-
imum power transfer by matching the load and source resistances.  
(b) Find the average power delivered to the load, assuming maximum 
power transfer.

3.8	
For the circuit shown in Figure 3.31, determine vout(t)
SECTION 3.2
3.9 	
A single-phase transformer has 2000 turns on the primary winding and 
500 turns on the secondary. Winding resistances are R1 5 2 V, and R2 5 
0.125 V; leakage reactances are X1 5 8 V and X2 5 0.5 V. The resistance 
load on the secondary is 12 V.
	
(a) If the applied voltage at the terminals of the primary is 1000 V, deter-
mine V2 at the load terminals of the transformer, neglecting magnetizing 
current.
	
(b) If the voltage regulation is defined as the difference between the volt-
age magnitude at the load terminals of the transformer at full load and at 
no load in percent of full-load voltage with input voltage held constant, 
compute the percent voltage regulation.
3.10	 A single-phase step-down transformer is rated 13 MVA, 66 kV/11.5 kV. 
With the 11.5 kV winding short-circuited, rated current flows when the 
voltage applied to the primary is 5.5 kV. The power input is read as 100 kW. 
Determine Req1 and Xeq1 in ohms referred to the high-voltage winding.
3.11	 For the transformer in Problem 3.10, the open-circuit test with 11.5 kV 
applied results in a power input of 65 kW and a current of 30 A. Compute 
the values for Gc and Bm in siemens referred to the high-voltage winding. 
Compute the efficiency of the transformer for a load of 10 MW at 0.8 p.f. 
lagging at rated voltage.
3.12 	 The following data are obtained when open-circuit and short-circuit tests 
are performed on a single-phase, 50-kVA, 2400/240-volt, 60-Hz distribu-
tion transformer.
FIGURE 3.31
Problem 3.8
VOLTAGE  
(volts)
CURRENT 
(amperes)
POWER 
(watts)
Measurements on low-voltage side 
with high-voltage winding open
240
4.85
173
Measurements on high-voltage side 
with low-voltage winding shorted
52.0
20.8
650
	
Problems	
145

146	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
	
(a) Neglecting the series impedance, determine the exciting admittance 
referred to the high-voltage side. (b) Neglecting the exciting admittance, 
determine the equivalent series impedance referred to the high-voltage 
side. (c) Assuming equal series impedances for the primary and referred 
secondary, obtain an equivalent T-circuit referred to the high-voltage side.
3.13	 A single-phase 50-kVA, 2400/240-volt, 60-Hz distribution transformer 
has a 1-ohm equivalent leakage reactance and a 5000-ohm magnetizing 
reactance referred to the high-voltage side. If rated voltage is applied to 
the high-voltage winding, calculate the open-circuit secondary voltage. 
Neglect I2R and G2
cV losses. Assume equal series leakage reactances for 
the primary and the referred secondary.
3.14	 A single-phase 50-kVA, 2400/240-volt, 60-Hz distribution transformer is 
used as a step-down transformer at the load end of a 2400-volt feeder 
whose series impedance is (1.0 1 j 2.0) ohms. The equivalent series 
impedance of the transformer is (1.0 1 j 2.5) ohms referred to the high-
voltage (primary) side. The transformer is delivering rated load at a 0.8 
power factor lagging and at a rated secondary voltage. Neglecting the 
transformer exciting current, determine (a) the voltage at the transformer 
primary terminals, (b) the voltage at the sending end of the feeder, and  
(c) the real and reactive power delivered to the sending end of the feeder.
3.15	 Rework Problem 3.14 if the transformer is delivering rated load at rated 
secondary voltage and at (a) unity power factor, (b) 0.8 power factor lead-
ing. Compare the results with those of Problem 3.14.
3.16	 A single-phase, 50-kVA, 2400/240-V, 60-Hz distribution transformer has 
the following parameters:
	
	
Resistance of the 2400-V winding: R1 5 0.75 V
	
	
Resistance of the 240-V winding: R2 5 0.0075 V
	
	
Leakage reactance of the 2400-V winding: X1 5 1.0 V
	
	
Leakage reactance of the 240-V winding: X2 5 0.01 V
	
	
Exciting admittance on the 240-V side 5 0.003 2 j 0.02 S
	
(a) Draw the equivalent circuit referred to the high-voltage side of the 
transformer.
	
(b) Draw the equivalent circuit referred to the low-voltage side of the 
transformer. Show the numerical values of impedances on the equiv-
alent circuits.
3.17	 The transformer of Problem 3.16 is supplying a rated load of 50 kVA at a 
rated sec ondary voltage of 240 V and at 0.8 power factor lagging. Neglect 
the transformer exciting current. (a) Determine the input terminal voltage 
of the transformer on the high-voltage side. (b) Sketch the corresponding 
phasor diagram. (c) If the transformer is used as a step-down transformer 
at the load end of a feeder whose impedance is 0.5 1 j 2.0 V, find the volt-
age VS and the power factor at the sending end of the feeder.

SECTION 3.3
3.18	 Using the transformer ratings as base quantities, work Problem 3.13 in 
per-unit.
3.19	 Using the transformer ratings as base quantities, work Problem 3.14 in 
per-unit.
3.20	 Using base values of 20 kVA and 115 volts in zone 3, rework Example 3.4.
3.21	 Rework Example 3.5; using Sbase3f 5 100 kVA and VbaseLL 5 600 volts.
3.22	 A balanced Y-connected voltage source with Eag 5 277/08 volts is applied 
to a balanced-Y load in parallel with a balanced-D load where ZY 5 20 1 
j 10 and ZD 5 30 2 j 15 ohms. The Y load is solidly grounded. Using base 
values of Sbase1f 5 10 kVA and VbaseLN 5 277 volts, calculate the source 
current Ia in per-unit and in amperes.
3.23	 Figure 3.32 shows the oneline diagram of a three-phase power system. By 
selecting a common base of 100 MVA and 22 kV on the generator side, 
draw an impedance diagram showing all impedances including the load 
impedance in per-unit. The data are given as follows:
	
	
G:	
90 MVA		
22 kV	
	
x 5 0.18 per unit
	
	
T1:	
50 MVA		
22/220 kV	
x 5 0.10 per unit
	
	
T2:	
40 MVA		
220/11 kV	
x 5 0.06 per unit
	
	
T3:	
40 MVA		
22/110 kV	
x 5 0.064 per unit
	
	
T4:	
40 MVA		
110/11 kV	
x 5 0.08 per unit
	
	
M:	
66.5 MVA	
10.45 kV	
x 5 0.185 per unit
	
Lines 1 and 2 have series reactances of 48.4 and 65.43 V, respectively. At 
bus 4, the three-phase load absorbs 57 MVA at 10.45 kV and 0.6 power 
factor lagging.
G
M
FIGURE 3.32
Problem 3.23
3.24	 For Problem 3.18, the motor operates at full load, at 0.8 power factor 
leading, and at a terminal voltage of 10.45 kV. Determine (a) the voltage 
at bus 1, which is the generator bus, and (b) the generator and motor 
internal EMFs.
	
Problems	
147

148	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
3.25	 Consider a single-phase electric system shown in Figure 3.33. Transform-
ers are rated as follows:
	
	
X–Y 15 MVA, 13.8/138 kV, leakage reactance 10% 
	
	
Y–Z 15 MVA, 138/69 kV, leakage reactance 8%
	
With the base in circuit Y chosen as 15 MVA, 138 kV, determine the per-
unit impedance of the 500 V resistive load in circuit Z, referred to circuits 
Z, Y, and X. Neglecting magnetizing currents, transformer resistances, 
and line impedances, draw the impedance diagram in per unit.
X–Y
Y–Z
FIGURE 3.33
Single-phase electric 
system for 
Problem 3.25
3.26	 A bank of three single-phase transformers, each rated 30 MVA, 
38.1/3.81 kV, are connected in Y–D with a balanced load of three 1 V,  
Y-connected resistors. Choosing a base of 90 MVA, 66 kV for the 
high-voltage side of the three-phase transformer, specify the base for 
the low-voltage side. Compute the per-unit resistance of the load on 
the base for the low-voltage side. Also, determine the load resistance 
in ohms referred to the high-voltage side and the per-unit value on the  
chosen base.
3.27	 A three-phase transformer is rated 1000 MVA, 220 Y/22 D kV. The 
Y-equivalent short-circuit impedance, considered equal to the leak-
age reactance, measured on the low-voltage side is 0.1 V. Compute 
the per-unit reactance of the transformer. In a system in which the 
base on the high-voltage side of the transformer is 100 MVA, 230 kV, 
what value of the per-unit reactance should be used to represent this 
transformer?
3.28	 For the system shown in Figure 3.34, draw an impedance diagram in per 
unit by choosing 100 kVA to be the base kVA and 2400 V as the base 
voltage for the generators.
T1
T2
p.u.
p.u.
p.u.
p.u.
FIGURE 3.34
System for 
Problem 3.28

3.29	 Consider three ideal single-phase transformers (with a voltage gain of h) 
put together as a D–V three-phase bank as shown in Figure 3.35. Assum-
ing positive-sequence voltages for Van, Vbn, and Vcn, find Va9n9,Vb9n9, and 
VC9n9 in terms of Van, Vbn, and Vcn, respectively.
	
(a) Would such relationships hold for the line voltages as well?
	
(b) Looking into the current relationships, express I9a, I9b, and I9c in terms 
of Ia, Ib, and Ic, respectively.
	
(c) Let S9 and S be the per-phase complex power output and input, 
respectively. Find S9 in terms of S.
FIGURE 3.35
D2Y connection  
for Problem 3.29
3.30	 Reconsider Problem 3.29. If Van, Vbn, and Vcn are a negative-sequence set, 
how would the voltage and current relationships change?
	
(a) If C1 is the complex positive-sequence voltage gain in Problem 3.29 
and (b) if C2 is the negative sequence complex voltage gain, express the 
relationship between C1 and C2
3.31	 If positive-sequence voltages are assumed and the Y-D connection is con-
sidered, again with ideal transformers as in Problem 3.29, find the com-
plex voltage gain C3.
	
(a) What would the gain be for a negative-sequence set?
	
(b) Comment on the complex power gain.
	
(c) When terminated in a symmetric Y-connected load, find the referred 
impedance Z9L, the secondary impedance ZL referred to primary (i.e., the 
per-phase driving-point impedance on the primary side), in terms of ZL 
and the complex voltage gain C.
SECTION 3.4
3.32	 Determine the positive- and negative-sequence phase shifts for the three-
phase transformers shown in Figure 3.36.
3.33	 Consider the three single-phase two-winding transformers shown in 
Figure 3.37. The high-voltage windings are connected in Y. (a) For the 
	
Problems	
149

150	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
low-voltage side, connect the windings in D, place the polarity marks, and 
label the terminals a, b, and c in accordance with the American standard. 
(b) Relabel the terminals a9, b9, and c9 such that VAN is 908 out of phase 
with Va9n for positive sequence.
FIGURE 3.36
Problems 3.32 and 3.52 (Coils drawn on the same vertical line are on the same core)
FIGURE 3.37
Problem 3.33

3.34	 Three single-phase, two-winding transformers, each rated 450 MVA,  
20 kV/288.7 kV, with leakage reactance Xeq 5 0.10 per unit, are connected 
to form a three-phase bank. The high-voltage windings are connected in 
Y with a solidly grounded neutral. Draw the per-unit equivalent circuit if 
the low-voltage windings are connected (a) in D with American standard 
phase shift or (b) in Y with an open neutral. Use the transformer ratings 
as base quantities. Winding resistances and exciting current are neglected.
3.35	 Consider a bank of three single-phase two-winding transformers whose 
high-voltage terminals are connected to a three-phase, 13.8-kV feeder. The 
low-voltage terminals are connected to a three-phase substation load rated 
2.0 MVA and 2.5 kV. Determine the required voltage, current, and MVA 
ratings of both windings of each transformer, when the high-voltage/low-
voltage windings are connected (a) Y–D, (b) D–Y, (c) Y–Y, and (d) D–D.
3.36	 Three single-phase two-winding transformers, each rated 25 MVA, 
34.5/13.8 kV, are connected to form a three-phase D–D bank. Balanced 
positive-sequence voltages are applied to the high-voltage terminals, and a 
balanced, resistive Y load connected to the low-voltage terminals absorbs 
75 MW at 13.8 kV. If one of the single-phase transformers is removed 
(resulting in an open-D connection) and the balanced load is simultane-
ously reduced to 43.3 MW (57.7% of the original value), determine (a) the 
load voltages Van, Vbn, and Vcn; (b) load currents Ia, Ib, and Ic; and (c) the 
MVA supplied by each of the remaining two transformers. Are balanced 
voltages still applied to the load? Is the open-D transformer overloaded?
3.37	 Three single-phase two-winding transformers, each rated 25 MVA, 
54.2/5.42 kV, are connected to form a three-phase Y–D bank with a bal-
anced Y-connected resistive load of 0.6 V per phase on the low-voltage 
side. By choosing a base of 75 MVA (three phase) and 94 kV (line-to-line)  
for the high-voltage side of the transformer bank, specify the base quan-
tities for the low-voltage side. Determine the per-unit resistance of the 
load on the base for the low-voltage side. Then determine the load resis-
tance RL in ohms referred to the high-voltage side and the per-unit value 
of this load resistance on the chosen base.
3.38	 Consider a three-phase generator rated 300 MVA, 23 kV, supplying a sys-
tem load of 240 MVA and 0.9 power factor lagging at 230 kV through a 
330 MVA, 23 D/ 230 Y-kV step-up transformer with a leakage reactance 
of 0.11 per unit. (a) Neglecting the exciting current and choosing base 
values at the load of 100 MVA and 230 kV, find the phasor currents IA, IB, 
and IC supplied to the load in per unit. (b) By choosing the load terminal 
voltage VA as reference, specify the proper base for the generator circuit 
and determine the generator voltage V as well as the phasor currents IA, IB, 
and IC, from the generator. (Note: Take into account the phase shift of the 
transformer.) (c) Find the generator terminal voltage in kV and the real 
power supplied by the generator in MW. (d) By omitting the transformer 
phase shift altogether, check to see whether you get the same magnitude of 
generator terminal voltage and real power delivered by the generator.
	
Problems	
151

152	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
SECTION 3.5
3.39	 The leakage reactance of a three-phase, 300-MVA, 230 Y/23 D-kV trans-
former is 0.06 per unit based on its own ratings. The Y winding has a 
solidly grounded neutral. Draw the per-unit equivalent circuit. Neglect 
the exciting admittance and assume the American Standard phase shift.
3.40	 Choosing system bases to be 240/24 kV and 100 MVA, redraw the per-
unit equivalent circuit for Problem 3.39.
3.41	 Consider the single-line diagram of the power system shown in  
Figure 3.38. Equipment ratings are
Generator 1:
1000 MVA, 18 kV, X” 5  
0.2 per unit
Generator 2:
1000 MVA, 18 kV, X” 5 0.2 p.u.
Synchronous motor 3:
1500 MVA, 20 kV, X” 5 0.2 p.u.
Three-phase D–Y transformers
T1,T2, T3, T4:
1000 MVA, 500 kV Y/20 kV D, 
X 5 0.1 p.u.
Three-phase Y–Y transformer T5:
1500 MVA, 500 kV Y/20 kV Y, 
X 5 0.1 p.u.
	
Neglecting resistance, transformer phase shift, and magnetizing reac-
tance, draw the equivalent reactance diagram. Use a base of 100 MVA 
and 500 kV for the 50-ohm line. Determine the per-unit reactances.
FIGURE 3.38
Problems 3.41  
and 3.42
3.42	 For the power system in Problem 3.41, the synchronous motor absorbs 
1500 MW at 0.8 power factor leading with the bus 3 voltage at 18 kV. 
Determine the bus 1 and bus 2 voltages in kV. Assume that generators 1 
and 2 deliver equal real powers and equal reactive powers. Also assume a 
balanced three-phase system with positive-sequence sources.

3.43	 Three single-phase transformers, each rated 10 MVA, 66.4/12.5 kV, 60 Hz,  
with an equivalent series reactance of 0.1 per unit divided equally between 
primary and secondary, are connected in a three-phase bank. The high-
voltage windings are Y-connected and their terminals are directly con-
nected to a 115-kV three-phase bus. The secondary terminals are all 
shorted together. Find the currents entering the high-voltage terminals 
and leaving the low-voltage terminals if the low-voltage windings are (a) 
Y-connected and (b) D-connected.
3.44	 A 130-MVA, 13.2-kV three-phase generator, which has a positive- 
sequence reactance of 1.5 per unit on the generator base, is connected to a 
135-MVA, 13.2 D/115 Y-kV step-up transformer with a series impedance 
of (0.0051 j 0.1) per unit on its own base. (a) Calculate the per-unit gen-
erator reactance on the transformer base. (b) The load at the transformer 
terminals is 15 MW at unity power factor and at 115 kV. Choosing the 
transformer high-side voltage as the reference phasor, draw a phasor dia-
gram for this condition. (c) For the condition of part (b), find the trans-
former low-side voltage and the generator internal voltage behind its 
reactance. Also compute the generator output power and power factor.
3.45 	 Figure 3.39 shows a oneline diagram of a system in which the three-phase 
generator is rated 300 MVA, 20 kV with a subtransient reactance of 0.2 per 
unit and with its neutral grounded through a 0.4-V reactor. The transmis-
sion line is 64 km long with a series reactance of 0.5 V/km. The three-phase 
transformer T1 is rated 350 MVA, 230/ 20 kV with a leakage reactance of 
0.1 per unit. Transformer T2 is composed of three single-phase transform-
ers, each rated 100 MVA, 127/13.2 kV with a leakage reactance of 0.1 per 
unit. Two 13.2-kV motors M1 and M2 with a subtransient reactance of 
0.2 per unit for each motor represent the load. M1 has a rated input of  
200 MVA with its neutral grounded through a 0.4-V current-limiting reac-
tor. M2 has a rated input of 100 MVA with its neutral not connected to 
ground. Neglect phase shifts associated with the transformers. Choose 
the generator rating as base in the generator circuit and draw the posi-
tive-sequence reactance diagram showing all reactances in per unit.
3.46	 The motors M1 and M2 of Problem 3.45 have inputs of 120 and 60 MW, 
respectively, at 13.2 kV, and both operate at unity power factor. Deter-
mine the generator terminal voltage and voltage regulation of the line. 
Neglect transformer phase shifts.
3.47	 Consider the oneline diagram shown in Figure 3.40. The three-phase 
transformer bank is made up of three identical single-phase transformers, 
FIGURE 3.39
Problems 3.45  
and 3.46
	
Problems	
153

154	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
each specified by X1 5 0.24 V (on the low-voltage side), negligible resis-
tance and magnetizing current, and turns ratio h 5 N2/ N1 5 10. The 
transformer bank is delivering 100 MW at 0.8 p.f. lagging to a substation 
bus whose voltage is 230 kV.
	
(a) Determine the primary current magnitude, primary voltage (line-to-
line) magnitude, and the three-phase complex power supplied by the gen-
erator. Choose the line-to-neutral voltage at the bus, Va9 n9 as the reference. 
Account for the phase shift, and assume positive-sequence operation.
	
(b) Find the phase shift between the primary and secondary voltages.
FIGURE 3.40
Oneline diagram  
for Problem 3.47
3.48	 With the same transformer banks as in Problem 3.47, Figure 3.41 shows 
the oneline diagram of a generator, a step-up transformer bank, a trans-
mission line, a step-down transformer bank, and an impedance load. The 
generator terminal voltage is 15 kV (line-to-line).
T1
T2
FIGURE 3.41
Oneline diagram  
for Problem 3.48
	
(a) Draw the per-phase equivalent circuit, accounting for phase shifts for 
positive-sequence operation.
	
(b) By choosing the line-to-neutral generator terminal voltage as the 
reference, determine the magnitudes of the generator current, transmis-
sion-line current, load current, and line-to-line load voltage. Also, find 
the three-phase complex power delivered to the load.
3.49	 Consider the single-line diagram of a power system shown in Figure 3.42 
with equipment ratings given:
	
	
Generator G1:	
	
	
50 MVA, 13.2 kV, x 5 0.15 p.u.
	
	
Generator G2:	
	
	
20 MVA, 13.8 kV, x 5 0.15 p.u.
	
	
Three-phase D–Y transformer T1:	
80 MVA, 13.2 D/165 Y kV,  X 5 0.1 p.u.
	
	
Three-phase Y–D transformer T2:	
40 MVA, 165 Y/13.8 D kV,  X 5 0.1 p.u.
	
	
Load:	
	
	
	
40 MVA, 0.8 PF lagging, operat-
ing at 150 kV

	
Choose a base of 100 MVA for the system and 132-kV base in the  
transmission-line circuit. Let the load be modeled as a parallel combina-
tion of resistance and inductance. Neglect transformer phase shifts. Draw 
a per-phase equivalent circuit of the system showing all impedances in 
per unit.
SECTION 3.6
3.50	 A single-phase three-winding transformer has the following parameters: 
Z1 5 Z2 5 Z3 5 0 1 j0.05, GC 5 0, and BM 5 0.2 per unit. Three iden-
tical transformers, as described, are connected with their primaries in Y 
(solidly grounded neutral) and with their secondaries and tertiaries in D. 
Draw the per-unit sequence networks of this transformer bank.
3.51	 The ratings of a three-phase three-winding transformer are
	
	
Primary (1):   Y connected, 66 kV, 15 MVA
	
	
Secondary (2): Y connected, 13.2 kV, 10 MVA
	
	
Tertiary (3):   A connected, 2.3 kV, 5 MVA
	
Neglecting winding resistances and exciting current, the per-unit leakage 
reactances are
	
	
X12 5 0.08 on a 15-MVA,66-kV base
	
	
X13 5 0.10 on a 15-MVA,66-kV base
	
	
X23 5 0.09 on a 10-MVA, 13.2-kV base
	
(a) Determine the per-unit reactances X1, X2, X3 of the equivalent circuit 
on a 15-MVA, 66-kV base at the primary terminals. (b) Purely resistive 
loads of 7.5 MW at 13.2 kV and 5 MW at 2.3 kV are connected to the sec-
ondary and tertiary sides of the transformer, respectively. Draw the per-
unit impedance diagram, showing the per-unit impedances on a 15-MVA, 
66-kV base at the primary terminals.
3.52	 Draw the per-unit equivalent circuit for the transformers shown in 
Figure  3.34. Include ideal phase-shifting transformers showing phase 
shifts determined in Problem 3.32. Assume that all windings have the 
same kVA rating and that the equivalent leakage reactance of any two 
windings with the third winding open is 0.10 per unit. Neglect the exciting 
admittance.
T1
T2
FIGURE 3.42
Oneline diagram for 
Problem 3.49
	
Problems	
155

156	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
3.53	 The ratings of a three-phase, three-winding transformer are
	
	
Primary:   Y connected, 66 kV, 15 MVA
	
	
Secondary: Y connected, 13.2 kV, 10 MVA
	
	
Tertiary:   D connected, 2.3 kV, 5 MVA
	
Neglecting resistances and exciting current, the leakage reactances are:
	
	
XPS 5 0.09 per unit on a 15-MVA, 66-kV base
	
	
XPT 5 0.08 per unit on a 15-MVA, 66-kV base
	
	
XST 5 0.05 per unit on a 10-MVA, 13.2-kV base
	
Determine the per-unit reactances of the per-phase equivalent circuit 
using a base of 15 MVA and 66 kV for the primary.
3.54	 An infinite bus, which is a constant voltage source, is connected to the 
primary of the three-winding transformer of Problem 3.53. A 7.5-MVA, 
13.2-kV synchronous motor with a subtransient reactance of 0.2 per 
unit is connected to the transformer secondary. A 5-MW, 2.3-kV three-
phase resistive load is connected to the tertiary. Choosing a base of 66 kV  
and 15 MVA in the primary, draw the impedance diagram of the sys-
tem showing per-unit impedances. Neglect transformer exciting current, 
phase shifts, and all resistances except the resistive load.
SECTION 3.7
3.55	 A single-phase 10-kVA, 2300/230-volt, 60-Hz two-winding distribution 
transformer is connected as an autotransformer to step up the voltage 
from 2300 to 2530 volts. (a) Draw a schematic diagram of this arrange-
ment, showing all voltages and currents when delivering full load at rated 
voltage. (b) Find the permissible kVA rating of the autotransformer if 
the winding currents and voltages are not to exceed the rated values as a 
two-winding transformer. How much of this kVA rating is transformed 
by magnetic induction? (c) The following data are obtained from tests 
carried out on the transformer when it is connected as a two-winding 
transformer:
	
	
Open-circuit test with the low-voltage terminals excited:
	
	
Applied voltage 5 230 V, input current 5 0.45 A, input power 5 70 W.
	
	
Short-circuit test with the high-voltage terminals excited:
	
	
Applied voltage 5 120 V, input current 5 4.5 A, input power 5 240 W.
	
Based on the data, compute the efficiency of the autotransformer cor-
responding to full load, rated voltage, and 0.8 power factor lagging. 
Comment on why the efficiency is higher as an autotransformer than as a 
two-winding transformer.

3.56	 Three single-phase two-winding transformers, each rated 3 kVA, 220/110 
volts, 60 Hz, with a 0.10 per-unit leakage reactance, are connected as a 
three-phase extended D autotransformer bank, as shown in Figure 3.36 (c).  
The low-voltage D winding has a 110 volt rating. (a) Draw the positive- 
sequence phasor diagram and show that the high-voltage winding has a 
479.5 volt rating. (b) A three-phase load connected to the low-voltage 
terminals absorbs 6 kW at 110 volts and at 0.8 power factor lagging. Draw 
the per-unit impedance diagram and calculate the voltage and current at 
the high-voltage terminals. Assume positive-sequence operation.
3.57	 A two-winding single-phase transformer rated 60 kVA, 240/1200 V, 60 Hz, 
has an efficiency of 0.96 when operated at rated load, 0.8 power factor 
lagging. This transformer is to be utilized as a 1440/1200-V step-down 
autotransformer in a power distribution system. (a) Find the permissible 
kVA rating of the autotransformer if the winding currents and voltages 
are not to exceed the ratings as a two-winding transformer. Assume an 
ideal transformer. (b) Determine the efficiency of the autotransformer 
with the kVA loading of part (a) and 0.8 power factor leading.
3.58	 A single-phase two-winding transformer rated 90 MVA, 80/120 kV is to 
be connected as an autotransformer rated 80/200 kV. Assume that the 
transformer is ideal. (a) Draw a schematic diagram of the ideal trans-
former connected as an autotransformer, showing the voltages, currents, 
and dot notation for polarity. (b) Determine the permissible kVA rating 
of the autotransformer if the winding currents and voltages are not to 
exceed the rated values as a two-winding transformer. How much of the 
kVA rating is transferred by magnetic induction?
SECTION 3.8
3.59	 The two parallel lines in Example 3.13 supply a balanced load with a 
load current of 1.0/2308 per unit. Determine the real and reactive power 
supplied to the load bus from each parallel line with (a) no regulating 
transformer, (b) the voltage-magnitude-regulating transformer in Exam-
ple 3.13(a), and (c) the phase-angle-regulating transformer in Exam­
ple 3.13(b). Assume that the voltage at bus abc is adjusted so that the 
voltage at bus a9b9c9 remains constant at 1.0/08 per unit. Also assume 
positive sequence. Comment on the effects of the regulating transformers.
3.60	 PowerWorld Simulator case Problem 3_60 duplicates Example 3.13 
except that a resistance term of 0.06 per unit has been added to the trans-
former and 0.05 per unit to the transmission line. Since the system is no 
longer lossless, a field showing the real power losses has also been added 
to the oneline. With the LTC tap fixed at 1.05, plot the real power losses 
as the phase shift angle is varied from 210 to 110 degrees. What value of 
phase shift minimizes the system losses?
3.61	 Repeat Problem 3.60, except keep the phase-shift angle fixed at 3.0 degrees 
while varying the LTC tap between 0.9 and 1.1. What tap value minimizes 
the real power losses?
PW
PW
	
Problems	
157

158	
Chapter 3  |  Power Transformers
3.62	 Rework Example 3.12 for a 110% tap, providing a 10% increase for the 
high-voltage winding.
3.63	 A 23/230-kV step-up transformer feeds a three-phase transmission line, 
which in turn supplies a 150-MVA, 0.8 lagging power factor load through 
a step-down 230/23-kV transformer. The impedance of the line and 
transformers at 230 kV is 18 1 j60 V. Determine the tap setting for each 
transformer to maintain the voltage at the load at 23 kV.
3.64	 The per-unit equivalent circuit of two transformers Ta and Tb connected 
in parallel, with the same nominal voltage ratio and the same reactance 
of 0.1 per unit on the same base, is shown in Figure 3.43. Transformer Tb 
has a voltage-magnitude step-up toward the load of 1.05 times that of Ta 
(that is, the tap on the secondary winding of Tb is set to 1.05). The load 
is represented by 0.8 1 j 0.6 per unit at a voltage V2 5 1.0/08 per unit. 
Determine the complex power in per unit transmitted to the load through 
each transformer. Comment on how the transformers share the real and 
reactive powers.
V2
V1
FIGURE 3.43
Problem 3.64
3.65	 Reconsider Problem 3.64 with the change that now Tb includes both a 
transformer of the same turns ratio as Ta and a regulating transformer 
with a 48 phase shift. On the base of Ta, the impedance of the two com-
ponents of Tb is j 0.1 per unit. Determine the complex power in per unit 
transmitted to the load through each transformer. Comment on how the 
transformers share the real and reactive powers.
CASE STUDY QUESTIONS
a.	
What are the advantages of correctly specifying a transformer most suit-
able for its application? 
b.	
Why is it important to reduce the moisture within a transformer to 
acceptable levels during transformer installation? 
c.	
What should be the focus of transformer preventive maintenance efforts? 

REFERENCES
1.	
R. Feinberg, Modern Power Transformer Practice (New York: Wiley, 
1979).
2.	
A. C. Franklin and D. P. Franklin, The J & P Transformer Book, 11th ed. 
(London: Butterworths, 1983).
3.	
W. D. Stevenson, Jr., Elements of Power System Analysis, 4th ed. (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1982).
4.	
J. R. Neuenswander, Modern Power Systems (Scranton, PA: International 
Textbook Company, 1971).
5.	
M. S. Sarma, Electric Machines (Dubuque, IA: Brown, 1985).
6.	
A. E. Fitzgerald, C. Kingsley, and S. Umans, Electric Machinery, 4th ed. 
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1983).
7.	
O. I. Elgerd, Electric Energy Systems: An Introduction (New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1982).
8.	
C. Gamez, “Power Transformer–Part 3: Life Management and Extension,” 
Transformers Magazine, 1, 3, October 2014, pp. 10–15 (www.transformers 
-magazine.com).
	
References	
159


161
Transmission Line Parameters
4
765-kV transmis-
sion line  
with aluminum 
guyed-V towers 
(Courtesy of 
American Electric 
Power Company.)
T
his chapter discusses the four basic transmission-line parameters: series resis-
tance, series inductance, shunt capacitance, and shunt conductance and inves-
tigates transmission-line electric and magnetic fields.
Series resistance accounts for ohmic (I2R) line losses. Series impedance, includ-
ing resistance and inductive reactance, gives rise to series-voltage drops along the 
line. Shunt capacitance gives rise to line-charging currents. Shunt conductance ac-
counts for V2G line losses due to leakage currents between conductors or between 
conductors and ground. Shunt conductance of overhead lines is usually neglected.

162	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
Although the ideas developed in this chapter can be applied to underground 
transmission and distribution, the primary focus here is on overhead lines. Under-
ground transmission in the United States presently accounts for less than 1% of total 
transmission and is found mostly in large cities or under waterways. There is, how-
ever, a large application for underground cable in distribution systems.
CASE STUDY
Two transmission articles are presented here. The first article describes the inte-
grated nature of the Canada-United States transmission grid and highlights its 
mutual benefits. The article identifies four strategic goals to further strengthen 
the bilateral electricity relationship [10]. The second article describes the ongo-
ing congestion of the North American transmission grid, including its impacts 
on reliability, efficiency, and costs. The article emphasizes the need to upgrade 
and modernize the grid while leveraging new technologies [12].
Integrating North America’s Power Grid
Patrick Brown
Canadian Electricity Association (CEA)
How the U.S. and Canada 
Maximize Their Working 
Relationship
North America is shifting towards a 
new energy paradigm. Where it was 
once viewed through the prism of scar-
city, some are now beginning to speak 
of energy in the language of abundance.
The grounds for optimism are 
understandable. For instance, techno-
logical breakthroughs on the produc-
tion side are unlocking previously in-
accessible deposits of oil and natural 
gas, while advances in conservation 
and efficiency practices are affording 
customers greater control over their 
energy use.
Still, the achievement of North 
American independence from volatile 
global energy markets is by no means 
a foregone conclusion. Economic re-
covery efforts remain fragile. The sup-
ply and delivery infrastructure for our 
resources is in urgent need of upgrade 
while an evolving landscape of risks 
poses significant threats to its security. 
And perhaps most importantly, trans-
formative events in the market—such 
as the North American boom in nat-
ural gas production—have overtaken 
many of the policy structures in place 
across Canada and the United States.
Too much of the framework 
shaping governments’ approach on 
energy issues is therefore not optimally  
suited to addressing the opportunities 
and challenges at hand. The back-
bone of any strategy to confront and 
leverage the new energy landscape 
“Integrating North America’s Power Grid”, 
by Patrick Brown, Electricity Today T & D  
Magazine (June 2013) Reprinted with 
Permission.

	
Case Study	
163
must be an enhanced North Ameri-
can electricity system.
Electricity plays an integral role 
in the robust Canada-U.S. relationship 
on energy, which itself is a fundamen-
tal pillar of the broader flow of two-
way trade that is without compare 
anywhere in the world. The linkages 
between the Canadian and U.S. grids— 
more than three dozen in total—offer 
several advantages to both countries, 
such as higher reliability and expanded 
access 
to 
low-emitting 
resources. 
These physical interconnections have 
facilitated steady growth in what has 
become a continent-wide marketplace 
for electricity, with supply fulfilling 
demand in an efficient, cost-effective 
manner across North America.
From the vantage point of the 
voice of the Canadian electricity sec-
tor, CEA views our vibrant, bilateral 
electricity relationship—which has 
long served as a central instrument for 
economic vitality in both countries— 
as being an ideal platform from which 
to launch a renewed push towards a 
more secure, prosperous, and autono-
mous continental energy posture.
This case study is intended to 
help guide such efforts. In order to 
set a proper context, the first section 
provides an overview of the intercon-
nected and integrated nature of the 
Canada-U.S. relationship on electric-
ity and highlights the mutual benefits 
thereof. The second section identi-
fies four strategic goals to further 
strengthen the relationship.
The U.S.-Canada Electricity  
Relationship
The trading relationship enjoyed by 
Canada and the U.S. is a model of  
bilateral cooperation. According to the 
government of Canada, approximately 
300,000 individuals and $1.6  billion 
(CAD) worth of goods and services 
move freely across the U.S.-Canada 
border daily, making each country the 
other’s most important trading part-
ner. The scope and scale of this two-
way trading flow is without compare 
anywhere in the world. An integral 
part of this relationship is energy.
Energy serves as the main engine 
fueling economic activity and prosper-
ity across North America, delivering 
a wealth of societal benefits and en-
abling a high quality of life on both 
sides of the border. The two countries 
have long acted as each other’s best 
customers when it comes to the buy-
ing and selling of energy commodities. 
For example, research from the report, 
“U.S. Natural Gas Exports by Country,” 
published by the United States Energy 
Information Administration, reveals 
that Canada receives the greatest share 
of U.S. natural gas exports (with vol-
umes nearly tripling between 2006 and 
2012). Also, the Embassy of Canada in 
the United States reports that Canada 
provides the United States with more 
crude oil and petroleum products, coal, 
uranium, and natural gas than any 
other foreign source.
Canada is the largest supplier to 
the U.S. of another vital commodity— 
electricity. Crucial in the day-to-day 
lives of North Americans, it is so  
reliable as to be taken for granted. In 
our homes, offices, factories, ports, 
and stock exchanges, it is instinctively 
assumed that the lights will turn on 
with a simple flick of the switch. 
Likewise, the origin of the electrons 
being used is rarely considered. The 

164	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
crowds cheering on the Vancouver 
Canucks might never contemplate 
that electricity generated in the 
United States could be illuminating 
the arena. And the car manufac-
turer in Michigan may be unaware 
that 
electricity 
from 
Canadian  
generators is powering its assembly 
line (see Figure 1).
The movement of electricity be-
tween Canada and the United States 
may go unnoticed by the public. 
However, this should not be viewed 
as a cause for concern. Instead, it 
reflects how routine and reliable 
a transaction the cross-border ex-
change of electricity has become in 
North America. The integration of 
electricity markets in Canada and the 
United States means supply can fulfill 
demand in an efficient, cost-effective 
manner across the continent.
North Americans benefit from 
a shared system which can generate 
and transmit electrons across vast 
distances to ensure a reliable, secure, 
and competitively priced supply of 
electricity, 24 hours a day, seven days 
a week. Figures 1 and 2 offer a clear 
visual indicator of the extent of the 
current integration of the electricity 
systems in Canada and the United 
States. By interconnecting into each 
other’s networks at over 35 points, 
the two countries benefit from nu-
merous advantages: a higher level of 
Yukon 
Northwest
Territories
Nunavut
British
Columbia
Alberta
Saskatchewan
Manitoba
Ontario
Québec
Newfoundland &
Labrador
Nova Scotia
P.E.I.
500 kV(1)
230 kV(3)
500 kV(2)
230 kV(2)
345 kV(2)
230 kV(8)
115 kV(4)
69 kV(3)
765 kV(1)
450 kV(1)
120 kV(3)
345 kV(2)
138 kV(1)
69 kV(2)
New Brunswick
230 kV(1)
230 kV(1)*
* According to the National Energy Board, construction scheduled for completion in summer 2013.
Figure 1  Major Transmission Interconnections
The physical linkages between the Canadian and U.S. grids have likewise enabled 
steady growth in what has become a robust, continent-wide marketplace for 
electricity. Electricity trade occurs at a range of points across and beyond the 
international border, reflecting the largely north–south nature of the networks in 
Canadian provinces, as they seamlessly tie into the denser web of transmission 
infrastructure in the United States.

	
Case Study	
165
reliable service for customers through 
enhanced system stability; efficien-
cies in system operation; efficiencies 
in fuel management; opportunities 
to use power from nearby markets 
to address local contingencies; and 
expanded access to low emitting and 
competitively priced resources.
Maximizing The Benefits  
of Grid Integration
Four Strategic Goals for Canada 
and The U.S. to Further Strengthen 
their Relationship
1.	 Plugging the electric infrastruc-
ture gap
	
●  Coordinate and cooperate on 
identifying new infrastruc-
ture needs and addressing 
aging infrastructure on the 
North American grid and 
effectively communicate such 
needs to the general public.
	
●  Remove regulatory impedi-
ments to much-needed electric 
infrastructure investments.
	
●  Update and enhance the effi-
ciency of permitting proce-
dures for international power 
line projects.
2.	 Maximizing environmental 
sustainability
	
●  Ensure that any market-based 
solution to combat climate 
change 
that 
incorporates 
the electricity sector recog-
nizes the integrated nature 
of the North American elec-
tricity market, encourages 
the continued two-way flow 
in 
cross-border 
electricity 
trade, and contains credit 
provisions for early action 
taken to reduce emissions.
	
●  Support existing measures that 
are proven to cost-effectively 
deliver emission reductions 
and help enable inter­mittent 
renewable techno­logies.
	
●  Recognize 
hydropower 
as 
a clean, renewable resource 
across policy programs.
	
●  Maintain support for foster-
ing cleaner ways to use North 
America’s plentiful supplies  
of natural gas and coal for 
power 
generation, 
includ-
ing the deployment of car-
bon capture and storage 
technology.
3.	 Maintaining vigilance on 
reliability and security
	
●  Support the existing frame-
work in place at the North 
American Electric Reliability 
Corporation to develop reli-
ability standards (including 
for cyber security protec-
tion) for the North American 
transmission grid.
	
●  Enhance public-private sec-
tor, as well as government- 
to-government coordination 
and sharing of timely and 
actionable threat information.
	
●  Address cyber and other 
security threats in a compre-
hensive manner across all 
industry sectors, with a focus 
on securing the most critical 
assets from the most urgent 
challenges.
	
●  Standardize and streamline 
border-crossing 
procedures 
for crews providing assistance 
to utilities in the other country.

166	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
4.	 Ensuring free, fair, and fluid 
inter-jurisdictional trade
	
●  Remain vigilant in avoiding 
erecting barriers that may 
inhibit 
inter-jurisdictional 
electricity trade.
	
●  Refrain from imposing unnec-
essarily burdensome over- 
the-counter derivatives of 
regulatory requirements on 
energy endusers which  pose 
no systemic risk to the 
marketplace.
	
●  Update and enhance the 
efficiency of administrative 
procedures for authorizing 
exports of electricity across 
the international border.
Last Look
Against the backdrop of trans-
formation and transition in the 
North American energy landscape, 
CEA believes that there are nu-
merous 
opportunities 
for 
lever-
aging the legacy of cooperation 
and achievement in operating the 
world’s largest integrated power 
grid, and expanding the suite of 
benefits which such integration of-
fers to consumers in Canada and 
the United States.
Electricity Imports & Exports
Historically, electricity exports to 
the United States have represented 
Source: National Energy Board, Electricity Exports and Imports, 2012. Retrieved February 21, 2013
      MB
Exp 8,048
Imp 519
Net 7,529
      ON
Exp 13,823
Imp 655
Net 13,168
      QC
Exp 24,037
Imp 83
Net 23,954
     NB
Exp 778
Imp 591
Net 187
     CAN
Exp 57,864
Imp 10,887 
Net 46,977
     AB
Exp   41
Imp   851
Net - 810
     SK
Exp   68
Imp   115
Net  -47
    NS
Exp   1
Imp   10
Net - 9
       BC
Exp   10,838
Imp   8,016
Net   2,822
Newfoundland 
& Labrador
Nova
Scotia
P.E.I.
Northwest
Territories
Nunavut
British
Columbia
Alberta
Saskatchewan
Manitoba
Ontario
Québec
New 
Brunswick
Yukon
Figure 2  Electricity Exports and Imports Between Canada and the U.S. (2012)

	
Case Study	
167
anywhere from 5 to 10 percent of 
Canada’s total production. The bulk 
of these exports involve the sale of 
surplus generation from major hydro-
power producing provinces such as 
Québec, British Columbia, and Man-
itoba. More recently, export volumes 
from Ontario have also risen, mak-
ing the province the second largest 
exporter (on both a gross and net 
basis) for several consecutive years. 
While hydro enjoys a sizeable share of  
Ontario’s supply mix, nuclear energy 
comprises approximately half of the 
province’s portfolio.
Overall, the vast majority of 
electrons delivered across the border 
from Canadian generators to U.S. cus-
tomers are derived from clean, non- 
emitting sources.
Patrick Brown is the director of U.S. 
Affairs for the Canadian Electricity 
Association.  ■
Grid Congestion
Dave Bryant 
CTC Global Corporation
Unclogging the Arteries of North 
America’s Power Grid
Without access to affordable and re-
liable electricity, no society in today’s 
world can possibly flourish. Canada 
and the United States rely heavily on 
electricity to pump water to grow 
crops, manufacture products compet-
itively, and power North America’s  
information-based infrastructure, wide 
-screen televisions, iPhones, and air 
conditioning. In many ways, the elec-
tric infrastructure could be considered 
society’s most important artery.
Sadly, however, the American 
Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) 
gave the U.S. energy infrastructure and 
electric artery a D1 rating in 2013. Ac-
cording to ASCE, the primary reason  
the United States received such a low 
grade is the fact that the country’s elec-
trical infrastructure is substantially 
aged and congested. The low rating is 
also a function of how difficult it will 
be for the United States to improve the 
power grid in light of its complexities, 
regulatory challenges, and implemen-
tation hurdles.
What is Grid Congestion?
Grid 
congestion 
is 
a 
situation 
wherein the existing transmission 
and/or distribution lines are unable to  
accommodate all required load dur-
ing periods of high demand or during 
emergency load conditions, such as 
when an adjacent line is taken out of 
service or damaged by a storm, com-
monly referred to as an “N minus 1” 
or “N minus 2” condition—or worse. 
Grid congestion not only impacts 
reliability, it also reflects a decrease 
“Grid Congestion”, by Dave Bryant, Electric-
ity Today T & D Magazine (July/August 2013) 
Reprinted with Permission.

168	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
in efficiency. Under high load con-
ditions, line losses escalate expo-
nentially. If lines are congested and 
operating at or near their thermal 
limits, they would also be exhibiting 
significant line losses during high 
load conditions. Another significant 
problem with grid congestion is that 
during periods of high demand, elec-
tric retailers may not have access to 
the least expensive source of electric-
ity which can “artificially” drive con-
sumer prices to very high levels.
As North America has learned 
in the wake of several major black-
outs, not unlike clogged arteries in 
the human body, a weak or congested 
transmission grid can lead to very un-
favorable consequences.
Back Story
The Energy Policy Act of 1992 man-
dated that the Federal Energy Regula-
tory Commission (FERC) open up the 
national grid on a nondiscriminatory, 
non-preferential basis for the whole-
sale delivery of electric power. In April 
of 1996, FERC issued Orders 888 and 
889 that encouraged wholesale com-
petition. The primary objective of 
these orders was the elimination of 
the monopoly over the transmission 
of electricity. To achieve this objec-
tive, FERC required all public utilities 
that own, control, or operate facilities 
used for transmitting electric energy in 
interstate commerce to separate trans-
mission from generation and market-
ing functions. FERC also required that 
these entities file open-access nondis-
criminatory transmission tariffs.
In September, 1996, the State of 
California also put into law The Elec-
tric Utility Industry Restructuring Act 
(AB 1890) in an effort to make the 
generation of electricity more com-
petitive. In 1999, FERC issued Order 
2000 which asked all transmission- 
owning utilities, including non-public 
utilities, to place their transmission 
facilities under the control of an  
appropriate Regional Transmission 
Organization (RTO). This was done 
in an effort to better manage trans-
mission congestion, oversee tariff 
management, and support the re-
gional planning of system upgrades, 
among other objectives.
During the transition or “decou-
pling,” as FERC later described in their 
staff report of March 26, 2003 (Docket 
No PA02-2-000), a supply-demand 
imbalance, flawed market design, and 
inconsistent rules made significant 
wholesale market manipulation pos-
sible. These, and several other factors, 
set the stage for the Western energy cri-
sis of 2000 to 2001.
According to a report released 
by the Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission, California’s retail rate 
freeze (a component of new U.S. bill 
AB 1890 instituted by the California 
Legislature) and the inability to pass 
along price increases to customers not 
only bankrupted Pacific Gas & Elec-
tric (and nearly bankrupted Southern 
California Edison), the conditions 
also caused widespread rolling out-
ages with an economic impact esti-
mated at 40 to 45 billion dollars. In 
1999, the retail rate freeze imposed on 
San Diego Gas & Electric (SDG&E) 
was temporarily lifted so retail cus-
tomers in Southern California felt the 
brunt of cost increases immediately.
According to the final FERC 
report released in late March 2003, 

	
Case Study	
169
a number of factors contributed to 
the Western energy crisis of 2000 and 
2001. While strong economic growth 
at that time led to increased demand 
for electricity, environmental concerns 
limited, prevented, or delayed new 
generation from being built locally.
Drought 
conditions 
in 
the 
Northwestern United States also re-
sulted in reduced hydropower genera-
tion for the country while a ruptured 
natural gas line feeding California 
led to further generation constraints 
in a state that was highly dependent 
upon gas-fired generation. Unusually 
high temperatures, unplanned—or 
intentional—plant outages of older 
plants, and transmission capacity con-
straints also contributed to the crisis.
Congestion Costs
On the east coast, in 2002, the 
newly-established 
PJM 
Intercon-
nection 
(a 
regional 
transmission 
organization) assessed the costs of  
congestion associated with individual 
transmission and distribution lines 
within 
their 
jurisdiction. 
PJM 
Inter­connection reported that in sev-
eral cases, over a period of several 
months, the combined costs of conges-
tion of many transmission lines were 
measured to be over a billion dollars 
per year. This value doesn’t include 
the costs of congestion from other re-
gional transmission organizations.
The aforementioned costs were 
primarily a function of the difference 
in cost between a potentially available 
energy resource versus the cost paid 
for energy delivered from a more ex-
pensive but deliverable source (and/or 
as a function of market driven “supply  
and demand” pricing).
Impact of Congestion
On August 14, 2003, the Northeast 
United States and Ontario, Canada ex-
perienced the second most widespread 
blackout on record at that time (after 
Brazil in 1999), affecting 55 million 
people. Six weeks later, on September 
28, 2003, a similar outage occurred in 
Europe that affected 56 million people.
According to the final report 
released by the North American Elec-
tric Reliability Corporation (NERC), 
the organization responsible for the 
adequacy and reliability of the bulk 
power transmission in North America,  
the U.S./Canada blackout of Au-
gust 2003 was caused by a number  
of factors. The report stated that the 
causes of the blackout included inac-
curate telemetry data used to operate 
the Midwest Independent Transmission 
System Operator (MISO) “State Es-
timator” (and a subsequent computer 
re-boot failure); a “race condition” com-
puter bug in FirstEnergy’s Energy Man-
agement System; and three 345 kilovolt 
(kV) transmission line trips (outages) 
due to excessive conductor sag, which 
led to a cascading of similar sag-trip 
outages on their 138-kV system.
These events and lack of effec-
tive communication between other 
utilities ultimately shut down 508 
generating units at 265 power plants. 
According to the final NERC Report 
“Technical Analysis of the August 14, 
2003, Blackout: What Happened, 
Why, and What Did We Learn?,” 
the economic impact was estimated 
to approach 10 billion dollars. On 
July  30 and 31 of 2012, a similar 
series of cascading outages in India 
affected more than 670 million peo-
ple. The Indian Government Ministry 

170	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
of Power also reported that substan-
tial grid limitations and line tripping 
also played major roles in this event.
Steps Forward
Following the blackout of 2003, the 
Energy Policy Act of 2005 was estab-
lished as a mechanism to help improve 
the efficiency, reliability, and capacity 
of the grid by creating incentives for 
utilities to invest in grid improvements 
and leverage new technologies includ-
ing high-capacity low-sag conductors.
In 2009, the American Clean 
Energy and Security Act was approved 
by the House of Representatives but 
defeated in the Senate. While much of 
this bill was focused on climate change 
issues, many of its components also 
supported the modernization of the 
grid, primarily to enable the addition 
of new alternative “clean” sources 
of generation and develop and lever-
age new technology. Though the bill 
didn’t pass, the message was clear and 
new cleaner sources of generation 
continue to be brought online.
The Challenges Continue
The addition of new sources of 
generation is further adding to the  
challenge of alleviating grid conges-
tion. While new transmission lines 
are being proposed and/or built to 
link new generation, existing trans-
mission and distribution lines may 
not be robust enough to handle addi-
tional load, especially during peak or 
emergency conditions, depending on 
where and how the new lines are inte-
grated into the existing grid. 
The Worst May Be Yet to Come
In the coming years, as outlined 
in the North American Reliability 
Corporation (NERC) “2012 Long-
Term Reliability Assessment” report, 
the problem of congested transmis-
sion lines may become exacerbated 
not only by the increase in renewable 
resources that need to be integrated 
onto the grid, but with potentially 
greater impact, by the fact that the 
renewables may, under certain condi-
tions, be unavailable at the same time.
The retirement of larger and/or 
strategically situated generation units 
will also impact the grid. Changes in 
generation type and location will re-
quire enhancements to the grid to 
provide reactive and voltage support, 
and address thermal (conductor sag) 
constraints, in order to insure system 
stability. This will be particularly chal-
lenging considering the timeframes re-
quired to make grid changes and the 
fact that, in many of the deregulated 
market areas, the system operator (per-
forming the planning function) may 
have little insight into the retirement 
decisions of generation, which can be 
shut down with only a 90-day notice.
As the electric industry moves 
from conventional base load genera-
tion to various renewables that are de-
pendent upon ambient conditions to 
perform (or not), and, if transmission 
enhancements are not implemented 
to accommodate the somewhat un-
predictable changes, overall system 
reliability could be adversely affected.
Smart Grid Strategy Flaws
While utilities will continue to face 
significant challenges in securing per-
mits to build new transmission lines, 
and incentives for utilities to invest 
in upgrading existing lines are not 
completely clear, another concern 

is the scope of the new Smart Grid 
policy enacted by the U.S. federal 
government.
The U.S. Department of Energy 
(DOE) defines Smart Grid “as an 
electrical grid that uses information 
and communications technology to 
gather and act on information, such 
as information about the behaviors 
of suppliers and consumers, in an 
automated fashion to improve the 
efficiency, reliability, economics, and 
sustainability of the production and 
distribution of electricity.”
Surprisingly absent from the U.S.  
DOE definition is the word “capacity.” 
The Energy Policy Act of 2005 clearly 
called for and provided a framework 
for incentives to leverage technology 
to “improve the efficiency, reliability 
and capacity of the grid.” Capacity is 
not only a key element in mitigating 
congestion costs (which is a nice way 
of saying ‘giving’ the consumer access 
to the least expensive source of elec-
tricity—without artificial market ma-
nipulation), capacity is also extremely 
critical to grid reliability, not to men-
tion North America’s national secu-
rity and financial wellbeing.
Lessons Learned
The key point in this feature is that util-
ities, consumers and regulatory bodies 
need to recognize the limitations of 
data and computers if they are serious 
about grid efficiency, capacity, and 
reliability—especially in this era of 
increasing cyber security risks. When 
telemetry devices and computers fail, 
thus leading to blackouts and outages, 
remember that the power grid is fun-
damentally a function of conductor 
capacity and thermal sag.
Modern Conductors
As increasingly higher levels of 
current are carried by overhead 
conductors, the electrical resistance 
of the wires causes them to heat up. 
Their coefficient of thermal expan-
sion can then increase the conductor’s 
sag, which can lead to short-circuit 
events and outages. While smart me-
ters and other electronic devices may 
help utilities identify areas impacted 
by outages, strategies that outline pre-
vention should become the priority.
The use of high-capacity, low-
sag conductors (Figure 3) can alleviate 
grid congestion and serve to improve 
the efficiency, capacity, and reliability 
of the grid while also enabling utilities 
to more flexibly handle new sources 
of generation and storage technolo-
gies as they emerge and are integrated 
into the grid in varied locations.
Leveraging Technology
Today, a number of utilities such as 
American Electric Power (AEP), NV 
Energy, OG&E Energy Corporation, 
and others are discovering how to 
leverage new technologies including 
high-capacity, low-sag conductors. 
	
Case Study	
171
Figure 3  High-capacity low-sag  
conductor.

172	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
These 
modern 
conductors 
use 
aerospace-derived technology to re-
duce conductor sag, increase line 
capacity, and reduce line losses.
The reduction of line losses 
has the same impact as building new 
generation. Thus, the economics of 
incorporating 
these 
technologies 
into the grid are very favorable— 
especially because existing struc-
tures rarely require modifications to 
accommodate the new wire. AEP is 
currently using a new high-capacity, 
low-sag conductor to increase the ca-
pacity of 240 circuit miles of a 345kV 
line near Corpus Christi, Texas, to 
accommodate new generation and 
growing demand (Figure 4). More 
than 100 other utilities in more than 
25 countries have also deployed the 
technology for similar reasons at over 
250 projects so far.
Role of Efficiency
For more than 100 years, utilities and 
their suppliers spent billions of dollars 
improving the efficiency of generators 
in an effort to squeak more out of less 
and improve economics. In the last  
30 years, the push for improved ef-
ficiency has trickled downstream to 
the consumer where they too have 
discovered the benefits of using 
energy-efficient appliances to reduce 
their monthly bills. This effort has not 
only benefited consumers; it has also 
enabled utilities to postpone the devel-
opment of new generation resources 
or retire old ones. As the saying goes, 
“it is cheaper to save a ‘Negawatt’ than 
it is to create a Megawatt.”
Having spent billions of dollars 
improving the efficiency of generation 
and demand side appliances, perhaps 
it’s time to focus on building more  
Figure 4  Re-conductoring a 345-kV line.

	
Section 4.1 Transmission Line Design Considerations	
173
efficiency into the grid itself where, in 
the United States, according to Jim 
Rogers, Chairman of Duke Energy,  
eight to 10 percent of all energy 
generated is lost during transmission 
and distribution.
Famous Last Words
What began as a function of old age—
and continued growth in demand for 
affordable and reliable electricity—is 
now known as grid congestion. Con-
gestion not only reflects capacity con-
straints, it also reflects substantial 
inefficiencies and decreased reliability. 
While electronics, smart meters and 
other technologies are certainly play-
ing a role in decreasing stress on the 
grid and generation resources, to truly 
resolve the problem and prepare for a 
somewhat unknown future, the physi-
cal grid needs to be upgraded to combat 
grid congestion. The cost of upgrades 
will pale in comparison with the cost of 
ignoring this physical reality.
Later this year, the U.S. Depart-
ment of Energy will be releasing its 
“2012 National Electric Transmission 
Congestion Study.” It will be interest-
ing to see how this report will impact 
the future of transmission congestion 
in North America.  ■
4.1  Transmission Line Design Considerations
An overhead transmission line consists of conductors, insulators, support structures, 
and, in most cases, shield wires.
CONDUCTORS
Aluminum has replaced copper as the most common conductor metal for overhead 
transmission. Although a larger aluminum cross-sectional area is required to ob-
tain the same loss as in a copper conductor, aluminum has a lower cost and lighter 
weight. Also, the supply of aluminum is abundant, whereas that of copper is limited.
One of the most common conductor types is aluminum conductor, steel- 
reinforced (ACSR), which consists of layers of aluminum strands surrounding a 
central core of steel strands (Figure 4.1). Stranded conductors are easier to manufac-
ture, since larger conductor sizes can be obtained by simply adding successive layers 
of strands. Stranded conductors are also easier to handle and more flexible than 
solid conductors, especially in larger sizes. The use of steel strands gives ACSR con-
ductors a high strength-to-weight ratio. For purposes of heat dissipation, overhead 
transmission-line conductors are bare (no insulating cover).
FIGURE 4.1
Typical ACSR  
conductor

174	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
Other conductor types include the all-aluminum conductor (AAC), all-aluminum- 
alloy conductor (AAAC), aluminum conductor alloy-reinforced (ACAR), and 
aluminum-clad steel conductor (Alumoweld). Higher-temperature conductors capa-
ble of operation in excess of 1508C include the aluminum conductor steel supported 
(ACSS) that uses fully annealed aluminum around a steel core, and the gap-type 
ZT-aluminum conductor (GTZACSR) that uses heat-resistant aluminum over a steel 
core with a small annular gap between the steel and first layer of aluminum strands. 
Emerging technologies use composite materials, including the aluminum conductor 
carbon reinforced (ACFR), whose core is a resinmatrix composite containing carbon 
fiber, and the aluminum conductor composite reinforced (ACCR), whose core is an 
aluminum-matrix containing aluminum fibers [10].
EHV lines often have more than one conductor per phase; these conductors 
are called a bundle. The 765-kV line in Figure 4.2 has four conductors per phase, and 
the 345-kV double-circuit line in Figure 4.3 has two conductors per phase. Bundle 
conductors have a lower electric field strength at the conductor surfaces, thereby 
controlling corona. They also have a smaller series reactance.
INSULATORS
Insulators for transmission lines above 69 kV are typically suspension-type insu-
lators, that consist of a string of discs constructed of porcelain, toughened glass, 
or polymer. The standard disc (Figure 4.4) has a 10-in. (0.254-m) diameter, 53
4-in. 
(0.146-m) spacing between centers of adjacent discs, and a mechanical strength of 
7500 kg. The 765-kV line in Figure 4.2 has two strings per phase in a V-shaped ar-
rangement, which helps to restrain conductor swings. The 345-kV line in Figure 4.5 
has one vertical string per phase. The number of insulator discs in a string increases 
FIGURE 4.2
A 765-kV transmission line with 
self-supporting lattice steel 
towers (Courtesy of the
American Electric Power 
Company)
FIGURE 4.3
A 345-kV double-circuit 
transmission line with 
self-supporting lattice steel 
towers (Courtesy of NSTAR, 
formerly Boston Edison Company)

	
Section 4.1 Transmission Line Design Considerations	
175
FIGURE 4.4
Cut-away view of a standard porcelain insulator disc for 
suspension insulator strings (Courtesy of Ohio Brass)
FIGURE 4.5
Wood frame structure for a 345-kV 
line (Courtesy of NSTAR, formerly 
Boston Edison Company)
with line voltage (Table 4.1). Other types of discs include larger units with higher 
mechanical strength and fog insulators for use in contaminated areas.
SUPPORT STRUCTURES
Transmission lines employ a variety of support structures. Figure 4.2 shows a self-
supporting, lattice steel tower typically used for 500- and 765-kV lines. Double-circuit 
345-kV lines usually have self-supporting steel towers with the phases arranged either 
in a triangular configuration to reduce tower height or in a vertical configuration to 
reduce tower width (Figure 4.3). Wood frame configurations are commonly used for 
voltages of 345 kV and below (Figure 4.5).
SHIELD WIRES
Shield wires located above the phase conductors protect the phase conductors against 
lightning. They are usually high- or extra-high-strength steel, Alumoweld, or ACSR 
with much smaller cross section than the phase conductors. The number and location 
of the shield wires are selected so that almost all lightning strokes terminate on the 
shield wires rather than on the phase conductors. Figures 4.2, 4.3, and 4.5 have two 
shield wires. Shield wires are grounded to the tower. As such, when lightning strikes 
a shield wire, it flows harmlessly to ground, provided the tower impedance and tower 
footing resistance are small.
The decision to build new transmission is based on power-system plan-
ning studies to meet future system requirements of load growth and new genera-
tion. The points of interconnection of each new line to the system, as well as the 
power and voltage ratings of each, are selected based on these studies. Thereafter, 
transmission-line design is based on optimization of electrical, mechanical, environ-
mental, and economic factors.

176	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
Nominal 
Voltage
Phase Conductors
Aluminum  
Cross-Section  
Area per 
Conductor  
(ACSR)  
(kcmil)
Minimum Clearances
(kV)
Number of  
Conductors  
per Bundle
Bundle  
Spacing 
(cm)
Phase-to- 
Phase  
(m)
Phase-to- 
Ground  
(m)
 69
1
—
—
—
—
138
1
3002700
—
4 to 5
—
230
1
  40021000
—
6 to 9
—
345
1
200022500
—
6 to 9
7.6 to 11
345
2
  80022200
45.7
6 to 9
7.6 to 11
500
2
200022500
45.7
  9 to 11
9 to 14
500
3
  90021500
45.7
  9 to 11
9 to 14
765
4
  90021300
45.7
  13.7
12.2
Nominal 
Voltage
Suspension Insulator String
Shield Wires
(kV)
Number of  
Strings per  
Phase
Number of 
Standard 
Insulator  
Discs per 
Suspension  
String
Type
Number
Diameter  
(cm)
 69
1
4 to 6
Steel
0, 1 or 2
—
138
1
  8 to 11
Steel
0, 1 or 2
—
230
1
12 to 21
Steel or ACSR
1 or 2
1.1 to 1.5
345
1
18 to 21
Alumoweld
2
0.87 to 1.5
345
1 and 2
18 to 21
Alumoweld
2
0.87 to 1.5
500
2 and 4
24 to 27
Alumoweld
2
0.98 to 1.5
500
2 and 4
24 to 27
Alumoweld
2
0.98 to 1.5
765
2 and 4
30 to 35
Alumoweld
2
0.98
TABLE  4.1
Typical transmission-line characteristics [1, 2] (Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), EPRI 
AC Transmission Line Reference Book—200 kV and Above (Palo Alto, CA: EPRI, www.epri.com, 
December 2005); Westinghouse Electric Corporation, Electrical Transmission and Distribution 
Reference Book, 4th ed. (East Pittsburgh, PA, 1964).)

	
Section 4.1 Transmission Line Design Considerations	
177
ELECTRICAL FACTORS
Electrical design dictates the type, size, and number of bundle conductors per phase. 
Phase conductors are selected to have sufficient thermal capacity to meet continuous, 
emergency overload, and short-circuit current ratings. For EHV lines, the number of 
bundle conductors per phase is selected to control the voltage gradient at conductor 
surfaces, thereby reducing or eliminating corona.
Electrical design also dictates the number of insulator discs, vertical or 
V-shaped string arrangement, phase-to-phase clearance, and phase-to-tower clear-
ance, all selected to provide adequate line insulation. Line insulation must withstand 
transient overvoltages due to lightning and switching surges, even when insulators 
are contaminated by fog, salt, or industrial pollution. Reduced clearances due to 
conductor swings during winds must also be accounted for.
The number, type, and location of shield wires are selected to intercept lightning 
strikes that would otherwise hit the phase conductors. Also, tower footing resistance can 
be reduced by using driven ground rods or a buried conductor (called counterpoise) run-
ning parallel to the line. Line height is selected to satisfy prescribed conductor-to-ground 
clearances and to control ground-level electric field and its potential shock hazard.
Conductor spacings, types, and sizes also determine the series impedance and 
shunt admittance. Series impedance affects line-voltage drops, I2R losses, and sta-
bility limits (Chapters 5, 13). Shunt admittance, primarily capacitive, affects line-
charging currents, which inject reactive power into the power system. Shunt reactors 
(inductors) are often installed on lightly loaded EHV lines to absorb part of this 
reactive power, thereby reducing overvoltages.
MECHANICAL FACTORS
Mechanical design focuses on the strength of the conductors, insulator strings, and sup-
port structures. Conductors must be strong enough to support a specified thickness of ice 
and a specified wind in addition to their own weight. Suspension insulator strings must 
be strong enough to support the phase conductors with ice and wind loadings from 
tower to tower (span length). Towers that satisfy minimum strength requirements, called 
suspension towers, are designed to support the phase conductors and shield wires with 
ice and wind loadings, and, in some cases, the unbalanced pull due to breakage of one or 
two conductors. Dead-end towers located every mile or so satisfy the maximum strength 
requirement of breakage of all conductors on one side of the tower. Angles in the line 
employ angle towers with intermediate strength. Conductor vibrations, which can cause 
conductor fatigue failure and damage to towers, are also of concern. Vibrations are con-
trolled by adjustment of conductor tensions, use of vibration dampers, and—for bundle 
conductors—large bundle spacing and frequent use of bundle spacers.
ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS
Environmental factors include land usage and visual impact. When a line route is selected, 
the effect on local communities and population centers, land values, access to property, wild-
life, and use of public parks and facilities must all be considered. Reduction in visual impact 
is obtained by aesthetic tower design and by blending the line with the countryside. Also, the 
biological effects of prolonged exposure to electric and magnetic fields near transmission 
lines is of concern. Extensive research has been and continues to be done in this area.

178	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
ECONOMIC FACTORS
The optimum line design meets all the technical design criteria at lowest overall cost, 
which includes the total installed cost of the line as well as the cost of line losses over 
the operating life of the line. Many design factors affect cost. Utilities and consulting 
organizations use digital computer programs combined with specialized knowledge 
and physical experience to achieve optimum line design.
4.2  Resistance
The dc resistance of a conductor at a specified temperature T is
Rdc,T 5 rT l
A V
(4.2.1)
where rT 5 conductor resistivity at temperature T
l 5 conductor length
A 5 conductor cross-sectional area
Two sets of units commonly used for calculating resistance, SI and English 
units, are summarized in Table 4.2. In English units, conductor cross-sectional area 
is expressed in circular mils (cmil). One inch equals 1000 mils, and 1 cmil equals 
py4 sq mil. A circle with diameter D in., or (D in.) (1000 mil/in.) 5 1000 D mil 5 
d mil, has an area
A 51
p
4 D2 in.2211000 mil
in.2
2
5 p
4 s1000 Dd2 5 p
4 d 2 sq mil
or
A 51
p
4 d 2 sq mil21
1 cmil
py4 sq mil2 5 d 2 cmil 
(4.2.2)
Resistivity depends on the conductor metal. Annealed copper is the interna-
tional standard for measuring resistivity r (or conductivity s, where s 5 1yr). Re-
sistivity of conductor metals is listed in Table 4.3. As shown, hard-drawn aluminum, 
which has 61% of the conductivity of the international standard, has a resistivity at 
20 8C of 17.00 V-cmil/ft or 2.83 3 1028 Vm.
Quantity
Symbol
SI Units
English Units
Resistivity
r
Vm
V-cmil/ft
Length
<
m
ft
Cross-sectional area
A
m2
cmil
dc resistance
Rdc 5 r/
A
V
V
TABLE  4.2
Comparison of SI and English units for calculating conductor resistance

	
Section 4.2 Resistance	
179
Conductor resistance depends on the following factors:
1.	 Spiraling
2.	 Temperature
3.	 Frequency (“skin effect”)
4.	 Current magnitude—magnetic conductors
These are described in the following paragraphs.
For stranded conductors, alternate layers of strands are spiraled in opposite di-
rections to hold the strands together. Spiraling makes the strands 1 or 2% longer than 
the actual conductor length. As a result, the dc resistance of a stranded conductor 
is 1 or 2% larger than that calculated from (4.2.1) for a specified conductor length.
Resistivity of conductor metals varies linearly over normal operating temper-
atures according to
rT2 5 rT11
T2 1 T
T1 1 T2
(4.2.3)
where rT2 and rT1 are resistivities at temperatures T2 and T18C, respectively. T is a tem-
perature constant that depends on the conductor material and is listed in Table 4.3.
The ac resistance or effective resistance of a conductor is
Rac 5 Ploss
uI u2 V
(4.2.4)
where Ploss is the conductor real power loss in watts and I is the rms conductor cur-
rent. For dc, the current distribution is uniform throughout the conductor cross sec-
tion, and (4.2.1) is valid. However, for ac, the current distribution is nonuniform. 
r208C
T
Resistivity at 208C
Temperature 
Constant
Material
% Conductivity
Vm 3 1028
V-cmil/ft
8C
Copper:
  Annealed
100%
1.72
10.37
234.5
  Hard-drawn
97.3%
1.77
10.66
241.5
Aluminum
  Hard-drawn
61%
2.83
17.00
228.1
Brass
20–27%
6.4–8.4
38–51
480
Iron
17.2%
10
60
180
Silver
108%
1.59
9.6
243
Sodium
40%
4.3
26
207
Steel
2–14%
12–88
72–530
180–980
TABLE  4.3
% Conductivity, resistivity, and temperature constant of conductor metals

180	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
As frequency increases, the current in a solid cylindrical conductor tends to crowd 
toward the conductor surface with smaller current density at the conductor center. 
This phenomenon is called skin effect. A conductor with a large radius can even have 
an oscillatory current density versus the radial distance from the conductor center.
With increasing frequency, conductor loss increases, which, from (4.2.4), causes 
the ac resistance to increase. At power frequencies (60 Hz), the ac resistance is at 
most a few percent higher than the dc resistance. Conductor manufacturers normally 
provide dc, 50-Hz, and 60-Hz conductor resistance based on test data (see Appendix 
Tables A.3 and A.4).
For magnetic conductors, such as steel conductors used for shield wires, resis-
tance depends on current magnitude. The internal flux linkages, and therefore the 
iron or magnetic losses, depend on the current magnitude. For ACSR conductors, 
the steel core has a relatively high resistivity compared to the aluminum strands, and 
therefore the effect of current magnitude on ACSR conductor resistance is small. 
Tables on magnetic conductors list resistance at two current levels (see Table A.4).
Stranded conductor: dc and ac resistance
Table A.3 lists a 4/0 copper conductor with 12 strands. Strand diameter is  
0.1328 in. For this conductor:
a.	 Verify the total copper cross-sectional area of 211,600 cmil.
b.	 Verify the dc resistance at 508C of 0.302 Vymi. Assume a 2% increase in 
resistance due to spiraling.
c.	 From Table A.3, determine the percent increase in resistance at 60 Hz 
versus dc.
SOLUTION
a.  The strand diameter is d 5 (0.1328 in.) (1000 mil@in.) 5 132.8 mil, and, from 
(4.2.2), the strand area is d 2 cmil. Using four significant figures, the cross-sectional 
area of the 12-strand conductor is
A 5 12d 2 5 12s132.8d2 5 211,600 cmil
which agrees with the value given in Table A.3.
b.  Using (4.2.3) and hard-drawn copper data from Table 4.3,
r508C 5 10.66 1
50 1 241.5
20 1 241.52 5 11.88 V­cmilyft
From (4.2.1), the dc resistance at 508C for a conductor length of 1 mile (5280 ft) is
Rdc, 508C 5 s11.88ds5280 3 1.02d
211,600
5 0.302 Vymi
EXAMPLE 4.1

	
Section 4.4 Inductance: Solid Cylindrical Conductor	
181
4.3  CONDUCTANCE
Conductance accounts for real power loss between conductors or between con-
ductors and ground. For overhead lines, this power loss is due to leakage currents 
at insulators and to corona. Insulator leakage current depends on the amount 
of dirt, salt, and other contaminants that have accumulated on insulators, as 
well as on meteorological factors, particularly the presence of moisture. Corona  
occurs when a high value of electric field strength at a conductor surface causes the 
air to become electrically ionized and to conduct. The real power loss due to corona, 
called corona loss, depends on meteorological conditions, particularly rain, and on 
conductor surface irregularities. Losses due to insulator leakage and corona are 
usually small compared to conductor I2R loss. Conductance is usually neglected in 
power system studies because it is a very small component of the shunt admittance.
4.4  Inductance: Solid Cylindrical Conductor
The inductance of a magnetic circuit that has a constant permeability m can be ob-
tained by determining the following:
1.	 Magnetic field intensity H, from Ampere’s law
2.	 Magnetic flux density B sB 5 mHd
3.	 Flux linkages l
4.	 Inductance from flux linkages per ampere sL 5 lyI d
As a step toward computing the inductances of more general conductors and 
conductor configurations, first compute the internal, external, and total inductance 
of a solid cylindrical conductor. Also compute the flux linking one conductor in an 
array of current-carrying conductors.
Figure 4.6 shows a 1-meter section of a solid cylindrical conductor with radius r, 
carrying current I. For simplicity, assume that the conductor (1) is sufficiently long that 
end effects are neglected, (2) is nonmagnetic sm 5 m0 5 4p 3 1027 Hymd, and (3) has a 
uniform current density (skin effect is neglected). From (3.1.1), Ampere’s law states that 
which agrees with the value listed in Table A.3.
c.  From Table A.3,
R60 Hz, 508C
Rdc, 508C
5 0.303
0.302 5 1.003  
R60 Hz, 258C
Rdc, 258C
5 0.278
0.276 5 1.007
Thus, the 60-Hz resistance of this conductor is about 0.3 to 0.7% higher than the 
dc resistance. The variation of these two ratios is due to the fact that resistance in 
Table A.3 is given to only three significant figures.

182	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
$Htan dl 5 Ienclosed
(4.4.1)
To determine the magnetic field inside the conductor, select the dashed circle 
of radius x , r shown in Figure 4.6 as the closed contour for Ampere’s law. Due to 
symmetry, Hx is constant along the contour. Also, there is no radial component of 
Hx, so Hx is tangent to the contour. That is, the conductor has a concentric magnetic 
field. From (4.4.1), the integral of Hx around the selected contour is
Hx s2pxd 5 Ix  for x , r
(4.4.2)
where Ix is the portion of the total current enclosed by the contour. Solving (4.4.2),
Hx 5 Ix
2px Aym
(4.4.3)
Now assume a uniform current distribution within the conductor, that is 
Ix 51
x
r2
2
I  for x , r
(4.4.4)
Using (4.4.4) in (4.4.3)
Hx 5 xI
2pr2 Aym
(4.4.5)
For a nonmagnetic conductor, the magnetic flux density Bx is
Bx 5 m0Hx 5 m0xI
2pr2 Wbym2
(4.4.6)
The differential flux dF per-unit length of conductor in the cross-hatched rectangle 
of width dx shown in Figure 4.6 is
dF 5 Bx dx Wbym
(4.4.7)
Computation of the differential flux linkage dl in the rectangle is tricky since 
only the fraction sxyrd2 of the total current I is linked by the flux. That is,
dl 51
x
r2
2
dF 5 m0I
2pr4  x3 dx Wb­tym
(4.4.8)
FIGURE 4.6
Internal magnetic 
field of a solid 
cylindrical conductor

	
Section 4.4 Inductance: Solid Cylindrical Conductor	
183
Integrating (4.4.8) from x 5 0 to x 5 r determines the total flux linkages lint inside 
the conductor
lint 5#
r
0
dl 5 m0I
2pr4 #
r
0
x3 dx 5 m0I
8p 5 1
2 3 1027I Wb­tym
(4.4.9)
The internal inductance Lint per-unit length of conductor due to this flux linkage is then
Lint 5 lint
I 5 m0
8p 5 1
2 3 1027 Hym
(4.4.10)
Next, in order to determine the magnetic field outside the conductor, select the 
dashed circle of radius x . r shown in Figure 4.7 as the closed contour for Ampere’s 
law. Noting that this contour encloses the entire current I, integration of (4.4.1) yields
Hx s2pxd 5 I
(4.4.11)
which gives
Hx 5
I
2px Aym x . r
(4.4.12)
Outside the conductor, m 5 m0 and
Bx 5 m0Hx 5 s4p 3 1027d I
2px 5 2 3 1027
 I
x Wbym2
(4.4.13)
dF 5 Bx dx 5 2 3 1027
 I
x dx Wbym
(4.4.14)
Since the entire current I is linked by the flux outside the conductor,
dl 5 dF 5 2 3 1027
 I
x dx Wb{tym
(4.4.15)
Integrating (4.4.15) between two external points at distances D1 and D2 from 
the conductor center gives the external flux linkage l12 between D1 and D2:
FIGURE 4.7
External magnetic 
field of a solid 
cylindrical conductor

184	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
l12 5#
D2
D1
dl 5 2 3 1027I#
D2
D1
 dx
x
5 2 3 1027I ln 1
D2
D12 Wb­tym
(4.4.16)
The external inductance L12 per-unit length due to the flux linkages between D1 and 
D2 is then
L12 5 l12
I 5 2 3 1027 ln 1
D2
D12 Hym
(4.4.17)
The total flux lP linking the conductor out to external point P at distance D is the 
sum of the internal flux linkage, (4.4.9), and the external flux linkage, (4.4.16) from 
D1 5 r to D2 5 D. That is
lP 5 1
2 3 1027I 1 2 3 1027I ln D
r 
(4.4.18)
Using the identity 1
2 5 2 ln e1y4 in (4.4.18), a more convenient expression for lP 
is obtained:
lp 5 2 3 1027I 1ln e1y4 1 ln D
r2
5 2 3 1027I ln D
e21y4r
5 2 3 1027I ln D
r9 Wb­tym
(4.4.19)
where
r9 5 e21y4 r 5 0.7788r
(4.4.20)
Also, the total inductance LP due to both internal and external flux linkages out to distance D is
LP 5 lP
I 5 2 3 1027 ln 1
D
r92 Hym
(4.4.21)
Finally, consider the array of M solid cylindrical conductors shown in 
Figure 4.8. Assume that each conductor m carries current Im referenced out of the 
page. Also assume that the sum of the conductor currents is zero—that is,
I1 1 I2 1 Á 1 IM 5 o
M
m51
Im 5 0
(4..4.22)
The flux linkage lkPk, which links conductor k out to point P due to current Ik, is, 
from (4.4.19),
lkPk 5 2 3 1027Ik ln DPk
r9k

(4.4.23)
Note that lkPk includes both internal and external flux linkages due to Ik. The flux 
linkage lkPm, which links conductor k out to P due to Im, is, from (4.4.16),

	
Section 4.4 Inductance: Solid Cylindrical Conductor	
185
lkPm 5 2 3 1027Im ln DPm
Dkm

(4.4.24)
Equation (4.4.24) uses Dkm instead of sDkm 2 rkd or sDkm 1 rkd, which is a valid 
approximation when Dkm is much greater than rk. It can also be shown that this is 
a good approximation even when Dkm is small. Using superposition, the total flux 
linkage lkp, which links conductor k out to P due to all the currents, is
lkP 5 lkP1 1 lkP2 1 Á 1 lkPM
5 2 3 1027o
M
m51
Im ln DPm
Dkm

(4.4.25)
where Dkk 5 r 9k 5 e21y4rk is defined when m 5 k in the above summation. Equation 
(4.4.25) is separated into two summations:
lkP 5 2 3 1027 o
M
m51
Im ln 1
Dkm
1 2 3 1027o
M
m51
Im ln DPm
(4.4.26)
Removing the last term from the second summation results in
lkP 5 2 3 1027 3o
M
m51
Im ln 1
Dkm
1 o
M21
m51
Im ln DPm 1 IM ln DPM4
(4.4.27)
From (4.4.22),
IM 5 2sI1 1 I2 1 Á 1 IM21d 5 2o
M21
m51
Im
(4.4.28)
Using (4.4.28) in (4.4.27)
lkP 5 2 3 1027 3o
M
m51
Im ln 1
Dkm
1 o
M21
m51
Im ln DPm 2 o
M21
m51
Im ln DPM4
5 2 3 10273o
M
m51
Im  ln 1
Dkm
1 o
M21
m 5 1
 Im  ln DPm
DPM4
(4.4.29)
FIGURE 4.8
Array of M solid 
cylindrical conductors

186	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
Now, let lk equal the total flux linking conductor k out to infinity. That is, 
lk 5 lim
pS` lkP. As P S `, all the distances DPm become equal, the ratios DPmyDPM 
become unity, and ln sDPmyDPMd S 0. Therefore, the second summation in (4.4.29) 
becomes zero as P S `, and
lk 5 2 3 1027o
M
m51
Im ln  1
Dkm Wb­tym
(4.4.30)
Equation (4.4.30) gives the total flux linking conductor k in an array of M conduc-
tors carrying currents I1, I2,…, IM, whose sum is zero. This equation is valid for either 
dc or ac currents. lk is a dc flux linkage when the currents are dc, and lk is a phasor 
flux linkage when the currents are phasor representations of sinusoids.
4.5  Inductance: Single-Phase Two-Wire 
Line And Three-Phase Three-Wire Line 
With Equal Phase Spacing
The results of the previous section are used here to determine the inductances of two 
relatively simple transmission lines: a single-phase two-wire line and a three-phase 
three-wire line with equal phase spacing.
Figure 4.9(a) shows a single-phase two-wire line consisting of two solid cylin-
drical conductors x and y. Conductor x with radius rx carries phasor current Ix 5 I 
referenced out of the page. Conductor y with radius ry carries return current Iy 5 2I. 
Since the sum of the two currents is zero, (4.4.30) is valid, from which the total flux 
linking conductor x is
lx 5 2 3 10271Ix ln 1
Dxx
1 Iy ln 1
Dxy2
5 2 3 10271I ln 1
r9x
2 I ln 1
D2
5 2 3 1027I ln D
r9x Wb­tym
(4.5.1)
FIGURE 4.9
Single-phase  
two-wire line

	
Section 4.5 Inductance	
187
Where rx9 5 e21y4rx 5 0.7788rx.
The inductance of conductor x is then
Lx 5 lx
Ix
5 lx
I 5 2 3 1027 ln D
r9x Hym per conductor
(4.5.2)
Similarly, the total flux linking conductor y is
ly 5 2 3 10271Ix ln 1
Dyx
1 Iy ln 1
Dyy2
5 2 3 1027 1I ln 1
D 2 I ln 1
r9y2
5 22 3 1027 I ln D
r9y

(4.5.3)
and
Ly 5
ly
Iy
5
ly
2I 5 2 3 1027 ln D
r9y Hym per conductor	
(4.5.4)
The total inductance of the single-phase circuit, also called loop inductance, is
L 5 Lx 1 Ly 5 2 3 1027 1ln D
r9x
1 ln D
r9y2
5 2 3 1027 ln D2
r9x r9y
5 4 3 1027 ln 
D
Ïr9x r9y Hym per circuit
(4.5.5)
Also, if r9x 5 r9y 5 r9, the total circuit inductance is
L 5 4 3 1027 ln D
r9 Hym per circuit	

(4.5.6)
The inductances of the single-phase two-wire line are shown in Figure 4.9(b).
Figure 4.10(a) shows a three-phase three-wire line consisting of three solid 
cylindrical conductors a, b, c, each with radius r, and with equal phase spacing D 
between any two conductors. To determine inductance, assume balanced positive- 
sequence currents Ia, Ib, Ic that satisfy Ia 1 Ib 1 Ic 5 0. Then (4.4.30) is valid and the 
total flux linking the phase a conductor is
la 5 2 3 10271Ia ln 1
r9 1 Ib ln 1
D 1 Ic ln 1
D2
5 2 3 1027 3Ia ln 1
r9 1 sIb 1 Icd ln 1
D4
(4.5.7)

188	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
Using sIb 1 Icd 5 2Ia,
la 5 2 3 10271Ia ln 1
r9 2 Ia ln 1
D2
5 2 3 1027 Ia ln D
r9 Wb­tym
(4.5.8)
The inductance of phase a is then
La 5 la
Ia
5 2 3 1027 ln D
r9 Hym per phase
(4.5.9)
Due to symmetry, the same result is obtained for Lb 5 lbyIb and for Lc 5 lcyIc . 
However, only one phase need be considered for balanced three-phase operation of 
this line, since the flux linkages of each phase have equal magnitudes and 1208 dis-
placement. The phase inductance is shown in Figure 4.10(b).
4.6  Inductance: Composite Conductors, 
Unequal Phase Spacing, Bundled 
Conductors
The results of Section 4.5 are extended here to include composite conductors, which 
consist of two or more solid cylindrical subconductors in parallel. A stranded con-
ductor is one example of a composite conductor. For simplicity assume that for each 
conductor, the subconductors are identical and share the conductor current equally.
Figure 4.11 shows a single-phase two-conductor line consisting of two compos-
ite conductors x and y. Conductor x has N identical subconductors, each with radius 
rx and with current (I/N) referenced out of the page. Similarly, conductor y consists 
of M identical subconductors, each with radius ry and with return current (–I/M). 
Since the sum of all the currents is zero, (4.4.30) is valid and the total flux Fk linking 
subconductor k of conductor x is
Fk 5 2 3 1027 3
I
N o
N
m51
ln 1
Dkm
2 1
M o
M
m519
ln 1
Dkm4
(4.6.1)
FIGURE 4.10
Three-phase 
three-wire line with 
equal phase spacing

	
Section 4.6 Composite Conductors	
189
Since only the fraction (1/N) of the total conductor current I is linked by this 
flux, the flux linkage lk of (the current in) subconductor k is
lk 5 Fk
N 5 2 3 1027I 3
1
N 2 o
N
m51
ln 1
Dkm
2
1
NM o
M
m519
ln 1
Dkm4
(4.6.2) 
The total flux linkage of conductor x is
lx 5 o
N
k51
lk 5 2 3 1027I o
N
k513
1
N 2 o
N
m51
ln 1
Dkm
2
1
NM o
M
m519
ln 1
Dkm4
(4.6.3)
Using ln Aa 5 a ln A and o ln Ak 5 ln P Ak (sum of ln s 5 ln of products), 
(4.6.3) can be rewritten in the following form:
lx 5 2 3 1027 I ln P
N
k51
 1P
M
m519
Dkm2
1yNM
1P
N
m51
Dkm2
1yN 2 
(4.6.4) 
and the inductance of conductor x, Lx 5 lx
I , can be written as
Lx 5 2 3 1027 ln 
Dxy
Dxx Hym per conductor	 
(4.6.5)
where
Dxy 5ÎP
 N
k51
 P
M
m519
Dkm
 (4.6.6) 
Dxx 5ÎP
 N
k51
 P
N
m51
Dkm
(4.6.7)
MN
N 2
FIGURE 4.11
Single-phase  
two-conductor line 
with composite 
conductors

190	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
Dxy, given by (4.6.6), is the MNth root of the product of the MN distances from 
the subconductors of conductor x to the subconductors of conductor y. Associated 
with each subconductor k of conductor x are the M distances Dk19, Dk29, …, DkM to 
the subconductors of conductor y. For N subconductors in conductor x, there are 
therefore MN of these distances. Dxy is called the geometric mean distance or GMD 
between conductors x and y.
Also, Dxx, given by (4.6.7), is the N 2 root of the product of the N 2 distances be-
tween the subconductors of conductor x. Associated with each subconductor k are 
the N distances Dk1, Dk2, …, Dkk 5 r9, …, DkN, For N subconductors in conductor x, 
there are therefore N 2 of these distances. Dxx is called the geometric mean radius or 
GMR of conductor x.
Similarly, for conductor y,
Ly 5 2 3 1027 ln
Dxy
Dyy
   Hym per conductor
(4.6.8)
where
Dyy 5ÎP
 M
k519
 P
M
m519
Dkm
(4.6.9)
Dyy, the GMR of conductor y, is the M 2 root of the product of the M 2 distances be-
tween the subconductors of conductor y. The total inductance L of the single-phase 
circuit is
L 5 Lx 1 Ly  H/m per circuit
(4.6.10)
M 2
GMR, GMD, and inductance: single-phase two-conductor line
Expand (4.6.6), (4.6.7), and (4.6.9) for N 5 3 and M 5 29. Then evaluate Lx, Ly, 
and L in H/m for the single-phase two-conductor line shown in Figure 4.12.
EXAMPLE 4.2
FIGURE 4.12
Single-phase two-
conductor line for 
Example 4.2

	
Section 4.6 Composite Conductors	
191
SOLUTION
For N 5 3 and M 5 29, (4.6.6) becomes
Dxy 5Î
6 P
3
k51
 P
29
m519
 Dkm
    5Î
6 P
3
k51
  Dk19Dk29
    5 Ï
6 sD119D129dsD219D229dsD319D329d
Similarly, (4.6.7) becomes
Dxx 5Î
9 P
3
k51
 P
3
m51
 Dkm
    5Î
9 P
3
k51
  Dk1Dk2Dk3
    5 Ï
9 sD11D12D13dsD21D22D23dsD31D32D33d
and (4.6.9) becomes
Dyy 5Î
4 P
29
k519
 P
29
m519
 Dkm
    5Î
4 P
29
k519
  Dk19Dk29
    5 Ï
4 sD1919D1929)sD2919D2929d
Evaluating Dxy, Dxx, and Dyy for the single-phase two-conductor line shown in 
Figure 4.12,
D119 5 4 m	
D129 5 4.3 m 	
D219 5 3.5 m
D229 5 3.8 m	
D31’ 5 2 m	
D32’ 5 2.3 m
Dxy 5 Ï
6 s4ds4.3ds3.5ds3.8ds2ds2.3d 5 3.189 m
D11 5 D22 5 D33 5 r9x 5 e–1/4rx 5 (0.7788)(0.03) 5 0.02336 m
D21 5 D12 5 0.5 m
D23 5 D32 5 1.5 m
D31 5 D13 52.0 m
(Continued)

192	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
Dxx 5 Ï
9 s0.02336d3s0.5d2s1.5d2s2.0d2 5 0.3128 m
D1919 5 D2929 5 r9y 5 e21y4ry 5 s0.7788ds0.4d 5 0.03115 m
D1929 5 D2919 5 0.3 m
Dyy 5 Ï
4 s0.03115d2s0.3d2 5 0.09667 m
Then, from (4.6.5), (4.6.8), and (4.6.10):
Lx 5 2 3 1027 ln1
3.189
0.31282 5 4.644 3 1027 Hym per conductor
Ly 5 2 3 1027 ln1
3.189
0.096672 5 6.992 3 1027 Hym per conductor
L 5 Lx 1 Ly 5 1.164 3 1026 Hym per circuit
It is seldom necessary to calculate GMR or GMD for standard lines. The GMR 
of standard conductors is provided by conductor manufacturers and can be found 
in various handbooks (see Appendix Tables A.3 and A.4). Also, if the distances be-
tween conductors are large compared to the distances between subconductors of 
each conductor, then the GMD between conductors is approximately equal to the 
distance between conductor centers.
Inductance and inductive reactance: single-phase line
A single-phase line operating at 60 Hz consists of two 4/0 12-strand copper con-
ductors with 5 ft spacing between conductor centers. The line length is 20 miles. 
Determine the total inductance in H and the total inductive reactance in V.
SOLUTION
The GMD between conductor centers is Dxy 5 5 ft. Also, from Table A.3, the GMR of 
a 4/0 12-strand copper conductor is Dxx 5 Dyy 5 0.01750 ft. From (4.6.5) and (4.6.8),
Lx 5 Ly 5 2 3 1027 ln1
5
0.017502
H
m 3 1609 m
mi 3 20 mi
     5 0.03639  H per conductor 
The total inductance is
L 5 Lx 1 Ly 5 2 3 0.03639 5 0.07279  H per circuit 
and the total inductive reactance is
XL 5 2pf L 5 s2pds60ds0.07279d 5 27.44 V per circuit
EXAMPLE 4.3

	
Section 4.6 Composite Conductors	
193
To calculate inductance for three-phase lines with stranded conductors and equal 
phase spacing, r9 is replaced by the conductor GMR in (4.5.9). If the spacings between 
phases are unequal, then balanced positive-sequence flux linkages are not obtained 
from balanced positive-sequence currents. Instead, unbalanced flux linkages occur, 
and the phase inductances are unequal. However, balance can be restored by exchang-
ing the conductor positions along the line, which is a technique called transposition.
Figure 4.13 shows a completely transposed three-phase line. The line is transposed at 
two locations such that each phase occupies each position for one-third of the line length. 
Conductor positions are denoted 1, 2, 3 with distances D12, D23, D31 between positions. 
The conductors are identical, each with GMR denoted Ds. To calculate inductance of this 
line, assume balanced positive-sequence currents Ia, Ib, Ic, for which Ia 1 Ib 1 Ic 5 0. Again, 
(4.4.30) is valid, and the total flux linking the phase a conductor while it is in position 1 is
la1 5 2 3 1027 3Ia ln 1
DS
1 Ib ln 1
D12
1 Ic ln 1
D314 Wb­tym
(4.6.11)
Similarly, the total flux linkage of this conductor while it is in positions 2 and 3 is
la2 5 2 3 1027 3Ia ln 1
DS
1 Ib ln 1
D23
1 Ic ln 1
D124 Wb­tym
(4.6.12)
la3 5 2 3 1027 3Ia ln 1
DS
1 Ib ln 1
D31
1 Ic ln 1
D234 Wb­tym
 (4.6.13)
The average of the above flux linkages is
la 5
la11
l
32 1 la21
l
32 1 la31
l
32
l
5 la1 1 la2 1 la3
3
5 2 3 1027
3
 33Ia ln 1
DS
1 Ib ln 
1
D12D23D31
1 Ic ln 
1
D12D23D314
(4.6.14)
Using (Ib 1 Ic) 5 2Ia in (4.6.14),
la 5 2 3 1027
3
 33Ia ln 1
DS
2 Ia ln 
1
D12D23D314
5 2 3 1027Ia ln Ï
3 D12D23D31
DS
  Wb­tym
(4.6.15)
FIGURE 4.13
Completely 
transposed 
three-phase line

194	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
and the average inductance of phase a is
La 5 la
Ia
5 2 3 1027 ln Ï
3 D12D23D31
DS  Hym per phase
(4.6.16)
The same result is obtained for Lb 5 lb/Ib and for Lc 5 lc/Ic. However, only one 
phase need be considered for balanced three-phase operation of a completely trans-
posed three-phase line. Defining
Deq 5 Ï
3 D12D23D31
(4.6.17)
results in
La 5 2 3 1027 ln 
Deq
DS Hym
(4.6.18)
Deq, the cube root of the product of the three-phase spacings, is the geometric mean 
distance between phases. Also, DS is the conductor GMR for stranded conductors, 
or r9 for solid cylindrical conductors.
Inductance and inductive reactance: three-phase line
A completely transposed 60-Hz three-phase line has flat horizontal phase spac-
ing with 10 m between adjacent conductors. The conductors are 1,590,000 cmil 
ACSR with 54/3 stranding. Line length is 200 km. Determine the inductance in H 
and the inductive reactance in V.
SOLUTION
From Table A.4, the GMR of a 1,590,000 cmil 54/3 ACSR conductor is
DS 5 0.0520 ft 1 m
3.28 ft 5 0.0159 m
Also, from (4.6.17) and (4.6.18),
Deq 5 Ï
3 s10ds10ds20d 5 12.6 m
La 5 2 3 1027 ln 1
12.6
0.01592 H
m 3 1000 m
km
3 200 km
5 0.267 H
The inductive reactance of phase a is
Xa 5 2pfLa 5 2ps60ds0.267d 5 101 V
EXAMPLE 4.4

	
Section 4.6 Composite Conductors	
195
It is common practice for EHV lines to use more than one conductor per phase, 
a practice called bundling. Bundling reduces the electric field strength at the conduc-
tor surfaces, which in turn reduces or eliminates corona and its results: undesirable 
power loss, communications interference, and audible noise. Bundling also reduces 
the series reactance of the line by increasing the GMR of the bundle.
Figure 4.14 shows common EHV bundles consisting of two, three, or four con-
ductors. The three-conductor bundle has its conductors on the vertices of an equilateral 
triangle, and the four-conductor bundle has its conductors on the corners of a square. To 
calculate inductance, DS in (4.6.18) is replaced by the GMR of the bundle. Since the bun-
dle constitutes a composite conductor, calculation of bundle GMR is, in general, given 
by (4.6.7). If the conductors are stranded and the bundle spacing d is large compared to 
the conductor outside radius, each stranded conductor is first replaced by an equivalent 
solid cylindrical conductor with GMR 5 DS. Then the bundle is replaced by one equiva-
lent conductor with GMR 5 DSL, given by (4.6.7) with n 5 2, 3, or 4 as follows:
Two-conductor bundle:
DSL 5 Ï
4 sDS 3 dd2 5 ÏDSd
(4.6.19)
Three-conductor bundle:
DSL 5 Ï
9 sDS 3 d 3 dd3 5 Ï
3 DSd 2
(4.6.20)
Four-conductor bundle:
DSL 5 ÏsDS 3 d 3 d 3 dÏ2 d4 5 1.091Ï
4 DSd 3
(4.6.21)
The inductance is then
La 5 2 3 1027 ln 
Deq
DSL Hym
(4.6.22)
If the phase spacings are large compared to the bundle spacing, then sufficient 
accuracy for Deq is obtained by using the distances between bundle centers.
16
FIGURE 4.14
Bundle conductor 
configurations
Inductive reactance: three-phase line with bundled conductors
Each of the 1,590,000 cmil conductors in Example 4.4 is replaced by two 
795,000 cmil ACSR 26/2 conductors, as shown in Figure 4.15. Bundle spacing is 
EXAMPLE 4.5
(Continued)

196	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
4.7  Series Impedances: Three-Phase Line with 
Neutral Conductors and Earth Return
This section develops equations suitable for computer calculation of the series 
impedances, including resistances and inductive reactances, for the three-phase over-
head line shown in Figure 4.16. This line has three phase conductors a, b, and c, 
where bundled conductors, if any, have already been replaced by equivalent conduc-
tors, as described in Section 4.6. The line also has N neutral conductors denoted n1,  
n2, ..., nN.* All the neutral conductors are connected in parallel and are grounded 
0.40 m. Flat horizontal spacing is retained, with 10 m between adjacent bundle 
centers. Calculate the inductive reactance of the line and compare it with that of 
Example 4.4.
SOLUTION
From Table A.4, the GMR of a 795,000 cmil 26/2 ACSR conductor is
￼DS 5 0.0375 ft 3
1 m
3.28 ft 5 0.0114 m
From (4.6.19), the two-conductor bundle GMR is
￼DSL 5 Ïs0.0114ds0.40d 5 0.0676   m
Since Deq 5 12.6 m is the same as in Example 4.4,
La 5 2 3 1027 ln 1
12.6
0.06762 s1000d s200d 5 0.209 H
Xa 5 2pfL1 5 s2pds60ds0.209d 5 78.8 V
The reactance of the bundled line, 78.8 V, is 22% less than that of Example 4.4, 
even though the two-conductor bundle has the same amount of conductor ma-
terial (that is, the same cmil per phase). One advantage of reduced series line 
reactance is smaller line-voltage drops. Also, the loadability of medium and long 
EHV lines is increased (see Chapter 5).
* Instead of shield wire, the term neutral conductor is used. It applies to distribution as well as 
transmission lines. 
FIGURE 4.15
Three-phase  
bundled conductor 
line for Example 4.5

	 Section 4.7 Series Impedances: Three-Phase Line with Neutral Conductors and Earth Return	
197
to the earth at regular intervals along the line. Any isolated neutral conductors that 
carry no current are omitted. The phase conductors are insulated from each other 
and from the earth.
If the phase currents are not balanced, there may be a return current in the grounded 
neutral wires and in the earth. The earth return current will spread out under the line, 
seeking the lowest impedance return path. A classic paper by Carson [4], later modified by 
others [5, 6], shows that the earth can be replaced by a set of “earth return” conductors lo-
cated directly under the overhead conductors, as shown in Figure 4.16. Each earth return 
conductor carries the negative of its overhead conductor current, has a GMR denoted 
Dk9k9, distance Dkk9 from its overhead conductor, and resistance Rk9 given by:
Dk9k9 5 Dkk  m
(4.7.1)
Dkk9 5 658.5Ïryf  m
(4.7.2)
Rk9 5 9.869 3 10–7f  V/m
(4.7.3)
FIGURE 4.16
Three-phase 
transmission line 
with earth replaced 
by earth return 
conductors

198	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
where r is the earth resistivity in ohm-meters and f is frequency in hertz. Table 4.4 
lists earth resistivities and 60-Hz equivalent conductor distances for various 
types of earth. It is common practice to select r 5 100 Vm when actual data are 
unavailable.
Note that the GMR of each earth return conductor, Dk9k9, is the same as the 
GMR of its corresponding overhead conductor, Dkk. Also, all the earth return con-
ductors have the same distance Dkk9 from their overhead conductors and the same 
resistance Rk9.
For simplicity, renumber the overhead conductors from 1 to (3 1 N), begin-
ning with the phase conductors, then overhead neutral conductors, as shown in 
Figure 4.16. Operating as a transmission line, the sum of the currents in all the con-
ductors is zero. That is,
o
s612Nd
k51
Ik 5 0
(4.7.4)
Equation (4.4.30) is therefore valid, and the flux linking overhead conductor k is
lk 5 2 3 1027 o
s31Nd
m51
Im ln Dkm9
Dkm9 Wb­tym
(4.7.5)
In matrix format, (4.7.5) becomes
l 5 LI
(4.7.6)
where
l is a (3 1 N) vector 
I is a (3 1 N) vector
L is a (3 1 N) 3 (3 1 N) matrix whose elements are
Lkm 5 2 3 1027 ln Dkm9
Dkm

(4.7.7)
When k 5 m, Dkk in (4.7.7) is the GMR of (bundled) conductor k. When k Þ m, Dkm 
is the distance between conductors k and m.
Type of Earth
Resistivity (Vm)
Dkk9 (m)
Sea water
0.0121.0
8.50285.0
Swampy ground
102100
2692850
Average damp earth
100
850
Dry earth
1000
2690
Pure slate
107
269,000
Sandstone
109
2,690,000
TABLE 4.4
Earth resistivities 
and 60-Hz equivalent 
conductor distances

	 Section 4.7 Series Impedances: Three-Phase Line with Neutral Conductors and Earth Return	
199
A circuit representation of a 1-meter section of the line is shown in Figure 4.17(a).  
Using this circuit, the vector of voltage drops across the conductors is
EAa
EBb
ECc
0
0
o
0
    5 (R 1 jvL)  
Ia
Ib
Ic
In1
o
InN
  
(4.7.8)
where L is given by (4.7.7) and R is a (3 1 N) 3 (3 1 N) matrix of conductor resistances.
sRa1Rk9dRk9 Á
Rk9
     Rk9sRb1Rk9dRk9 Á
o
                sRc1Rk9dRk9 Á
                         sRn11Rk9dRk9 Á
          ∞
            Rk 9              (RnN1RK9)
  Vym

(4.7.9)
The resistance matrix of (4.7.9) includes the resistance Rk of each overhead conduc-
tor and a mutual resistance Rk9 due to the image conductors. Rk of each overhead 
conductor is obtained from conductor tables such as Appendix Table A.3 or A.4, for 
a specified frequency, temperature, and current. Rk9 of all the image conductors is the 
same, as given by (4.7.3).
3 4
43
4
FIGURE 4.17
Circuit  
representation 
of series-phase 
impedances
3
R 5

200	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
Our objective now is to reduce the (3 1 N) equations in (4.7.8) to three equa-
tions, thereby obtaining the simplified circuit representations shown in Figure 4.17(b). 
We partition (4.7.8) as follows:
ZA
ZB
EAa
EBb
ECc
0
Á
0
Ia
Ib
Ic
In1
InN
o
Z11
Z12
Z13
Z21
Z22
Z23
Z31
Z32
Z33
Z41
Z42
Z43
Z(31N)1
Z(31N)2
Z(31N)3
Z14
Á
Z1(31N)
Z24
Á
Z2(31N)
Z34
Á
Z3(31N)
Z44
Á
Z4(31N)
Z(31N)4
Á
Z(31N)(31N)
4
443
3 3
ZC
ZD
￼

(4.7.10)
The diagonal elements of this matrix are
Zkk 5 Rk 1 Rk9 1 jv2 3 1027 ln Dkk9
Dkk Vym
(4.7.11)
And the off-diagonal elements, for k Þ m, are
Zkm 5 Rk9 1 jv2 3 1027 ln Dkm9
Dkm Vym
(4.7.12)
Next, (4.7.10) is partitioned as shown above to obtain
3
Ep
04 53
ZA    ZB
ZC  ZD4 3
IP
In4
(4.7.13)
where
EP 5 3
EAa
EBb
ECc4
;  IP 5 3
Ia
Ib
Ic4
;  In 5 3
In1
o
InN4
EP is the three-dimensional vector of voltage drops across the phase conductors (in-
cluding the neutral voltage drop), IP is the three-dimensional vector of phase currents 
and In is the N vector of neutral currents. Also, the (3 1 N) 3 (3 1 N) matrix in 
(4.7.10) is partitioned to obtain the following matrices:
ZA with dimension 3 3 3
ZB with dimension 3 3 N 
ZC with dimension N 3 3
ZD with dimension N 3 N

	
Section 4.8 Electric Field and Voltage:  Solid Cylindrical Conductor	
201
Equation (4.7.13) is rewritten as two separate matrix equations:
EP 5 ZAIP 1 ZBIn
(4.7.14)
0 5 ZCIP 1 ZD In
(4.7.15)
Solving (4.7.15) for In,
In 52Z2
D
1ZC IP
(4.7.16)
Using (4.7.16) in (4.7.14),
EP 5 fZA 2 ZBZ2
D
1ZC]IP
(4.7.17)
or
EP 5 ZPIP
(4.7.18)
where
ZP 5 fZA 2 ZBZ2
D
1ZC]
(4.7.19)
Equation (4.7.17), the desired result, relates the phase-conductor voltage drops (in-
cluding neutral voltage drop) to the phase currents. ZP given by (4.7.19) is the 3 3 3 
series-phase impedance matrix, whose elements are denoted
Zp 53
Zaaeq
Zabeq
Zaceq
Zabeq
Zbbeq
Zbceq
Zaceq
Zbceq
Zcceq4
   Vym
(4.7.20)
If the line is completely transposed, the diagonal and off-diagonal elements are 
averaged to obtain
ZP
⁄ 53
Z
⁄
aaeq
Z
⁄
abeq
Z
⁄
abeq
Z
⁄
abeq
Z
⁄
aaeq
Z
⁄
abeq
Z
⁄
abeq
Z
⁄
abeq
Z
⁄
aaeq4
   Vym
(4.7.21)
where
Z
⁄
aaeq 5 1
3 sZaaeq 1 Zbbeq 1 Zcceqd
(4.7.22)
Z
⁄
abeq 5 1
3 sZabeq 1 Zaceq 1 Zbceqd
(4.7.23)
4.8  Electric Field and Voltage:  
Solid Cylindrical Conductor
The capacitance between conductors in a medium with constant permittivity « can 
be obtained by determining the following properties.

202	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
1.	 Electric field strength E, from Gauss’s law
2.	 Voltage between conductors
3.	 Capacitance from charge per unit volt (C 5 q/V)
As a step toward computing capacitances of general conductor configurations, 
first compute the electric field of a uniformly charged, solid cylindrical conductor 
and the voltage between two points outside the conductor. Also compute the voltage 
between two conductors in an array of charged conductors.
Gauss’s law states that the total electric flux leaving a closed surface equals the 
total charge within the volume enclosed by the surface. That is, the normal com-
ponent of electric flux density integrated over a closed surface equals the charge 
enclosed:
%D ' ds 5 % «E ' ds 5 Qenclosed
(4.8.1)
where D' denotes the normal component of electric flux density, E' denotes the 
normal component of electric field strength, and ds denotes the differential surface 
area. From Gauss’s law, electric charge is a source of electric fields. Electric field lines 
originate from positive charges and terminate at negative charges.
Figure 4.18 shows a solid cylindrical conductor with radius r and with charge 
q coulombs per meter (assumed positive in the figure), uniformly distributed on the 
conductor surface. For simplicity, assume that the conductor is (1) sufficiently long 
that end effects are negligible, and (2) a perfect conductor (that is, zero resistivity, 
r 5 0).
Inside the perfect conductor, Ohm’s law gives Eint 5 rJ 5 0. That is, the inter-
nal electric field Eint is zero. To determine the electric field outside the conductor, 
select the cylinder with radius x . r and with 1-meter length, shown in Figure 4.18, 
as the closed surface for Gauss’s law. Due to the uniform charge distribution, the 
FIGURE 4.18
Perfectly conducting 
solid cylindrical 
conductor with 
uniform charge 
distribution

	
Section 4.8 Electric Field and Voltage: Solid Cylindrical Conductor 	
203
electric field strength Ex is constant on the cylinder. Also, there is no tangential 
component of Ex, so the electric field is radial to the conductor. Then, integration 
of (4.8.1) yields
«Exs2pxds1d 5 qs1d
Ex 5
q
2p«x Vym
(4.8.2)
where, for a conductor in free space, « 5 «0 5 8.854 3 10–12 F/m.
A plot of the electric field lines is also shown in Figure 4.18. The direction of 
the field lines, denoted by the arrows, is from the positive charges where the field orig-
inates, to the negative charges, which in this case are at infinity. If the charge on the 
conductor surface were negative, then the direction of the field lines would be reversed.
Concentric cylinders surrounding the conductor are constant potential sur-
faces. The potential difference between two concentric cylinders at distances D1 and 
D2 from the conductor center is
V12 5#
D2
D1
Exdx
(4.8.3)
Using (4.8.2) in (4.8.1),
V12 5#
D2
D1
q
2p«x
 dx 5
q
2p« ln D2
D1 volts
(4.8.4)
Equation (4.8.4) gives the voltage V12 between two points, P1 and P2, at distances 
D1 and D2 from the conductor center, as shown in Figure 4.18. Also, in accordance 
with the notation, V12 is the voltage at P1 with respect to P2. If q is positive and D2 is 
greater than D1, as shown in the figure, then V12 is positive; that is, P1 is at a higher 
potential than P2. Equation (4.8.4) is also valid for either dc or ac. For ac, V12 is a 
phasor voltage and q is a phasor representation of a sinusoidal charge.
Now apply (4.8.4) to the array of M solid cylindrical conductors shown in 
Figure 4.19. Assume that each conductor m has an ac charge qm C/m uniformly 
FIGURE 4.19
Array of M solid 
cylindrical conductors

204	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
distributed along the conductor. The voltage Vki between conductors k and i due to 
the charge qm acting alone is
Vki 5 qm
2p« ln Dim
Dkm
   volts	

(4.8.5)
where Dmm 5 rm when k 5 m or i 5 m. In (4.8.5), neglected is the distortion of the 
electric field in the vicinity of the other conductors, caused by the fact that the other 
conductors themselves are constant potential surfaces. Vkim can be thought of as the 
voltage between cylinders with radii Dkm and Dim concentric to conductor m at points 
on the cylinders remote from conductors, where there is no distortion.
Using superposition, the voltage Vki between conductors k and i due to all the 
changes is
Vki 5
1
2p«o
M
m51
qm ln Dim
Dkm
    volts
(4.8.6)
4.9  Capacitance: Single-Phase Two-Wire 
Line And Three-Phase Three-Wire Line 
With Equal Phase Spacing
The results of the previous section are used here to determine the capaci-
tances of the two relatively simple transmission lines considered in Section 4.5, a  
single-phase two-wire line and a three-phase three-wire line with equal phase spacing.
First consider the single-phase two-wire line shown in Figure 4.9. Assume that 
the conductors are energized by a voltage source such that conductor x has a uniform 
charge q CYm and, assuming conservation of charge, conductor y has an equal quan-
tity of negative charge –q. Using (4.8.6) with k 5 x, i 5 y, and m 5 x, y,
Vxy 5
1
2p«3q ln
Dyx
Dxx
2 q ln 
Dyy
Dxy4
5
q
2p« ln 
DyxDxy
DxxDyy

(4.9.1)
Using Dxy 5 Dyx 5 D, Dxx 5 rx, and Dyy 5 ry, (4.9.1) becomes
Vxy 5 q
p« ln 
D
Ïrxry
   volts
(4.9.2)
For a 1-meter line length, the capacitance between conductors is
Cxy 5 q
Vxy
5
p«
ln1
D
Ïrxry2 Fym line­to­line
(4.9.3)

	
Section 4.9 Capacitance	
205
and if rx 5 ry 5 r,
Cxy 5
p«
lnsDyrd Fym line­to­line
(4.9.4)
If the two-wire line is supplied by a transformer with a grounded center tap, 
then the voltage between each conductor and ground is one-half that given by (4.9.2). 
That is,
Vxn 5 Vyn 5
Vxy
2 
(4.9.5)
and the capacitance from either line to the grounded neutral is
Cn 5 Cxn 5 Cyn 5 q
Vxn
5 2Cxy
5
2p«
lnsDyrd Fym line­to­neutral
(4.9.6)
Circuit representations of the line-to-line and line-to-neutral capacitances 
are shown in Figure 4.20. Note that if the neutral is open in Figure 4.20(b), the two 
line-to-neutral capacitances combine in series to give the line-to-line capacitance.
Next consider the three-phase line with equal phase spacing shown in 
Figure 4.10. Neglect the effect of earth and neutral conductors here. To determine 
the positive-sequence capacitance, assume positive-sequence charges qa, qb, qc such 
that qa 1 qb 1 qc 5 0. Using (4.8.6) with k 5 a, i 5 b, and m 5 a, b, c, the voltage Vab 
between conductors a and b is
Vab 5
1
2p«3qa ln Dba
Daa
1 qb ln Dbb
Dab
1 qc ln Dbc
Dac4
(4.9.7)
Using Daa 5 Dbb 5 r, and Dab 5 Dba 5 Dca 5 Dcb 5 D, (4.9.7) becomes
Vab 5
1
2p«3qa ln D
r 1 qb ln r
D 1 qc ln D
D4
5
1
2p«3qa ln D
r 1 qb ln r
D4 volts
(4.9.8)
Note that the third term in (4.9.8) is zero because conductors a and b are equidistant 
from conductor c. Thus, conductors a and b lie on a constant potential cylinder for 
the electric field due to qc.
FIGURE 4.20
Circuit representation 
of capacitances for  
a single-phase  
two-wire line

206	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
Similarly, using (4.8.6) with k 5 a, i 5 c, and m 5 a,b,c, the voltage Vac is
Vab 5
1
2p«3qa ln Dca
Daa
1 qb ln Dcb
Dab
1 qc ln Dcc
Dac4
5
1
2p«3qa ln D
r 1 qb ln D
D 1 qc ln r
D4
5
1
2p«3qa ln D
r 1 qc ln r
D4 volts
(4.9.9)
Recall that for balanced positive-sequence voltages,
Vab 5 Ï3Van/1308 5 Ï3Van 3
Ï3
2 1 j1
24
(4.9.10)
Vac 5 2Vca 5 Ï3Van/2308 5 Ï3Van 3
Ï3
2 2 j1
24
(4.9.11)
Adding (4.9.10) and (4.9.11) yields
Vab1Vac 5 3Van
(4.9.12)
Using (4.9.8) and (4.9.9) in (4.9.12),
Van 5 1
3
 1
1
2p«2 32qa ln D
r 1 sqb 1 qcd ln r
D4
(4.9.13)
and with qb 1 qc 5 2qa,
Van 5
1
2p« qa ln D
r volts
(4.9.14)
The capacitance-to-neutral per line length is
Can 5 qa
Van
5
2p«
ln 1
D
r2
    Fym line­to­neutral
(4.9.15)
Due to symmetry, the same result is obtained for Cbn 5 qb/Vbn and Ccn 5 qc/Vcn. 
For balanced three-phase operation, however, only one phase need be considered. A 
circuit representation of the capacitance-to-neutral is shown in Figure 4.21.
4.10  Capacitance: Stranded Conductors, Unequal 
Phase Spacing, Bundled Conductors
Equations (4.9.6) and (4.9.15) are based on the assumption that the conductors are 
solid cylindrical conductors with zero resistivity. The electric field inside these conduc-
tors is zero, and the external electric field is perpendicular to the conductor surfaces. 
Practical conductors with resistivities similar to those listed in Table 4.3 have a small 
FIGURE 4.21
Circuit representation 
of the capacitance- 
to-neutral of a three-
phase line with equal 
phase spacing

	Section 4.10 Capacitance: Stranded Conductors, Unequal Phase Spacing, Bundled Conductors	
207
internal electric field. As a result, the external electric field is slightly altered near the 
conductor surfaces. Also, the electric field near the surface of a stranded conductor 
is not the same as that of a solid cylindrical conductor. However, it is normal prac-
tice when calculating line capacitance to replace a stranded conductor by a perfectly 
conducting solid cylindrical conductor whose radius equals the outside radius of the 
stranded conductor. The resulting error in capacitance is small, since only the electric 
field near the conductor surfaces is affected.
Also, (4.8.2) is based on the assumption that there is uniform charge distri-
bution. But conductor charge distribution is nonuniform in the presence of other 
charged conductors. Therefore (4.9.6) and (4.9.15), which are derived from (4.8.2), 
are not exact. However, the nonuniformity of conductor charge distribution can be 
shown to have a negligible effect on line capacitance.
For three-phase lines with unequal phase spacing, balanced positive-sequence 
voltages are not obtained with balanced positive-sequence charges. Instead, unbal-
anced line-to-neutral voltages occur, and the phase-to-neutral capacitances are un-
equal. Balance can be restored by transposing the line such that each phase occupies 
each position for one-third of the line length. If equations similar to (4.9.7) for Vab 
as well as for Vac are written for each position in the transposition cycle, and are then 
averaged and used in (4.9.12) through (4.9.14), the resulting capacitance becomes
Can 5
2p«
lnsDeqyrd Fym
(4.10.1)
where
Deq 5 Ï
3 DabDbcDac
(4.10.2)
Figure 4.22 shows a bundled conductor line with two conductors per bundle. 
To determine the capacitance of this line, assume balanced positive-sequence charges 
qa, qb, qc for each phase such that qa 1 qb 1 qc 5 0. Assume that the conductors in 
each bundle, which are in parallel, share the charges equally. Thus conductors a and 
a9 each have the charge qa/2. Also assume that the phase spacings are much larger 
than the bundle spacings so that Dab may be used instead of (Dab 2 d) or (Dab 1 d). 
Then, using (4.8.6) with k 5 a, i 5 b, m 5 a, a9, b, b9, c, c9,
Vab 5
1
2p« 3
qa
2  ln Dba
Daa
1 qa
2  ln Dba9
Daa9
1 qb
2  ln Dbb
Dab
1 qb
2  ln Dbb9
Dab9
1 qc
2  ln Dbc
Dac
1 qc
2  ln Dbc9
Dac94
5
1
2p« 3
qa
2  1ln Dab
r
1 ln Dab
d 2 1 qb
2  1ln r
Dab
1 ln d
Dab2
1 qc
21ln Dbc
Dac
1 ln Dbc
Dac24
5
1
2p« 3qa ln Dab
Ïrd 1 qb ln Ïrd
Dab
1 qc ln Dbc
Dac4
(4.10.3)

208	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
Equation (4.10.3) is the same as (4.9.7), except that Daa and Dbb, in (4.9.7) are 
replaced by Ïrd in this equation. Therefore, for a transposed line, derivation of the 
capacitance would yield
Can 5
2p«
lnsDeqyDSCd Fym
(4.10.4)
where
DSC 5 Ïrd  for a two-conductor bundle	

(4.10.5)
Similarly,
DSC 5 Ï
3 rd 2  for a three-conductor bundle	 
(4.10.6)
DSC 5 1.091 Ï
4 rd 3  for a four-conductor bundle	

(4.10.7)
Equation (4.10.4) for capacitance is analogous to (4.6.22) for inductance. 
In both cases Deq, given by (4.6.17) or (4.10.2), is the geometric mean of the 
distances between phases. Also, (4.10.5)–(4.10.7) for DSC are analogous to 
(4.6.19)2(4.6.21) for DSL, except that the conductor outside radius r replaces the 
conductor GMR DS.
The current supplied to the transmission-line capacitance is called charging 
current. For a single-phase circuit operating at line-to-line voltage Vxy 5 Vxy/08, the 
charging current is
Ichg 5 YxyVxy 5 jvCxyVxy A
(4.10.8)
As shown in Chapter 2, a capacitor delivers reactive power. From (2.3.5), the reactive 
power delivered by the line-to-line capacitance is
QC 5
V 2
xy
Xc
5 YxyV 2
xy 5 vCxyV 2
xy    var
(4.10.9)
For a completely transposed three-phase line that has balanced positive-sequence 
voltages with Van 5 VLN/08, the phase a charging current is
Ichg 5 YVan 5 jvCanVLN A
(4.10.10)
and the reactive power delivered by phase a is
QC1f 5 YV 2
an 5 vCanV 2
LN    var
(4.10.11)
The total reactive power supplied by the three-phase line is
QC3f 5 3QC1f 5 3vCanV 2
LN 5 vCanV2
LL    var
(4.10.12)
FIGURE 4.22
Three-phase line with 
two conductors per 
bundle

	Section 4.10 Capacitance: Stranded Conductors, Unequal Phase Spacing, Bundled Conductors	
209
Capacitance, admittance, and reactive power supplied: 
single-phase line
For the single-phase line in Example 4.3, determine the line-to-line capacitance in 
F and the line-to-line admittance in S. If the line voltage is 20 kV, determine the 
reactive power in kvar supplied by this capacitance.
SOLUTION
From Table A.3, the outside radius of a 4/0 12-strand copper conductor is
r 5 0.552
2
 in. 3 1 ft
12 in. 5 0.023 ft
and from (4.9.4),
Cxy 5 ps8.854 3 10212d
ln1
5
0.0232
5 5.169 3 10212 Fym
or
Cxy 5 5.169 3 10212
 F
m 3 1609 m
mi 3 20 mi 5 1.66 3 1027 F
and the shunt admittance is
Yxy 5 jvCxy 5 js2p60ds1.66 3 1027d
5 j6.27 3 1025 S line­to­line
From (4.10.9),
QC 5 (6.27 3 1025)(20 3 103)2 5 25.1  kvar
EXAMPLE 4.6
Capacitance and shunt admittance; charging current  
and reactive power supplied: three-phase line
For the three-phase line in Example 4.5, determine the capacitance-to-neutral in 
F and the shunt admittance-to-neutral in S. If the line voltage is 345 kV, deter-
mine the charging current in kA per phase and the total reactive power in Mvar 
supplied by the line capacitance. Assume balanced positive-sequence voltages.
SOLUTION
From Table A.4, the outside radius of a 795,000 cmil 26/2 ACSR conductor is
r 5 1.108
2
 in. 3 0.0254 m
in. 5 0.0141 m
EXAMPLE 4.7
(Continued)

210	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
4.11  Shunt Admittances: Lines with Neutral 
Conductors and Earth Return
This section covers equations suitable for computer calculation of the shunt ad-
mittances for the three-phase overhead line shown in Figure 4.16. Approximate the 
earth’s surface as a perfectly conducting horizontal plane, even though the earth 
under the line may have irregular terrain and resistivities as shown in Table 4.4.
The method of images accounts for the effect of the earth plane, described as 
follows. Consider a single conductor with uniform charge distribution and with 
height H above a perfectly conducting earth plane, as shown in Figure 4.23(a). 
When the conductor has a positive charge, an equal quantity of negative charge 
is induced on the earth. The electric field lines originate from the positive 
charges on the conductor and terminate at the negative charges on the earth. 
Also, the electric field lines are perpendicular to the surfaces of the conductor  
and earth.
Now replace the earth by the image conductor shown in Figure 4.23(b), which 
has the same radius as the original conductor, lies directly below the original con-
ductor with conductor separation H11 5 2H, and has an equal quantity of nega-
tive charge. The electric field above the dashed line representing the location of the 
From (4.10.5), the equivalent radius of the two-conductor bundle is
DSC 5 Ïs0.0141ds0.40d 5 0.0750 m
Deq 5 12.6 m is the same as in Example 4.5. Therefore, from (4.10.4),
Can 5 (2p)(8.854 3 10212)
ln1
12.6
0.07502
 F
m 3 1000 m
km 3 200 km
5 2.17 3 1026 F
The shunt admittance-to-neutral is
Yan 5 jvCan 5 j s2p60ds2.17 3 1026d
5 j8.19 3 1024 S
From (4.10.10),
Ichg 5 uIchgu 5 s8.19 3 1024d1
345
Ï32 5 0.163 kAyphase
and from (4.10.12),
QC3f 5 s8.19 3 1024ds345d2 5 97.5 Mvar

	
Section 4.11 Shunt Admittances: Lines with Neutral Conductors and Earth Return	
211
removed earth plane in Figure 4.23(b) is identical to the electric field above the earth 
plane in Figure 4.23(a). Therefore, the voltage between any two points above the 
earth is the same in both figures.
FIGURE 4.23
Method of images
Effect of earth on capacitance: single-phase line
If the single-phase line in Example 4.6 has flat horizontal spacing with 18-ft 
average line height, determine the effect of the earth on capacitance. Assume a 
perfectly conducting earth plane.
SOLUTION
The earth plane is replaced by a separate image conductor for each overhead con-
ductor, and the conductors are charged as shown in Figure 4.24. From (4.8.6), the 
voltage between conductors x and y is
EXAMPLE 4.8
FIGURE 4.24
Single-phase line 
for Example 4.8
(Continued)

212	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
For the three-phase line with N neutral conductors shown in Figure 4.25, the 
perfectly conducting earth plane is replaced by a separate image conductor for each 
overhead conductor. The overhead conductors a, b, c, n1, n2, Á , nN carry charges 
qa, qb, qc, qn1, Á , qnN, and the image conductors a9, b9, c9, n19, Á , nN9 carry charges 
2qa, 2qb, 2qc, 2qn1, Á ,2qnN. Applying (4.8.6) to determine the voltage Vkk9 be-
tween any conductor k and its image conductor k9,
Vkk9 5  1
2p«3o
nN
m5a
qm ln Hkm
Dkm
2 o
nN
m5a
qm ln Dkm
Hkm4
5
2
2p«o
nN
m5a
qm ln Hkm
Dkm

(4.11.1)
where Dkk 5 rk and Dkm is the distance between overhead conductors k and m. Hkm is 
the distance between overhead conductor k and image conductor m. By symmetry, 
the voltage Vkn between conductor k and the earth is one-half of Vkk9.
Vkn 5 1
2Vkk9 5
1
2p«o
nN
m5a
qm ln Hkm
Dkm

(4.11.2)
Vxy 5
q
2p« 3ln 
Dyx
Dxx
2 ln 
Dyy
Dxy
2 ln 
Hyx
Hxx
1 ln 
Hyy
Hxy4
5
q
2p« 3ln 
DyxDxy
DxxDyy
2 ln 
HyxHxy
HxxHyy4
5 q
p« 3ln D
r 2 ln 
Hxy
Hxx4
The line-to-line capacitance is
Cxy 5 q
Vxy
5
p«
ln D
r 2 ln 
Hxy
Hxx
    Fym
Using   D 5 5 ft,  r 5 0.023 ft,  Hxx 5 2H 5 36   ft,  and  Hxy 5 Ïs36d2 1 s5d2 5 36.346  ft,
Cxy 5
p(8.854 3 10212)
ln 
5
0.023 2 ln 36.346
36
5 5.178 3 10212 Fym
compared with 5.169 3 10212 FYm in Example 4.6. The effect of the earth plane 
is to slightly increase the capacitance. Note that as the line height H increases, the 
ratio HxyYHxx approaches 1, ln(HxyyHxx) S 0, and the effect of the earth becomes 
negligible.

	
Section 4.11 Shunt Admittances: Lines with Neutral Conductors and Earth Return	
213
where
k 5 a, b, c, n1, n2, Á , nN
m 5 a, b, c, n1, n2, Á , nN
Since all the neutral conductors are grounded to the earth.
Vkn 5 0    for k 5 n1, n2, Á , nN
(4.11.3)
In matrix format, (4.11.2) and (4.11.3) are
PA
PB
Van
Vbn
Vcn
0
o
0
qa
qb
qc
qn1
o
qnN
Paa
Pab
Pac
Pba
Pbb
Pbc
Pca
Pcb
Pcc
Pn1a
Pn1b
Pn1c
o
PnNa
PnNb
PnNc
Pan1
Á
PanN
Pbn1
Á
PbnN
Pcn1
Á
PcnN
Pn1n1
Á
Pn1nN
PnNn1
Á
PnNnN
4
443
3 3
PC
PD
5

(4.11.4)
The elements of the (3 1 N) 3 (3 1 N) matrix P are
Pkm 5
1
2p« ln Hkm
Dkm myF
(4.11.5)
where
k 5 a, b, c, n1, Á , nN
m 5 a, b, c, n1, Á , nN
FIGURE 4.25
Three-phase line with 
neutral conductors 
and with earth plane 
replaced by image 
conductors

214	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
Equation (4.11.4) is now partitioned as shown to obtain
3
Vp
04 53
PA    PB
PC  PD4 3
qP
qn4
(4.11.6)
VP is the three-dimensional vector of phase-to-neutral voltages. qP is the three- 
dimensional vector of phase-conductor charges and qn is the N vector of neutral 
conductor charges. The (3 1 N) 3 (3 1 N)P matrix is partitioned as shown in 
(4.11.4) to obtain:
PA with dimension 3 3 3
PB with dimension 3 3 N
PC with dimension N 3 3
PD with dimension N 3 N
Equation (4.11.6) is rewritten as two separate equations:
VP 5 PAqP 1 PBqn	 
(4.11.7)
0 5 PC qP 1 PDqn	

(4.11.8)
Then (4.11.8) is solved for qn, which is used in (4.11.7) to obtain
VP 5 (PA 2 PBPD
21PC)qP
(4.11.9)
or
qP 5 CPVP
(4.11.10)
where
CP 5 sPA 2 PBP21
D PCd21 Fym
(4.11.11)
Equation (4.11.10), the desired result, relates the phase-conductor charges to 
the phase-to-neutral voltages. CP is the 3 3 3 matrix of phase capacitances whose 
elements are denoted
CP 53
Caa
Cab
Cac
Cab
Cbb
Cbc
Cac
Cbc
Ccc4 Fym
(4.11.12)
It can be shown that CP is a symmetric matrix whose diagonal terms Caa, Cbb, Ccc are 
positive, and whose off-diagonal terms Cab, Cbc, Cac are negative. This indicates that 
when a positive line-to-neutral voltage is applied to one phase, a positive charge is 
induced on that phase and negative charges are induced on the other phases, which 
is physically correct.
If the line is completely transposed, the diagonal and off-diagonal elements of 
CP are averaged to obtain

	
Section 4.12 Electric Field Strength at Conductor Surfaces and at Ground Level	
215
CP
⁄ 53
C
⁄
aa
C
⁄
ab
C
⁄
ab
C
⁄
ab
C
⁄
aa
C
⁄
ab
C
⁄
ab
C
⁄
ab
C
⁄
aa4 Fym
(4.11.13)
where
C
⁄
aa 5 1
3 sCaa1 Cbb1 Ccc)   Fym
(4.11.14)
C
⁄
ab 5 1
3 sCab 1 Cbc 1 Cac) Fym
(4.11.15)
C
⁄
P  is a symmetrical capacitance matrix.
The shunt phase admittance matrix is given by
YP 5 jvCP 5 j(2pf  )CP Sym
(4.11.16)
or, for a completely transposed line,
Y
⁄
P 5 jvC
⁄
P 5 j(2pf   )C
⁄
P Sym
(4.11.17)
4.12  Electric Field Strength at Conductor 
Surfaces and at Ground Level
When the electric field strength at a conductor surface exceeds the breakdown 
strength of air, current discharges occur. This phenomenon, called corona, causes 
additional line losses (corona loss), communications interference, and audible noise. 
Although breakdown strength depends on many factors, a rough value is 30 kV/cm 
in a uniform electric field for dry air at atmospheric pressure. The presence of water 
droplets or rain can lower this value significantly. To control corona, transmission 
lines are usually designed to maintain calculated values of conductor surface electric 
field strength below 20 kVrms/cm.
When line capacitances are determined and conductor voltages are known, 
the conductor charges can be calculated from (4.9.3) for a single-phase line or from 
(4.11.10) for a three-phase line. Then the electric field strength at the surface of one 
phase conductor, neglecting the electric fields due to charges on other phase conduc-
tors and neutral wires, is, from (4.8.2),
Er 5
q
2p«r Vym
(4.12.1)
where r is the conductor outside radius.
For bundled conductors with Nb conductors per bundle and with charge q C/m 
per phase, the charge per conductor is q/Nb and
Erave 5 qyNb
2p«r Vym
(4.12.2)

216	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
Equation (4.12.2) represents an average value for an individual conductor in a bun-
dle. The maximum electric field strength at the surface of one conductor due to all 
charges in a bundle, obtained by the vector addition of electric fields (as shown in 
Figure 4.26), is as follows: 
Two-conductor bundle (Nb 5 2):
Ermax 5 qy2
2p«r 1 qy2
2p«d 5 qy2
2p«r11 1 r
d2
5 Erave11 1 r
d2
(4.12.3)
Three-conductor bundle (Nb 5 3):
Ermax 5 qy3
2p«1
1
r 1 2 cos 308
d 2 5 Erave11 1 rÏ3
d 2
(4.12.4)
Four-conductor bundle (Nb 5 4):
Ermax 5 qy4
2pe 1
1
r 1
1
dÏ2 1 2 cos 458
d 2 5 Erave 31 1 r
d (2.1213)4
(4.12.5)
Although the electric field strength at ground level is much less than at conduc-
tor surfaces where corona occurs, there are still capacitive coupling effects. Charges 
are induced on ungrounded equipment, such as vehicles with rubber tires located 
near a line. If a person contacts the vehicle and ground, a discharge current will flow 
to ground. Transmission-line heights are designed to maintain discharge currents 
below prescribed levels for any equipment that may be on the right-of-way. Table 4.5 
shows examples of maximum ground-level electric field strength.
As shown in Figure 4.27, the ground-level electric field strength due to charged 
conductor k and its image conductor is perpendicular to the earth plane has a value of 
Ekswd 51
qk
2p«2
2 cosu
Ïy2
k 1 sw 2 xkd2
51
qk
2p«2 
2yk
y2
k 1 sw 2 xkd2     Vym
(4.12.6)
where (xk, yk) are the horizontal and vertical coordinates of conductor k with respect 
to reference point R, w is the horizontal coordinate of the ground-level point where 
the electric field strength is to be determined, and qk is the charge on conductor k. 
FIGURE 4.26
Vector addition of 
electric fields at 
the surface of one 
conductor in a bundle

	
Section 4.12 Electric Field Strength at Conductor Surfaces and at Ground Level	
217
The total ground-level electric field is the phasor sum of terms Ek(w) for all overhead 
conductors. A lateral profile of ground-level electric field strength is obtained by 
varying w from the center of the line to the edge of the right-of-way.
Line Voltage (kVrms)
Maximum Ground-Level Electric Field Strength (kVrms/m)
23 (1f)
0.01–0.025
23 (3f)
0.01–0.05
115
0.1–0.2
345
2.3–5.0
345 (double circuit)
5.6
500
8.0
765
10.0
TABLE 4.5
Examples of maximum ground-level electric field strength versus transmission-line voltage [1]  
(© Copyright 1987. Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), Publication Number EL-2500. Transmission 
 Line Reference Book, 345-kV and Above, Second Edition, Revised. Reprinted with permission.)
FIGURE 4.27
Ground-level electric 
field strength due to 
an overhead conductor 
and its image
Conductor surface and ground-level electric field strengths: 
single-phase line
For the single-phase line of Example 4.8, calculate the conductor surface electric 
field strength in kVrms/cm. Also calculate the ground-level electric field in kVrms/m 
directly under conductor x. The line voltage is 20 kV.
SOLUTION
From Example 4.8, Cxy 5 5.178 3 10–12 F/m. Using (4.9.3) with Vxy 5 20/08  kV,
qx 5 2 qy 5 s5.178 3 10212ds20 3 103/08d 5 1.036 3 1027/08 Cym
EXAMPLE 4.9
(Continued)

218	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
4.13  Parallel Circuit Three-Phase Lines
If two parallel three-phase circuits are close together, either on the same tower as in 
Figure 4.3, or on the same right-of-way, there are mutual inductive and capacitive 
couplings between the two circuits. When calculating the equivalent series impedance 
and shunt admittance matrices, these couplings should not be neglected unless the 
spacing between the circuits is large.
Consider the double-circuit line shown in Figure 4.28. For simplicity, assume 
that the lines are not transposed. Since both are connected in parallel. they have 
the same series-voltage drop for each phase. Following the same procedure as in 
Section 4.7, write 2(6 1 N ) equations similar to (4.7.6) through (4.7.9): six equations 
for the overhead phase conductors, N equations for the overhead neutral conductors, 
From (4.12.1), the conductor surface electric field strength is, with r 5 0.023 ft 5 
0.00701 m,
Er 5
1.036 3 1027
s2pds8.854 3 10212ds0.00701d V
m 3
kV
1000 V 3
m
100 cm
5 2.66  kVrmsycm
Selecting the center of the line as the reference point R, the coordinates 
(xx, yx) for conductor x are (22.5 ft, 18 ft) or (20.762 m, 5.49 m) and (10.762 m, 
5.49 m) for conductor y. The ground-level electric field directly under conductor 
x, where w 5 20.762 m, is, from (4.12.6),
Es20.762d 5 Exs20.762d 1 Eys20.762d
5
1.036 3 1027
s2pds8.85 3 10212d 3
s2ds5.49d
s5.49d2 2
s2ds5.49d
s5.49d2 1 s0.762 1 0.762d24
5 1.862 3 103s0.364 2 0.338d 5 48.5/08  Vym 5 0.0485  kVym
For this 20-kV line, the electric field strengths at the conductor surface and at 
ground level are low enough to be of relatively small concern. For EHV lines, electric 
field strengths and the possibility of corona and shock hazard are of more concern.
FIGURE 4.28
Single-line diagram of 
a double-circuit line

	
Section 4.13 Parallel Circuit Three-Phase Lines	
219
and (6 1 N ) equations for the earth return conductors. After lumping the neutral 
voltage drop into the voltage drops across the phase conductors, and eliminating the 
neutral and earth return currents, resulting in
3
EP
EP4 5 ZP 3
IP1
IP24
(4.13.1)
where EP is the vector of phase-conductor voltage drops (including the neutral volt-
age drop), and IP1 and IP2 are the vectors of phase currents for lines 1 and 2. Zp is a 
6 3 6 impedance matrix. Solving (4.13.1),
3
IP1
IP24 5 Z21
P 3
EP
EP4 53
YA  YB
YC  YD43
EP
EP4 53
(YA 1 YB)
(YC 1 YD)4EP
(4.13.2)
where YA, YB, YC, and YD are obtained by partitioning Z21
P  into four 3 3 3 matrices. 
Adding IP1 and IP2,
(IP1 1 IP2) 5 (YA 1 YB 1 YC 1 YD)EP
(4.13.3)
and solving for EP,
EP 5 ZPeq(IP1 1 IP2)
(4.13.4)
where
ZPeq 5 (YA 1 YB1 Yc 1 YD)–1
(4.13.5)
ZPeq is the equivalent 3 3 3 series phase impedance matrix of the double-circuit line. 
Note that in (4.13.5) the matrices YB and YC account for the inductive coupling be-
tween the two circuits.
An analogous procedure can be used to obtain the shunt admittance matrix. 
Following the ideas of Section 4.11, write (6 1 N ) equations similar to (4.11.4). After 
eliminating the neutral wire charges, the result is
3
qP1
qP24 5 CP 3
VP
VP4 53
CA  CB
CC  CD43
VP
VP4 53
(CA 1 CB)
(CC 1 CD)4VP
(4.13.6)
where Vp is the vector of phase-to-neutral voltages, and qPl and qP2 are the vectors of 
phase-conductor charges for lines 1 and 2. Cp is a 6 3 6 capacitance matrix that is 
partitioned into four 3 3 3 matrices CA, CB, CC, and CD. Adding qPl and qP2
(qP1 1 qP2) 5 CPeqVP
(4.13.7)
where
CPeq 5 (CA 1 CB 1 CC 1 CD)
(4.13.8)
Also,
YPeq 5 jvCPeq
(4.13.9)
Ypeq is the equivalent 3 3 3 shunt admittance matrix of the double-circuit line. The ma-
trices CB and CC in (4.13.8) account for the capacitive coupling between the two circuits.

220	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
These ideas can be extended in a straightforward fashion to more than two par-
allel circuits.
Multiple Choice Questions
SECTION 4.1
	4.1	 ACSR stands for
(a) Aluminum-clad steel conductor
(b) Aluminum conductor steel supported
(c) Aluminum conductor steel reinforced
	4.2	 Overhead transmission-line conductors are bare with no insulating cover.
(a) True	
(b) False
	4.3	 Alumoweld is an aluminum-clad steel conductor.
(a) True	
(b) False
	4.4	 EHV lines often have more than one conductor per phase; these conduc-
tors are called a _______.  
	4.5	 Shield wires located above the phase conductors protect the phase con-
ductors against lightning.
(a) True	
(b) False
	4.6	 Conductor spacings, types, and sizes do have an impact on the series 
impedance and shunt admittance.
(a) True	
(b) False
SECTION 4.2
	4.7	 A circle with diameter D in. = 1000 D mil = d mil has an area of _______ 
c mil.  
	4.8	 An ac resistance is higher than a dc resistance.
(a) True	
(b) False
	4.9	 Match the following for the current distribution throughout the conduc-
tor cross section: 
(i)  For dc	
(a) uniform
(ii) For ac	
(b) nonuniform
SECTION 4.3
	4.10	 Transmission line conductance is usually neglected in power system 
studies.
(a) True	
(b) False
SECTION 4.4
	4.11	 The internal inductance Lint per unit-length of a solid cylindrical conduc-
tor is a constant, given by 1
2 3 1027Hym in SI system of units.
(a) True	
(b) False

	
Multiple Choice Questions	
221
	4.12	 The total inductance LP of a solid cylindrical conductor (of radius r) due 
to both internal and external flux linkages out of distance D is given by 
(in HYm)
(a) 2 3 1027	
(b) 4 3 1027ln_Dr+
(c) 2 3 1027ln_Dr+
where r9 5 e21
4 r 5 0.778r.
SECTION 4.5
	4.13	 For a single-phase, two-wire line consisting of two solid cylindrical con-
ductors of same radius, r, the total circuit inductance, also called loop 
inductance, is given by (in H/m) 
(a) 2 3 1027ln_D
r9+	
(b) 4 3 1027ln_D
r9+
where r9 5 e21
4 r 5 0.778r
	4.14	 For a three-phase three-wire line consisting of three solid cylindrical  
conductors, each with radius r and with equal phase spacing D between 
any two conductors, the inductance in H/m per phase is given by
(a) 2 3 1027ln_D
r9+	
(b) 4 3 1027ln_D
r9+
(c) 6 3 1027ln_D
r9+
where r9 5 e21
4 r 5 0.778 r
	4.15	 For a balanced three-phase positive-sequence currents Ia, Ib, Ic, does the 
equation Ia 1 Ib 1 Ic  5 0 hold good?
SECTION 4.6
	4.16	 A stranded conductor is an example of a composite conductor.
(a) True	
(b) False
	4.17	 S lnAk 5 ln P Ak
(a) True	
(b) False
	4.18	 Is Geometric Mean Distance (GMD) the same as Geometric Mean 
Radius (GMR)?
(a) Yes	
(b) No
	4.19	 Expand 6ÏP3
k51 P29
m519 Dkm.
	4.20	 If the distance between conductors are large compared to the distances 
between subconductors of each conductor, then the GMD between con-
ductors is approximately equal to the distance between conductor centers.
(a) True	
(b) False
	4.21	 For a single-phase two-conductor line with composite conductors x and 
y, express the inductance of conductor x in terms of GMD and its GMR.
	4.22	 In a three-phase line, in order to avoid unequal phase inductances due to 
unbalanced flux linkages, what technique is used?

222	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
	4.23	 For a completely transposed three-phase line identical conductors, 
each with GMR denoted DS with conductor distance D12, D23, and D31 
give expressions for GMD between phases and the average per-phase 
inductance.
	4.24	 For EHV lines, a common practice of conductor bundling is used. Why?
	4.25	 Does bundling reduce the series reactance of the line?
(a) Yes	
(b) No
	4.26	 Does r9 5 e21
4 r 5 0.788r, which comes in calculation of inductance, play 
a role in capacitance computations?
(a) Yes	
(b) No
	4.27	 In terms of line-to-line capacitance, the line-to-neutral capacitance of a 
single-phase transmission line is
(a) Same	
(b) Twice	
(c) One-half
	4.28	 For either single-phase two-wire line or balanced three-phase three-wire 
line with equal phase spacing D and with conductor radius r, the capaci-
tance (line-to-neutral) in F/m is given by Can 5 ___.  
	4.29	 In deriving expressions for capacitance for a balanced three-phase three-
wire line with equal phase spacing, the following relationships may have 
been used.
(i) Sum of positive-sequence charges, qa 1 qb 1 qc = 0
(ii) The sum of the two line-to-line voltages Vab 1 Vac is equal to three-
times the line-to-neutral voltage Van.
Which of the following is true?
(a) Both	
(b) Only (i)	
(c) Only (ii)	
(d) None
SECTION 4.10
	4.30	 When calculating line capacitance, it is normal practice to replace a 
stranded conductor by a perfectly conducting solid cylindrical conductor 
whose radius equals the out side radius of the stranded conductor.
(a) True	
(b) False
	4.31	 For bundled-conductor configurations, the expressions for calculating 
DSL in inductance calculations and DSC in capacitance calculations are 
analogous, except that the conductor outside radius r replaces the con-
ductor GMR, DS.
(a) True	
(b) False
	4.32	 The current supplied to the transmission-line capacitance is called ____.  
	4.33	 For a completely transposed three-phase line that has balanced positive- 
sequence voltages, the total reactive power supplied by the three-phase line, 
in var, is given by QC3 = ______ in terms of frequency v, line-to-neutral 
capacitance Can, and line-to-line voltage Vll.

	
Problems	
223
SECTION 4.11
	4.34	 Considering lines with neutral conductors and earth return, the effect of 
earth plane is accounted for by the method of _______ with a perfectly 
conducting earth plane.
	4.35	 The affect of the earth plane is to slightly increase the capacitance, and as 
the line height increases, the effect of earth becomes negligible.
(a) True	
(b) False
SECTION 4.12
	4.36	 When the electric field strength at a conductor surface exceeds the break-
down strength of air, current discharges occur. This phenomenon is 
called ______.  
	4.37	 To control corona, transmission lines are usually designed to maintain 
the calculated conductor surface electric field strength below _______ 
kVrms/cm.  
	4.38	 Along with limiting corona and its effects, particularly for EHV lines, the 
maximum ground-level electric field strength needs to be controlled to 
avoid the shock hazard.
(a) True	
(b) False
SECTION 4.13
	4.39	 Considering two parallel three-phase circuits that are close together, 
when calculating the equivalent series-impedance and shunt-admittance 
matrices, mutual inductive and capacitive couplings between the two cir-
cuits can be neglected.
(a) True	
(b) False
Problems
SECTION 4.2
	4.1	 The Aluminum Electrical Conductor Handbook lists a dc resistance of 
0.01558 ohm per 1000 ft at 208C and a 60-Hz resistance of 0.0956 ohm 
per mile at 508C for the all-aluminum Marigold conductor, which has 61 
strands and whose size is 1113 kcmil. Assuming an increase in resistance of 
2% for spiraling, calculate and verify the dc resistance. Then calculate the dc 
resistance at 508C, and determine the percentage increase due to skin effect.
	4.2	 The temperature dependence of resistance is also quantified by the rela-
tion R2 5 R1 31 1 a(T2 2 T1)4 where R1 and R2 are the resistances at 
temperatures T1 and T2, respectively, and a is known as the temperature 
coefficient of resistance. If a copper wire has a resistance of 55 V at 208C, 
find the maximum permissible operating temperature of the wire if its 

224	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
resistance is to increase by at most 20%. Take the temperature coefficient 
at 208C to be a 5 0.00382.
	4.3	 A transmission-line cable with a length of 2 km consists of 19 strands 
of identical copper conductors, each 1.5 mm in diameter. Because of the 
twist of the strands, the actual length of each conductor is increased by 
5%. Determine the resistance of the cable if the resistivity of copper is 
1.72 mV-cm at 208C.
	4.4	 One thousand circular mils or 1 kcmil is sometimes designated by the 
abbreviation MCM. Data for commercial bare-aluminum electrical con-
ductors lists a 60 Hz resistance of 0.0080 ohm per kilometer at 758C for a 
793-MCM AAC conductor.
(a)  Determine the cross-sectional conducting area of this conductor in 
square meters.
(b) Find the 60 Hz resistance of this conductor in ohms per kilometer at 
508C.
	4.5	 A 60-Hz, 765-kV, three-phase overhead transmission line has four ACSR 
900 kcmil 54/3 conductors per phase. Determine the 60 Hz resistance of 
this line in ohms per kilometer per phase at 508C.
	4.6	 A three-phase overhead transmission line is designed to deliver 190.5 MVA  
at 220 kV over a distance of 63 km, such that the total transmission line 
loss is not to exceed 2.5% of the rated line MVA. Given the resistivity of 
the conductor material to be 2.84 3 1028 V-m, determine the required 
conductor diameter and the conductor size in circular mils. Neglect 
power losses due to insulator leakage currents and corona.
	4.7	 If the per-phase line loss in a 70-km-long transmission line is not 
to  exceed 65 kW while it is delivering 100 A per phase, compute the 
required conductor diameter if the resistivity of the conductor material 
is 1.72 3 1028 V-m.
SECTIONS 4.4 AND 4.5
	4.8	 A 60-Hz, single-phase two-wire overhead line has solid cylindrical copper 
conductors with a 1.5 cm diameter. The conductors are arranged in a 
horizontal configuration with 0.5 m spacing. Calculate in mH/km (a) the 
inductance of each conductor due to internal flux linkages only, (b) the 
inductance of each conductor due to both internal and external flux link-
ages, and (c) the total inductance of the line.
	4.9	 Rework Problem 4.8 if the diameter of each conductor is (a) increased by 
20% to 1.8 cm or (b) decreased by 20% to 1.2 cm without changing the 
phase spacing. Compare the results with those of Problem 4.8.
	4.10	 A 60-Hz, three-phase three-wire overhead line has solid cylindrical 
conductors arranged in the form of an equilateral triangle with 4-ft 
conductor spacing. The conductor diameter is 0.5 in. Calculate the 
positive-sequence inductance in H/m and the positive-sequence inductive 
reactance in V/km.

	
Problems	
225
	4.11	 Rework Problem 4.10 if the phase spacing is (a) increased by 20% to 4.8 ft  
or (b) decreased by 20% to 3.2 ft. Compare the results with those of Prob-
lem 4.10.
	4.12	 Find the inductive reactance per mile of a single-phase overhead trans-
mission line operating at 60 Hz given the conductors to be Partridge and 
the spacing between centers to be 30 ft.
	4.13	 A single-phase overhead transmission line consists of two solid alumi-
num conductors having a radius of 3 cm with a spacing 3.5 m between 
centers. (a) Determine the total line inductance in mH/m. (b) Given the 
operating frequency to be 60 Hz, find the total inductive reactance of the 
line in V/km and in V/mi. (c) If the spacing is doubled to 7 m, how does 
the reactance change?
	4.14	 (a) In practice, one deals with the inductive reactance of the line per phase 
per mile and use the logarithm to the base 10. Show that Eq. (4.5.9) of the 
text can be rewritten as
	
x 5 k log D
r9 ohms per mile per phase
	
5 xd 1 xa
where xd 5 k log D is the inductive reactance spacing factor in ohms per mile
	
xa 5 k log 1
r9  is the inductive reactance at 1-ft spacing in ohms per mile
	
k 5 4.657 3 l023f 5 0.2794 at 60 Hz
(b) Determine the inductive reactance per mile per phase at 60 Hz for a 
single-phase line with phase separation of 10 ft and conductor radius of 
0.06677 ft. If the spacing is doubled, how does the reactance change?
SECTION 4.6
	4.15	 Find the GMR of a stranded conductor consisting of six outer strands 
surrounding and touching one central strand, all strands having the same 
radius r.
	4.16	 A bundle configuration for UHV lines (above 1000 kV) has identical con-
ductors equally spaced around a circle, as shown in Figure 4.29. Nb is the 
number of conductors in the bundle, A is the circle radius, and DS is the 
conductor GMR. Using the distance D1n between conductors 1 and n 
given by D1n 5 2A sin[sn 2 1dpyNb] for n = 1, 2, . . ., Nb, and the following 
trigonometric identity:
[2 sinspyNbd][2 sins2pyNbd][2 sins3pyNbd] Á [2 sin{sNb 2 1dpyNb}] 5 Nb
show that the bundle GMR, denoted DSL, is
DSL 5 [NbDSAsNb 2 1d]s1yNbd
Also show that the above formula agrees with (4.6.19) through (4.6.21) 
for EHV lines with Nb 5 2, 3, and 4.

226	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
	4.17	 Determine the GMR of each of the unconventional stranded conductors 
shown in Figure 4.30. All strands have the same radius r.
	4.18	 A 230-kV, 60-Hz, three-phase completely transposed overhead line has 
one ACSR 954 kcmil conductor per phase and flat horizontal phase spac-
ing, with 7 m between adjacent conductors. Determine the inductance in 
H/m and the inductive reactance in V/km.
	4.19	 Rework Problem 4.18 if the phase spacing between adjacent conductors 
is (a) increased by 10% to 7.7 m or (b) decreased by 10% to 6.3 m. Com-
pare the results with those of Problem 4.18.
	4.20	 Calculate the inductive reactance in V/km of a bundled 500-kV, 60-Hz, 
three-phase completely transposed overhead line having three ACSR 
1113 kcmil conductors per bundle, with 0.5 m between conductors in the 
bundle. The horizontal phase spacings between bundle centers are 10, 10, 
and 20 m.
	4.21	 Rework Problem 4.20 if the bundled line has (a) three ACSR, 1351 kcmil 
conductors per phase or (b) three ACSR, 900 kcmil conductors per phase, 
without changing the bundle spacing or the phase spacings between bun-
dle centers. Compare the results with those of Problem 4.20.
	4.22	 The conductor configuration of a bundled single-phase overhead trans-
mission line is shown in Figure 4.31. Line X has its three conductors 
situated at the corners of an equilateral triangle with 10 cm spacing. Line 
Y has its three conductors arranged in a horizontal configuration with 
10 cm spacing. All conductors are identical, solid-cylindrical conductors 
each with a radius of 2 cm. Find the equivalent representation in terms 
of the geometric mean radius of each bundle and a separation that is the 
geometric mean distance.
FIGURE 4.30
Unconventional 
stranded conductors 
for Problem 4.17
FIGURE 4.29
Bundle configuration 
for Problem 4.16

	
Problems	
227
	4.23	 Figure 4.32 shows the conductor configuration of a completely trans-
posed three-phase overhead transmission line with bundled phase 
conductors. All conductors have a radius of 0.74 cm with a 30-cm 
bundle spacing. (a) Determine the inductance per phase in mH/km 
and in mH/mi. (b) Find the inductive line reactance per phase in V/mi 
at 60 Hz.
FIGURE 4.31
Problem 4.22
	4.24	 Consider a three-phase overhead line made up of three phase conduc-
tors: Linnet, 336.4 kcmil, and ACSR 26/7. The line configuration is such 
that the horizontal separation between center of C and that of A is 40", 
and between that of A and B is also 40" in the same line; the vertical sep-
aration of A from the line of C–B is 16". If the line is operated at 60 Hz at 
a conductor temperature of 758C, determine the inductive reactance per 
phase in V/mi,
(a)  by using the formula given in Problem 4.14 (a), and
(b)  by using (4.6.18) from the text.
	4.25	 For the overhead line of configuration shown in Figure 4.33 operating 
at 60 Hz and a conductor temperature of 708C, determine the resistance 
per phase, inductive reactance in ohms/mile/phase, and the current- 
carrying capacity of the overhead line. Each conductor is ACSR Cardinal  
of Table A.4.
FIGURE 4.32
Problem 4.23
FIGURE 4.33
Line configuration for 
Problem 4.25

228	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
	4.26	 Consider a symmetrical bundle with N subconductors arranged in a cir-
cle of radius A. The inductance of a single-phase symmetrical bundle-
conductor line is given by
L 5 2 3 1027 ln GMD
GMR Hym
Where GMR is given by [Nr9sAdN21]1yN r9 5 se 2 1y4 rd, r being the subcon-
ductor radius, and GMD is approximately the distance D between the 
bundle centers. Note that A is related to the subconductor spacing S in 
the bundle circle by S = 2A sin(P/N)
Now consider a 965-kV, single-phase, bundle-conductor line with 
eight subconductors per phase, phase spacing D = 20 m, and the sub-
conductor spacing S = 45.72 cm. Each subconductor has a diameter of  
4.572 cm. Determine the line inductance in H/m.
	4.27	 Figure 4.34 shows double-circuit conductors’ relative positions in seg-
ment 1 of transposition of a completely transposed three-phase overhead 
transmission line. The inductance is given by
L 5 2 3 1027 ln GMD
GMR Hymyphase
Where GMD 5 sDABeqDBCeqDACeqd1y3
With mean distances defined by equivalent spacings
DABeq 5 sD12D1929D129D192d1y4
DBCeq 5 sD23D2939D293D239d1y4
DACeq 5 sD13D1939D139D193d1y4
And GMR 5 [(GMR)A(GMR)B(GMR)C]1/3 with phase GMRs defined by
sGMRdA 5 [r9D119]1y2 ;  sGMRdB 5 [r9D229]1y2 ;   sGMRdC 5 [r9D339]1y2 
and r9 is the GMR of phase conductors.
	
Now consider a 345-kV, three-phase, double-circuit line with phase-
conductor’s GMR of 0.0588 ft and the horizontal conductor configura-
tion shown in Figure 4.35.
FIGURE 4.34
For Problem 4.27 
(Double-circuit con-
ductor configuration)

	
Problems	
229
(a) Determine the inductance per meter per phase in Henries (H).
(b) Calculate the inductance of just one circuit and then divide by 2 to 
obtain the inductance of the double circuit.
	4.28	 For the case of double-circuit, bundle-conductor lines, the same method 
indicated in Problem 4.27 applies with r9 replaced by the bundle’s GMR 
in the calculation of the overall GMR.
	
Now consider a double-circuit configuration shown in Figure 4.36 
that belongs to a 500-kV, three-phase line with bundle conductors of 
three subconductors at 21 in. spacing. The GMR of each subconductor 
is given to be 0.0485 ft.
	
Determine the inductive reactance of the line in ohms per mile per 
phase. You may use
XL 5 0.2794 log GMD
GMR Vymiyphase
 C′
B′
C
A′
B
A
FIGURE 4.36
Configuration for 
Problem 4.28
	4.29	 Reconsider Problem 4.28 with an alternate phase placement given below:
Physical Position
1
2
3
19
29
39
Phase Placement
A
B
B9
C
C9
A9
Calculate the inductive reactance of the line in V/mi/phase.
FIGURE 4.35
For Problem 4.27

230	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
	4.30	 Reconsider Problem 4.28 with still another alternate phase placement 
shown below.
Physical Position
1
2
3
19
29
39
Phase Placement
C
A
B
B
A
C
Find the inductive reactance of the line in V/mi/phase.
	4.31	 Figure 4.37 shows the conductor configuration of a three-phase trans-
mission line and a telephone line supported on the same towers. The 
power line carries a balanced current of 250 A/phase at 60 Hz, while 
the telephone line is directly located below phase b. Assume balanced 
three-phase currents in the power line. Calculate the voltage per kilome-
ter induced in the telephone line.
 SECTION 4.9
	
4.32	
Calculate the capacitance-to-neutral in F/m and the admittance-to-neutral 
in S/km for the single-phase line in Problem 4.8. Neglect the effect of the 
earth plane.
	
4.33	
Rework Problem 4.32 if the diameter of each conductor is (a) increased 
by 20% to 1.8 cm or (b) decreased by 20% to 1.2 cm. Compare the results 
with those of Problem 4.32.
	
4.34	
Calculate the capacitance-to-neutral in F/m and the admittance-to-neutral 
in S/km for the three-phase line in Problem 4.10. Neglect the effect of the 
earth plane.
FIGURE 4.37
Conductor layout for 
Problem 4.31

	
Problems	
231
	
4.35	
Rework Problem 4.34 if the phase spacing is (a) increased by 20% to 4.8 ft  
or (b) decreased by 20% to 3.2 ft. Compare the results with those of Prob-
lem 4.34.
	
4.36	
The line of Problem 4.23 as shown in Figure 4.32 is operating at 60 Hz. 
Determine (a) the line-to-neutral capacitance in nF/km per phase and in 
nF/mi per phase; (b) the capacitive reactance in V-km per phase and in 
V-mi per phase; and (c) the capacitive reactance in V per phase for a line 
length of 100 mi.
	
4.37	
(a) In practice, one deals with the capacitive reactance of the line in  
ohms ? mi to neutral. Show that Eq. (4.9.15) of the text can be rewritten as
	
XC 5 k9 log D
r    ohms ? mi to netural
	
5 x9d 1 x9a
where x9d 5 k9 log D is the capacitive reactance spacing factor
	
x9a 5 k9 log 1r is the capacitive reactance at 1-ft spacing
	 k9 5 (4.1 3 106)/f 5 0.06833 3 106 at f 5 60 Hz
(b) Determine the capacitive reactance in V ? mi. for a single-phase line of 
Problem 4.14. If the spacing is doubled, how does the reactance change?
	4.38	 The capacitance per phase of a balanced three-phase overhead line is 
given by
	
C 5
0.0389
logsGMDyrd mfymiyphase
For the line of Problem 4.24, determine the capacitive reactance per 
phase in V ? mi.
SECTION 4.10
	
4.39	
Calculate the capacitance-to-neutral in F/m and the admittance-to-neutral 
in S/km for the three-phase line in Problem 4.18. Also calculate the line-
charging current in kA/phase if the line is 110 km in length and is oper-
ated at 230 kV. Neglect the effect of the earth plane.
	
4.40	
Rework Problem 4.39 if the phase spacing between adjacent conductors 
is (a) increased by 10% to 7.7 m or (b) decreased by 10% to 6.3 m. Com-
pare the results with those of Problem 4.39.
	
4.41	
Calculate the capacitance-to-neutral in F/m and the admittance-to-neutral 
in S/km for the line in Problem 4.20. Also calculate the total reactive 
power in Mvar/km supplied by the line capacitance when it is operated at 
500 kV. Neglect the effect of the earth plane.

232	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
	
4.42	
Rework Problem 4.41 if the bundled line has (a) three ACSR, 1351-kcmil con-
ductors per phase or (b) three ACSR, 900 kcmil conductors per phase without 
changing the bundle spacing or the phase spacings between bundle centers.
	
4.43	
Three ACSR Drake conductors are used for a three-phase overhead 
transmission line operating at 60 Hz. The conductor configuration is 
in the form of an isosceles triangle with sides of 20, 20, and 38 ft. (a) Find 
the capacitance-to-neutral and capacitive reactance-to-neutral for each 
1-mile length of line. (b) For a line length of 175 mi and a normal oper-
ating voltage of 220 kV, determine the capacitive reactance-to-neutral for 
the entire line length as well as the charging current per mile and total 
three-phase reactive power supplied by the line capacitance.
	
4.44	
Consider the line of Problem 4.25. Calculate the capacitive reactance per 
phase in V ? mi.
SECTION 4.11
	
4.45	
For an average line height of 10 m, determine the effect of the earth on 
capacitance for the single-phase line in Problem 4.32. Assume a perfectly 
conducting earth plane.
	
4.46	
A three-phase 60-Hz, 125-km overhead transmission line has flat hori-
zontal spacing with three identical conductors. The conductors have an 
outside diameter of 3.28 cm with 12 m between adjacent conductors. 
(a) Determine the capacitive reactance-to-neutral in V-m per phase and 
the capacitive reactance of the line in V per phase. Neglect the effect of 
the earth plane. (b) Assuming that the conductors are horizontally placed 
20 m above ground, repeat part (a) while taking into account the effect of 
ground. Consider the earth plane to be a perfect conductor.
	
4.47	
For the single-phase line of Problem 4.14 (b), if the height of the conduc-
tor above ground is 80 ft., determine the line-to-line capacitance in F/m. 
Neglecting earth effect, evaluate the relative error involved. If the phase 
separation is doubled, repeat the calculations.
	
4.48	
The capacitance of a single-circuit, three-phase transposed line with the 
configuration shown in Figure 4.38, including ground effect, and with 
conductors not equilaterally spaced is given by
Cah
2p«0
ln 
Deq
r
2 ln Hm
Hs
 Fym line­to­neutral
where Deq 5 Ï
3 D12D23D13 5 GMD
	
r 5 conductor’s outside radius
	
Hm 5 sH12H23H13d1y3
	
 Hs 5 sH1H2H3d1y3

	
Problems	
233
(a)  Now consider Figure 4.39 in which the configuration of a three-phase, 
single circuit, 345-kV line with conductors having an outside diameter  
of 1.065 in. is shown. Determine the capacitance to neutral in F/m, 
including the ground effect.
(b)  Next, neglecting the effect of ground, see how the value changes.
C∙
B∙
A∙
C
A
B
D
D
D
H
H
H
H
H
H
FIGURE 4.38
Three-phase single-
circuit line config-
uration including 
ground effect for 
Problem 4.48
	
4.49	
The capacitance-to-neutral, neglecting the ground effect, for the three-
phase, single-circuit, bundle-conductor line is given by
FIGURE 4.39
Configuration for 
Problem 4.48 (a)

234	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
Cah 5
2p«0
/h 1
GMD
GMR2
 Fym line­to­neutral
Where
 GMD 5 sDABDBCDACd1y3
GMR 5 [rNsAdN21]1yN     
in which N is the number of subconductors of the bundle conductor on 
a circle of radius A, and each subconductor has an outside radius of r.
The capacitive reactance in mega-ohms for 1 mi of line at 60 Hz can be 
shown to be
XC 5 0.0683 log 1
GMD
GMR2 5 X9a 1 X9d
where X9a 5 0.0683 log 1
1
GMR2 and X9d 5 0.0683 log sGMDd.
Note that A is related to the bundle spacing S given by
A 5
S
2 sin 1
p
N2
  for N . 1
Using the above information for the configuration shown in Figure 4.40, 
compute the capacitance-to-neutral in F/m and the capacitive reactance 
in V ? mi to neutral for the three-phase, 765-kV, 60-Hz, single-circuit, 
bundle-conductor line (N 5 4) with subconductor’s outside diameter of 
1.16 in. and subconductor spacing (S) of 18 in.
SECTION 4.12
	
4.50	
Calculate the conductor surface electric field strength in kVrms/cm for 
the single-phase line in Problem 4.32 when the line is operating at 20 kV. 
Also calculate the ground-level electric field strength in kVrms/m directly 
under one conductor. Assume a line height of 10 m.
FIGURE 4.40
Configuration for 
Problem 4.49

	
References	
235
	
4.51	
Rework Problem 4.50 if the diameter of each conductor is (a) increased 
by 25% to 1.875 cm or (b) decreased by 25% to 1.125 cm without chang-
ing the phase spacings. Compare the results with those of Problem 4.50.
CASE STUDY QUESTIONS
a.	
Approximately how many physical transmission interconnections are 
there between the United States and Canada? Across which states and 
provinces are the interconnections located?
b.	
How many kWhs of electrical energy was exported from Canada to the 
United States in 2012? Was the majority of that energy export derived 
from clean, non-emitting sources of electrical power? 
c.	
What caused the August 2003 blackout in the United States and Can-
ada? How many generating units were forced to shut down during that 
blackout? 
d.	
What are the advantages of high-capacity, low-sag conductors? As of 
2013, how many electric utilities in the world had deployed high-capacity, 
low-sag conductor technology?
REFERENCES
	 1.	
Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), EPRI AC Transmission Line 
Reference Book—200 kV and Above (Palo Alto, CA: EPRI, www.epri 
.com, December 2005).
	 2.	
Westinghouse Electric Corporation, Electrical Transmission and Distri-
bution Reference Book, 4th ed. (East Pittsburgh, PA, 1964).
	 3.	
General Electric Company, Electric Utility Systems and Practices, 4th ed. 
(New York: Wiley, 1983).
	 4.	
John R. Carson, “Wave Propagation in Overhead Wires with Ground 
Return,” Bell System Tech. J. 5 (1926): 539–554.
	 5.	
C. F. Wagner and R. D. Evans, Symmetrical Components (New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1933).
	 6.	
Paul M. Anderson, Analysis of Faulted Power Systems (Ames, IA: Iowa 
State Press, 1973).
	 7.	
M. H. Hesse, “Electromagnetic and Electrostatic Transmission Line 
Parameters by Digital Computer,” Trans. IEEE PAS-82 (1963): 282–291.
	 8.	
W. D. Stevenson, Jr., Elements of Power System Analysis, 4th ed. (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1982).

236	
Chapter 4  |  Transmission Line Parameters
	 9.	
C. A. Gross, Power System Analysis (New York: Wiley, 1979).
10.	
P. Brown, “Integrating North America’s Power Grid,” Electricity Today  
T & D Magazine, 26, 5, (June 2013), pp. 8–11 (www.electricity-today.com).
11.	
IEEE ANCI C2. National Electrical Safety Code, 2007 edition (New 
York: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers).
12.	
D. Bryant, “Grid Congestion,” Electricity Today T & D Magazine, 26, 
6 (July/August 2013), pp. 58–60 (www.electricity-today.com).

237
Transmission Lines: 
Steady-State Operation
5
T
his chapter analyzes the performance of single-phase and balanced three-phase 
transmission lines under normal steady-state operating conditions. Expressions 
for voltage and current at any point along a line are developed where the dis-
tributed nature of the series impedance and shunt admittance is taken into account. 
A line is treated here as a two-port network for which the ABCD parameters and an 
equivalent p circuit are derived. Also, approximations are given for a medium-length 
line lumping the shunt admittance, for a short line neglecting the shunt admit-
tance, and for a lossless line assuming zero series resistance and shunt conductance.  
Series capacitor 
installation at 
Goshen Substation, 
Goshen, Idaho, 
USA rated at 395 
kV, 965 Mvar 
(Courtesy of 
PacifiCorp.)

238	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
The concepts of surge impedance loading and transmission-line wavelength are also 
presented.
An important issue discussed in this chapter is voltage regulation. Transmission- 
line voltages are generally high during light load periods and low during heavy load 
periods. Voltage regulation, defined in Section 5.1, refers to the change in line voltage 
as line loading varies from no-load to full load.
Another important issue discussed here is line loadability. Three major line- 
loading limits are (1) the thermal limit, (2) the voltage-drop limit, and (3) the steady-
state stability limit. Thermal and voltage-drop limits are discussed in Section 5.1. 
The theoretical steady-state stability limit, discussed in Section 5.4 for lossless lines 
and in Section 5.5 for lossy lines, refers to the ability of synchronous machines at 
the ends of a line to remain in synchronism. Practical line loadability is discussed in 
Section 5.6.
Section 5.7 covers line compensation techniques for improving voltage  
regulation and for raising line loadings closer to the thermal limit.
CASE STUDY
High voltage direct current (HVDC) applications embedded within ac power 
system grids have many benefits. A bipolar HVDC transmission line has 
only two insulated sets of conductors versus three for an ac transmission 
line. As such, HVDC transmission lines have smaller transmission towers, 
narrower rights-of-way, and lower line losses compared to ac lines with 
similar capacity. The resulting cost savings can offset the higher converter 
station costs of HVDC. Further, HVDC may be the only feasible method 
to (1) interconnect two asynchronous ac networks; (2) utilize long under-
ground or underwater cable circuits; (3) bypass network congestion;  
(4) reduce fault currents; (5) share utility rights-of-way without degrading 
reliability; and (6) mitigate environmental concerns. The following article 
provides an overview of HVDC along with HVDC applications [6].
The ABCs of HVDC Transmission Technologies: An Overview 
of High Voltage Direct Current Systems and Applications
By Michael P. Bahrman and Brian K. Johnson
High voltage direct current (HVDC) 
technology has characteristics that 
make it especially attractive for certain 
transmission applications. HVDC 
transmission is widely recognized  
as being advantageous for long- 
distance bulk-power delivery, asyn-
chronous interconnections, and long 
submarine cable crossings. The num-
ber of HVDC projects committed  

	
Case Study	
239
or under consideration globally has 
increased in recent years, reflecting a 
renewed interest in this mature tech-
nology. New converter designs have 
broadened the potential range of 
HVDC transmission to include ap-
plications for underground, offshore, 
economic replacement of reliability- 
must-run generation, and voltage 
stabilization. This broader range of 
applications has contributed to the 
recent growth of HVDC transmis-
sion. There are approximately ten 
new HVDC projects under construc-
tion or active consideration in North 
America along with many more 
projects underway globally. Figure 1  
shows the Danish terminal for Skager-
rak’s pole 3, which is rated 440 MW.  
Figure 2 shows the 6500-kV HVDC 
transmission line for the 2000 MW 
Intermountain Power Project be-
tween Utah and California. This ar-
ticle discusses HVDC technologies, 
application areas where HVDC is  
favorable compared to ac transmis-
sion, system configuration, station 
design, and operating principles.
Core Hvdc Technologies
Two basic converter technologies are 
used in modem HVDC transmission  
systems. 
These 
are 
conventional 
line-commutated current source con-
verters (CSCs) and self-commutated 
voltage source converters (VSCs). 
Figure 3 shows a conventional HVDC 
converter station with CSCs while 
Figure 4 shows a HVDC converter 
station with VSCs.
Line-Commutated Current Source 
Converter
Conventional HVDC transmission 
employs line-commutated CSCs with 
thyristor valves. Such converters re-
quire a synchronous voltage source in 
order to operate. The basic building 
block used for HVDC conversion is  
the three-phase, full-wave bridge 
referred to as a six-pulse or Graetz 
bridge. The term six-pulse is due to 
six commutations or switching op-
erations per period resulting in a 
characteristic harmonic ripple of six 
times the fundamental frequency in 
the dc output voltage. Each six-pulse 
bridge is comprised of six controlled 
switching 
elements 
or 
thyristor 
Figure 2  A 6500-kV HVDC  
transmission line
(“The ABCs of HVDC Transmission  
Technologies” by Michael P. Bahrman and 
Brian K. Johnson. © 2007 IEEE. Reprinted,  
I with permission, from IEEE Power & Energy  
Magazine, March/April 2007)
Figure 1  HVDC converter station with 
ac filters in the foreground and 
valve hall in the background

240	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
valves. Each valve is comprised of a 
suitable number of series-connected 
thyristors to achieve the desired  
dc voltage rating.
The dc terminals of two six-pulse 
bridges with ac voltage sources phase 
displaced by 308 can be connected 
in series to increase the dc voltage  
and eliminate some of the charac-
teristic ac current and dc voltage  
harmonics. Operation in this manner 
is referred to as 12-pulse operation. In 
12-pulse operation, the characteristic 
ac current and dc voltage harmon-
ics have frequencies of 12n 6 1 and 
12n, respectively. The 308 phase dis-
placement is achieved by feeding one 
bridge through a transformer with 
a wye-connected secondary and the 
other bridge through a transformer 
with a delta-connected secondary. 
Most modern HVDC transmission 
Figure 3  Conventional HVDC with current source converters
Figure 4  HVDC with voltage source converters

schemes utilize 12-pulse converters to 
reduce the harmonic filtering require-
ments required for six-pulse opera-
tion; for example, fifth and seventh 
on the ac side and sixth on the dc 
side. This is because, although these 
harmonic currents still flow through 
the valves and the transformer wind-
ings, they are 1808 out of phase and 
cancel out on the primary side of 
the converter transformer. Figure 5 
shows the thyristor valve arrange-
ment for a 12-pulse converter with 
three quadruple valves, one for each 
phase. Each thyristor valve is built 
up with series-connected thyristor  
modules.
Line-commutated 
converters 
require a relatively strong synchro-
nous voltage source in order to com-
mutate. Commutation is the transfer 
of current from one phase to another 
in a synchronized firing sequence of 
the thyristor valves. The three-phase 
symmetrical short-circuit capacity 
available from the network at the 
converter connection point should 
be at least twice the converter rat-
ing for converter operation. Line- 
commutated CSCs can only operate  
with the ac current lagging the volt-
age, so the conversion process de-
mands 
reactive 
power. 
Reactive 
power is supplied from the ac filters, 
which look capacitive at the funda-
mental frequency, shunt banks, or 
series capacitors that are an integral 
part of the converter station. Any 
surplus or deficit in reactive power 
from these local sources must be ac-
commodated by the ac system. This 
difference in reactive power needs to 
be kept within a given band to keep 
the ac voltage within the desired tol-
erance. The weaker the ac system 
or the further the converter is away 
from generation, the tighter the reac-
tive power exchange must be to stay 
within the desired voltage tolerance. 
Figure 6 illustrates the reactive power 
demand, reactive power compensa-
tion, and reactive power exchange 
with the ac network as a function of 
dc load current.
	
Case Study	
241
Figure 5 Thyristor valve arrangement for a 12-pulse converter 
with three quadruple valves, one for each phase

242	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
Converters with series capac-
itors connected between the valves 
and the transformers were introduced 
in the late 1990s for weak-system,  
back-to-back applications. These con-
verters are referred to as capacitor- 
commutated converters (CCCs). The 
series capacitor provides some of the 
converter reactive power compensa-
tion requirements automatically with 
load current and provides part of 
the commutation voltage, improving  
voltage stability. The overvoltage 
protection of the series capaci-
tors is simple since the capacitor is 
not exposed to line faults, and the 
fault current for internal converter  
faults is limited by the impedance 
of the converter transformers. The 
CCC configuration allows higher 
power ratings in areas were the ac 
network is close to its voltage stabil-
ity limit. The asynchronous Garabi 
interconnection between Brazil and 
Argentina consists of four 3 550 MW 
parallel CCC links. The Rapid City 
Tie between the Eastern and Western 
interconnected systems consists of  
2 3 10 MW parallel CCC links  
(Figure 7). Both installations use a 
modular design with converter valves 
located within prefabricated electri-
cal enclosures rather than a conven-
tional valve hall.
Figure 6  Reactive power compensation for conventional 
HVDC converter station
Figure 7  Asynchronous back-to-back tie with capacitor - commutated converter  
near Rapid City, South Dakota

Self-Commutated Voltage Source 
Converter
HVDC transmission using VSCs 
with pulse-width modulation (PWM),  
commercially 
known 
as 
HVDC 
Light, was introduced in the late 
1990s. Since then, the progression to 
higher voltage and power ratings for 
these converters has roughly paral-
leled that for thyristor valve convert-
ers in the 1970s. These VSC-based 
systems are self-commutated with 
insulated-gate 
bipolar 
transistor 
(IGBT) valves and solid-dielectric 
extruded HVDC cables. Figure 8 il-
lustrates solid-state converter devel-
opment for the two different types of 
converter technologies using thyristor 
valves and IGBT valves.
HVDC transmission with VSCs 
can be beneficial to overall system per-
formance. VSC technology can rap-
idly control both active and reactive 
power independently of one another. 
Reactive power can also be controlled 
at each terminal independent of the 
dc transmission voltage level. This 
control capability gives total flexibil-
ity to place converters anywhere in 
the ac network because there is no re-
striction on minimum network short-
circuit capacity. Self-commutation  
with VSC even permits black start; 
that is, the converter can be used to 
synthesize a balanced set of three- 
phase voltages like a virtual synchro-
nous generator. The dynamic support 
of the ac voltage at each converter ter-
minal improves the voltage stability  
and can increase the transfer capa-
bility of the sending- and receiving- 
end ac systems, thereby leveraging 
the transfer capability of the dc link.  
Figure 9 shows the IGBT converter 
valve arrangement for a VSC sta-
tion. Figure 10 shows the active and 
reactive power operating range for 
a converter station with a VSC. Un-
like conventional HVDC transmis-
sion, the converters themselves have 
	
Case Study	
243
Figure 8  Solid-state converter development

244	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
no reactive power demand and can  
actually control their reactive power 
to regulate ac system voltage, just like 
a generator.
Hvdc Applications
HVDC transmission applications can 
be broken down into different basic 
categories. Although the rationale 
Figure 9  HVDC IGBT valve converter arrangement
Figure 10  Operating range for voltage source converter 
HVDC transmission

for selection of HVDC is often eco-
nomic, there may be other reasons 
for its selection. HVDC may be the 
only feasible way to interconnect two 
asynchronous networks, reduce fault 
currents, utilize long underground  
cable circuits, bypass network conges-
tion, share utility rights-of-way with-
out degradation of reliability, and 
to mitigate environmental concerns. 
In all of these applications, HVDC 
nicely complements the ac transmis-
sion system.
Long-Distance Bulk Power 
Transmission
HVDC transmission systems often 
provide a more economical alter-
native to ac transmission for long- 
distance bulk-power delivery from  
remote resources such as hydro-
electric developments, mine-mouth 
power plants, or large-scale wind 
farms. Higher power transfers are 
possible over longer distances using 
fewer lines with HVDC transmission 
than with ac transmission. Typical 
HVDC lines utilize a bipolar config-
uration with two independent poles, 
one at a positive voltage and the other 
at a negative voltage with respect to 
ground. Bipolar HVDC lines are 
comparable to a double-circuit ac line 
since they can operate at half power 
with one pole out of service while 
requiring only one-third the number 
of insulated sets of conductors as a 
double circuit ac line. Automatic re-
starts from temporary dc line fault 
clearing sequences are routine, even 
for generator outlet transmission. 
No synchro-checking is required as 
for automatic reclosures following ac 
line faults since the dc restarts do not  
expose turbine generator units to high 
risk of transient torque amplification 
from closing into faults or across high 
phase angles. The controllability of 
HVDC links offer firm transmission 
capacity without limitation due to 
network congestion or loop flow on 
parallel paths. Controllability allows 
the HVDC to “leap-frog” multiple 
“choke-points” or bypass sequential 
path limits in the ac network. There-
fore, the utilization of HVDC links 
is usually higher than that for extra 
high voltage ac transmission, lower-
ing the transmission cost per MWh. 
This controllability can also be very 
beneficial for the parallel transmis-
sion since, by eliminating loop flow, it 
frees up this transmission capacity for 
its intended purpose of serving inter-
mediate load and providing an outlet 
for local generation.
Whenever long-distance trans-
mission is discussed, the concept of 
“break-even 
distance” 
frequently 
arises. This is where the savings in 
line costs offset the higher converter 
station costs. A bipolar HVDC line 
uses only two insulated sets of con-
ductors rather than three. This results 
in narrower rights-of-way, smaller 
transmission towers, and lower line 
losses than with ac lines of compara-
ble capacity. A rough approximation 
of the savings in line construction  
is 30%.
Although break-even distance 
is influenced by the costs of right- 
of-way and line construction with a 
typical value of 500 km, the concept 
itself is misleading because in many 
cases more ac lines are needed to deliver 
the same power over the same distance 
due to system stability limitations.  
	
Case Study	
245

246	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
Furthermore, the long-distance ac 
lines usually require intermediate 
switching stations and reactive power 
compensation. This can increase the 
substation costs for ac transmission 
to the point where it is comparable to 
that for HVDC transmission.
For 
example, 
the 
genera-
tor outlet transmission alternative 
for the 6250-kV, 500-MW Square 
Butte project was two 345-kV series- 
compensated ac transmission lines. 
The 12,600-MW Itaipu project has 
half its power delivered on three  
800-kV series-compensated ac lines 
(three circuits) and the other half 
delivered on two 6600-kV bipolar 
HVDC lines (four circuits). Similarly, 
the 6500-kV, 1600-MW Intermoun-
tain Power Project (IPP) ac alternative 
comprised two 500-kV ac lines. The IPP 
takes advantage of the double-circuit  
nature of the bipolar line and includes 
a 100% short-term and 50% contin-
uous monopolar overload. The first 
6000-MW stage of the transmission 
for the Three Gorges project in China 
would have required 5 3 500-kV ac  
lines as opposed to 2 3 6500-kV, 
3000-MW bipolar HVDC lines.
Table 1 contains an economic 
comparison of capital costs and 
losses for different ac and dc trans-
mission alternatives for a hypotheti-
cal 750-mile, 3000-MW transmission 
system. The long transmission dis-
tance requires intermediate substa-
tions or switching stations and shunt 
reactors for the ac alternatives. The 
long distance and heavy power trans-
fer, nearly twice the surge-impedance 
loading on the 500-kV ac alterna-
tives, require a high level of series  
compensation. These ac station costs 
are included in the cost estimates for 
the ac alternatives.
It is interesting to compare the 
economics for transmission to that of 
transporting an equivalent amount 
of energy using other transport meth-
ods, in this case using rail transporta-
tion of sub-bituminous western coal 
with a heat content of 8500 Btu/lb to 
support a 3000-MW base load power 
plant with heat rate of 8500 Btu/kWh  
operating at an 85% load factor. The 
rail route is assumed to be longer 
than the more direct transmission 
route—900 miles. Each unit train is 
comprised of 100 cars each carry-
ing 100 tons of coal. The plant re-
quires three unit trains per day. The 
annual coal transportation costs are 
about US$560 million per year at 
an assumed rate of US$50/ton. This 
works out to be US$186 kW/year 
and US$25 per MWh. The annual 
diesel fuel consumed in the process 
is in excess of 20 million gallons at 
500 net ton-miles per gallon. The rail 
transportation costs are subject to es-
calation and congestion whereas the 
transmission costs are fixed. Further-
more, transmission is the only way to 
deliver remote renewable resources.
Underground and Submarine Cable 
Transmission
Unlike the case for ac cables, there is 
no physical restriction limiting the 
distance or power level for HVDC 
underground or submarine cables. 
Underground cables can be used on 
shared rights-of-way with other utili-
ties without impacting reliability con-
cerns over use of common corridors. 

	
Case Study	
247
 
DC Alternatives
AC Alternatives
Hybrid AC/DC Alternative
500 kV
500 kV
765 kV
500 kV
Alternative
1 500 kV
2 3 1500 kV
1 600 kV
1800 kV
2 Single
Double
2 Single
1500 kV
Single
Total
Capital Cost
Bipole
2 bipoles
Bipole
Bipole
Ckt
Ckt
Ckt
Bipole
Ckt
AC 1 DC
Rated power (MW)
3000
4000
3000
3000
3000
3000
3000
3000
1500
4500
Station costs including  
  reactive compensation (M$)
$420
$680
$465
$510
$542
$542
$630
$420
$302
$722
Transmission line cost  
  (M$/mile)
$1.60
$1.60
$1.80
$1.95
$2.00
$3.20
$2.80
$1.60
$2.00
Distance in miles
750
1500
750
750
1500
750
1500
750
750
1500
Transmission Line  
  Cost (M$)
$1200
$2400
$1350
$1463
$3000
$2400
$4200
$1200
$1500
$2700
Total Cost (M$)
$1620
$3080
$1815
$1973
$3542
$2942
$4830
$1620
$1802
$3422
Annual Payment,  
  30 years @ 10%
$172
$327
$193
$209
$376
$312
$512
$172
$191
$363
Cost per kW-Yr
$57.28
$81.68
$64.18
$69.75
$125.24
$104.03
$170.77
$57.28
$127.40
$80.66
Cost per MWh @ 85%
  Utilization Factor
$7.69
$10.97
$8.62
$9.37
$16.82
$13.97
$22.93
$7.69
$17.11
$10.83
  Losses @ full load
193
134
148
103
208
208
139
106
48
154
Losses at full load in %
6.44%
3.35%
4.93%
3.43%
6.93%
6.93%
4.62%
5.29%
4.79%
5.12%
Capitalized cost of losses  
  @$1500kW(M$)
$246
$171
$188
$131
$265
$265
$177
$135
$61
$196
Parameters:
Interest rate %
10%
Capitalized cost of losses
$1500 $/kW
Note:
AC current assumes 94% p.f.
Full load converter station losses 5 0.75% per station
Total substation losses (transformers, reactors) assumed 5 0.5% of rated power
TABLE  1
Comparative costs of HVDC and EHV AC transmission alternatives

248	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
For underground or submarine cable 
systems, there is considerable savings in 
installed cable costs and cost of losses 
when using HVDC transmission.  
Depending on the power level to be 
transmitted, these savings can offset 
the higher converter station costs at  
distances of 40 km or more. Further-
more, there is a drop-off in cable capac-
ity with ac transmission over distance 
due to its reactive component of charg-
ing current since cables have higher  
capacitances and lower inductances 
than ac overhead lines. Although this 
can be compensated by intermediate 
shunt compensation for underground 
cables at increased expense, it is not 
practical to do so for submarine cables.
For a given cable conductor 
area, the line losses with HVDC ca-
bles can be about half those of ac 
cables. This is due to ac cables requir-
ing more conductors (three phases), 
carrying the reactive component of 
current, skin-effect, and induced cur-
rents in the cable sheath and armor.
With a cable system, the need to 
balance unequal loadings or the risk 
of postcontingency overloads often 
necessitates use of series-connected re-
actors or phase-shifting transformers. 
These potential problems do not exist 
with a controlled HVDC cable system.
Extruded HVDC cables with 
prefabricated joints used with VSC-
based transmission are lighter, more 
flexible, and easier to splice than 
the mass-impregnated oil-paper ca-
bles (MINDs) used for conventional 
HVDC transmission, thus making 
them more conducive for land cable 
applications where transport lim-
itations and extra splicing costs can 
drive up installation costs. The lower- 
cost cable installations made possi-
ble by the extruded HVDC cables 
and prefabricated joints makes long-
distance underground transmission 
economically feasible for use in areas 
with rights-of-way constraints or sub-
ject to permitting difficulties or delays 
with overhead lines.
Asynchronous Ties
With HVDC transmission systems, in-
terconnections can be made between  
asynchronous networks for more eco-
nomic or reliable system operation. 
The asynchronous interconnection 
allows interconnections of mutual 
benefit while providing a buffer be-
tween the two systems. Often these 
interconnections use back-to-back 
converters with no transmission line. 
Asynchronous HVDC links act as 
an effective “firewall” against prop-
agation of cascading outages in one 
network from passing to another  
network.
Many asynchronous intercon­
nections exist in North America 
between the Eastern and Western  
interconnected systems, between the 
Electric Reliability Council of Texas 
(ERCOT) and its neighbors, [e.g., 
Mexico and the Southwest Power 
Pool (SPP)], and between Quebec 
and its neighbors (e.g., New England 
and the Maritimes). The August 2003 
Northeast blackout provides an exam-
ple of the “firewall” against cascading 
outages provided by asynchronous  
interconnections. As the outage ex-
panded and propagated around the 
lower Great Lakes and through On-
tario and New York, it stopped at the 

asynchronous interface with Quebec. 
Quebec was unaffected; the weak ac 
interconnections between New York 
and New England tripped, but the 
HVDC links from Quebec continued 
to deliver power to New England.
Regulators try to eliminate 
“seams” in electrical networks be-
cause of their potential restriction 
on power markets. Electrical seams, 
however, serve as natural points 
of separation by acting as “shear-
pins,” thereby reducing the impact 
of large-scale system disturbances. 
Asynchronous ties can eliminate 
market seams while retaining natural 
points of separation.
Interconnections between asyn-
chronous networks are often at the 
periphery of the respective systems 
where the networks tend to be weak 
relative to the desired power trans-
fer. Higher power transfers can be 
achieved with improved voltage sta-
bility in weak system applications 
using CCCs. The dynamic voltage 
support and improved voltage stabil-
ity offered by VSC-based converters 
permits even higher power transfers 
without as much need for ac system 
reinforcement. VSCs do not suffer 
commutation failures, allowing fast 
recoveries from nearby ac faults. Eco-
nomic power schedules that reverse 
power direction can be made without 
any restrictions since there is no min-
imum power or current restrictions.
Offshore Transmission
Self-commutation, dynamic voltage 
control, and black-start capability al-
low compact VSC HVDC transmis-
sion to serve isolated loads on islands 
or offshore production platforms 
over long-distance submarine cables. 
This capability can eliminate the need 
for running expensive local genera-
tion or provide an outlet for offshore 
generation such as that from wind. 
The VSCs can operate at variable fre-
quency to more efficiently drive large 
compressor or pumping loads using 
high-voltage motors. Figure 11 shows 
the Troll A production platform in 
the North Sea where power to drive 
compressors is delivered from shore 
	
Case Study	
249
Figure 11 VSC power supply to Troll A production platform

250	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
to reduce the higher carbon emis-
sions and higher O&M costs associ-
ated with less efficient platform-based 
generation.
Large remote wind generation 
arrays require a collector system, 
reactive power support, and outlet 
transmission. Transmission for wind 
generation must often traverse scenic 
or environmentally sensitive areas or 
bodies of water. Many of the better 
wind sites with higher capacity fac-
tors are located offshore. VSC-based 
HVDC transmission allows efficient 
use of long-distance land or subma-
rine cables and provides reactive sup-
port to the wind-generation complex. 
Figure 12 shows a design for an off-
shore converter station designed to 
transmit power from offshore wind 
generation.
Multiterminal Systems
Most HVDC systems are for point-
to-point transmission with a conver-
ter station at each end. The use of 
intermediate taps is rare. Conven-
tional HVDC transmission uses 
voltage polarity reversal to reverse 
the power direction. Polarity rever-
sal requires no special switching  
arrangement 
for 
a 
two-terminal  
system where both terminals reverse 
polarity by control action with no 
switching to reverse power direction. 
Special dc-side switching arrange-
ments are needed for polarity reversal 
in a multiterminal system, however, 
where it may be desired to reverse the 
power direction at a tap while main-
taining the same power direction on 
the remaining terminals. For a bipo-
lar system, this can be done by con-
necting the converter to the opposite 
pole. VSC HVDC transmission, how-
ever, reverses power through reversal 
of the current direction rather than 
voltage polarity. Thus, power can be 
reversed at an intermediate tap in-
dependently of the main power flow 
direction without switching to reverse 
voltage polarity.
Power Delivery to Large  
Urban Areas
Power supply for large cities depends 
on local generation and power im-
port capability. Local generation is 
often older and less efficient than 
newer units located remotely. Often, 
however, the older, less-efficient units 
located near the city center must be 
dispatched out-of-merit because they 
must be run for voltage support or 
reliability due to inadequate trans-
mission. Air-quality regulations may 
limit the availability of these units. 
New transmission into large cities is 
difficult to site due to right-of-way 
limitations and land-use constraints.
Compact VSC-based under-
ground transmission circuits can be 
placed on existing dual-use rights-
of-way to bring in power as well as 
to provide voltage support, allowing 
a more economical power supply 
Figure 12 VSC converter for offshore 
wind generation

without 
compromising 
reliability. 
The receiving terminal acts like a 
virtual generator, delivering power 
and supplying voltage regulation 
and dynamic reactive power reserve.  
Stations are compact and housed 
mainly indoors, making siting in ur-
ban areas somewhat easier. Further-
more, the dynamic voltage support 
offered by the VSC can often increase 
the capability of the adjacent ac  
transmission.
System Configurations  
and Operating Modes
Figure 13 shows the different com-
mon system configurations and op-
erating modes used for HVDC trans-
mission. Monopolar systems are the 
simplest and least expensive systems 
for moderate power transfers since 
only two converters and one high-
voltage insulated cable or line con-
ductor are required. Such systems 
have been used with low-voltage elec-
trode lines and sea electrodes to carry 
the return current in submarine cable 
crossings.
In some areas, conditions are 
not conducive to monopolar earth or 
sea return. This could be the case in 
heavily congested areas, fresh-water 
cable crossings, or areas with high 
earth resistivity. In such cases a me-
tallic neutral- or low-voltage cable 
is used for the return path, and the 
dc circuit uses a simple local ground 
connection for potential reference 
only. Back-to-back stations are used 
for interconnection of asynchronous 
networks and use ac lines to connect 
Figure 13  HVDC configurations and operating modes
	
Case Study	
251

252	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
on either side. In such systems, power 
transfer is limited by the relative ca-
pacities of the adjacent ac systems at 
the point of connection.
As an economic alternative to 
a monopolar system with metallic 
return, the midpoint of a 12-pulse 
converter can be connected to earth 
directly or through an impedance and 
two half-voltage cables or line con-
ductors can be used. The converter 
is only operated in 12-pulse mode so 
there is never any stray earth current.
VSC-based HVDC transmis-
sion is usually arranged with a sin-
gle converter connected pole-to-pole 
rather than pole-to-ground. The cen-
ter point of the converter is connected 
to ground through a high impedance 
to provide a reference for the dc volt-
age. Thus, half the converter dc volt-
age appears across the insulation on 
each of the two dc cables, one positive 
and the other negative.
The most common configuration 
for modern overhead HVDC trans-
mission lines is bipolar with a single 
12-pulse converter for each pole at each 
terminal. This gives two independent 
dc circuits with each capable of half ca-
pacity. For normal balanced operation 
there is no earth current. Monopolar  
earth return operation, often with 
overload capacity, can be used during 
outages of the opposite pole.
Earth return operation can be 
minimized during monopolar out-
ages by using the opposite pole line 
for metallic return via pole/converter  
bypass switches at each end. This 
requires a metallic-return transfer 
breaker in the ground electrode line at 
one of the dc terminals to commutate 
the current from the relatively low  
resistance of the earth into that of 
the dc line conductor. Metallic return 
operation capability is provided for 
most dc transmission systems. This 
not only is effective during conver-
ter outages but also during line insu-
lation failures where the remaining  
insulation strength is adequate to 
withstand the low resistive voltage 
drop in the metallic return path.
For very-high-power HVDC 
transmission, especially at dc volt-
ages above 6500 kV (i.e., 6600 kV or 
6800 kV), series-connected convert-
ers can be used to reduce the energy 
unavailability for individual conver-
ter outages or partial line insulation 
failure. By using two series-connected 
converters per pole in a bipolar sys-
tem, only one quarter of the trans-
mission capacity is lost for a converter  
outage or if the line insulation for the 
affected pole is degraded to where it 
can only support half the rated dc line 
voltage. Operating in this mode also 
avoids the need to transfer to mono­­
polar metallic return to limit the  
duration of emergency earth return.
Station Design and Layout
Conventional Hvdc
The converter station layout depends 
on a number of factors such as the 
dc system configuration (i.e., mono­
polar, bipolar, or back-to-back), ac 
filtering, and reactive power compen-
sation requirements. The thyristor 
valves are air-insulated, water-cooled, 
and enclosed in a converter build-
ing often referred to as a valve hall. 
For back-to-back ties with their  

characteristically low dc voltage, thy-
ristor valves can be housed in prefab-
ricated electrical enclosures, in which 
case a valve hall is not required.
To obtain a more compact sta-
tion design and reduce the number 
of insulated high-voltage wall bush-
ings, converter transformers are often 
placed adjacent to the valve hall with 
valve winding bushings protruding 
through the building walls for con-
nection to the valves. Double or qua-
druple valve structures, housing valve 
modules, are used within the valve 
hall. Valve arresters are located imme-
diately adjacent to the valves. Indoor 
motor-operated grounding switches 
are used for personnel safety during 
maintenance. Closed-loop valve cool-
ing systems are used to circulate the 
cooling medium of deionized water or 
water-glycol mix through the indoor 
thyristor valves with heat transfer to 
dry coolers located outdoors. Area 
requirements for conventional HVDC 
converter stations are influenced by the 
ac system voltage and reactive power 
compensation 
requirements 
where 
each individual bank rating may be 
limited by such system requirements 
as reactive power exchange and maxi-
mum voltage step on bank switching. 
The ac yard with filters and shunt 
compensation can take up as much as  
three quarters of the total area require-
ments of the converter station. Fig­
ure 14 shows a typical arrangement for 
an HVDC converter station.
VSC-Based HVDC
The transmission circuit consists of a 
bipolar two-wire HVDC system with 
converters connected pole-to-pole.  
DC capacitors are used to provide a  
Figure 14 Monopolar HVDC converter station
	
Case Study	
253

254	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
stiff dc voltage source. The dc capac-
itors are grounded at their electrical 
center point to establish the earth ref-
erence potential for the transmission 
system. There is no earth return oper-
ation. The converters are coupled to 
the ac system through ac phase reac-
tors and power transformers. Unlike 
most conventional HVDC systems, 
harmonic filters are located between 
the phase reactors and power trans-
formers. Therefore, the transformers 
are exposed to no dc voltage stresses 
or harmonic loading, allowing use 
of ordinary power transformers.  
Figure 15 shows the station arrange-
ment for a 6150-kV, 350 to 550-MW 
VSC converter station.
The IGBT valves used in VSC 
converters are comprised of series-
connected IGBT positions. The IGBT 
is a hybrid device exhibiting the low 
forward drop of a bipolar transistor 
as a conducting device. Instead of the 
regular current-controlled base, the 
IGBT has a voltage-controlled capac-
itive gate, as in the MOSFET device.
A complete IGBT position con-
sists of an IGBT, an anti-parallel di-
ode, a gate unit, a voltage divider, and 
a water-cooled heat sink. Each gate 
unit includes gate-driving circuits, 
surveillance circuits, and optical in-
terface. The gate-driving electronics 
control the gate voltage and current 
at turn-on and turn-off to achieve  
optimal turn-on and turn-off pro-
cesses of the IGBTs.
To be able to switch voltages 
higher than the rated voltage of one 
IGBT, many positions are connected 
in series in each valve similar to thyris-
tors in conventional HVDC valves. All  
IGBTs must turn on and off at the 
same moment to achieve an evenly 
distributed voltage across the valve. 
Higher currents are handled by par-
alleling IGBT components or press 
packs.
The primary objective of the 
valve dc-side capacitor is to provide 
a stiff voltage source and a low- 
inductance path for the turn-off 
switching currents and to provide  
Figure 15 VSC HVDC converter station

energy storage. The capacitor also 
reduces the harmonic ripple on the 
dc voltage. Disturbances in the sys-
tem (e.g., ac faults) cause dc voltage 
variations. The ability to limit these 
voltage variations depends on the  
size of the dc-side capacitor. Since the 
dc capacitors are used indoors, dry 
capacitors are used.
AC filters for VSC HVDC con-
verters have smaller ratings than those 
for conventional converters and are 
not required for reactive power com-
pensation. Therefore, these filters are 
always connected to the converter bus 
and not switched with transmission 
loading. All equipment for VSC-based 
HVDC converter stations, except the 
transformer, high-side breaker, and 
valve coolers, is located indoors.
Hvdc Control and  
Operating Principles
Conventional HVDC
The fundamental objectives of an 
HVDC control system are as follows:
1.	 to control basic system quanti-
ties such as dc line current, dc 
voltage, and transmitted power 
accurately and with sufficient 
speed of response;
2.	 to maintain adequate commu-
tation margin in inverter opera-
tion so that the valves can 
recover their forward blocking 
capability after conduction 
before their voltage polarity 
reverses;
3.	 to control higher-level quan-
tities such as frequency in iso-
lated mode or provide power 
oscillation damping to help 
stabilize the ac network;
4.	 to compensate for loss of a 
pole, a generator, or an ac 
transmission circuit by rapid 
readjustment of power;
5.	 to ensure stable operation 
with reliable commutation 
in the presence of system 
disturbances;
6.	 to minimize system losses and 
converter reactive power con-
sumption; and
7.	 to ensure proper operation 
with fast and stable recoveries 
during ac system faults and 
disturbances.
For conventional HVDC trans-
mission, one terminal sets the dc 
voltage level while the other termi-
nal(s) regulates the (its) dc current by 
controlling its output voltage relative 
to that maintained by the voltage- 
setting terminal. Since the dc line  
resistance is low, large changes in cur-
rent and hence power can be made 
with relatively small changes in firing 
angle (alpha). Two independent meth-
ods exist for controlling the converter 
dc output voltage. These are (1) by 
changing the ratio between the direct 
voltage and the ac voltage by vary-
ing the delay angle or (2) by chang-
ing the converter ac voltage via load 
tap changers (LTCs) on the conver-
ter transformer. Whereas the former 
method is rapid, the latter method is 
slow due to the limited speed of re-
sponse of the LTC. Use of high-delay 
angles to achieve a larger dynamic 
range, however, increases the con-
verter reactive power consumption. 
	
Case Study	
255

256	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
To minimize the reactive power de-
mand while still providing adequate 
dynamic control range and commuta-
tion margin, the LTC is used at the rec-
tifier terminal to keep the delay angle 
within its desired steady-state range  
(e.g., 13–188) and at the inverter to 
keep the extinction angle within its 
desired range (e.g., 17–208) if the an-
gle is used for dc voltage control or 
to maintain rated dc voltage if oper-
ating in minimum commutation mar-
gin control mode. Figure 16 shows 
the characteristic transformer cur-
rent and dc bridge voltage waveforms 
along with the controlled items Ud, 
Id, and tap changer position (TCP).
Vsc-Based HVDC
Power can be controlled by changing 
the phase angle of the converter ac 
voltage with respect to the filter bus 
voltage, whereas the reactive power 
can be controlled by changing the 
magnitude of the fundamental com-
ponent of the converter ac voltage 
with respect to the filter bus voltage. 
By controlling these two aspects of 
the converter voltage, operation in all 
four quadrants is possible. This means 
that the converter can be operated in 
the middle of its reactive power range 
near unity power factor to maintain 
dynamic reactive power reserve for 
contingency voltage support similar 
to a static var compensator. It also 
means that the real power transfer 
can be changed rapidly without alter-
ing the reactive power exchange with 
the ac network or waiting for switch-
ing of shunt compensation.
Being able to independently 
control ac voltage magnitude and 
phase relative to the system voltage 
allows use of separate active and re-
active power control loops for HVDC 
system regulation. The active power 
control loop can be set to control ei-
ther the active power or the dc-side 
voltage. In a dc link, one station is 
then selected to control the active 
power while the other must be set to 
control the dc-side voltage. The reac-
tive power control loop can be set to 
control either the reactive power or 
the ac-side voltage. Either of these 
two modes can be selected indepen-
dently at either end of the dc link. 
Figure 16  Conventional HVDC control

Figure 17 shows the characteristic ac 
voltage waveforms before and after 
the ac filters along with the controlled 
items Ud, Id, Q, and Uac.
Conclusions
The favorable economics of long- 
distance bulk-power transmission with 
HVDC together with its controllabil-
ity make it an interesting alternative  
or complement to ac transmission. 
The higher voltage levels, mature 
technology, and new converter de-
signs have significantly increased the 
interest in HVDC transmission and 
expanded the range of applications.
For Further Reading
B. Jacobson, Y. Jiang-Hafner, R. Rey, 
and G. Asplund, “HVDC with voltage 
source converters and extruded cables 
for up to 6300 kV and 1000 MW,” 
in Proc. CIGRE 2006, Paris, France, 
pp. B4–105.
L. Ronstrom, B.D. Railing,  
J.J. Miller, R. Steckley, G. Moreau,  
R. Bard, and J. Lindberg, “Cross sound 
cable project second generation VSC 
technology for HVDC,” Proc. CIGRE 
2006, Paris, France, pp. B4–102.
M. Bahrman, D. Dickinson,  
P. Fisher, and M. Stoltz, “The Rapid 
City Tie—New Technology Tames 
the 
East-West 
Interconnection,” 
in Proc. Minnesota Power Systems 
Conf., St. Paul, MN, Nov. 2004.
D. McCallum, G. Moreau,  
J. Primeau, D. Soulier, M. Bahrman, 
and B. Ekehov, “Multiterminal Inte-
gration of the Nicolet Converter Sta-
tion into the Quebec-New England 
Phase II Transmission System,” in 
Proc. CIGRE 1994, Paris, France.
A. Ekstrom and G. Liss, “A  
refined HVDC control system,” IEEE 
Trans. Power Systems, vol. PAS-89, 
pp. 723–732, May–June 1970.
Figure 17  Control of VSC HVDC transmission
	
Case Study	
257

258	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
5.1  Medium and Short Line Approximations
In this section, short and medium-length transmission-line approximations as a 
means of introducing ABCD parameters are presented. Some readers may prefer to 
start in Section 5.2, which presents the exact transmission-line equations.
It is convenient to represent a transmission line by the two-port network shown 
in Figure 5.1, where VS and IS are the sending-end voltage and current, and VR and 
IR are the receiving-end voltage and current.
The relation between the sending-end and receiving-end quantities can be  
written as
VS 5 AVR 1 BIR  volts
(5.1.1)
IS 5 CVR 1 DIR A
(5.1.2)
Biographies
Michael P. Bahrman received a 
B.S.E.E. from Michigan Techno-
logical University. He is currently 
the U.S. HVDC marketing and 
sales manager for ABB Inc. He has  
24 years of experience with ABB 
Power Systems, including system 
analysis, system design, multiter-
minal HVDC control development, 
and project management for var-
ious HVDC and FACTS projects 
in North America. Prior to joining 
ABB, he was with Minnesota Power 
for ten years where he held positions 
as transmission planning engineer, 
HVDC control engineer, and man-
ager of system operations. He has 
been an active member of IEEE, serv-
ing on a number of subcommittees  
and working groups in the area of 
HVDC and FACTS.
Brian K. Johnson received the 
PhD in electrical engineering from the 
University of Wisconsin-Madison.  
He is currently a professor in the 
Department of Electrical and Com-
puter Engineering at the University 
of Idaho. His interests include power 
system protection and the applica-
tion of power electronics to utility 
systems, security, and survivability of 
ITS systems and power systems, dis-
tributed sensor and control networks, 
and real-time simulation of traffic 
systems. He is a member of the Board 
of Governors of the IEEE Intelligent 
Transportation Systems Society and 
the Administrative Committee of the  
IEEE Council on Superconductivity.  ■
FIGURE 5.1
Representation of 
two-port network

	
Section 5.1 Medium and Short Line Approximations	
259
or, in matrix format,
3
VS
IS4 53
A
B
C
D4 3
VR
IR4
(5.1.3)
where A, B, C, and D are parameters that depend on the transmission-line constants 
R, L, C, and G. The ABCD parameters are, in general, complex numbers. A and D 
are dimensionless. B has units of ohms, and C has units of siemens. Network theory 
texts [5] show that ABCD parameters apply to linear, passive, bilateral two-port net-
works, with the following general relation:
AD 2 BC 5 1
(5.1.4) 
The circuit in Figure 5.2 represents a short transmission line, usually applied 
to overhead 60-Hz lines less than 25 km in length. Only the series resistance and re-
actance are included. The shunt admittance is neglected. The circuit applies to either 
single-phase or completely transposed three-phase lines operating under balanced 
conditions. For a completely transposed three-phase line, Z is the series impedance, 
VS and IR are positive-sequence line-to-neutral voltages, and IS and IR are positive-
sequence line currents.
To avoid confusion between total series impedance and series impedance per 
unit length, use the following notation:
z 5 R 1 jvL  V/m,  series impedance per unit length
y 5 G 1 jvC  S/m,  shunt admittance per unit length
Z 5 zl  V,  total series impedance
Y 5 yl  S,  total shunt admittance
l 5 line length  m
Recall that shunt conductance G is usually neglected for overhead transmission.
The ABCD parameters for the short line in Figure 5.2 are easily obtained by 
writing a KVL and KCL equation as
VS 5 VR 1 ZIR
(5.1.5) 
IS 5 IR
(5.1.6)
or, in matrix format,
3
VS
IS4 53
1
Z
0
14 3
VR
IR4
(5.1.7) 
FIGURE 5.2
Short transmission line

260	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
Comparing (5.1.7) and (5.1.3), the ABCD parameters for a short line are
A 5 D 5 1 per unit
(5.1.8) 
B 5 Z V
(5.1.9)
C 5 0 S
(5.1.10)
For medium-length lines, typically ranging from 25 to 250 km at 60 Hz, it is common 
to lump the total shunt capacitance and locate half at each end of the line. Such a 
circuit, called a nominal p circuit, is shown in Figure 5.3.
To obtain the ABCD parameters of the nominal p circuit, note first that  
the current in the series branch in Figure 5.3 equals IR 1 VRY
2 . Then, writing a  
KVL equation,
VS 5 VR 1 Z 1IR 1 VRY
2 2
	
511 1 YZ
2 2 VR 1 ZIR
(5.1.11) 
Also, writing a KCL equation at the sending end,
IS 5 IR 1 VRY
2
1 VSY
2 
(5.1.12) 
Using (5.1.11) in (5.1.12),
IS 5 IR 1 VRY
2
1311 1 YZ
2 2 VR 1 ZIR4 Y
2
	
5 Y 11 1 YZ
4 2 VR 111 1 YZ
2 2 IR
(5.1.13) 
Writing (5.1.11) and (5.1.13) in matrix format,
3
VS
IS4
53
11 1 YZ
2 2
Z
Y 11 1 YZ
4 2 11 1 YZ
2 24
 3
VR
IR4

(5.1.14) 
FIGURE 5.3
Medium-length 
transmission line—
nominal p circuit

	
Section 5.1 Medium and Short Line Approximations	
261
Thus, comparing (5.1.14) and (5.1.3)
A 5 D 5 1 1 YZ
2   per unit 
(5.1.15) 
B 5 Z  V
(5.1.16) 
C 5 Y 11 1 YZ
4 2 S
(5.1.17) 
Note that for both the short and medium-length lines, the relation AD 2 BC 5 1 is 
verified. Note also that since the line is the same when viewed from either end, A 5 D.
Figure 5.4 gives the ABCD parameters for some common networks, including a 
series impedance network that approximates a short line and a p circuit that approx-
imates a medium-length line. A medium-length line could also be approximated by 
the T circuit shown in Figure 5.4, lumping half of the series impedance at each end 
FIGURE 5.4
ABCD parameters  
of common networks

262	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
of the line. Also given are the ABCD parameters for networks in series, which are 
conveniently obtained by multiplying the ABCD matrices of the individual networks.
ABCD parameters can be used to describe the variation of line voltage with 
line loading. Voltage regulation is the change in voltage at the receiving end of the 
line when the load varies from no-load to a specified full load at a specified power 
factor, while the sending-end voltage is held constant. Expressed in percent of full-
load voltage,
percent VR 5 uVRNLu 2 uVRFLu
uVRFLu
3 100
(5.1.18) 
where percent VR is the percent voltage regulation, |VRNL| is the magnitude of the  
no-load receiving-end voltage, and |VRFL| is the magnitude of the full-load receiving- 
end voltage.
The effect of load power factor on voltage regulation is illustrated by the pha-
sor diagrams in Figure 5.5 for short lines. The phasor diagrams are graphical rep-
resentations of (5.1.5) for lagging and leading power factor loads. Note that, from 
(5.1.5) at no-load, IRNL 5 0 and VS 5 VRNL for a short line. As shown, the higher 
(worse) voltage regulation occurs for the lagging p.f. load, where VRNL exceeds VRFL 
by the larger amount. A smaller or even negative voltage regulation occurs for the 
leading p.f. load. In general, the no-load voltage is, from (5.1.1) with IRNL 5 0,
VRNL 5 VS
A 
(5.1.19) 
which can be used in (5.1.18) to determine voltage regulation.
In practice, transmission-line voltages decrease when heavily loaded and in-
crease when lightly loaded. When voltages on EHV lines are maintained within 15% 
of rated voltage, corresponding to about 10% voltage regulation, unusual operating 
problems are not encountered. Ten percent voltage regulation for lower voltage lines 
including transformer-voltage drops is also considered good operating practice.
In addition to voltage regulation, line loadability is an important issue.  
Three major line-loading limits are (1) the thermal limit, (2) the voltage-drop limit, 
and (3) the steady-state stability limit.
The maximum temperature of a conductor determines its thermal limit.  
Conductor temperature affects the conductor sag between towers and the loss of  
FIGURE 5.5
Phasor diagrams for a 
short transmission line

	
Section 5.1 Medium and Short Line Approximations	
263
conductor tensile strength due to annealing. If the temperature is too high, prescribed 
conductor-to-ground clearances may not be met, or the elastic limit of the conduc-
tor may be exceeded such that it cannot shrink to its original length when cooled.  
Conductor temperature depends on the current magnitude and its time duration, 
as well as on ambient temperature, wind velocity, and conductor surface condi-
tions. Appendix Tables A.3 and A.4 give approximate current-carrying capacities of  
copper and ACSR conductors. The loadability of short transmission lines (less than 
25 km in length for 60-Hz overhead lines) is usually determined by the conductor 
thermal limit or by ratings of line terminal equipment such as circuit breakers.
For longer line lengths (up to 300 km), line loadability is often determined by 
the voltage-drop limit. Although more severe voltage drops may be tolerated in some 
cases, a heavily loaded line with VR/VS $ 0.95 is usually considered safe operating 
practice. For line lengths over 300 km, steady-state stability becomes a limiting fac-
tor. Stability, discussed in Section 5.4, refers to the ability of synchronous machines 
on either end of a line to remain in synchronism.
ABCD parameters and the nominal p circuit:  
medium-length line
A three-phase, 60-Hz, completely transposed 345-kV, 200-km line has two 
795,000-cmil 26/2 ACSR conductors per bundle and the following positive- 
sequence line constants:
z 5 0.032 1 j 0.35  V/km
y 5 j4.2 3 1026  S/km
Full load at the receiving end of the line is 700 MW at 0.99 p.f. leading and at 95% 
of rated voltage. Assuming a medium-length line, determine the following:
a.	 ABCD parameters of the nominal p circuit
b.	 Sending-end voltage VS, current IS, and real power PS
c.	 Percent voltage regulation
d.	 Thermal limit, based on the approximate current-carrying capacity 
listed in Table A.4
e.	 Transmission-line efficiency at full load
SOLUTION
a.  The total series impedance and shunt admittance values are
Z 5 zl 5 (0.032 1 j0.35)(200) 5 6.4 1 j70 5 70.29/84.788  V
Y 5 yl 5 ( j4.2 3 1026)(200) 5 8.4 3 1024/908 S
EXAMPLE 5.1
(Continued)

264	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
From (5.1.15) through (5.1.17),
A 5 D 5 1 1 (8.4 3 1024/908)(70.29/84.788) _1
2+
	
5 1 1 0.02952/174.788
	
5 0.9706 1 j0.00269 5 0.9706/0.1598 per unit
 B 5 Z 5 70.29/84.788  V
C 5 (8.4 3 1024/908)(1 1 0.01476/174.788)
	
5 (8.4 3 1024/908)(0.9853 1 j 0.00134)
	
5 8.277 3 1024/90.088 S
b.  The receiving-end voltage and current quantities are
VR 5 (0.95)(345) 5 327.8 kVLL
VR 5 327.8
Ï3 /08 5 189.2/08 kVLN
IR 5
700/cos210.99
(Ï3)(0.95 3 345)(0.99) 5 1.246/8.118 kA
From (5.1.1) and (5.1.2), the sending-end quantities are
VS 5 (0.9706/0.1598)(189.2/08) 1 (70.29/84.78)(1.246/8.118)
	  5 183.6/0.1598 1 87.55/92.898
	  5 179.2 1 j87.95 5 199.6/26.148 kVLN
VS 5 199.6Ï3 5 345.8 kVLL < 1.00 per unit
IS 5 (8.277 3 1024/90.088)(189.2/08) 1 (0.9706/0.1598)(1.246/8.118)
	
5 0.1566/90.088 1 1.209/8.278
	
5 1.196 1 j0.331 5 1.241/15.58 kA
and the real power delivered to the sending end is
PS 5 (Ï3)(345.8)(1.241) cos(26.148 2 15.58)
	
5 730.5  MW
c.  From (5.1.19), the no-load receiving-end voltage is
VRNL 5 VS
A 5 345.8
0.9706 5 356.3 kVLL
and, from (5.1.18),
percent VR 5 356.3 2 327.8
327.8
3 100 5 8.7%

	
Section 5.2 Transmission-Line Differential Equations	
265
d.  From Table A.4, the approximate current-carrying capacity of two 795,000-cmil 
26/2 ACSR conductors is 2 3 0.9 5 1.8 kA.
e.  The full-load line losses are PS 2 PR 5 730.5 2 700 5 30.5 MW and the full-
load transmission efficiency is 
percent EFF 5 PR
PS
3 100 5 700
730.5 3 100 5 95.8%
Since VS 5 1.00 per unit, the full-load receiving-end voltage of 0.95 per unit cor-
responds to VR/VS 5 0.95, considered in practice to be about the lowest operating 
voltage possible without encountering operating problems. Thus, for this 345-kV 
200-km uncompensated line, voltage drop limits the full-load current to 1.246 kA 
at 0.99 p.f. leading, which is well below the thermal limit of 1.8 kA.
5.2  Transmission-Line Differential Equations
The line constants R, L, and C are derived in Chapter 4 as per-length values hav-
ing units of V/m, H/m, and F/m. They are not lumped, but rather are uniformly 
distributed along the length of the line. In order to account for the distributed na-
ture of transmission-line constants, consider the circuit shown in Figure 5.6, which 
represents a line section of length Δx. V(x) and I(x) denote the voltage and current 
at position x, which is measured in meters from the right, or receiving end of the 
line. Similarly, V(x 1 Dx) and I(x 1 Dx) denote the voltage and current at position  
(x 1 Δx). The circuit constants are
z 5 R 1 jvL  V/m
(5.2.1) 
y 5 G 1 jvC  S/m
(5.2.2) 
where G is usually neglected for overhead 60-Hz lines. Writing a KVL equation for 
the circuit
V(x 1 Dx) 5 V(x) 1 (zDx)I(x)  volts
(5.2.3) 
Rearranging (5.2.3),
V(x 1 Dx) 2 V(x)
Dx
5 zI(x)
(5.2.4) 
FIGURE 5.6
Transmission-line 
section of length Dx

266	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
and taking the limit as Dx approaches zero,
dV(x)
dx
5 zI(x)
(5.2.5) 
Similarly, writing a KCL equation for the circuit,
I(x 1 Dx) 5 I(x) 1 (yDx)V(x 1 Dx) A
(5.2.6) 
Rearranging,
I(x 1 Dx) 2 I(x)
Dx
5 yV (x)
(5.2.7) 
and taking the limit as Dx approaches zero,
dI(x)
dx
5 yV(x)
(5.2.8) 
Equations (5.2.5) and (5.2.8) are two linear, first-order, homogeneous differential 
equations with two unknowns, V(x) and I(x). Eliminate I(x) by differentiating (5.2.5) 
and using (5.2.8) as follows:
d 2V(x)
dx2
5 z dI(x)
dx
5 zyV(x)
(5.2.9) 
or
d 2V(x)
dx2
2 zyV(x) 5 0
(5.2.10) 
Equation (5.2.10) is a linear, second-order, homogeneous differential equation with 
one unknown, V(x). By inspection, its solution is
V(x) 5 A1egx 1 A2e2gx volts
(5.2.11) 
where A1 and A2 are integration constants and
g 5 Ïzy m21
(5.2.12) 
g, whose units are m21, is called the propagation constant. By inserting (5.2.11) and 
(5.2.12) into (5.2.10), the solution to the differential equation can be verified.
Next, using (5.2.11) in (5.2.5),
dV (x)
dx
5 gA1egx 2 gA2e2gx 5 zI(x)
(5.2.13) 
Solving for I(x),
I(x) 5 A1egx 2 A2e2gx
z/g

(5.2.14) 

	
Section 5.2 Transmission-Line Differential Equations	
267
Using (5.2.12), z/g 5 z/Ïzy 5 Ïz/y, (5.2.14) becomes
I(x) 5 A1egx 2 A2e2gx
Zc

(5.2.15) 
where
Zc 5Î
z
y  V 
(5.2.16) 
Zc, whose units are ohms, is called the characteristic impedance.
Next, the integration constants A1 and A2 are evaluated from the boundary 
conditions. At x 5 0, which is the receiving end of the line, the receiving-end voltage 
and current are
VR 5 V(0) 
(5.2.17) 
IR 5 I(0)
(5.2.18)
Also, at x 5 0, (5.2.11) and (5.2.15) become
VR 5 A1 1 A2
(5.2.19) 
IR 5 A1 2 A2
Zc

(5.2.20)
Solving for A1 and A2,
A1 5 VR 1 ZcIR
2

(5.2.21) 
A2 5 VR 2 ZcIR
2

(5.2.22)
Substituting A1 and A2 into (5.2.11) and (5.2.15),
V(x) 51
VR 1 ZcIR
2
2egx 11
VR 2 ZcIR
2
2e2gx
(5.2.23) 
I(x) 51
VR 1 Zc IR
2Zc 2
 
egx 21
VR 2 Zc IR
2Zc 2
 
e2gx
(5.2.24)
Rearranging (5.2.23) and (5.2.24),
V(x) 51
egx 1 e2gx
2
2VR 1 Zc 1
egx 2 e2gx
2
2IR
(5.2.25) 
I(x) 5 1
Zc
 1
egx 2 e2gx
2
2VR 11
egx 1 e2gx
2
2 IR
(5.2.26)

268	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
Recognizing the hyperbolic functions cosh and sinh,
V(x) 5 cosh(gx)VR 1 Zc sinh(gx)IR
(5.2.27) 
I(x) 5 1
Zc
 sinh(gx) VR 1 cosh(gx)IR
(5.2.28)
Equations (5.2.27) and (5.2.28) give the ABCD parameters of the distributed 
line. In matrix format,
3
V(x)
I(x)4 53
A(x)
B(x)
C(x)
D(x)4 3
VR
IR4
(5.2.29) 
where
A(x) 5 D(x) 5 cosh(gx) per unit
(5.2.30) 
B(x) 5 Zc sinh(gx)  V
(5.2.31)
C(x) 5 1
Zc
 sinh(gx)  S
 (5.2.32) 
Equation (5.2.29) gives the current and voltage at any point x along the line in 
terms of the receiving-end voltage and current. At the sending end, where x 5 l, V(l ) 5 
VS and I(l) 5 IS. That is,
3
VS
IS4 53
A
B
C
D4 3
VR
IR4
(5.2.33) 
where
A 5 D 5 cosh(gl) per unit
(5.2.34) 
B 5 Zc sinh(gl )  V
(5.2.35)
C 5 1
Zc
 sinh(gl )  S
(5.2.36)
Equations (5.2.34) through (5.2.36) give the ABCD parameters of the distrib-
uted line. In these equations, the propagation constant g is a complex quantity with 
real and imaginary parts denoted a and b. That is,
g 5 a 1 jb m21
(5.2.37) 
The quantity gl is dimensionless. Also
egl 5 e(al1jbl) 5 eale jbl 5 eal/bl
(5.2.38) 
Using (5.2.38), the hyperbolic functions cosh and sinh can be evaluated as  
follows:
cosh(gl) 5 egl 1 e2gl
2
5 1
2
  (eal/bl 1 e2al/2bl )
(5.2.39) 

	
Section 5.2 Transmission-Line Differential Equations	
269
and
sinh(gl ) 5 egl 2 e2gl
2
5 1
2 (eal/bl 2 e2al/2bl )
(5.2.40) 
Alternatively, the following identities can be used:
cosh(al 1 jbl ) 5 cosh(al ) cos(bl ) 1 j sinh(al  ) sin(bl )
(5.2.41) 
sinh(al 1 jbl ) 5 sinh(al ) cos(bl ) 1 j cosh(al  ) sin(bl )
(5.2.42)
Note that in (5.2.39) through (5.2.42), the dimensionless quantity bl is in radians, not 
degrees.
The ABCD parameters given by (5.2.34) through (5.2.36) are exact parameters 
valid for any line length. For accurate calculations, these equations must be used 
for overhead 60-Hz lines longer than 250 km. The ABCD parameters derived in  
Section 5.1 are approximate parameters that are more conveniently used for hand 
calculations involving short- and medium-length lines. Table 5.1 summarizes the 
ABCD parameters for short, medium, long, and lossless (see Section 5.4) lines.
Parameter
A 5 D
B
C
Units
per Unit
V
S
Short line (less than 25 km)
Medium line—nominal  
  p circuit (25 to 250 km)
1
1 1 YZ
2
Z
Z
0
Y 11 1 YZ
4
 2
Long line—equivalent  
  p circuit (more than 250 km) cosh (g/) 5 1 1 Y9Z9
2
Zc sinh(g/) 5 Z9
(1/Zc) sinh(g/) 
5 Y911 1 Y9Z9
4 2
Lossless line (R 5 G 5 0)
cos(b/)
j Zc sin(b/)
j sin(b/)
Zc
TABLE 5.1
Summary: Transmission-line ABCD parameters
Exact ABCD parameters: long line
A three-phase 765-kV, 60-Hz, 300-km, completely transposed line has the follow-
ing positive-sequence impedance and admittance:
z 5 0.0165 1 j0.3306 5 0.3310/87.148  V/km
y 5 j4.674 3 1026 S/km
EXAMPLE 5.2
(Continued)

270	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
Assuming positive-sequence operation, calculate the exact ABCD parame-
ters of the line. Compare the exact B parameter with that of the nominal  
p circuit.
solution
From (5.2.12) and (5.2.16),
Zc 5Î
0.3310/87.148
4.674 3 1026/908 5 Ï7.082 3 104/22.868
	
5 266.1/21.438  V
and
gl 5 Ï(0.3310/87.148)(4.674 3 1026/908) 3 (300)
	
5 Ï1.547 3 1026/177.148 3 (300)
	
5 0.3731/88.578 5 0.00931 1 j0.3730 per unit
From (5.2.38),
egl 5 e0.00931e1j0.3730 5 1.0094/0.3730  radians
	
5 0.9400 1 j0.3678
and
e2gl 5 e20.00931e2j0.3730 5 0.9907/20.3730 radians
	
5 0.9226 2 j0.3610
Then, from (5.2.39) and (5.2.40),
cosh(gl ) 5 (0.9400 1 j0.3678) 1 (0.9226 2 j0.3610)
2
	
5 0.9313 1 j0.0034 5 0.9313/0.2098
 sinh(gl ) 5 (0.9400 1 j0.3678) 2 (0.9226 2 j0.3610)
2
	
 5 0.0087 1 j0.3644 5 0.3645/88.638
Finally, from (5.2.34) through (5.2.36),
A 5 D 5 cosh(gl ) 5 0.9313/0.2098 per unit
B 5 (266.1/21.438)(0.3645/88.638) 5 97.0/87.28  V
C 5
0.3645/88.638
266.1/21.438 5 1.37 3 1023/90.068 S

	
Section 5.3 Equivalent p Circuit	
271
Using (5.1.16), the B parameter for the nominal p circuit is
Bnominal p 5 Z 5 (0.3310/87.148)(300) 5 99.3/87.148  V
which is 2% larger than the exact value.
5.3  Equivalent p Circuit
Many computer programs used in power system analysis and design assume circuit 
representations of components such as transmission lines and transformers. It is 
therefore convenient to represent the terminal characteristics of a transmission line 
by an equivalent circuit instead of its ABCD parameters.
The circuit shown in Figure 5.7 is called an equivalent p circuit. It is identical 
in structure to the nominal p circuit of Figure 5.3, except that Z9 and Y9 are used 
instead of Z and Y. The objective is to determine Z9 and Y9 such that the equivalent 
p circuit has the same ABCD parameters as those of the distributed line, (5.2.34) 
through (5.2.36). The ABCD parameters of the equivalent p circuit, which has the 
same structure as the nominal p, are
A 5 D 5 1 1 Y9Z9
2  per unit
(5.3.1) 
B 5 Z9  V
(5.3.2)
C 5 Y911 1 Y9Z9
4 2 S
(5.3.3) 
where Z and Y in (5.1.15) through (5.1.17) have been replaced with Z9 and Y9 in 
(5.3.1) through (5.3.3). Equating (5.3.2) to (5.2.35),
FIGURE 5.7
Transmission-line 
equivalent p circuit

272	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
Z9 5 Zc  sinh(gl ) 5Î
z
y
  sinh(gl )
(5.3.4) 
Rewriting (5.3.4) in terms of the nominal p circuit impedance Z 5 zl,
Z9 5 zl 3Î
z
y sinh(gl )
zl 4 5 zl 3
sinh(gl )
Ïzyl 4
	
 5 ZF1  V 
(5.3.5) 
where
F1 5 sinh (gl )
gl  per unit
(5.3.6) 
Similarly, equating (5.3.1) to (5.2.34),
1 1 Y9Z9
2
5 cosh (gl)
Y9
2 5 cosh(gl ) 2 1
Z9

(5.3.7) 
Using (5.3.4) and the identity tanh 1
gl
22 5 cosh(gl ) 2 1
sinh(gl )
, (5.3.7) becomes
Y9
2 5 cosh(gl ) 2 1
Zc sinh (gl ) 5 tanh(gl/2)
Zc
5 tanh(gl/2)
Î
z
y

(5.3.8) 
Rewriting (5.3.8) in terms of the nominal p circuit admittance Y 5 yl,
Y9
2 5 yl
2
 3
tanh(gl/2)
Î
z
y
 yl
2 4
5 yl
2
 3
tanh(gl/2)
Ïzy l/2 4
	
 5 Y
2
 F2 S
(5.3.9) 
where
F2 5 tanh (gl/2)
gl/2  per unit
(5.3.10) 
Equations (5.3.6) and (5.3.10) give the correction factors F1 and F2 to convert Z and 
Y for the nominal p circuit to Z9 and Y9 for the equivalent p circuit.

Equivalent p circuit: long line
Compare the equivalent and nominal p circuits for the line in Example 5.2.
SOLUTION
For the nominal p circuit,
Z 5 zl 5 (0.3310/87.148)(300) 5 99.3/87.148  V
Y
2 5 yl
2 51
j4.674 3 1026
2
2
 (300) 5 7.011 3 1024/908 S
From (5.3.6) and (5.3.10), the correction factors are
F1 5
0.3645/88.638
0.3731/88.578 5 0.9769/0.068 per unit
F2 5 tanh(gl/2)
gl/2
5 cosh(gl ) 2 1
(gl/2) sinh(gl )
	
5
0.9313 1 j0.0034 2 1
1
0.3731
2
/88.5782
 (0.3645/88.638)
	
5 20.0687 1 j0.0034
0.06800/177.208
	
5
0.06878/177.178
0.06800/177.208 5 1.012/20.038 per unit
Then, from (5.3.5) and (5.3.9), for the equivalent p circuit,
Z9 5 (99.3/87.148)(0.9769/0.068) 5 97.0/87.28  V
Y9
2 5 (7.011 3 1024/908)(1.012/20.038) 5 7.095 3 1024/89.978 S
	
5 3.7 3 1027 1 j7.095 3 1024  S
Comparing these nominal and equivalent p circuit values, Z9 is about 
2% smaller than Z, and Y9/2 is about 1% larger than Y/2. Although the circuit 
values are approximately the same for this line, the equivalent p circuit should 
be used for accurate calculations involving long lines. Note the small shunt 
conductance, G9 5 3.7 3 1027 S, introduced in the equivalent p circuit. G9 is 
often neglected.
EXAMPLE 5.3
	
Section 5.3 Equivalent p Circuit	
273

274	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
5.4  Lossless Lines
This section discusses the following concepts for lossless lines: surge impedance, 
ABCD parameters, equivalent p circuit, wavelength, surge impedance loading, volt-
age profiles, and steady-state stability limit.
When line losses are neglected, simpler expressions for the line parameters are 
obtained and the above concepts are more easily understood. Since transmission 
and distribution lines for power transfer generally are designed to have low losses, 
the equations and concepts developed here can be used for quick and reasonably ac-
curate hand calculations leading to seat-of-the-pants analyses and to initial designs. 
More accurate calculations then can be made with computer programs for follow-up 
analysis and design.
SURGE IMPEDANCE
For a lossless line, R 5 G 5 0, and
z 5 jvL  V/m
(5.4.1) 
y 5 jvC  S/m
(5.4.2)
From (5.2.12) and (5.2.16),
Zc 5Î
z
y 5Î
jvL
jvC 5Î
L
C  V 
(5.4.3) 
and
g 5 Ïzy 5 Ï( jvL)( jvC) 5 jvÏLC 5 jb m21
(5.4.4) 
where
b 5 vÏLC m21
(5.4.5) 
The characteristic impedance Zc 5 ÏL/C, commonly called the surge impedance for 
a lossless line, is pure real—that is, resistive. The propagation constant g 5 jb is pure 
imaginary.
ABCD PARAMETERS
The ABCD parameters are, from (5.2.30) through (5.2.32),
A(x) 5 D(x) 5 cosh (gx) 5 cosh ( jbx)
	
5 e jbx 1 e2jbx
2
5 cos (bx) per unit
(5.4.6) 

	
Section 5.4 Lossless Lines	
275
sinh (gx) 5 sinh( jbx) 5 ejbx 2 e2jbx
2
5 j sin(bx) per unit
(5.4.7)
B(x) 5 Zc sinh(gx) 5 jZc sin(bx) 5 jÎ
L
C sin(bx)  V
(5.4.8)
C(x) 5 sinh(gx)
Zc
5 j sin(bx)
Î
L
C  S
(5.4.9)
EQUIVALENT p CIRCUIT
For the equivalent p circuit, using (5.3.4).
Z9 5 j Zc sin (bl ) 5 j X9  V 
(5.4.10)
or, from (5.3.5) and (5.3.6),
Z9 5 ( jvLl ) 1
sin (bl )
bl 2 5 j X9  V
(5.4.11) 
Also, from (5.3.9) and (5.3.10),
Y9
2 5 Y
2  tanh(jbl/2)
jbl/2
5 Y
2  
sinh( jbl /2)
( jbl/2) cosh(jbl/2)
	
51
jvCl
2 2 
j sin(bl/2)
( jbl/2) cos(bl/2) 51
jvCl
2 2 tan(bl/2)
bl/2
	
51
jvC9l
2 2 S
(5.4.12) 
Z9 and Y9 are both pure imaginary. Also, for bl less than p radians, Z9 is pure induc-
tive and Y9 is pure capacitive. Thus the equivalent p circuit for a lossless line, shown 
in Figure 5.8, is also lossless.
FIGURE 5.8
Equivalent p circuit 
for a lossless line  
(b𝓵 less than p)

276	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
WAVELENGTH
A wavelength is the distance required to change the phase of the voltage or current 
by 2p radians or 3608. For a lossless line, using (5.2.29),
V(x) 5 A(x)VR 1 B(x)IR
	
5 cos(bx) VR 1 jZc  sin(bx)IR
(5.4.13) 
and
I(x) 5 C(x)VR 1 D(x)IR
	
5  j sin(bx)
Z
VR 1 cos(bx)IR
(5.4.14)
From (5.4.13) and (5.4.14), V(x) and I(x) change phase by 2p radians when x 5 
2p/b. Denoting wavelength by l, and using (5.4.5),
l 5 2p
b 5
2p
vÏLC 5
1
f ÏLC m
(5.4.15) 
or
f l 5
1
ÏLC
(5.4.16) 
The term (1/ÏLC) in (5.4.16) is the velocity of propagation of voltage and current 
waves along a lossless line, as shown in Chapter 13. For overhead lines, (1/ÏLC) <
3 3 108 m/s, and for f 5 60 Hz, (5.4.14) gives
l < 3 3 108
60
5 5 3 106 m 5 5000 km 5 3100 mi
Typical power-line lengths are only a small fraction of the above 60-Hz wave-
length.
SURGE IMPEDANCE LOADING
Surge impedance loading (SIL) is the power delivered by a lossless line to a load re-
sistance equal to the surge impedance Zc 5 ÏL/C. Figure 5.9 shows a lossless line 
terminated by a resistance equal to its surge impedance. This line represents either 
FIGURE 5.9
Lossless line 
terminated by its 
surge impedance

	
Section 5.4 Lossless Lines	
277
a single-phase line or one phase-to-neutral of a balanced three-phase line. At SIL, 
from (5.4.13),
V(x) 5 cos(bx) VR 1 jZc sin(bx)IR
	
5 cos(bx)VR 1 jZc  sin(bx) 1
VR
Zc2
	
5 (cos bx 1 j sin bx) VR
	
5 e jbxVR volts
(5.4.17) 
uV(x)u 5 uVRu volts
(5.4.18)
Thus, at SIL, the voltage profile is flat. That is, the voltage magnitude at any point x 
along a lossless line at SIL is constant. Also from (5.4.14) at SIL,
I(x) 5 j sin(bx)
Zc
VR 1 (cos bx) VR
Zc
	
5 (cos bx 1 j sin bx) VR
Zc
	
5 (e jbx) VR
Zc A
(5.4.19)
Using (5.4.17) and (5.4.19), the complex power flowing at any point x along the line is
S(x) 5 P(x) 1 j Q(x) 5 V(x)I *(x)
	
5 (e jbxVR) 1
e jbxVR
Zc 2
*
	
5 uVRu2
Zc

(5.4.20)
Thus the real power flow along a lossless line at SIL remains constant from the send-
ing end to the receiving end. The reactive power flow is zero.
At rated line voltage, the real power delivered, or SIL, from (5.4.20), is
SIL 5 V 2
rated
Zc

(5.4.21) 
where rated voltage is used for a single-phase line and rated line-to-line voltage is 
used for the total real power delivered by a three-phase line. Table 5.2 lists surge im-
pedance and SIL values for typical overhead 60-Hz three-phase lines.
VOLTAGE PROFILES
In practice, power lines are not terminated by their surge impedance. Instead, loadings 
can vary from a small fraction of SIL during light load conditions up to multiples of 
SIL, depending on line length and line compensation, during heavy load conditions. 
If a line is not terminated by its surge impedance, then the voltage profile is not flat.  

278	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
Figure 5.10 shows voltage profiles of lines with a fixed sending-end voltage magni-
tude VS for line lengths l up to a quarter wavelength. This figure shows four load-
ing conditions: (1) no-load. (2) SIL, (3) short circuit, and (4) full load, which are  
described as follows:
1.	 At no-load, IRNL 5 0 and (5.4.13) yields
	
 VNL(x) 5 (cos bx)VRNL
(5.4.22) 
The no-load voltage increases from VS 5 (cos bl )VRNL at the sending end 
to VRNL at the receiving end (where x 5 0).
2.	 From (5.4.18), the voltage profile at SIL is flat.
3.	 For a short circuit at the load, VRSC 5 0 and (5.4.13) yields
	
VSC(x) 5 (Zc sin bx)IRSC
(5.4.23) 
FIGURE 5.10
Voltage profiles of 
an uncompensated 
lossless line with 
fixed sending-end 
voltage for line 
lengths up to a 
quarter wavelength
Vrated 
(kV)
ZC 5 ÏL/C 
(V)
SIL 5 V2
rated/ZC 
(MW)
69
366–400
12–13
138
366–405
47–52
230
365–395
134–145
345
280–366
325–425
500
233–294
850–1075
765
254–266
2200–2300
TABLE 5.2
Surge impedance and SIL values for typical 60-Hz overhead lines [1, 2]
(Source: Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), EPRI AC Transmission Line Reference Book— 
200 kV and Above (Palo Alto, CA: EPRI, www.epri.com. December 2005); Westinghouse  
Electric Corporation, Electrical Transmission and Distribution Reference Book, 4th ed. (East  
Pittsburgh, PA, 1964).)

	
Section 5.4 Lossless Lines	
279
The voltage decreases from VS 5 (sin bl)(ZcIRSC) at the sending end to 
VRSC 5 0 at the receiving end.
4.	 The full-load voltage profile, which depends on the specification of full-
load current, lies above the short-circuit voltage profile.
Figure 5.10 summarizes these results, showing a high receiving-end voltage at 
no-load and a low receiving-end voltage at full load. This voltage regulation problem 
becomes more severe as the line length increases. In Section 5.6, shunt compensation 
methods to reduce voltage fluctuations are presented.
STEADY-STATE STABILITY LIMIT
The equivalent p circuit of Figure 5.8 can be used to obtain an equation for the real 
power delivered by a lossless line. Assume that the voltage magnitudes VS and VR 
at the ends of the line are held constant. Also, let d denote the voltage-phase angle 
at the sending end with respect to the receiving end. From KVL, the receiving-end 
current IR is
IR 5 VS 2 VR
Z9
2 Y9
2
 VR
	
5 VSe jd 2 VR
j X9
2 jvC9l
2
 VR 
(5.4.24) 
and the complex power SR delivered to the receiving end is
SR 5 VR I R
* 5 VR 1
VSe jd 2 VR
jX9 2
*
1 jvC9l
2
 V2
R
	
5 VR 1
VSe2jd 2 VR
2j X9 2 1 jvCl
2
 V2
R
	
5 j VRVS cos d 1 VRVS sin d 2 j V2
R
X9
1 jvCl
2
 V2
R
(5.4.25)
FIGURE 5.11
Real power delivered 
by a lossless line versus 
voltage angle across 
the line

280	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
The real power delivered is
P 5 PS 5 PR 5 Re(SR) 5 VRVS
X9  sin d W
(5.4.26) 
Note that since the line is lossless, PS 5 PR.
Equation (5.4.26) is plotted in Figure 5.11. For fixed voltage magnitudes VS and 
VR, the phase angle d increases from 0 to 908 as the real power delivered increases. 
The maximum power that the line can deliver, which occurs when d 5 908, is given by
Pmax 5 VSVR
X9  W
(5.4.27) 
Pmax represents the theoretical steady-state stability limit of a lossless line. If an  
attempt were made to exceed this steady-state stability limit, then synchronous ma-
chines at the sending end would lose synchronism with those at the receiving end. 
Stability is further discussed in Chapter 11.
It is convenient to express the steady-state stability limit in terms of SIL. Using 
(5.4.10) in (5.4.26),
P 5 VSVR sin d
Zc sin bl
51
VSVR
Zc 2 
sin d
sin 1
2pl
l 2

(5.4.28) 
Expressing VS and VR in per-unit of rated line voltage,
P 51
VS
Vrated2 1
VR
Vrated2 1
V2
rated
Zc 2 
sin d
sin 1
2pl
l 2
	 5 VSp.u.VRp.u.(SIL) 
sin d
sin 1
2pl
l 2 W
(5.4.29) 
FIGURE 5.12
Transmission-line 
loadability curve 
for 60-Hz overhead 
lines—no series or 
shunt compensation

	
Section 5.4 Lossless Lines	
281
And for d 5 908, the theoretical steady-state stability limit is
Pmax 5
VSp.u.VRp.u. (SIL)
sin 1
2pl
l 2  W
(5.4.30) 
Equations (5.4.27) through (5.4.30) reveal two important factors affecting the 
steady-state stability limit. First, from (5.4.27), it increases with the square of the line 
voltage. For example, a doubling of line voltage enables a fourfold increase in maxi-
mum power flow. Second, it decreases with line length. Equation (5.4.30) is plotted in 
Figure 5.12 for VSp.u. 5 VRp.u. 5 1, l 5 5000 km, and line lengths up to 1100 km. As 
shown, the theoretical steady-state stability limit decreases from 4(SIL) for a 200 km 
line to about 2(SIL) for a 400 km line.
Theoretical steady-state stability limit: long line
Neglecting line losses, find the theoretical steady-state stability limit for the  
300-km line in Example 5.2. Assume a 266.1-V surge impedance, a 5000 km  
wavelength, and VS 5 VR 5 765 kV.
solution
From (5.4.21),
SIL 5 (765)2
266.1 5 2199 MW
From (5.4.30) with l 5 300 km and l 5 5000 km,
Pmax 5
(1)(1)(2199)
sin 1
2p 3 300
5000 2
5 (2.716)(2199) 5 5974 MW
Alternatively, from Figure 5.12, for a 300 km line, the theoretical steady-state 
stability limit is (2.72)SIL 5 (2.72)(2199) 5 5980 MW, which is about the same as 
the previous result (see Figure 5.13).
Open PowerWorld Simulator case Example 5_4 and select Tools, Play to 
see this example. When the load on a line is equal to the SIL, the voltage profile 
across the line is flat, and the line’s net reactive power losses are zero. For loads 
above the SIL, the line consumes reactive power, and the load’s voltage magni-
tude is below the sending-end value. Conversely, for loads below the SIL, the line 
actually generates reactive power, and the load’s voltage magnitude is above the 
EXAMPLE 5.4
(Continued)

282	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
5.5  Maximum Power Flow
Maximum power flow, discussed in Section 5.4 for lossless lines, is derived here in 
terms of the ABCD parameters for lossy lines. The following notation is used:
A 5 cosh (g/) 5 A/uA
B 5 Z9 5 Z9/uZ
VS 5 VS/d VR 5 VR/08
Solving (5.2.33) for the receiving-end current,
IR 5 VS 2 AVR
B
5 VSe jd 2 AVRejuA
Z9e juz

(5.5.1) 
The complex power delivered to the receiving end is
sending-end value. Use the load arrow button to vary the load to see the changes 
in the receiving-end voltage and the line’s reactive power consumption (indicated 
by the reactive power supplied by the generator). 
FIGURE 5.13
Screen for Example 5.4

	
Section 5.5 Maximum Power Flow	
283
SR 5 PR 1 jQR 5 VRIR
* 5 VR3
VSe j(d2uz) 2 AVRej(uA2uz)
Z9
4
*
	
5 VRVS
Z9
 e j(uz2d) 2 AVR
2
Z9  ej(uz2uA)
(5.5.2) 
The real and reactive power delivered to the receiving end are thus
	
PR 5 Re(SR) 5 VRVS
Z9  cos(uZ 2 d) 2 AVR
2
Z9  cos(uZ 2 uA)
(5.5.3) 
QR 5 Im (SR) 5 VRVS
Z9  sin(uZ 2 d) 2 AVR
2
Z9  sin(uZ 2 uA)
(5.5.4)
Note that for a lossless line, uA 5 08, B 5 Z9 5 j X9, Z9 5 X9, uZ 5 908, and (5.5.3) 
reduces to
PR 5 VRVS
X9  cos (90 2 d) 2 AVR
2
X9  cos (908)
	
5 VRVS
X9  sin d
(5.5.5) 
which is the same as (5.4.26).
The theoretical maximum real power delivered (or steady-state stability limit) 
occurs when d 5 uz in (5.5.3):
PRmax 5 VRVS
Z9
2 AVR
2
Z9  cos (uZ 2 uA)
(5.5.6) 
The second term in (5.5.6), and the fact that Z9 is larger than X9, reduce PRmax to a 
value somewhat less than that given by (5.4.27) for a lossless line.
Theoretical maximum power delivered: long line
Determine the theoretical maximum power, in MW and in per-unit of SIL, that 
the line in Example 5.2 can deliver. Assume VS 5 VR 5 765 kV.
SOLUTION
From Example 5.2,
A 5 0.9313 per unit;	
uA 5 0.2098
B 5 Z9 5 97.0 V	
 uZ 5 87.2
Zc 5 266.1 V
EXAMPLE 5.5
(Continued)

284	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
5.6  Line Loadability
In practice, power lines are not operated to deliver their theoretical maximum power, 
which is based on rated terminal voltages and an angular displacement d 5 908 across 
the line. Figure 5.12 shows a practical line loadability curve plotted below the theoretical 
steady-state stability limit. This curve is based on the voltage-drop limit VR/VS $ 0.95 
and on a maximum angular displacement of 30 to 358 across the line (or about 458 
across the line and equivalent system reactances) in order to maintain stability during 
transient disturbances [1, 3]. The curve is valid for typical overhead 60-Hz lines with no 
compensation. Note that for short lines less than 25 km long, loadability is limited by 
the thermal rating of the conductors or by terminal equipment ratings, not by voltage 
drop or stability considerations. Section 5.7 investigates series and shunt compensation 
techniques to increase the loadability of longer lines toward their thermal limit.
From (5.5.6) with VS 5 VR 5 765 kV,
PRmax 5 (765)2
97
2 (0.9313)(765)2
97
 cos (87.28 2 0.2098)
From (5.4.20),
SIL 5 (765)2
266.1 5 2199 MW
Thus
PRmax 5 5738
2199 5 2.61 per unit
This value is about 4% less than that found in Example 5.4, where losses were 
neglected.
Practical line loadability and percent voltage regulation: 
long line
The 300-km uncompensated line in Example 5.2 has four 1,272,000 cmil 54/3 
ACSR conductors per bundle. The sending-end voltage is held constant at  
1.0 per-unit of rated line voltage. Determine the following:
a.	 The practical line loadability. (Assume an approximate receiving-end 
voltage VR 5 0.95 per unit and d 5 358 maximum angle across the line.)
EXAMPLE 5.6

	
Section 5.6 Line Loadability	
285
b.	 The full-load current at 0.986 p.f. leading based on the above practical 
line loadability
c.	 The exact receiving-end voltage for the full-load current found in part (b)
d.	 Percent voltage regulation for the above full-load current
e.	 Thermal limit of the line, based on the approximate current-carrying 
capacity given in Table A.4
SOLUTION
a.  From (5.5.3), with VS 5 765, VR 5 0.95 3 765 kV, and d 5 358, using the 
values of Z9, uz, A, and ua from Example 5.5,
PR 5 (765)(0.95 3 765)
97.0
 cos (87.28 2 358)
	
2(0.9313)(0.95 3 765)2
97.0
 cos (87.28 2 0.2098)
	
5 3513 2 266 5 3247  MW
PR 5 3247 MW is the practical line loadability, provided the thermal and voltage- 
drop limits are not exceeded. Alternatively, from Figure 5.12 for a 300 km line, the 
practical line loadability is (1.49)SIL5 (1.49)(2199) 5 3277 MW, which is about 
the same as the previous result.
b.  For the loading at 0.986 p.f. leading and at 0.95 3 765 kV, the full-load re-
ceiving-end current is
IRFL 5
PR
Ï3VR(p.f.) 5
3247
(Ï3)(0.95 3 765)(0.986) 5 2.616 kA
c.  From (5.1.1) with IRFL 5 2.616/cos21 0.986 5 2.616/9.5998 kA, using the A 
and B parameters from Example 5.2,
VS 5 AVRFL 1 BIRFL
765
Ï3/d 5 (0.9313/0.2098) (VRFL/08) 1 (97.0/87.28) (2.616/9.5998)
441.7/d 5 (0.9313 VRFL 2 30.04) 1 j(0.0034VRFL 1 251.97)
Taking the squared magnitude of the above equation,
(441.7)2 5 0.8673V2
RFL2 54.24VRFL 1 64,391
Solving,
VRFL 5 420.7 kVLN
	
5 420.7Ï3 5 728.7 kVLL 5 0.953 per unit
(Continued)

286	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
d.  From (5.1.19), the receiving-end no-load voltage is
VRNL 5 VS
A 5
765
0.9313 5 821.4 kVLL
And from (5.1.18),
percent VR 5 821.4 2 728.7
728.7
3 100 5 12.72%
e.  From Table A.4, the approximate current-carrying capacity of four  
1,272,000-cmil 54/3 ACSR conductors is 4 3 1.2 5 4.8 kA.
Since the voltages VS 5 1.0 and VRFL 5 0.953 per unit satisfy the voltage- 
drop limit VR/VS $ 0.95, the factor that limits line loadability is steady-state stabil-
ity for this 300-km uncompensated line. The full-load current of 2.616 kA corre-
sponding to loadability is also well below the thermal limit of 4.8 kA. The 12.7% 
voltage regulation is too high because the no-load voltage is too high. Compensa-
tion techniques to reduce no-load voltages are discussed in Section 5.7.
Selection of transmission line voltage and number of lines 
for power transfer
From a hydroelectric power plant, 9000 MW are to be transmitted to a load center 
located 500 km from the plant. Based on practical line loadability criteria, determine 
the number of three-phase, 60 Hz lines required to transmit this power, with one line 
out of service, for the following cases: (a) 345 kV lines with Zc 5 297 V; (b) 500-kV 
lines with Zc 5 277 V; and (c) 765-kV lines with Zc 5 266 V. Assume VS 5 1.0 per 
unit, VR 5 0.95 per unit, and d 5 358. Also assume that the lines are uncompensated 
and widely separated such that there is negligible mutual coupling between them.
SOLUTION
a.  For 345 kV lines, (5.4.21) yields
SIL 5 (345)2
297 5 401 MW
Neglecting losses, from (5.4.29), with /5 500 km and d 5 358,
P 5 (1.0)(0.95)(401) sin(358)
sin 1
2p 3 500
5000 2
5 (401) (0.927) 5 372 MW/line
EXAMPLE 5.7

	
Section 5.6 Line Loadability	
287
Alternatively, the practical line loadability curve in Figure 5.12 can be used to 
obtain P 5 (0.93)SIL for typical 500-km overhead 60-Hz uncompensated lines.
In order to transmit 9000 MW with one line out of service,
#345 kV lines 5
9000 MW
372 MW/line 1 1 5 24.2 1 1 < 26
b.  For 500 kV lines,
SIL 5 (500)2
277 5 903 MW
P 5 (903) (0.927) 5 837 MW/line
#500 kV lines 5 9000
837 1 1 5 10.8 1 1 < 12
c.  For 765 kV lines,
SIL 5 (765)2
266 5 2200 MW
P 5 (2200) (0.927) 5 2039 MW/line
#765 kV lines 5 9000
2039 1 1 5 4.4 1 1 < 6
Increasing the line voltage from 345 to 765 kV, which is a factor of 2.2, reduces the  
required number of lines from 26 to 6, which is a factor of 4.3.
Effect of intermediate substations on number of lines  
required for power transfer
Can five instead of six 765 kV lines transmit the required power in Example 5.7 if 
there are two intermediate substations that divide each line into three 167-km line 
sections, and if only one line section is out of service?
SOLUTION
The lines are shown in Figure 5.14. For simplicity, neglect line losses. The equivalent 
p circuit of one 500 km, 765 kV line has a series reactance from (5.4.10) and (5.4.15),
X9 5 (266) sin 1
2p 3 500
5000 2 5 156.35 V
EXAMPLE 5.8
(Continued)

288	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
Combining series/parallel reactances in Figure 5.14, the equivalent reactance of 
five lines with one line section out of service is
Xeq 5 1
5 1
2
3 X92 1 1
4
 1
X9
3 2 5 0.2167X9 5 33.88 V
Then, from (5.4.26) with d 5 358,
P 5 (765) (765 3 0.95) sin (358)
33.88
5 9412 MW
Inclusion of line losses would reduce the above value by 3 or 4% to about  
9100 MW. Therefore, the answer is yes. Five 765-kV, 500-km uncompensated lines 
with two intermediate substations and with one line section out of service trans-
mits 9000 MW. Intermediate substations are often economical if their costs do 
not outweigh the reduction in line costs.
This example is modeled in PowerWorld Simulator case Example 5_8  
(see Figure 5.15). Each line segment is represented with the lossless line model 
from Example 5.4 with the p circuit parameters modified to exactly match those 
for a 167-km distributed line. The pie charts on each line segment show the  
percentage loading of the line, assuming a rating of 3500 MVA. The solid red 
squares on the lines represent closed circuit breakers, and the green squares cor-
respond to open circuit breakers. Clicking on a circuit breaker toggles its status. 
The simulation results differ slightly from the simplified analysis done earlier in  
the example because the PowerWorld simulation includes the charging capaci-
tance of the transmission lines. With all line segments in-service, use the load’s 
arrow to verify that the SIL for this system is 11,000 MW, which is five times that 
of the single circuit line in Example 5.4. 
FIGURE 5.14
Transmission-line 
configuration for 
Example 5.8

	
Section 5.7 Reactive Compensation Techniques	
289
5.7  Reactive Compensation Techniques
Inductors and capacitors are used on medium-length and long transmission lines to 
increase line loadability and to maintain voltages near rated values.
Shunt reactors (inductors) are commonly installed at selected points along 
EHV lines from each phase to neutral. The inductors absorb reactive power and 
reduce overvoltages during light load conditions. They also reduce transient over-
voltages due to switching and lightning surges. However, shunt reactors can reduce 
line loadability if they are not removed under full-load conditions.
In addition to shunt reactors, shunt capacitors are sometimes used to deliver 
reactive power and increase transmission voltages during heavy load conditions.  
Another type of shunt compensation includes thyristor-switched reactors in parallel 
with capacitors. These devices, called static var compensators, can absorb reactive 
power during light loads and deliver reactive power during heavy loads. Through 
automatic control of the thyristor switches, voltage fluctuations are minimized and 
line loadability is increased. Synchronous condensors (synchronous motors with no 
mechanical load) can also control their reactive power output, although more slowly 
than static var compensators.
Series capacitors are sometimes used on long lines to increase line loadability. 
Capacitor banks are installed in series with each phase conductor at selected points 
FIGURE 5.15
Screen for Example 5.8

290	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
along a line. Their effect is to reduce the net series impedance of the line in series with 
the capacitor banks, thereby reducing line-voltage drops and increasing the steady-
state stability limit. A disadvantage of series capacitor banks is that automatic pro-
tection devices must be installed to bypass high currents during faults and to reinsert 
the capacitor banks after fault clearing. Also, the addition of series capacitors can 
excite low-frequency oscillations, a phenomenon called subsynchronous resonance, 
which may damage turbine-generator shafts. Studies have shown, however, that  
series capacitive compensation can increase the loadability of long lines at only a 
fraction of the cost of new transmission [1].
Figure 5.16 shows a schematic and an equivalent circuit for a compensated line 
section, where NC is the amount of series capacitive compensation expressed in per-
cent of the positive-sequence line impedance and NL is the amount of shunt reactive 
compensation in percent of the positive-sequence line admittance. It is assumed in 
Figure 5.16 that half of the compensation is installed at each end of the line section. 
The following two examples illustrate the effect of compensation.
FIGURE 5.16
Compensated 
transmission-line 
section
Shunt reactive compensation to improve transmission-line 
voltage regulation
Identical shunt reactors (inductors) are connected from each phase conductor to 
neutral at both ends of the 300 km line in Example 5.2 during light load condi-
tions, providing 75% compensation. The reactors are removed during heavy load 
conditions. Full load is 1.90 kA at unity p.f. and at 730 kV. Assuming that the 
sending-end voltage is constant, determine the following properties.
EXAMPLE 5.9

	
Section 5.7 Reactive Compensation Techniques	
291
a.	 Percent voltage regulation of the uncompensated line
b.	 The equivalent shunt admittance and series impedance of the compen-
sated line
c.	 Percent voltage regulation of the compensated line
SOLUTION
a.  From (5.1.1) with IRFL 5 1.9/08 kA, using the A and B parameters from Ex-
ample 5.2,
VS 5 AVRFL 1 BIRFL
	
5 (0.9313/0.2098) 1
730
Ï3/082 1 (97.0/87.28) (1.9/08)
	
5 392.5/0.2098 1 184.3/87.28
	
5 401.5 1 j185.5
	
5 442.3/24.88 kVLN
VS 5 442.3Ï3 5 766.0 kVLL
The no-load receiving-end voltage is, from (5.1.19),
VRNL 5 766.0
0.9313 5 822.6 kVLL
and the percent voltage regulation for the uncompensated line is, from (5.1.18),
percent VR 5 822.6 2 730
730
3 100 5 12.68%
b.  From Example 5.3, the shunt admittance of the equivalent p circuit without 
compensation is
Y9 5 2(3.7 3 1027 1 j7.094 3 1024)
	
5 7.4 3 1027 1 j14.188 3 1024 S
With 75% shunt compensation, the equivalent shunt admittance is
Yeq 5 7.4 3 1027 1 j14.188 3 1024
 _1 2 75
100+
	
5 3.547 3 1024/89.888 S
Since there is no series compensation, the equivalent series impedance is the same 
as without compensation:
Zeq 5 Z9 5 97.0/87.28  V
(Continued)

292	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
c.  The equivalent A parameter for the compensated line is
Aeq 5 1 1
Yeq Zeq
2
	
5 1 1
(3.547 3 1024/89.888)(97.0/87.28)
2
	
5 1 1 0.0172/177.18
	
5 0.9828/0.058 per unit
Then, from (5.1.19),
VRNL 5
766
0.9828 5 779.4 kVLL
Since the shunt reactors are removed during heavy load conditions, VRFL 5 730 kV  
is the same as without compensation. Therefore
percent VR 5 779.4 2 730
730
3 100 5 6.77%
The use of shunt reactors at light loads improves the voltage regulation from 
12.68% to 6.77% for this line.
Series capacitive compensation to increase  
transmission-line loadability
Identical series capacitors are installed in each phase at both ends of the line in 
Example 5.2, providing 30% compensation. Determine the theoretical maximum 
power that this compensated line can deliver and compare with that of the un-
compensated line. Assume VS 5 VR5 765 kV.
SOLUTION 
From Example 5.3, the equivalent series reactance without compensation is
X9 5 97.0 sin 87.28 5 96.88  V
Based on 30% series compensation, half at each end of the line, the impedance of 
each series capacitor is
Zcap 5 2jXcap 5 2j _1
2+ (0.30) (96.88) 5 2j14.53 V
EXAMPLE 5.10

	
Section 5.7 Reactive Compensation Techniques	
293
From Figure 5.4, the ABCD matrix of this series impedance is
3
1
2j14.53
0
1 4
As also shown in Figure 5.4, the equivalent ABCD matrix of networks in 
series is obtained by multiplying the ABCD matrices of the individual networks. 
For this example there are three networks: the series capacitors at the sending 
end, the line, and the series capacitors at the receiving end. Therefore the equiva-
lent ABCD matrix of the compensated line is, using the ABCD parameters, from 
Example 5.2,
3
1
2j14.53
0
1 4 3
0.9313/0.2098
97.0/87.28
1.37 3 1023/90.068
0.9313/0.209843
1
2j14.53
0
1 4
After performing these matrix multiplications, results in
3
Aeq
Beq
Ceq
Deq4 53
0.9512/0.2058
69.70/86.028
1.37 3 1023/90.068
0.9512/0.20584
Therefore
Aeq 5 0.9512 per unit  uAeq 5 0.2058
Beq 5 Z9eq 5 69.70 V  uZeq 5 86.028
From (5.5.6) with VS 5 VR 5 765 kV,
PRmax 5 (765)2
69.70 2 (0.9512)(765)2
69.70
 cos (86.028 2 0.2058)
	
5 8396 2 583 5 7813 MW
which is 36.2% larger than the value of 5738 MW found in Example 5.5 without 
compensation. Note that the practical line loadability of this series compensated 
line is also about 35% larger than the value of 3247 MW found in Example 5.6 
without compensation.
This example is modeled in PowerWorld Simulator case Example 5_10  
(see Figure 5.17). When opened, both of the series capacitors are bypassed (i.e., 
they are modeled as short circuits), meaning this case is initially identical to the 
Example 5.4 case. Click on the blue Bypassed field to place each of the series  
capacitors into the circuit. This decreases the angle across the line, resulting in 
more net power transfer.
(Continued)

294	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS
SECTION 5.1
5.1	
Representing a transmission line by the two-port network, in terms of 
ABCD parameters, (a) express VS, which is the sending-end voltage, in 
terms of VR, which is the receiving-end voltage, and IR, the receiving-end 
current, and (b) express IS, which is the sending-end current, in terms  
of VR and IR.
(a) VS 5 __________ (b) IS 5 __________
5.2	
As applied to linear, passive, bilateral two-port networks, the ABCD 
parameters satisfy AD 2 BC 5 1.
(a) True	
(b) False
5.3	
Express the no-load receiving-end voltage VRNL in terms of the sending- 
end voltage, VS, and the ABCD parameters.
5.4	
The ABCD parameters, which are in general complex numbers, have 
units of __________, __________, __________, and __________,  
respectively.
5.5	
The loadability of short transmission lines (less than 25 km, repre-
sented by including only series resistance and reactance) is determined 
FIGURE 5.17
Screen for Example 5.10

	
Multiple Choice Questions	
295
by __________; that of medium lines (less than 250 km, represented by 
nominal p circuit) is determined by __________; and that of long lines 
(more than 250 km, represented by equivalent p circuit) is determined by 
__________.
5.6	
Can the voltage regulation, which is proportional to (Vrnl 2 Vrfl), be 
negative?
(a) Yes	
(b) No
SECTION 5.2
5.7	
The propagation constant, which is a complex quantity in general, has 
units of ______, and the characteristic impedance has units of ______.
5.8	
Express hyperbolic functions cosh Ïx and sinh Ïx in terms of exponen-
tial functions.
5.9	
eg, where g 5 a 1 jb, can be expressed as eal/bl, in which al is dimen-
sionless and bl is in radians (also dimensionless).
(a) True	
(b) False
SECTION 5.3
5.10	
The equivalent p circuit is identical in structure to the nominal p circuit.
(a) True	
(b) False
5.11	
The correction factors F1 5 sinh (gl ) gl and F2 5 tanh (gl/2)/(gl/2), which 
are complex numbers, have the units of ______. 
SECTION 5.4
5.12	
For a lossless line, the surge impedance is purely resistive and the propa-
gation constant is pure imaginary.
(a) True	
(b) False
5.13	
For equivalent p circuits of lossless lines, the A and D parameters are 
pure _______, whereas B and C parameters are pure _______.
5.14	
In equivalent p circuits of lossless lines, Z9 is pure __________, and Y9 is 
pure __________.
5.15	
Typical power-line lengths are only a small fraction of the 60-Hz wavelength. 
(a) True	
(b) False
5.16	
The velocity of propagation of voltage and current waves along a lossless 
overhead line is the same as speed of light.
(a) True	
(b) False
5.17	
Surge Impedance Loading (SIL) is the power delivered by a lossless line 
to a load resistance equal to __________. 
5.18	
For a lossless line, at SIL, the voltage profile is __________, and the real 
power delivered, in terms of rated line voltage V and surge impedance Zc, 
is given by __________.

296	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
5.19	
The maximum power that a lossless line can deliver, in terms of the volt-
age magnitudes VS and VR (in volts) at the ends of the line held constant, 
and the series reactance X9 of the corresponding equivalent p circuit, is 
given by __________, in watts. 
SECTION 5.5
5.20	
The maximum power flow for a lossy line is somewhat less than that for 
a lossless line.
(a) True	
(b) False
SECTION 5.6
5.21	
For short lines less than 25 km long, loadability is limited by the thermal 
rating of the conductors or by terminal equipment ratings, not by voltage 
drop or stability considerations.
(a) True	
(b) False
5.22	
Increasing the transmission line voltage reduces the required number of 
lines for the same power transfer.
(a) True	
(b) False
5.23	
Intermediate substations are often economical from the viewpoint of the 
number of lines required for power transfer if their costs do not outweigh 
the reduction in line costs.
(a) True	
(b) False
SECTION 5.7
5.24	
Shunt reactive compensation improves transmission-line ______, whereas 
series capacitive compensation increases transmission-line ______.
5.25	
Static-var-compensators can absorb reactive power during light loads 
and deliver reactive power during heavy loads.
(a) True	
(b) False
PROBLEMS
SECTION 5.1
5.1	
A 30-km, 34.5-kV, 60-Hz, three-phase line has a positive-sequence series 
impedance z 5 0.19 1 j0.34 V/km. The load at the receiving end absorbs 
10 MVA at 33 kV. Assuming a short line, calculate: (a) the ABCD param-
eters, (b) the sending-end voltage for a load power factor of 0.9 lagging, 
and (c) the sending-end voltage for a load power factor of 0.9 leading.
5.2	
A 200-km, 230-kV, 60-Hz, three-phase line has a positive-sequence series 
impedance z 5 0.08 1 j0.48 V/km and a positive-sequence shunt admit-
tance y 5 j3.33 3 1026 S/km. At full load, the line delivers 250 MW at 

	
Problems	
297
0.99 p.f. lagging and at 220 kV. Using the nominal p circuit, calculate: (a) 
the ABCD parameters, (b) the sending-end voltage and current, and (c) 
the percent voltage regulation.
5.3	
Rework Problem 5.2 in per unit using 1000-MVA (three-phase) and  
230-kV (line-to-line) base values. Calculate: (a) the per-unit ABCD 
parameters, (b) the per-unit sending-end voltage and current, and (c) the 
percent voltage regulation.
5.4	
Derive the ABCD parameters for the two networks in series, as shown in 
Figure 5.4.
5.5	
Derive the ABCD parameters for the T circuit shown in Figure 5.4.
5.6	
(a) Consider a medium-length transmission line represented by a nomi-
nal p circuit shown in Figure 5.3 of the text. Draw a phasor diagram 
for lagging power-factor condition at the load (receiving end).
(b) Now consider a nominal T circuit of the medium-length transmission 
line shown in Figure 5.18. 
First draw the corresponding phasor diagram for lagging power-factor 
load condition.
Then determine the ABCD parameters in terms of Y and Z for the nom-
inal T circuit and for the nominal p circuit of part (a).
FIGURE 5.18
Nominal T-circuit for 
Problem 5.6
5.7	
The per-phase impedance of a short three-phase transmission line is 
0.5/53.158 V. The three-phase load at the receiving end is 1200 kW at  
0.8 p.f. lagging. If the line-to-line sending-end voltage is 3.3 kV, determine 
(a) the receiving-end line-to-line voltage in kV and (b) the line current.
Draw the phasor diagram with the line current I, as reference.
5.8	
Reconsider Problem 5.7 and find the following: (a) sending-end power fac-
tor, (b) sending-end three-phase power, and (c) the three-phase line loss. 
5.9	
The 100-km, 230-kV, 60-Hz, three-phase line in Problems 4.18 and 4.39 
delivers 300 MVA at 218 kV to the receiving end at full load. Using the 
nominal p circuit, calculate the ABCD parameters, sending-end voltage, 
and percent voltage regulation when the receiving-end power factor is 
(a) 0.9 lagging, (b) unity, and (c) 0.9 leading. Assume a 508C conductor 
temperature to determine the resistance of this line.

298	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
5.10	
The 500-kV, 60-Hz, three-phase line in Problems 4.20 and 4.41 has a  
180-km length and delivers 1600 MW at 475 kV and at 0.95 power factor 
leading to the receiving end at full load. Using the nominal p circuit, 
calculate the (a) ABCD parameters, (b) sending-end voltage and  
current, (c) sending-end power and power factor, (d) full-load line 
losses and efficiency, and (e) percent voltage regulation. Assume a 508C 
conductor temperature to determine the resistance of this line.
5.11	
A 40-km, 220-kV, 60-Hz, three-phase overhead transmission line 
has a per-phase resistance of 0.15 V/km, a per-phase inductance of  
1.3263 mH/km, and negligible shunt capacitance. Using the short line 
model, find the sending-end voltage, voltage regulation, sending-end 
power, and transmission line efficiency when the line is supplying a  
three-phase load of (a) 381 MVA at 0.8 power factor lagging and at  
220 kV and (b) 381 MVA at 0.8 power factor leading and at 220 kV.
5.12	
A 60-Hz, 100-mile, three-phase overhead transmission line, constructed 
of ACSR conductors, has a series impedance of (0.1826 1 j 0.784) V/mi 
per phase and a shunt capacitive reactance-to-neutral of 185.5 3 103
/2908 V-mi per phase. Using the nominal p circuit for a medium-length 
transmission line, (a) determine the total series impedance and shunt 
admittance of the line; (b) compute the voltage, the current, and the real 
and reactive power at the sending end if the load at the receiving end draws 
200 MVA at unity power factor and at a line-to-line voltage of 230 kV;  
and (c) find the percent voltage regulation of the line. 
SECTION 5.2
5.13	
Evaluate cosh(gl) and tanh(gl/2) for gl 5 0.40/858 per unit.
5.14	
A 500-km, 500-kV, 60-Hz, uncompensated three-phase line has a positive- 
sequence series impedance z 5 0.03 1j 0.35 V/km and a positive- 
sequence shunt admittance y 5 j4.4 3 1026 S/km. Calculate: (a) Zc, 
(b) (gl ), and (c) the exact ABCD parameters for this line. 
5.15	
At full load, the line in Problem 5.14 delivers 900 MW at unity power 
factor and at 475 kV. Calculate: (a) the sending-end voltage, (b) the  
sending-end current, (c) the sending-end power factor, (d) the full-load 
line losses, and (e) the percent voltage regulation.
5.16	
The 500-kV, 60-Hz, three-phase line in Problems 4.20 and 4.41 has a  
300-km length. Calculate: (a) Zc, (b) (gl), and (c) the exact ABCD param-
eters for this line. Assume a 508C conductor temperature. 
5.17	
At full load, the line in Problem 5.16 delivers 1500 MVA at 480 kV to 
the receiving-end load. Calculate the sending-end voltage and percent 
voltage regulation when the receiving-end power factor is (a) 0.9 lagging, 
(b) unity, and (c) 0.9 leading. 
5.18	
A 60-Hz, 230-mile, three-phase overhead transmission line has a series 
impedance z 5 0.8431/79.048 V/mi and a shunt admittance g 5 5.105 3 
1026/908 S/mi. The load at the receiving end is 125 MW at unity power 

factor and at 215 kV. Determine the voltage, current, and both real and 
reactive power at the sending end and the percent voltage regulation of 
the line. Also find the wavelength and velocity of propagation of the line.
5.19	
Using per-unit calculations, rework Problem 5.18 to determine the  
sending-end voltage and current.
5.20	
(a) The series expansions of the hyperbolic functions are given by
	
	
cosh u 5 1 1 u2
2 1 u4
24 1 u6
720 1 Á
	
	
sinh u 5 1 1 u2
6 1 u4
120 1
u6
5040 1 Á
For the ABCD parameters of a long transmission line represented by an 
equivalent p circuit, apply the above expansion considering only the first 
two terms, and express the result in terms of Y and Z.
(b) For the nominal p and equivalent p circuits shown in Figures 5.3  
and 5.7 of the text, show that
	
	
A 2 1
B
5 Y
2   and  A 2 1
B
5 Y9
2
hold good, respectively.
5.21	
Starting with (5.1.1) of the text, show that
	
	
A 5 VSIS 1 VRIR
VRIS 1 VSIR
  and  B 5
VS
2 2 VR
2
VRIS 1 VSIR
5.22	
Consider the A parameter of the long line given by cosh u, where u 5 
ÏZY. With x 5 e2u 5 x1 1 jx2 and A 5 A1 1 jA2, show that x1 and x2 
satisfy the following:
	
	
x2
1 2 x2
2 2 2(A1x1 2 A2x2) 1 1 5 0
	
and	 x1x2 2 (A2x1 1 A1x2) 5 0.
SECTION 5.3
5.23	
Determine the equivalent p circuit for the line in Problem 5.14 and com-
pare it with the nominal p circuit.
5.24	
Determine the equivalent p circuit for the line in Problem 5.16. Compare 
the equivalent p circuit with the nominal p circuit.
5.25	
Let the transmission line of Problem 5.12 be extended to cover a  
distance of 200 miles. Assume conditions at the load to be the same as 
in Problem 5.12. Determine the (a) sending-end voltage, (b) sending-end 
current, (c) sending-end real and reactive powers, and (d) percent voltage 
regulation.
	
Problems	
299

300	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
SECTION 5.4
5.26	
A 350-km, 500-kV, 60-Hz, three-phase uncompensated line has a positive- 
sequence series reactance x 5 0.34 V/km and a positive-sequence shunt 
admittance y 5 j4.5 3 1026 S/km. Neglecting losses, calculate: (a) Zc, 
(b) gl, (c) the ABCD parameters, (d) the wavelength l of the line in kilo-
meters, and (e) the surge impedance loading in MW.
5.27	
Determine the equivalent p circuit for the line in Problem 5.26.
5.28	
Rated line voltage is applied to the sending end of the line in Problem 
5.26. Calculate the receiving-end voltage when the receiving end is ter-
minated by (a) an open circuit, (b) the surge impedance of the line, and  
(c) one-half of the surge impedance. (d) Also calculate the theoretical 
maximum real power that the line can deliver when rated voltage is 
applied to both ends of the line.
5.29	
Rework Problems 5.9 and 5.16, neglecting the conductor resistance. 
Compare the results with and without losses.
5.30	
From (4.6.22) and (4.10.4), the series inductance and shunt capacitance 
of a three-phase overhead line are
	
	
La 5 2 3 1027 ln(Deq/DSL) 5 m0
2p ln(Deq/DSL) H/m
	
	
Can 5
2p«0
ln(Deq/DSC) F/m
	
where m0 5 4p 3 1027H/m and «0 51
1
36p2 3 1029
 F/m.
  Using these equations, determine formulas for surge impedance and 
velocity of propagation of an overhead lossless line. Then determine the 
surge impedance and velocity of propagation for the three-phase line given 
in Example 4.5. Assume positive-sequence operation. Neglect line losses 
as well as the effects of the overhead neutral wires and the earth plane.
5.31	
A 500-kV, 300-km, 60-Hz, three-phase overhead transmission line, assumed 
to be lossless, has a series inductance of 0.97 mH/km per phase and a shunt 
capacitance of 0.0115 mF/km per phase. (a) Determine the phase constant 
b, the surge impedance Zc, velocity of propagation v, and the wavelength 
l of the line. (b) Determine the voltage, current, real and reactive power 
at the sending end, and the percent voltage regulation of the line if the 
receiving-end load is 800 MW at 0.8 power factor lagging and at 500 kV.
5.32	
The following parameters are based on a preliminary line design: VS 5 
1.0 per unit, VR 5 0.9 per unit, l 5 5000 km, Zc 5 320 V, d 5 36.88. 

A three-phase power of 700 MW is to be transmitted to a substation 
located 315 km from the source of power. (a) Determine a nominal volt-
age level for the three-phase transmission line, based on the practical line- 
loadability equation. (b) For the voltage level obtained in part (a), determine  
the theoretical maximum power that can be transferred by the line.
5.33	
Consider a long radial line terminated in its characteristic impedance Zc. 
Determine the following:
(a) V1/I1, known as the driving point impedance.
(b) |V2|/V1|, known as the voltage gain, in terms of a/.
(c) |I2|/|/I1|, known as the current gain, in terms of a/.
(d) The complex power gain,2S21/S12, in terms of a/.
(e) The real power efficiency, (2P21/P12) 5 h, terms of a/.
Note: 1 refers to sending end and 2 refers to receiving end. (S21) is the 
complex power received at 2; S12 is sent from 1.
5.34	
For the case of a lossless line, how would the results of Problem 5.33 
change?
In terms of Zc, which is a real quantity for this case, express P12 in terms 
|I1| and |V1|.
5.35	
For a lossless open-circuited line, express the sending-end voltage, V1, in 
terms of the receiving-end voltage, V2, for the three cases of short-line 
model, medium-length line model, and long-line model. Is it true that  
the voltage at the open receiving end of a long line is higher than that at 
the sending end, for small bl ?
5.36	
For a short transmission line of impedance (R 1 jX) ohms per phase, 
show that the maximum power that can be transmitted over the line is
	
	
Pmax 5 V2
R
Z2 1
ZVS
VR
2 R2 where Z 5 ÏR2 1 X2
when the sending-end and receiving-end voltages are fixed, and for the 
condition
	
	
Q 5 2V2
RX
R2 1 X2  when dP/dQ 5 0
5.37	
(a) Consider complex power transmission via the three-phase short line 
for which the per-phase circuit is shown in Figure 5.19. Express S12, 
the complex power sent by bus 1 (or V1), and (2S21), the complex 
power received by bus 2 (or V2), in terms of V1, V2, Z, /Z, and u12 5 
u1 2 u2, which is the power angle.
(b) For a balanced three-phase transmission line in per-unit notation with 
Z 5 1/858, u12 5 108, determine S12 and (2S21) for
	
Problems	
301

302	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
	
	
(i)  V1 5 V2 5 1.0
	
	
(ii) V1 5 1.1 and V2 5 0.9
	
Comment on the changes of real and reactive powers from parts (i) to (ii).
FIGURE 5.19
Per-phase circuit for 
Problem 5.37
SECTION 5.5
5.38	
The line in Problem 5.14 has three ACSR 1113 kcmil conductors per 
phase. Calculate the theoretical maximum real power that this line can 
deliver and compare with the thermal limit of the line. Assume VS 5 VR 5 
1.0 per unit and unity power factor at the receiving end.
5.39	
Repeat Problems 5.14 and 5.38 if the line length is (a) 200 km or (b) 600 km.
5.40	
For the 500 kV line given in Problem 5.16, (a) calculate the theoretical 
maximum real power that the line can deliver to the receiving end when 
rated voltage is applied to both ends; (b) calculate the receiving-end reac-
tive power and power factor at this theoretical loading.
5.41	
A 230-kV, 100-km, 60-Hz, three-phase overhead transmission line with a 
rated current of 900 A/phase has a series impedance z 5 0.088 1 j0.465 
V/km and a shunt admittance y 5 j3.524 mS/km. (a) Obtain the nom-
inal p equivalent circuit in normal units and in per unit on a base of  
100 MVA (three phase) and 230 kV (line-to-line). (b) Determine the 
three-phase rated MVA of the line. (c) Compute the ABCD parameters. 
(d) Calculate the SIL.
5.42	
A three-phase power of 460 MW is transmitted to a substation located 
500 km from the source of power. With VS 5 1 per unit, VR 5 0.9 per unit,  
l 5 5000 km, Zc 5 500 V, and d 5 36.878, determine a nominal voltage 
level for the lossless transmission line based on Eq. (5.4.29) of the text.
  Using this result, find the theoretical three-phase maximum power that 
can be transferred by the lossless transmission line.
5.43	
Open PowerWorld Simulator case Example 5_4 and graph the load bus 
voltage as a function of load real power (assuming unity power factor 
at the load). What is the maximum amount of real power that can be 
PW

transferred to the load at unity power factor if the load voltage always 
must be greater than 0.9 per unit?
5.44	
Repeat Problem 5.43, but now vary the load reactive power, assuming the 
load real power is fixed at 1499 MW.
SECTION 5.6
5.45	
For the line in Problems 5.14 and 5.38, determine (a) the practical line 
loadability in MW, assuming VS 5 1.0 per unit, VR ø 0.95 per unit, and 
dmax 5 358; part (b) the full-load current at 0.99 p.f. leading, based on the 
above practical line loadability; (c) the exact receiving-end voltage for the 
full-load current in part (b); and (d) the percent voltage regulation. For 
this line, is loadability determined by the thermal limit, the voltage-drop 
limit, or steady-state stability?
5.46	
Repeat Problem 5.45 for the 500 kV line given in Problem 5.10.
5.47	
Determine the practical line loadability in MW and in per-unit of SIL 
for the line in Problem 5.14 if the line length is (a) 200 km or (b) 600 km. 
Assume VS 5 1.0 per unit, VR 5 0.95 per unit, dmax 5 358, and 0.99 lead-
ing power factor at the receiving end.
5.48	
It is desired to transmit 2000 MW from a power plant to a load center 
located 300 km from the plant. Determine the number of 60 Hz, three-
phase, uncompensated transmission lines required to transmit this power 
with one line out of service for the following cases: (a) 345 kV lines, Zc 5 
300 V, (b) 500 kV lines, Zc 5 275 V, (c) 765 kV lines, Zc 5 260 V. Assume 
that VS 5 1.0 per unit, VR 5 0.95 per unit, and dmax 5 358.
5.49	
Repeat Problem 5.48 if it is desired to transmit: (a) 3200 MW to a load 
center located 300 km from the plant or (b) 2000 MW to a load center 
located 400 km from the plant. 
5.50	
A three-phase power of 4000 MW is to be transmitted through four iden-
tical 60-Hz overhead transmission lines over a distance of 300 km. Based 
on a preliminary design, the phase constant and surge impedance of the 
line are b 5 9.46 3 1024 rad/km and Zc 5 343 V, respectively. Assum-
ing VS 5 1.0 per unit, VR 5 0.9 per unit, and a power angle d 5 36.878, 
determine a suitable nominal voltage level in kV based on the practical 
line-loadability criteria.
5.51	
The power flow at any point on a transmission line can be calculated in 
terms of the ABCD parameters. By letting A 5 |A|/a, B 5 |B|/b, VR 5 
|VR|/08, and VS 5 |VS|/d, the complex power at the receiving end can be 
shown to be
	
	
PR 1 jQR 5
uVRuuVsu/b 2 a
uBu
2
uduuV2
Ru/b 2 a
uBu
(a)  Draw a phasor diagram corresponding to the above equation. Let 
it be represented by a triangle O9OA with O9 as the origin and OA 
representing PR 1 jQR.
PW
	
Problems	
303

304	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
(b)	By shifting the origin from O9 to O, turn the result of part (a) into 
a power diagram, redrawing the phasor diagram. For a given fixed 
value of |VR| and a set of values for |VS|, draw the loci of point A, 
thereby showing the so-called receiving-end circles.
(c)	From the result of part (b) for a given load with a lagging power factor 
angle uR, determine the amount of reactive power that must be sup-
plied to the receiving end to maintain a constant receiving-end voltage 
if the sending-end voltage magnitude decreases from |VS1| to |VS2|
5.52	
(a) Consider complex power transmission via the three-phase long 
line for which the per-phase circuit is shown in Figure 5.20. See  
Problem 5.37 in which the short-line case was considered. Show that
	
	
sending­end power 5 S12 5 Y9*
2  V1
2 1
V2
1
Z9* 2 V1V2
Z9*  eju12
	
	
received power 5 2S21 5 2Y9*
2  V2
2 2
V2
2
Z9* 1 V1V2
Z9*  e2ju12
	
where u12 5 u1 2 u2.
(b) For a lossless line with equal voltage magnitudes at each end, show that
	
	
P12 5 2P21 5 V1
2 sin u12
Zc sin b/ 5 PSIL sin u12
sin b/
(c) For u12 5 458 and b 5 0.002 rad/km, find (P12/PSIL) as a function of 
line length in km, and sketch it.
(d) If a thermal limit of (P12/PSIL) 5 2 is set, which limit governs for short 
lines and long lines?
FIGURE 5.20
Per-phase circuit for 
Problem 5.52
5.53	
Open PowerWorld Simulator case Example 5_8. If the load bus voltage 
is greater than or equal to 730 kV even with any line segment out of ser-
vice, what is the maximum amount of real power that can be delivered to  
the load?
5.54	
Repeat Problem 5.53, but now assume any two line segments may be out 
of service.
PW
PW

SECTION 5.7
5.55	
Recalculate the percent voltage regulation in Problem 5.15 when identi-
cal shunt reactors are installed at both ends of the line during light loads, 
providing 65% total shunt compensation. The reactors are removed at 
full load. Also calculate the impedance of each shunt reactor.
5.56	
Rework Problem 5.17 when identical shunt reactors are installed at both 
ends of the line, providing 50% total shunt compensation. The reactors 
are removed at full load.
5.57	
Identical series capacitors are installed at both ends of the line in Prob-
lem 5.14, providing 40% total series compensation. Determine the equiv-
alent ABCD parameters of this compensated line. Also calculate the 
impedance of each series capacitor.
5.58	
Identical series capacitors are installed at both ends of the line in Prob-
lem 5.16, providing 30% total series compensation. (a) Determine the 
equivalent ABCD parameters for this compensated line. (b) Determine 
the theoretical maximum real power that this series-compensated line can 
deliver when VS 5 VR 5 1.0 per unit. Compare your result with that of 
Problem 5.40.
5.59	
Determine the theoretical maximum real power that the series- 
compensated line in Problem 5.57 can deliver when VS 5 VR 5 1.0 per unit.  
Compare your result with that of Problem 5.38.
5.60	
What is the minimum amount of series capacitive compensation NC in 
percent of the positive-sequence line reactance needed to reduce the num-
ber of 765-kV lines in Example 5.8 from five to four? Assume two inter-
mediate substations with one line section out of service. Also, neglect line 
losses and assume that the series compensation is sufficiently distributed 
along the line so as to effectively reduce the series reactance of the equiv-
alent p circuit to X9(12NC/100).
5.61	
Determine the equivalent ABCD parameters for the line in Problem 5.14 
if it has 70% shunt reactive (inductors) compensation and 40% series 
capacitive compensation. Half of this compensation is installed at each 
end of the line, as in Figure 5.14.
5.62	
Consider the transmission line of Problem 5.18. (a) Find the ABCD 
parameters of the line when uncompensated. (b) For a series capacitive 
compensation of 70% (35% at the sending end and 35% at the receiving 
end), determine the ABCD parameters. Comment on the relative change 
in the magnitude of the B parameter with respect to the relative changes 
in the magnitudes of the A, C, and D parameters. Also comment on the 
maximum power that can be transmitted when series compensated.
5.63	
Given the uncompensated line of Problem 5.18, let a three-phase shunt 
reactor (inductor) that compensates for 70% of the total shunt admit-
tance of the line be connected at the receiving end of the line during 
no-load conditions. Determine the effect of voltage regulation with the 
	
Problems	
305

306	
Chapter 5  |  Transmission Lines: Steady-State Operation
reactor connected at no load. Assume that the reactor is removed under 
full-load conditions.
5.64	
Let the three-phase lossless transmission line of Problem 5.31 supply a 
load of 1000 MVA at 0.8 power factor lagging and at 500 kV. (a) Deter-
mine the capacitance/phase and total three-phase Mvars supplied by a 
three-phase, D-connected shunt-capacitor bank at the receiving end to 
maintain the receiving-end voltage at 500 kV when the sending end of 
the line is energized at 500 kV. (b) If series capacitive compensation of 
40% is installed at the midpoint of the line, without the shunt capacitor 
bank at the receiving end, compute the sending-end voltage and percent 
voltage regulation.
5.65	
Open PowerWorld Simulator case Example 5_10 with the series capaci-
tive compensation at both ends of the line in service. Graph the load bus 
voltage as a function of load real power (assuming unity power factor 
at the load). What is the maximum amount of real power that can be 
transferred to the load at unity power factor if the load voltage is always 
greater than 0.85 per unit?
5.66	
Open PowerWorld Simulator case Example 5_10 with the series capaci-
tive compensation at both ends of the line in service. With the reactive 
power load fixed at 400 Mvar, graph the load bus voltage as the MW load 
is varied between 0 and 2600 MW in 200 MW increments. Then repeat 
with both of the series compensation elements out of service.
CASE STUDY QUESTIONS
a.	
For underground and underwater transmission, why are line losses for 
HVDC cables lower than those of ac cables with similar capacity?
b.	
Where are back-to-back HVDC converters (back-to-back HVDC links) 
currently located in North America? What are the characteristics of those 
locations that prompted the installation of back-to-back HVDC links?
c.	
Which HVDC technology can independently control both active (real) 
power flow and reactive power flow to and from the interconnected ac 
system?
REFERENCES
1.	
Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), EPRI AC Transmission Line 
Reference Book—200 kV and Above (Palo Alto, CA: EPRI, www.epri 
.com, December 2005).
2.	
Westinghouse Electric Corporation, Electrical Transmission and Distri-
bution Reference Book, 4th ed. (East Pittsburgh, PA, 1964).
PW
PW

	
References	
307
3.	
R. D. Dunlop, R. Gutman, and P. P. Marchenko, “Analytical Develop-
ment of Load-ability Characteristics for EHV and UHV Lines,” IEEE 
Trans. PAS, Vol. PAS-98, No. 2 (March/April 1979): pp. 6062607.
4.	
W. D. Stevenson, Jr. Elements of Power System Analysis, 4th ed. (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1982).
5.	
W. H. Hayt, Jr. and J. E. Kemmerly, Engineering Circuit Analysis, 7th ed. 
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006).
6.	
M. P. Bahrman and B. K. Johnson, “The ABCs of HVDC Transmission 
Technologies,” IEEE Power & Energy Magazine, 5, 2 (March/April 2007): 
pp. 32–44.


309
S
uccessful power system operation under normal balanced three-phase steady-
state conditions requires the following:
1.	 Generation supplies the demand (load) plus losses.
2.	 Bus voltage magnitudes remain close to rated values.
3.	 Generators operate within specified real and reactive power limits.
4.	 Transmission lines and transformers are not overloaded.
6 Power Flows
Tennessee  
Valley Authority 
(TVA) Regional 
Operations Center 
(Courtesy of TVA.)

310	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
The power flow (sometimes also called the load flow) is the basic tool for inves-
tigating these requirements. The power flow determines the voltage magnitude and 
angle at each bus in a power system under balanced three-phase steady-state condi-
tions. It also computes real and reactive power flows for all equipment interconnect-
ing the buses, as well as equipment losses.
Both existing power systems and proposed changes, including new generation 
and transmission, are of interest.
Conventional nodal or loop analysis is not suitable for power flow studies be-
cause the input data for loads are normally given in terms of power, not impedance. 
Also, generators are considered to be power sources, not voltage or current sources. The 
power flow problem is therefore formulated as a set of nonlinear algebraic equations 
suitable for computer solution.
Sections 6.1 through 6.3 review some basic methods, including direct and itera-
tive techniques for solving algebraic equations. Then Sections 6.4 through 6.6 formu-
late the power flow problem, specify input data, and present two solution methods: 
Gauss-Seidel and Newton-Raphson. Means for controlling power flows are discussed 
in Section 6.7. Sections 6.8 and 6.9 introduce sparsity techniques and a fast decoupled 
power flow method, while Section 6.10 discusses the dc power flow, and Section 6.11 
considers the power flow representation of wind turbine generators. Formulations for  
economic dispatch and optimal power flow are given in Sections 6.12 and 6.13
Since balanced three-phase steady-state conditions are assumed, this chap-
ter uses only positive-sequence networks. Also, all power flow equations and input/ 
output data are given in per unit (p.u.).
CASE STUDY
During this century, renewable energy sources, including solar and wind 
generation, are projected to substantially increase in the United States 
and worldwide. High penetrations of wind and solar generation can induce 
increased cycling of fossil-fueled power plants. The following case study 
examines the operational impacts of up to 35% wind and solar penetrations 
in the western United States. The primary impact of displacing fuel, as well 
as displacing fuel costs and emissions associated with fossil-fueled power 
plants, and the secondary impact of increased cycling, including costs and 
emissions associated with cycling of fossil-fueled power plants, are analyzed.
Finding Flexibility: Cycling the Conventional Fleet
By Debra Lew, Greg Brinkman, Nikhil Kumar,  
Steve Lefton, Gary Jordan, and Sundar Venkataraman
Adding new generation, load, or 
transmission to the grid changes 
the operation of the incumbent 
power system. Wind and solar 
generation plants are no differ-
ent, but their impact on the rest 

	
Case Study	
311
of the grid is exacerbated by the 
facts that wind and solar energy is 
nondispatchable and such genera-
tors produce variable output. And 
because wind and solar effectively 
bid into the market at very low or 
negative cost, they are preferred  
resources in the dispatch stack. 
They are used by system operators 
whenever possible, unless there are 
generator operating limits or trans-
mission constraints. 
At low wind and solar penetra-
tions or with low-variability resources 
(e.g., from high geographic diversity), 
the impact on the rest of the system 
may be small. But at high penetrations 
or with high-variability resources, 
wind and solar can induce increased 
cycling of the fossil-fueled fleet. This 
means that coal and gas generators 
may be asked to start up and shut 
down, ramp up and down, or operate 
at minimum generation levels more 
frequently. Cycling has impacts on 
emissions and on the wear-and-tear 
costs of the fossil-fueled fleet. 
Coal and gas generators tend 
to have additional emissions at start-
up and possibly also during ramps. 
Emissions are also affected by the 
output level of the generator. For ex-
ample, units tend to be less efficient at 
partial load, thus increasing the car-
bon dioxide (CO2) rates at minimum 
generation levels. 
Starts and ramps also lead 
to increased wear and tear on the 
unit 
components 
and 
systems. 
Temperature and pressure changes 
lead to stresses that can result in 
premature component failure, an 
increased need for maintenance and 
overhauls, and more frequent repairs.
The primary impact of a MWh 
of wind or solar energy is to dis-
place a MWh of other generation, 
typically 
fossil-fueled 
generation. 
Displacing a MWh of fossil-fueled 
generation displaces the costs and 
emissions associated with that fuel. 
But a secondary impact of this wind 
and solar energy can be to increase 
cycling of the fossil-fueled genera-
tors. As we have said, there are wear-
and-tear costs and emissions impacts 
associated with cycling. This raises 
two questions: how big are those 
secondary impacts, and do they sig-
nificantly negate the primary impacts 
that wind and solar energy bring to 
the table? Some recent analyses have 
claimed that wind actually increases 
overall emissions or that the avoided 
emissions from wind have been sig-
nificantly overestimated. 
Many integration studies have 
examined the impacts of high pene-
trations of wind power on particu-
lar systems and on the operation of 
the conventional fleet. Very few have 
considered cycling impacts in detail, 
partly because of the lack of data 
on cycling costs and emissions. This 
article describes the first study that 
combines detailed data on wear-
and-tear costs and the emissions 
impacts of cycling with operational 
simulations of the entire western 
U.S. grid with high penetrations of 
wind and solar to determine these 
impacts.
© 2013 IEEE. Reprinted, with permission, 
from Debra Lew, Greg Brinkman, Nikhil 
Kumar, Steve Lefton, Gary Jordan, and Sundar 
Venkataraman, “Finding Flexibility: Cycling the 
Conventional Fleet,” IEEE Power and Energy 
Magazine, November/December 2013, pp. 20–32.

312	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
The Western Wind and Solar  
Integration Study: Phase 2
In 2011, GE Energy, Intertek AIM, 
the National Renewable Energy Lab-
oratory (NREL), and RePPAE began 
the Western Wind and Solar Inte-
gration Study Phase 2 (WWSIS-2). 
This study built on the Phase 1 effort, 
which had examined up to 35% wind 
and solar penetrations in subregions 
in the Western Interconnection and 
mitigation options for integrating 
those resources. The conclusion of 
Phase 1 was that several changes in 
operating practices would be needed 
to integrate the wind and solar en-
ergy. The two most important of 
these were increased balancing area 
coordination and intrahour sched-
uling. There are many efforts being 
considered now in the western United 
States to implement these changes, 
including the creation of an energy 
imbalance market.
The goal of WWSIS-2 was to 
investigate the cycling impacts on 
the fossil-fueled fleet in detail and to 
determine if the wear-and-tear costs 
and the impacts on emissions signifi-
cantly reduced the benefits of wind 
and solar power. The point of this 
study was not to determine whether 
wind and solar plants should be built, 
but rather to understand what the  
impacts on the fossil-fueled fleet 
would be if wind and solar were built 
to a high penetration—especially the 
impacts on costs and emissions.
To do this, we simulated future 
power system operations under vary-
ing levels of wind and solar pene-
tration. Any simulation of the grid 
requires simplifying assumptions in 
order to develop a model that can be 
run with a reasonable amount of com-
puting power and time. Power system 
operation in a future scenario with 
high penetrations of wind and solar is 
likely to be different from today. Addi-
tionally, we did not have access to con-
fidential information such as bilateral 
contracts for power or transmission 
flows. The key differences between our 
model and today’s operation are:
●
●
We assumed a natural gas price 
that varied subregionally but 
averaged US$4.60/million Btu 
across the interconnection. We 
did not model a carbon tax or 
any renewable energy incen-
tive, such as the production tax 
credit.
●
●
We did not model bilateral con-
tracts for power or transmission 
flows but assumed a least-cost 
unit commitment and economic 
dispatch.
●
●
We modeled the nearly 40 stand- 
alone balancing authorities as 
20 zones, each holding its own 
contingency 
and 
flexibility 
reserves, with no hurdle rates 
between them.
New Data Sets
NREL analyzed measured emis-
sions from every power plant in the 
United States (using the Environ-
mental Protection Agency’s contin-
uous emissions-monitoring data) to 
determine incremental emissions due 
to a start or ramp as well as emissions 
rates from part loading. This analysis 

	
Case Study	
313
was used to create a unit-specific 
emissions data set for cycling and 
noncyclic operation. These unit- 
specific emissions were used in the 
detailed operational simulations. For 
display purposes, however, we have 
averaged the data by unit type to 
show high-level results.
Heat rates as a function of load 
were examined for combined cycle 
(CC), combustion turbine (CT), coal, 
and gas steam units. Table 1 shows 
the resulting penalties for operating 
at part load. This penalty is defined as 
the percentage increase in emissions 
rate (lb/MWh) when the average unit 
is operating at 50% of maximum ca-
pacity. CC units are the most efficient 
at full load and part load; CC and CT 
units have the most significant emis-
sions penalties for operating at 50% 
compared with 100% of maximum 
generation, however.
NOx emissions as a function 
of load were analyzed similarly and 
are shown in Table 1. Steam units 
(coal and gas) emit approximately 
an order of magnitude more NOx 
per MWh than gas CC units and 
CT units. Although part-load op-
eration leads to an NOx penalty for 
the CC and CT units, such operation 
was found to benefit the coal-fired 
steam units. For example, coal units 
operating at 50% were found to emit 
14% less NOx per MWh compared 
with full-loading operation; gas CC 
units were found to emit 22% more 
NOx per MWh at 50% load com-
pared with full load. Most of the 
NOx from all units is created from  
nitrogen in the combustion air (“ther-
mal” NOx), as opposed to in the fuel, 
so flame temperature is likely a pri-
mary driver of NOx emissions.
Because 
of 
the 
significant 
part-time usage of pollution control 
equipment for SO2, it was impossible 
to create part-load emission curves. 
Starting an off-line, fossil-fueled  
unit increases emissions for two 
reasons. First, it takes fuel to bring 
the unit online, and that fuel adds 
emissions without adding energy 
to the grid. Second, starts can in-
crease emissions rates because most 
pollution-control equipment does 
not become fully effective until flame 
and flue gas temperatures are in the 
proper range. Table 2 shows the start 
penalties for different types of units 
and different emissions. For exam-
ple, a coal unit emits 1.98 lb/MW of 
capacity of excess NOx during start-
up. This is equivalent to operating  
the unit at full load for approximately 
30 minutes. 
Ramping, or load-following, 
emissions were estimated in a simi-
lar way to the start-up emissions. A 
ramp was defined as an increase of 
output of 30% of maximum capacity 
(e.g., from 70% to 100% of maximum  
TABLE  1
Emissions penalty for part-load operation
Type  
of Unit
CO2 (%)
NOx (%)
Coal
5
214
Gas CC
9
22
Gas CT
18
15
Gas steam
6
214 

314	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
capacity). Table 3 presents generation- 
weighted averages. Ramping emis-
sions are much lower than start-
up emissions. The most significant 
ramping emission impact is the  
NOx emissions from coal units (equiv-
alent to 10–15 minutes of full-load  
operation). 
While emissions at various 
operating levels are reasonably well 
understood, many utilities in the 
western United States do not know 
the wear-and-tear costs of cycling 
their fossil-fueled units. First, they 
have not needed to know these costs 
because until very recently, many of 
these plants, which were designed as 
base load plants, were not cycled. 
Second, determining these costs is 
complex because cycling operation 
today may not have cost implications 
until several years in the future.
Intertek AIM studied wear-and-
tear costs from cycling for hundreds of 
fossil-fueled units around the world. 
For each unit, Intertek AIM had de-
termined a best fit and a lower-bound 
and upper-bound fit for cycling costs, 
where the bounds reflected the un-
certainty range for that plant. While 
specific data from those studies were 
confidential, aggregated data from 
those studies could be used as generic 
wear-and-tear costs for similar units 
that have not been studied. In this 
way, we were able to define variable 
operations and maintenance (VOM) 
costs for a hot, warm, and cold start; 
a ramp (typical); and for noncyclic 
operation for different types of plants. 
Table 4 shows the lower-bound costs 
for the different plant types. 
Upper-bound 
costs 
were 
also used in this study. The raw 
TABLE  2
Start-up emissions per MW of capacity
Type of Unit
Heat Input per Start 
(Millions Btu/MW)
NOx per Start  
(lb/MW)
SO2 per Start  
(lb/MW)
Coal
16.5
1.98
3.9
Gas CC
2.0
0.53
n/a
Gas CT
3.5
0.79
n/a
Gas steam
13.7
0.84
n/a
TABLE  3
Ramping emissions per MW of capacity
Type of Unit
Heat Input per Ramp 
(Millions Btu/MW)
NOx per Ramp  
(lb/MW)
SO2 per Ramp  
(lb/MW)
Coal
0.57
0.73
0.82
Gas CC
0.08
0.00
n/a
Gas CT
0.28
0.02
n/a
Gas steam
20.09
0.05
n/a

	
Case Study	
315
upper-bound data is confidential, 
however; only aggregated results can 
be presented here. All the cycling cost 
estimates used for this study are for 
typical units of various types; they 
are not unit-specific. The worst units 
for cycling are older base load power 
plants that should be retrofitted prior 
to significant cycling, using coun-
termeasures such as procedure and 
chemistry changes and hardware 
retrofits. Without these measures, cy-
cling could potentially lead to costly 
high-impact, low-probability events. 
Ongoing studies are examining the 
costs and benefits of retrofitting 
coal- and gas-fired power plants for 
increased flexibility.
Five Scenarios: Wind versus  
Solar
We used these new data sets in a com-
mercial production simulation tool, 
PLEXOS, to model grid operations 
of the Western Interconnection 
on a 5-minute time step, because 
wind and solar output varies within  
the hour. We used the Western 
Electricity 
Coordinating 
Council 
(WECC) Transmission Expansion 
Policy Planning Committee (TEPPC)  
2020 data set as a basis for our 
model, because it has been widely 
vetted among western U.S. utilities. 
A key change in assumptions was 
the natural gas price: the 2020 case 
average gas price was high, so we 
used the 2022 average gas price of 
US$4.60/million Btu.
We created five scenarios to ex-
amine increasing penetration levels 
of variable generation and also to 
compare wind with solar. Solar in-
cluded rooftop photovoltaics (PV), 
utilityscale PV, and concentrating 
solar power (CSP) with six hours of 
TABLE  4
Lower-bound median costs for cycling for various generation types
Small 
Subcritical 
Coal
Large 
Subcritical 
Coal
Super- 
Critical  
Coal
Gas, 
Combined 
Cycle
Gas,  
Large-Frame 
Combustion 
Turbine
Gas, Aero-
derivative 
Combustion 
Turbine
Gas, 
Steam
Hot start  
  (US$/MW)
94
59
54
35
32
19
36
Warm start  
  (US$/MW)
157
65
64
55
126
24
58
Cold start  
  (US$/MW)
147
105
104
79
103
32
75
Ramp  
  (US$/MW)
3.34
2.45
1.96
0.64
1.59
0.63
1.92
Noncyclic  
  operation 
(US$/MWh)
2.82
2.68
2.96
1.02
0.57
0.66
0.92

316	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
thermal storage. The scenarios were 
as follows:
●
●
No renewables: 0 MW wind, 0 
MW solar (0% wind, 0% solar)
●
●
TEPPC: 27,900 MW wind; 
7074 MW PV; 4352 MW CSP 
(9.4% wind, 3.6% solar)
●
●
High wind: 63,840 MW wind; 
20,064 MW PV; 6536 MW 
CSP (25% wind, 8% solar)
●
●
High mix: 43,118 MW wind; 
40,374 MW PV; 13,997 MW 
CSP (16.5% wind, 16.5% solar)
●
●
High solar: 23,357 MW wind; 
61,941 MW PV; 21,526 MW 
CSP (8% wind, 25% solar).
Penetration levels refer to en-
ergy, not capacity, and are penetra-
tion levels for the U.S. portion of 
the Western Interconnection only, 
because data for Canada and Mex-
ico were lacking. The scenario with-
out any renewables is an unrealistic 
one because existing wind and solar 
plants have been removed, but it was 
created to examine the impacts of all 
the wind and solar on the system.
Table 5 shows the penetration 
levels for each scenario. Wind and 
solar were nominally built to 33% 
energy penetration considering the 
historical weather patterns of 2004, 
2005, and 2006. The analysis was for 
the load and weather pattern of 2006, 
which had a typical solar profile but 
better wind than the average of the 
years 2004–2006. After curtailment 
(curtailment includes CSP stor-
age curtailment, some of which is 
built into the design of the genera-
tor), the 2006 penetration levels are 
30–33% of U.S. load in the Western 
Interconnection and 24–26% of to-
tal load in the Western Interconnec-
tion. Because Canada and Mexico 
have relatively small connections 
with the United States in the West-
ern Interconnection (compared with 
the total size of the U.S. portion), 
the impacts of renewables in the 
United States should be compared 
with the nominal 33% penetration 
numbers. Certain outputs, such as 
total change in emissions throughout 
the Western Interconnection, should 
be compared with the total Western 
Interconnection penetration levels 
(nominally 26%).
To bring resources to load, we 
expanded the capabilities of existing 
transmission paths by iterating pro-
duction cost runs until shadow prices 
across paths were within fixed, con-
sistent cutoff values.
Simulating Western Grid  
Operations
We committed base load units one 
day ahead using synthesized day- 
ahead wind and solar forecasts. We 
2006  
Penetration 
Level Across 
U.S. WECC 
After All 
Curtailment
2006  
Penetration 
Level Across 
All WECC 
After All 
Curtailment
TEPPC
13.2
10.5
High wind
32.6
26.0
High mix
32.2
25.6
High solar
30.2
24.1
TABLE  5
Renewable energy penetration levels

	
Case Study	
317
then committed gas units four hours 
ahead using synthesized four-hour-
ahead wind and solar forecasts. Fi-
nally, we ran a 5-minute real-time 
dispatch.
Balancing the system can be 
more challenging with higher pene-
trations of variable generation. We 
therefore increased operating re-
serves to accommodate the wind and 
solar, as shown in Table 6. We used 
dynamic reserve requirements, and 
Table 6 shows the average level of op-
erating reserves held throughout the 
year. We did not increase contingency 
reserves, which were held zonally, be-
cause neither wind nor solar plants 
were the single largest contingency. 
We adjusted other operating reserves, 
however, based on the wind and so-
lar output during each hour of the 
year. Regulating reserves were held 
equivalent to 1% of load plus 90% of 
the 10-minutes wind and solar vari-
ability. The high wind and solar pen-
etrations required up to 10% more 
regulating reserves than the scenario 
without any renewables. We also 
held a new reserve category—“flex-
ibility reserves”—to account for the 
60-minutes variability of wind and 
solar. These amounted to 1–3% of 
the installed capacity of the wind and 
solar generating facilities.
All of this work was overseen by 
a technical review committee consist-
ing of about 50 utility staff members, 
researchers, and power plant experts. 
They met approximately every other 
month to review inputs, assumptions, 
methodologies, and results.
System Operation with High 
Penetrations of Wind and Solar
We analyzed the 5-minute operational 
simulations, with a focus on cycling im-
pacts of the coal and gas units. All re-
sults reflect the specific characteristics 
of the generators and transmission of 
the Western Interconnection.
During the summer, load is 
high, and the impacts of variable 
generation on cycling are modest. In 
the spring and fall, however, load is 
low, and both wind and solar output 
are high, resulting in challenging op-
erational conditions. This makes for 
a low net load: net load is the load 
minus the variable generation. Five-
minute dispatch from the most chal-
lenging week of the year, as defined 
by the minimum net load condition, 
Scenario
Contingency 
(MW)
Regulation 
(MW)
Flexibility 
(MW)
No renewables
3361
1120
0
TEPPC
3361
1158
1193
High wind
3361
1236
2599
High mix
3361
1211
2035
High solar
3361
1207
1545
TABLE  6
Contingency, regulating, and flexibility reserves

318	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
is shown in Figure 1. At low pen-
etrations, as shown in Figure 1(a), 
there is little impact on the rest of the 
system except on the minimum net 
load day of March 29. For the high-
wind scenario, shown in Figure 1(b),  
however, most of the gas CC gen-
eration has been displaced; there is 
curtailment on March 29; and coal 
generation declines markedly over 
the week. In the high-solar scenario, 
shown in Figure 1(c), the high midday 
25 Mar.
26 Mar.
27 Mar.
28 Mar.
29 Mar.
(a)
(b)
(c)
30 Mar.
31 Mar.
1 Apr.
25 Mar.
26 Mar.
27 Mar.
28 Mar.
29 Mar.
30 Mar.
31 Mar.
1 Apr.
25 Mar.
26 Mar.
27 Mar.
28 Mar.
29 Mar.
30 Mar.
31 Mar.
1 Apr.
0
25
50
75
100
Generation (GW)
Curtailment
Wind
PV
CSP
Storage
Other
Gas CT
Gas CC
Hydro
Geothermal
Coal
Nuclear
Curtailment
Wind
PV
CSP
Storage
Other
Gas CT
Gas CC
Hydro
Geothermal
Coal
Nuclear
Curtailment
Wind
PV
CSP
Storage
Other
Gas CT
Gas CC
Hydro
Geothermal
Coal
Nuclear
0
25
50
75
100
Generation (GW)
0
25
50
75
100
Generation (GW)
Figure 1  Five-minute dispatch stacks for the (a) TEPPC, (b) high-wind, and (c) high- 
solar scenarios for a week in March. This week represented the most 
challenging week, as defined by the minimum net load condition.

	
Case Study	
319
output leads to curtailment and the 
backing down of coal generation on 
a nearly daily basis in the middle of 
the day. Gas CT units turn on in the 
evening to help meet the evening load 
peak.
Despite these challenges, we 
find that the system can operate and 
balance load and generation. There 
were no regulating reserve violations 
and very few contingency reserve vi-
olations. Figure 2 shows that wind 
and solar mostly displace gas CC 
generation. Displacement of coal 
increased with increasing penetra-
tions of wind because gas tends to 
be decommitted or backed down 
already at night, when there are 
high levels of wind. Curtailment of 
potential wind and solar generation 
on an annual basis was as much as 
5% in the high-penetration scenar-
ios. The high-mix scenario saw the 
least curtailment (1.6%). 
The biggest impact from wind 
and solar on cycling of other gener-
ation is the increased ramping of the 
coal units, as shown in Figure 3(b).  
Starts for coal units, as shown in 
Figure 3(a), change little. Gas CCs 
start more with low wind and so-
lar penetrations, but at high pene-
trations starts are similar to those 
in the scenario with no renewables. 
Gas CTs cycle more with high solar 
penetrations and less with high wind 
penetrations. 
Figure 4 depicts coal starts 
and ramps for the challenging week 
in March. At low penetrations, there 
is little change in coal commitments, 
and the coal units are typically run-
ning at or near full output. In the 
high-penetration scenarios, coal ca-
pacity is shut down approximately 
each week, and the coal is ramped 
up and down each day, especially 
with high penetrations of solar.
Emissions Reductions  
Are Significant
We find that wind- and solar-induced 
cycling offsets a very small percent-
age of the wind- and solar-induced 
emissions reductions of CO2, NOx, 
and SO2 across the Western Inter-
connection that are more than off-
set by the emissions reductions due 
HiSolar
HiMix
HiWind
TEPPC
0
25
50
75
100
Generation (%)
Scenario
Nuclear
Coal
Geothermal
Hydro
Gas CC
Gas CT
Other
Steam
Figure 2  Generation displaced by wind and solar, as com-
pared with the scenario without any renewables

320	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
20
10
0
Generation (GW)
Generation (GW)
Generation (GW)
Generation (GW)
20
10
25 Mar.
26 Mar.
27 Mar.
28 Mar.
29 Mar.
30 Mar.
31 Mar.
1 Apr.
25 Mar.
26 Mar.
27 Mar.
28 Mar.
29 Mar.
30 Mar.
31 Mar.
1 Apr.
0
20
10
0
20
10
0
(c)
(d)
25 Mar.
26 Mar.
27 Mar.
28 Mar.
29 Mar.
30 Mar.
31 Mar.
1 Apr.
25 Mar.
26 Mar.
27 Mar.
28 Mar.
29 Mar.
30 Mar.
31 Mar.
1 Apr.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4  Capacity committed (solid line) and dispatched (shaded area) for coal units 
during a sample week in March. The white area between the solid line 
and the shaded area illustrates how far the capacity is backed down (a) no 
renewables, (b) TEPPC, (c) high wind, and (d) high solar.
0
30,000
60,000
90,000
Number of Ramps
0
500
1000
Coal
Gas CC
Gas CT
Coal
Gas CC
(a)
(b)
Gas CT
Capacity Started (GW)
Scenario
NoRenew
TEPPC
HiWind
HiMix
HiSolar
Figure 3  (a) Capacity started and (b) total number of ramps for each plant type by 
scenario for one year

	
Case Study	
321
to the displacement of fossil-fueled 
generation. Compared with the sce-
nario without any renewables, the 
high-penetration scenarios (nomi-
nally 33% wind and solar in the U.S. 
portion of the Western Interconnec-
tion, resulting in 26% wind and solar 
across the interconnection) reduce 
CO2 by 29–34%, NOx by 16–22%, 
and SO2 by 14–24%, including the 
cycling impacts. CO2 emissions are 
reduced by a greater percentage 
than the wind and solar penetra-
tion level because wind and solar 
preferentially displace fossil-fueled 
generation, while typically the gen-
eration in the western United States 
is a combination of hydro, nuclear, 
fossil-fueled, and other renewable 
generation.
Figure 5(a) shows the total CO2 
emissions for each scenario. Ramp-
ing had no significant impact on CO2 
emissions, so those estimates are not 
shown. The start-up CO2 emissions 
(shown by the thin, dark line at the 
top of each bar) were negligible in  
all cases. Figure 5(b) shows the CO2 
emissions saved by each MWh of  
wind/solar. Avoided CO2—considering  
part-load, ramping, and start im-
pacts—was 1100–1190 lb/MWh of  
wind and solar produced in the high- 
penetration scenarios (see Table 7).  
CO2 emissions from starts were negli-
gible here as well. We also calculated 
the part-load penalty— which was the 
incremental CO2 emissions from part 
loading—as negligible. These values 
reflect aggregate emissions across the 
Western Interconnection; any spe-
cific plant might have lower or higher 
emissions than those shown here. 
From the fossil-fueled plant 
perspective, average CO2 emission 
rates of coal, CCs, and CTs change 
only slightly with wind and solar, as 
shown in Figure 6(a). Figure 6(b) 
0
200
400
600
800
TEPPCHiWind HiMix HiSolar
 CO2 Emissions (Billion lb)
0
500
1000
1500
HiWind
(a)
(b)
HiMix
HiSolar
CO2 Emission Savings (lb/MWh)
Full-Load Rate
Part-Load Adjustment
Start
Start
Operation
Figure 5  CO2 emissions by scenario: (a) absolute CO2 emissions for operation 
and starts and (b) CO2 emissions reductions compared with the scenario 
without renewables, separated into the constant emissions rate assump-
tion and adjustments for part load and starts. Ramping emissions are 
excluded because they have no significant impact on CO2 emissions.

322	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
shows that adding wind and solar can 
positively or negatively affect emis-
sions rates, depending on the plant 
type and scenario. For coal and CC 
units, wind and solar generally im-
proves emissions rates by up to 1%. 
The largest negative impact of wind- 
and solar-induced cycling is found in 
the high-wind scenario and for the 
CT units, where the emissions rate 
increases by 2%. This is on average; 
individual units might be more or less 
affected. 
Figure 7 shows the analysis for 
NOx emissions. There was a negligible 
impact of starts on NOx. Ramping 
Scenario
Avoided CO2 
(Ib/MWh)
Avoided NOx 
(Ib/MWh)
Avoided SO2 
(Ib/MWh)
High wind
1190
0.92
0.56
High mix
1150
0.80
0.44
High solar
1100
0.72
0.35
TABLE  7
Emissions avoided per MWh of wind and solar, considering part-
load, ramping, and start impacts. Part-load impacts were not 
included for SO2 because of inadequate data
−1
0
1
2
 CO2 Emissions Rate Change (%)
Coal
Gas CC
Gas CT
0
500
(a)
(b)
1000
1500
2000
 CO2 Emission Rate (lb/MWh)
Coal
Gas CC
Gas CT
NoRenew
TEPPC
HiWind
HiMix
HiSolar
Figure 6  (a) Average CO2 emission rates by plant type (defined as CO2 emissions 
divided by MWh of coal, CC, or CT generation) for each scenario and 
(b) changes in emissions rates as compared with the scenario without 
renewables

	
Case Study	
323
reduced the avoided NOx by 2–4%. 
This is shown in Figure 7(b) as a small 
negative contribution. Part-loading 
impacts, on the other hand, increased 
avoided NOx by 4–6%. On average, 
coal units in the western United 
States emit less NOx per MWh of 
generation at part load. The net im-
pact of considering cycling improved 
avoided NOx emissions from wind 
and solar by 1–2%.
Figure 8 shows the emissions 
analysis for SO2. Because there were 
inadequate data to create SO2 emis-
sion part-load curves, part-load 
impacts were not studied for SO2. 
Ramping impacts on avoided SO2 
were modest for the high-penetration  
scenarios, reducing avoided SO2 by 
2–5%. Start-up emissions affected 
the avoided emissions rates by signifi-
cantly less than 1%.
Wind- and Solar-Induced Cycling 
Operational Costs
The production simulation analysis 
undertaken in this study quantifies 
(1) the operational impacts of wind 
and solar displacing other generation 
and (2) the cycling costs induced by 
wind and solar. Operational costs 
(the industry term is production cost) 
include fuel, noncyclic VOM, and 
cycling costs. Cycling costs includes 
costs for starts, ramps and start- 
up fuel.
Under the scenarios studied, we 
find that the high wind and solar pen-
etrations affect the grid by displacing 
US$7 billion/year in fuel costs and 
inducing an increase of US$35–157 
million/year in cycling costs of fossil-
fueled plants. The overall production 
cost for each scenario is shown in  
Figure 9, with the lower- and up-
per-bound uncertainty ranges shown. 
0
300
600
900
TEPPC HiWind HiMix HiSolar
 NOx Emissions (Million lb)
0.00
0.50
0.25
0.75
1.00
HiWind
(a)
(b)
HiMix
HiSolar
NOx Emission Savings (lb/MWh)
Ramp
Start
Operation
Ramp
Full-Load Rate
Part-Load Adjustment
Start
Figure 7  NOX emissions by scenario: (a) absolute NOX emissions for operation, 
ramps, and starts, and (b) NOX emissions reductions compared with the 
scenario without renewables, separated into the constant emissions rate 
assumption and adjustments for part-load, ramps, and start impacts

324	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
At an average gas price of US$4.60/
million Btu, fuel dominates the pro-
duction cost savings as wind and solar 
penetration increases. It is important 
to note that production cost does not 
include the capital costs of renewable 
or thermal generation or transmission.
Figure 10 details the cycling 
costs of each scenario. The cycling 
costs range from about US$270 mil-
lion in the scenario without renew-
ables, using lower-bound costs, to 
about US$800 million in the high- 
solar scenario, using upper-bound 
0
200
400
600
TEPPC HiWind HiMix HiSolar
 SO2 Emissions (Million lb)
0.0
0.2
0.4
HiWind
(a)
(b)
HiMix
HiSolar
SO2 Emission Savings (lb/MWh)
Ramp
Start
Operation
Ramp
Start
Operation
Figure 8  SO2 emissions by scenario: (a) absolute SO2 emissions for operation, 
ramping, and starts and (b) SO2 emission reductions compared with the 
scenario without renewables, separated into the constant emissions 
rate assumption and adjustments for ramps, and start impacts. Part-load 
impacts were not studied because of inadequate data.
NoRenew TEPPC
HiWind
HiMix
HiSolar
NoRenew TEPPC
HiWind
(a)
(b)
HiMix
HiSolar
0
5
10
15
Production Cost (Billion US$)
Component
Ramping VOM
Start-Up Fuel
Start-Up VOM
Noncyclic VOM
Fuel
0
5
10
15
Production Cost (Billion US$)
Figure 9  Production cost for each scenario showing the (a) lower-bound and  
(b) upper-bound cycling costs. These costs do not include capital costs  
of renewable or thermal generation or transmission.

	
Case Study	
325
cycling costs. Interestingly, the high-
mix scenario has a higher wind and 
solar penetration but lower cycling 
costs than the TEPPC scenario. 
In these scenarios, going from no 
wind and solar penetration to 13% 
nominal wind and solar penetra-
tion induces higher cycling costs 
than going from 13% to 33% penet­
ration. On a per-MWh-of-fossil- 
fueled-generation basis, the increased 
cycling costs (compared with the sce-
nario without any renewables) are 
US$0.18–0.44/MWh, US$0.52–1.24/ 
MWh, 
US$0.47–1.14/MWh, 
and 
US$0.50–1.28/MWh for the TEPPC, 
high-wind, high-mix, and high-solar 
scenarios, respectively. The ranges 
represent the uncertainty range in 
the cycling cost inputs.
Figure 11 shows the lower- 
bound costs from the perspective of 
a coal, gas CC, or gas CT unit, in 
terms of cycling costs per MWh of 
that unit’s generation. Must-run gas 
CT units were excluded from this 
plot, as they skew the results. Cycling  
costs for coal increase modestly with 
high penetrations of wind and so-
lar. Cycling costs for gas CC units 
increase significantly with increased 
wind and solar penetration. But the 
largest cycling costs (per MWh) are 
borne by the gas CT units, which  
are operated as peakers and cycle 
the most. Interestingly, gas CT units 
see lower cycling costs in the TEPPC 
scenario than in the scenario with-
out any renewables at all. And in 
the high-wind scenario, their cycling 
costs are similar to the scenario with-
out renewables.
These cycling costs are compa-
rable to the noncyclic VOM of ap-
proximately US$2/MWh. The impact  
of wind and solar on the economic 
viability of a fossil-fueled plant can 
be significant if that plant’s energy 
production is displaced by wind and 
solar, its revenue is reduced, and it 
now bears an increased cycling cost. 
That fossil-fueled plant may still be 
needed to help balance the system 
or provide power on peak demand 
NoRenew TEPPC
HiWind
HiMix
HiSolar
NoRenew TEPPC
HiWind
(a)
(b)
HiMix
HiSolar
0
200
400
800
600
Cycling Cost (Million US$)
0
200
400
800
600
Cycling Cost (Million US$)
Component
Ramping VOM
Start-Up Fuel
Start-Up VOM
Figure 10  Production cost components resulting from cycling, showing the (a) 
lower-bound and (b) upper-bound wear-and-tear costs for each scenario. 
Cost com­ponents have been broken down into starts, start fuel, and 
ramping costs.

326	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
days. This raises a host of market 
and policy issues that require future 
analysis.
We 
performed 
a 
sensitiv-
ity analysis on the gas price to see 
if halving the price (to US$2.30/
million Btu) or doubling it (to 
US$9.60/million Btu) significantly 
changed results. The US$9.60 gas 
price had little effect on operations. 
The US$2.30 gas price led to more 
gas usage and less coal usage, regard-
less of renewables on the system. 
The type of generation displaced by 
renewables was very similar for the 
three gas price estimates. Interest-
ingly, the impact of wind and solar 
in the very low and very high gas 
price scenarios is to reduce overall 
cycling cost, because they displace 
starts for various unit types. The 
increase in cycling costs per MWh 
generated at fossil-fueled plants was 
similar in all the gas price scenarios. 
Units with increased cycling, how-
ever, will have a higher US$/MWh 
cost of generation and will proba-
bly see an increase in forced outage 
rates if adjustments to maintenance 
spending are not made.
An examination of the cycling 
impacts from a system perspective in 
Figure 12 shows the change in pro-
duction cost (operational cost, not 
including capital or power purchase 
agreement costs) for each scenario 
as compared with the scenario with-
out renewables. The primary opera-
tional impact of wind and solar is to 
displace a large amount of fuel cost 
(shown by the negative orange bars) 
and a small amount of noncyclic 
VOM (small negative blue bars). At 
this gas price (US$4.60/million Btu), 
the secondary impact of wind and 
solar is to incur the startup VOM, 
start-up fuel, and ramping VOM 
shown by the small positive bars. 
While it is important to remember 
that these operational costs do not 
include the capital costs of any gen-
erator or transmission, one can see 
0
5
10
NoRenew
TEPPC
HiWind
HiMix
HiSolar
NoRenew
TEPPC
HiWind
HiMix
HiSolar
NoRenew
TEPPC
HiWind
HiMix
HiSolar
Cycling Cost (US$/MWh)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Component
Ramping VOM
Start-Up Fuel
Start-Up VOM
0
5
10
Cycling Cost (US$/MWh)
0
5
10
Cycling Cost (US$/MWh)
Figure 11  Lower-bound cycling cost for (a) coal, (b) gas CC units, and (c) gas CTs 
(excluding the must-run CTs). The total, system wide, lower-bound cycling 
costs were disaggregated by plant type and divided by MWh of generation 
for that plant type.

	
Case Study	
327
that the cycling costs are a small 
fraction of the costs of the fuel dis-
placed. This cycling impact offsets 
the production cost reduction of 
wind and solar by US$0.14–0.67 per 
MWh of wind and solar generated. 
The net reduction in production 
cost compared with the scenario 
without renewables, including these 
cycling impacts, is approximately 
US$30 per MWh of wind and solar 
generated.
Wind Dominates Uncertainty, 
and Solar Dominates Variability
This study took advantage of re-
cent advances in simulating large PV 
plants that allowed a comparison of 
the impacts of wind and solar on the 
grid. We conducted statistical analysis 
of variability and uncertainty (fore-
cast error) to look at these impacts. 
We looked at extreme ramping events 
on an hourly and 5-minute basis and 
found that extreme ramping events 
were dominated by sunrise and sun-
set events. However, because we know 
when sunrise and sunset occur and, in 
fact, the path of the sun through the 
sky each day, we can plan for these 
events. When the solar diurnal vari-
ability is removed, PV variability due 
to weather is found to be similar to 
wind variability.
Statistical analysis of forecast 
errors showed that our day-ahead 
forecast errors were driven by wind un-
certainty. Day-ahead solar forecasts 
were more accurate than day-ahead 
wind forecasts. Because forecast ac-
curacy improves as one approaches 
the time in question, the four-hour-
ahead forecasts were much more 
accurate, as shown in Figure 13. We 
used a four-hour-ahead unit commit-
ment to commit gas units, similar to  
operations of the California Indepen-
dent System Operator. This helped 
mitigate the uncertainty of the wind 
day-ahead forecasts.
TEPPC
HiWind
HiMix
HiSolar
−30
−20
−10
0
Production Cost Change (US$/MWh)
Component
Ramping VOM
Start-Up Fuel
Start-Up VOM
Noncyclic VOM
Fuel
TEPPC
HiWind
(b)
(a)
HiMix
HiSolar
−30
−20
−10
0
Production Cost Change (US$/MWh)
Figure 12 The change in production cost for each scenario relative to the sce-
nario without renewables, per MWh of wind and solar generation, for 
the (a) lower-bound and (b) upper-bound wear-and-tear costs. Produc-
tion costs do not include any fixed capital or power purchase agree-
ment costs.

328	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
Conclusions
For the first time, we have con-
ducted an operational simulation of 
wind and solar impacts across the 
entire Western Interconnection us-
ing detailed data on cycling costs 
and cycling emissions. Our three 
high-penetration scenarios model a 
nominal 33% wind and solar pene-
tration across the U.S. portion of the 
Western Interconnection, resulting 
in 26% nominal penetration across 
the entire Western Interconnection. 
We examine the primary operational 
impact of wind and solar in displac-
ing fuel (and the costs and emissions 
associated with the fuel), along with 
the secondary impact of increased 
cycling (and the costs and emissions 
associated with cycling).
TEPPC
HiWind
HiMix
HiSolar
TEPPC
HiWind
HiMix
HiSolar
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Density
Density
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0
Wind and PV Four-Hour-Ahead Forecast Error (MW)
(b)
212,000 29000 26000 23000
0
3000
6000
9000
12,000
212,000 29000 26000 23000
0
3000
6000
9000
12,000
Wind and PV Day-Ahead Forecast Error (MW)
(a)
Figure 13  (a) Day-ahead and (b) four-hour-ahead wind and PV forecast errors for 
each scenario

	
Case Study	
329
We found that wind- and solar- 
induced cycling has a small impact 
on avoided emissions of CO2, NOx, 
and SO2. In our high-penetration 
scenarios, cycling reduces avoided 
CO2 emissions by 0.2%, improves 
avoided NOx by 1–2%, and lessens 
avoided SO2 by up to 5%. The net 
result is that wind and solar in our 
high-penetration scenarios reduce 
CO2 by 29–34%, NOx by 16–22%, 
and SO2 by 14–24%, inclusive of cy-
cling impacts.
We also found that the sec-
ondary impact of increased cycling 
incurs costs that are a small fraction 
of the displaced fuel costs. In our 
high-penetration scenarios, wind 
and solar induce additional annual 
cycling costs of US$35–157 million. 
This same wind and solar also dis-
places about US$7 billion annually 
in fuel costs. In the high-penetration 
scenarios, the increase in cycling cost 
for the average fossil-fueled plant 
ranges from US$0.47–1.14 per MWh 
of fossil-fueled generation in the 
high-mix scenario to US$0.50–1.28  
per MWh in the high-solar scenario. 
These additional costs, combined 
with reduced generation and reve-
nue, beg the question of market and 
policy changes that may be required 
in a potential future with high levels 
of wind and solar energy.
For Further Reading
GE Energy. (2010). “Western wind 
and solar integration study.” NREL. 
Golden, CO. NREL/SR-550-47434 
[Online]. Available: http://www.nrel 
.gov/docs/fy10osti/47434.pdf.
N. Kumar, P. Besuner, S. Lefton,  
D. Agan, and D. Hilleman. (2012). 
“Power plant cycling costs.” Intertek 
AIM. NREL. Sunnyvale, CA, Golden,  
CO. NREL/SR-5500-55433 [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.nrel.gov/docs 
/fy12osti/55433.pdf.
D. Lew, G. Brinkman, E. Ibanez, 
A. Florita, M. Heaney, B.-M. Hodge, 
M. Hummon, G. Stark, J. King,  
S. Lefton, N. Kumar, D. Agan, G. 
Jordan, and S. Venkataraman. (2013). 
“The western wind and solar integra-
tion study phase 2.” NREL. Golden, 
CO. NREL/TP-5500-55588. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.nrel.gov/docs 
/fy13osti/55588.pdf.
M. Milligan, K. Clark, J. King, 
B. Kirby, T. Guo, and G. Liu. (2013). 
“Examination of potential benefits 
of an energy imbalance market in the 
western interconnection.” NREL. 
Golden, CO. NREL/TP-5500-57115. 
[Online]. Available: http://www.nrel 
.gov/docs/fy13osti/57115.pdf.
Biographies
Debra Lew is with the National Re-
newable Energy Laboratory, Golden, 
Colorado.
Greg Brinkman is with the National Re-
newable Energy Laboratory, Golden, 
Colorado.
Nikhil Kumar is with Intertek, Sun-
nyvale, California.
Steve Lefton is with Intertek and 
Global Utility Consultants LLC, 
Sunnyvale, California.
Gary Jordan is with GE Energy Con-
sulting, Schenectady, New York.
Sundar Venkataraman is with GE En-
ergy Consulting, Phoenix, Arizona.  ■

330	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
6.1  Direct Solutions to Linear Algebraic 
Equations: Gauss Elimination
Consider the following set of linear algebraic equations in matrix format:
3
A11
A12
Á
A1N
A21
A22
Á
A2N
o
o
AN1
AN2
Á
ANN4
 3
x1
x2
o
xN4
 5 3
y1
y2
o
yN4

(6.1.1)
or
Ax 5 y
(6.1.2)
where x and y are N vectors and A is an N 3 N square matrix. The components of 
x, y, and A may be real or complex. Given A and y, the objective is to solve for x. 
Assume the det(A) is nonzero, so a unique solution to (6.1.1) exists.
The solution x can be obtained easily when A is an upper triangular matrix 
with nonzero diagonal elements. Then (6.1.1) has the form
3
A11
A12 Á
A1N
0
A22 Á
A2N
o
0
0 Á
AN21, N21
AN21,N
0
0 Á 0
ANN4
 3
x1
x2
o
xN21
xN4
 5 3
y1
y2
o
yN21
yN4

(6.1.3)
Since the last equation in (6.1.3) involves only xN,
xN 5 yN
ANN

(6.1.4)
After xN is computed, the next-to-last equation can be solved:
xN21 5
yN21 2 AN21, NxN
AN21, N21

(6.1.5)
In general, with xN, xN21, …, xk11 already computed, the kth equation can be solved as
xk 5
yk 2 o
N
n5k11
Aknxn
Akk  k 5 N, N 2 1, Á, 1
(6.1.6)
This procedure for solving (6.1.3) is called back substitution.
If A is not an upper triangular, (6.1.1), it can be transformed to an equiv-
alent equation with an upper triangular matrix. The transformation, called Gauss 

	
Section 6.1 Direct Solutions to Linear Algebraic Equations: Gauss Elimination	
331
elimination, is described by the following (N 2 1) steps. During Step 1, use the first 
equation in (6.1.1) to eliminate x1 from the remaining equations. That is, Equation 
1 is multiplied by An1∙A11 and then subtracted from equation n, for n 5 2, 3, …, N. 
After completing Step 1, we have
A11
A12
Á
A1N
0
1A22 2 A21
A11
A122
Á 1A2N 2 A21
A11
A1N2
0
1A32 2 A31
A11
A122
Á 1A3N 2 A31
A11
A1N2
o
o
o
0 1AN2 2 AN1
A11
A122
Á 1ANN 2 AN1
A11
A1N2
      3
x1
x2
x3
o
xN4
5     
y1
y2 2 A21
A11
y1
y3 2 A31
A11
y1
o
yN 2 AN1
A11
y1

(6.1.7)
Equation (6.1.7) has the following form:
3
A11
(1)
A(1)
12
Á
A1N
(1)
0
A(1)
22
Á
A2N
(1)
0
A(1)
32
Á
A3N
(1)
o
o
o
0
A(1)
N2
Á
A(1)
NN4
  3
x1
x2
x3
o
xN4
 5 3
y1
(1)
y2
(1)
y3
(1)
o
yN
(1)4

(6.1.8)
where the superscript (1) denotes Step 1 of the Gauss elimination.
During Step 2, use the second equation in (6.1.8) to eliminate x2 from the re-
maining (third, fourth, fifth, and so on) equations. That is, Equation 2 is multiplied 
by As1d
n2yAs1d
22 and subtracted from equation n, for n 5 3, 4, …, N.
After Step 2, there is
 As2d
11
As2d
12
As2d
13
Á
As2d
1N
0
A22
s2d
A23
s2d
Á
A2N
s2d
0
0
As2d
33
Á
A3N
s2d
0
0
A43
s2d
Á
As2d
4N
o
o
o
o
0
0
As2d
N3
Á
As2d
NN
       
x1
x2
x3
x4
o
xN
   5    
y1
s2d
y2
s2d
y3
s2d
y4
s2d
o
ys2d
N

(6.1.9)
3
4
3 4
3
43 4 3 4

332	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
During step k, start with Ask21dx 5 ysk21d. The first k of these equations, already trian-
gularized, are left unchanged. Also, equation k is multiplied by Ask21d
nk
yAsk21d
kk
 and then 
subtracted from equation n, for n 5 k 11, k 1 2, …, N.
After (N 2 1) steps, the equivalent equation is A(N21)x 5 y(N21), where A(N21) is 
upper triangular.
Gauss elimination and back substitution: direct solution  
to linear algebraic equations
Solve
3
10
  5
2
  94 3
x1
x24 5 3
6
34
using Gauss elimination and back substitution.
SOLUTION
Since N 5 2 for this example, there is (N 2 1) 5 1 Gauss elimination step.  
Multiplying the first equation by A21∙A11 5 2∙10 and then subtracting from the 
second,
3
10
   5
0
  9 2 2
10s5d4
 3
x1
x24
 5 3
6
3 2 2
10s6d4
or
3
10
  5
0
  84 3
x1
x24 5 3
6
1.84
which has the form A(1)x 5 y(1) where A(1) is upper triangular. Now, using back 
substitution, (6.1.6) gives, for k 5 2:
x2 5 ys1d
2
As1d
22
5 1.8
8 5 0.225
and, for k 5 1,
x1 5 ys1d
1 2 As1d
12x2
As1d
11
5 6 2 s5ds0.225d
10
5 0.4875
EXAMPLE 6.1

	
Section 6.1 Direct Solutions to Linear Algebraic Equations: Gauss Elimination	
333
Gauss elimination: triangularizing a matrix
Use Gauss elimination to triangularize
3
2
3
21
24
6
8
10
12
144 3
x1
x2
x34 5 3
5
7
94
SOLUTION 
There are (N 2 1) 5 2 Gauss elimination steps. During Step 1, subtract A21∙A11 5 
24∙2 5 22 times Equation 1 from Equation 2, and subtract A31∙A11 5 10∙2 5 5 
times Equation 1 from Equation 3, to give
3
2
3
21
0
6 2 s22ds3d
8 2 s22ds21d
0
12 2 s5ds3d
14 2 s5ds21d4 3
x1
x2
x34 5 3
5
7 2 s22ds5d
9 2 s5ds5d4
or
3
2
3
21
0
12
6
0
23
194 3
x1
x2
x34 5 3
5
17
2164
which is A(1)x 5 y(1). During Step 2, subtract As1d
32yAs1d
22 5 23∙12 5 20.25 times 
Equation 2 from Equation 3, to give
3
2
3
21
0
12
6
0
0
19 2 s2.25ds6d4 3
x1
x2
x34 5 3
5
17
2 16 2 s 2 .25ds17d4
or
3
2
3
21
0
12
6
0
0
20.54 3
x1
x2
x34 5 3
5
17
2 11.754
which is triangularized. The solution x now can be easily obtained via back  
substitution.
EXAMPLE 6.2

334	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
Computer storage requirements for Gauss elimination and back substitution 
include N2 memory locations for A and N locations for y. If there is no further need 
to retain A and y, then A(k) can be stored in the location of A, and y(k), as well as the 
solution x, can be stored in the location of y. Additional memory is also required for 
iterative loops, arithmetic statements, and working space.
Computer time requirements can be evaluated by determining the number of 
arithmetic operations required for Gauss elimination and back substitution. One 
can show that Gauss elimination requires (N3 2 N)∙3 multiplications, (N)(N 2 1)∙2 
divisions, and (N3 2 N)∙3 subtractions. Also, back substitution requires (N)(N 2 1)∙2 
multiplications, N divisions, and (N)(N 2 1)∙2 subtractions. Therefore, for very 
large N, the approximate computer time for solving (6.1.1) by Gauss elimination 
and back substitution is the time required to perform N3∙3 multiplications and N3∙3 
subtractions.
For example, consider a digital computer with a 2 3 1029 s multiplication time 
and 1 3 1029 s addition or subtraction time. Solving N 5 10,000 equations would 
require
1
3N3s2 3 1029d 1 1
3N3s1 3 1029d 5 1
3 s10,000d3s3 3 1029d 5 1000   s
approximately plus some additional bookkeeping time for indexing and managing 
loops.
Since the power flow problem often involves solving power systems with tens 
of thousands of equations, by itself Gauss elimination would not be a good solu-
tion. However, for matrixes that have relatively few nonzero elements, known as 
sparse matrices, special techniques can be employed to significantly reduce computer 
storage and time requirements. Since all large power systems can be modeled using 
sparse matrices, these techniques are briefly introduced in Section 6.8.
6.2  Iterative Solutions to Linear Algebraic 
Equations: Jacobi and Gauss-Seidel
A general iterative solution to (6.1.1) proceeds as follows. First select an initial guess 
x(0). Then use
x(i 11) 5 g[x(i)]    i 5 0, 1, 2, …
(6.2.1)
where x(i) is the ith guess and g is an N vector of functions that specify the iter-
ation method. Continue this procedure until the following stopping condition is 
satisfied, as
*
xk(i 1 1) 2 xk(i)
xk(i)
* , «    for all k 5 1, 2, …, N
(6.2.2)
where xk(i) is the kth component of x(i) and « is a specified tolerance level.

	
Section 6.2 Iterative Solutions to Linear Algebraic Equations: Jacobi and Gauss-Seidel	
335
The following questions are pertinent:
1.	 Will the iteration procedure converge to the unique solution?
2.	 What is the convergence rate (how many iterations are required)?
3.	 When using a digital computer, what are the computer storage and time 
requirements?
These questions are addressed for two specific iteration methods: Jacobi and Gauss-
Seidel.* The Jacobi method is obtained by considering the kth equation of (6.1.1), 
as follows:
yk 5 Ak1x1 1 Ak2x2 1 Á 1 Akkxk 1 Á 1 AkNxN
(6.2.3)
Solving for xk,
xk 5 1
Akk
 f yk 2 sAk1x1 1 Á 1 Ak,k21xk21 1 Ak,k11xk11 1 Á 1 AkNxNdg
5 1
Akk3yk 2 o
k21
n51
Aknxn 2 o
N
n5k11
Aknxn4
(6.2.4)
The Jacobi method uses the “old” values of x(i) at iteration i on the right side of 
(6.2.4) to generate the “new” value xk(i 1 1) on the left side of (6.2.4). That is,
xksi 1 1d 5 1
AkkFyk 2 o
k21
n51
Aknxnsid 2 o
N
n5k11
AknxnsidGk 5 1, 2, Á , N
(6.2.5)
The Jacobi method given by (6.2.5) also can be written in the following matrix format:
x(i 1 1) 5 Mx(i) 1 D21y
(6.2.6)
where
M 5 D21(D 2 A)
(6.2.7)
and
D 53
A11
0
0
Á
0
0
A22
0
Á
0
0
o
o
o
o
0
0
0
0
Á
ANN4

(6.2.8)
For Jacobi, D consists of the diagonal elements of the A matrix.
The Gauss-Seidel method is given by
xksi 1 1d 5 1
Akk
 3yk 2 o
k21
n51
Aknxnsi 1 1d 2 o
N
n5k11
Aknxnsid4
(6.2.9)
*The Jacobi method is also called the Gauss method.

336	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
Jacobi method: iterative solution to linear algebraic  
equations
Solve Example 6.1 using the Jacobi method. Start with x1(0) 5 x2(0) 5 0 and 
continue until (6.2.2) is satisfied for « 5 1024.
SOLUTION
From (6.2.5) with N 5 2,
k 5 1 x1si 1 1d 5 1
A11
 fy1 2 A12x2sidg 5 1
10 f6 2 5x2sidg
k 5 2 x2si 1 1d 5 1
A22
 fy2 2 A21x1sidg 5 1
9 f3 2 2x1sidg
Alternatively, in matrix format using (6.2.6) through (6.2.8),
D21 5 F10
0
0
9G
21
53
1
10
0
0
1
94
M 53
1
10
0
0
1
94
 3 
0
25
22
04 53
0
2 5
10
22
9
04
3
x1si 1 1d
x2si 1 1d4
 53
0
2 5
10
22
9
04
 3
x1sid
x2sid4
 13
1
10
0
0
1
94
 3
6
34
 
The above two formulations are identical. Starting with x1 (0) 5 x2(0) 5 0, the 
iterative solution is given in the following table:
Jacobi
i
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
x1(i )
0
0.60000
0.43334
0.50000
0.48148
0.48889
0.48683
0.48766
0.48743
0.48752
0.48749
x2(i )
0
0.33333
0.20000
0.23704
0.22222
0.22634
0.22469
0.22515
0.22496
0.22502
0.22500
As shown, the Jacobi method converges to the unique solution obtained in  
Example 6.1. 
EXAMPLE 6.3

	
Section 6.2 Iterative Solutions to Linear Algebraic Equations: Jacobi and Gauss-Seidel	
337
Comparing (6.2.9) with (6.2.5), note that Gauss-Seidel is similar to Jacobi except that 
during each iteration, the “new” values, xn(i 1 1), for n , k are used on the right side 
of (6.2.9) to generate the “new” value xk(i 1 1) on the left side.
The Gauss-Seidel method of (6.2.9) also can be written in the matrix format of 
(6.2.6) and (6.2.7), where
D 53
A11
0
0
Á
0
A21
A22
0
Á
0
o
o
o
AN1
AN2
Á
ANN4

(6.2.10)
For Gauss-Seidel, D in (6.2.10) is the lower triangular portion of A, whereas for  
Jacobi, D in (6.2.8) is the diagonal portion of A.
The convergence criterion is satisfied at the 10th iteration, since
*
x1s10d 2 x1s9d
x1s9d
* 5*
0.48749 2 0.48752
0.48749
* 5 6.2 3 1025 , «
and
*
x2s10d 2 x2s9d
x2s9d
* 5*
0.22500 2 0.22502
0.22502
* 5 8.9 3 1025 , «
Gauss-Seidel method: iterative solution to linear  
algebraic equations
Rework Example 6.3 using the Gauss-Seidel method. 
SOLUTION 
From (6.2.9),
k 5 1     x1si 1 1d 5 1
A11
 f y1 2 A12x2sidg 5 1
10 f6 2 5x2sidg
k 5 2     x2si 1 1d 5 1
A22
 f y2 2 A21x1si 1 1dg 5 1
9 f3 2 2x1si 1 1dg
EXAMPLE 6.4
(Continued )

338	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
Using this equation for x1si 1 1d, x2si 1 1d also can be written as
x2si 1 1d 5 1
9 53 2 2
10 f6 2 5x2sidg6
Alternatively, in matrix format, using (6.2.10), (6.2.6), and (6.2.7),
D21 53
10
0
2
94
21
53
1
10
0
2 2
90
1
94
M 53
1
10
0
2 2
90
1
94
 3
0
25
0
04 53
0
21
2
0
1
94
3
x1si 1 1d
x2si 1 1d4
53
0
21
2
0
1
94
 3
x1sid
x2sid4
13
1
10
0
2 2
90
1
94
 3
6
34
These two formulations are identical. Starting with x1(0) 5 x2(0) 5 0, the solution 
is given in the following table:
Gauss-Seidel
I
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
x1(i )
0
0.60000
0.50000 
0.48889 
0.48765 
0.48752 
0.48750
x2(i )
0
0.20000 
0.22222 
0.22469 
0.22497 
0.22500 
0.22500
For this example, Gauss-Seidel converges in 6 iterations, compared to 10 iterations 
with Jacobi.
The convergence rate is faster with Gauss-Seidel for some A matrices, but 
faster with Jacobi for other A matrices. In some cases, one method diverges while 
the other converges. In other cases both methods diverge, as illustrated by the next 
example.

	
Section 6.2 Iterative Solutions to Linear Algebraic Equations: Jacobi and Gauss-Seidel	
339
If any diagonal element Akk equals zero, then Jacobi and Gauss-Seidel are  
undefined, because the right-hand sides of (6.2.5) and (6.2.9) are divided by Akk. 
Also, if any one diagonal element has too small a magnitude, these methods will 
diverge. In Examples 6.3 and 6.4, Jacobi and Gauss-Seidel converge, since the diag-
onals (10 and 9) are both large; in Example 6.5, however, the diagonals (5 and 2) are 
small compared to the off-diagonals, and the methods diverge.
Divergence of Gauss-Seidel method
Using the Gauss-Seidel method with x1(0) 5 x2(0) 5 0, solve
3
5
10
9
243
x1
x24 53
6
34
SOLUTION 
Note that these equations are the same as those in Example 6.1, except that x1 and 
x2 are interchanged. Using (6.2.9),
k 5 1        x1si 1 1d 5 1
A11
 f y1 2 A12x2sidg 5 1
5 f6 2 10x2sidg
k 5 2        x2si 1 1d 5 1
A22
 f y2 2 A21x1si 1 1dg 5 1
2 f3 2 9x1si 1 1dg
  
Successive calculations of x1 and x2 are shown in the following table:
Gauss-Seidel
i
0
1
2
3
4
5
x1(i )
0
1.2
9
79.2
711
6397
x2(i )
0
23.9
239
2354.9
23198
228,786
The unique solution by matrix inversion is
3
x1
x24 53
5
10
9
24
21 3
6
34 5 21
80  3
2
210
29
54 3
6
34 53
0.225
0.48754
As shown, Gauss-Seidel does not converge to the unique solution; instead it  
diverges. Jacobi also diverges for this example.
EXAMPLE 6.5

340	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
In general, convergence of Jacobi or Gauss-Seidel can be evaluated by rec-
ognizing that (6.2.6) represents a digital filter with input y and output x(i). The 
z-transform of (6.2.6) may be employed to determine the filter transfer function and 
its poles. The output x(i) converges if and only if all the filter poles have magnitudes 
less than 1 (see Problems 6.16 and 6.17).
Rate of convergence is also established by the filter poles. Fast convergence is 
obtained when the magnitudes of all the poles are small. In addition, experience with 
specific A matrices has shown that more iterations are required for Jacobi and Gauss-
Seidel as the dimension N increases.
Computer storage requirements for Jacobi include N2 memory locations for 
the A matrix and 3N locations for the vectors y, x(i), and x(i 1 1). Storage space is 
also required for loops, arithmetic statements, and working space to compute (6.2.5). 
Gauss-Seidel requires N fewer memory locations, since for (6.2.9) the new value  
xk(i 1 1) can be stored in the location of the old value xk(i).
Computer time per iteration is relatively small for Jacobi and Gauss-Seidel. 
Inspection of (6.2.5) or (6.2.9) shows that N2 multiplications/divisions and N(N 2 1) 
subtractions per iteration are required [one division, (N 2 1) multiplications, and  
(N 2 1) subtractions for each k5 1, 2, …, N ]. But as was the case with Gauss elimi-
nation, if the matrix is sparse (i.e., most of the elements are zero), special sparse ma-
trix algorithms can be used to substantially decrease both the storage requirements 
and the computation time.
6.3  Iterative Solutions to Nonlinear  
Algebraic Equations: Newton-Raphson
A set of nonlinear algebraic equations in matrix format is given by
fsxd 53
 
f1sxd
f2sxd
o
fNsxd4
5 y
(6.3.1)
where y and x are N vectors and f(x) is an N vector of functions. Given y and f(x), 
the objective is to solve for x. The iterative methods described in Section 6.2 can be 
extended to nonlinear equations as follows. Rewriting (6.3.1).
0 5 y 2 f(x)
(6.3.2)
Adding Dx to both sides of (6.3.2), where D is a square N 3 N invertible matrix.
Dx 5 Dx 1 y 2 f(x)
(6.3.3)
Premultiplying by D21.
x 5 x 1 D21 [y 2 f(x)]
(6.3.4)
The old values x(i) are used on the right side of (6.3.4) to generate the new values  
x(i 1 1) on the left side. That is,

	
Section 6.3 Iterative Solutions to Nonlinear Algebraic Equations: Newton-Raphson 	
341
x(i 1 1) 5 x(i) 1 D21{y 2 f[x(i)]}
(6.3.5)
For linear equations, f(x) 5 Ax and (6.3.5) reduces to
x(i 1 1) 5 x(i) 1 D21 [y 2 Ax(z)] 5 D21(D 2 A)x(i) 1 D21y
(6.3.6)
which is identical to the Jacobi and Gauss-Seidel methods of (6.2.6). For nonlinear 
equations, the matrix D in (6.3.5) must be specified.
One method for specifying D, called Newton-Raphson, is based on the follow-
ing Taylor series expansion of f(x) about an operating point x0.
y 5 fsx0d 1 df
dx* x5x0
sx 2 x0d Á 
(6.3.7)
Neglecting the higher order terms in (6.3.7) and solving for x,
x 5 x0 13
df
dx* x 5 x04
21
fy 2 fsx0dg
(6.3.8)
The Newton-Raphson method replaces x0 by the old value x(i) and x by the new 
value x(i 1 1) in (6.3.8). Thus,
x(i 11) 5 x(i) 1 J21(i){y 2 f[x(i)]}
(6.3.9)
where
Jsid 5 df
dx*
x5xsid
5    
≠f1
≠x1
≠f1
≠x2
Á
≠f1
≠xN
≠f2
≠x1
≠f2
≠x2
Á
≠f2
≠xN
o
o
o
≠fN
≠x1
≠fN
≠x2
Á
≠fN
≠xN
   
x5xsid

(6.3.10)
The N 3 N matrix J(i), whose elements are the partial derivatives shown in (6.3.10), 
is called the Jacobian matrix. The Newton-Raphson method is similar to extended 
Gauss-Seidel, except that D in (6.3.5) is replaced by J(i) in (6.3.9).
3
4
Newton-Raphson method: solution to polynomial  
equations
Solve the scalar equation f(x) 5 y, where y 5 9 and f(x) 5 x2. Starting with x(0) 5 1,  
use (a) Newton-Raphson and (b) extended Gauss-Seidel with D 5 3 until (6.2.2) 
is satisfied for « 5 1024. Compare the two methods.
EXAMPLE 6.6
(Continued )

342	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
SOLUTION
a.  Using (6.3.10) with f(x) 5 x2,
Jsid 5 d
dx sx2d*
x5xsid
5 2x*
x5xsid
5 2xsid
Using J(i) in (6.3.9),
xsi 1 1d 5 xsid 1
1
2xsid f9 2 x2sidg
Starting with x(0) 5 1, successive calculations of the Newton-Raphson equation 
are shown in the following table.
Newton–Raphson
i
0
1
2
3
4
5
x (i )
1
5.00000
3.40000
3.02353
3.00009
3.00000
b.  Using (6.3.5) with D 5 3, the Gauss-Seidel method is
x(i 1 1) 5 x(i) 1 1
3 [9 2 x2(i)]
The corresponding Gauss-Seidel calculations are as follows:
Gauss-Seidel (D 5 3)
i
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
x (i )
1
3.66667
2.18519
3.59351
2.28908
3.54245
2.35945
As shown, Gauss-Seidel oscillates about the solution, slowly converging, 
whereas Newton-Raphson converges in five iterations to the solution x 5 3. Note 
that if x(0) is negative, Newton-Raphson converges to the negative solution x 5 23.  
Also, it is assumed that the matrix inverse J21 exists. Thus, the initial value  
x(0) 5 0 should be avoided for this example.
Newton-Raphson method: solution to nonlinear algebraic 
equations
Solve
3
x1 1 x2
x1x2 4 53
15
504        xs0d 53
4
94
EXAMPLE 6.7

	
Section 6.3 Iterative Solutions to Nonlinear Algebraic Equations: Newton-Raphson 	
343
Equation (6.3.9) contains the matrix inverse J21. Instead of computing J21, 
(6.3.9) can be rewritten as follows:
J(i)Dx(i) 5 Dy(i)
(6.3.11)
where
Dx(i) 5 x(i 11) 2 x(i)
(6.3.12)
and
Dy(i) 5 y 2 f[x(i)]
(6.3.13)
Use the Newton-Raphson method starting with the above x(0) and continue until 
(6.2.2) is satisfied with « 5 1024.
SOLUTION 
Using (6.3.10) with f1 5 (x1 1 x2) and f2 5 x1x2,
Jsid21 53
≠f1
≠x1
≠f1
≠x2
≠f2
≠x1
≠f2
≠x24
21
x5xsid
53
1
1
x2sid
x1sid4
21
53
x1sid
21
2x2sid
14
x1sid 2 x2sid
Using J(i)21 in (6.3.9),
3
x1si 1 1d
x2si 1 1d4 53
x1sid
x2sid4 13
x1sid
21
2x2sid
14
x1sid 2 x2sid
 3
15 2 x1sid 2 x2sid
50 2 x1sidx2sid 4
Writing the preceding as two separate equations,
x1si 1 1d 5 x1sid 1 x1sidf15 2 x1sid 2 x2sidg 2 f50 2 x1sidx2sidg
x1sid 2 x2sid
x2si 1 1d 5 x2sid 1 2x2sidf15 2 x1sid 2 x2sidg 1 f50 2 x1sidx2sidg
x1sid 2 x2sid
Successive calculations of these equations are shown in the following table.
Newton-Raphson
i
0
1
2
3
4
x1 (i )
4
5.20000
4.99130
4.99998
5.00000
x2 (i )
9
9.80000
10.00870
10.00002
10.00000
Newton-Raphson converges in four iterations for this example.

344	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
Newton-Raphson method in four steps
Complete the above four steps for the first iteration of Example 6.7.
SOLUTION
STEP 1  Dys0d 5 y 2 f [xs0d] 53
15
204 23
4 1 9
s4ds9d4 53
2
144
STEP 2  Js0d 53
1
1
x2s0d
x1s0d4 53
1
1
9
44
STEP 3  Using Dy(0) and J(0), (6.3.11) becomes
3
1
1
9
44 3
Dx1s0d
Dx2s0d4 53
2
144
Using Gauss elimination, subtract J21∙J11 59∙1 5 9 times the first equation from 
the second equation, giving
3
1
1
0
254 3
Dx1s0d
Dx2s0d4 53
2
244
Solving by back substitution,
Dx2s0d 5 24
25 5 0.8
Dx1s0d 5 2 2 0.8 5 1.2
STEP 4  xs1d 5 x(0) 1 Dxs0d 53
4
94 13
1.2
0.84 53
5.2
9.84
This is the same as computed in Example 6.7.
EXAMPLE 6.8
Then, during each iteration, the following four steps are completed:
STEP 1	 Compute Dy(i) from (6.3.13).
STEP 2	 Compute J(i) from (6.3.10).
STEP 3	 Using Gauss elimination and back substitution, solve (6.3.11)  
for Dx(i).
STEP 4	 Compute x(i 1 1) from (6.3.12).
Experience from power flow studies has shown that Newton-Raphson con-
verges in many cases where Jacobi and Gauss-Seidel diverge. Furthermore, the 
number of iterations required for convergence is independent of the dimension  

	
Section 6.4 The Power Flow Problem	
345
N for Newton-Raphson, but increases with N for Jacobi and Gauss-Seidel. Most 
Newton-Raphson power flow problems converge in fewer than 10 iterations [1].
6.4  The Power Flow Problem
The power flow problem is the computation of voltage magnitude and phase angle at 
each bus in a power system under balanced three-phase steady-state conditions. As 
a by-product of this calculation, real and reactive power flows in equipment such as 
transmission lines and transformers, as well as equipment losses, can be computed.
The starting point for a power flow problem is a single-line (oneline) diagram 
of the power system, from which the input data can be obtained. Input data consist 
of bus data, transmission line data, and transformer data.
As shown in Figure 6.1, the following four variables are associated with each 
bus k: voltage magnitude Vk, phase angle dk, net real power Pk, and reactive power 
Qk supplied to the bus. At each bus, two of these variables are specified as input data, 
and the other two are unknowns to be computed by the power flow program. For 
convenience, the power delivered to bus k in Figure 6.1 is separated into generator 
and load terms. That is,
Pk 5 PGk 2 PLk
Qk 5 QGk 2 QLk
(6.4.1)
Each bus k is categorized into one of the following three bus types:
1.	 Swing bus (or slack bus)—There is only one swing bus, which for conve-
nience is numbered bus 1 in this text. The swing bus is a reference bus  
for which V1/d1, is input data with the angle typically zero degrees and 
the voltage magnitude close to 1.0 per unit. The power flow computes  
P1 and Q1.
FIGURE 6.1
Bus variables Vk, dk, Pk, 
and Qk

346	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
2.	 Load (PQ) bus—Pk and Qk are input data. The power flow computes Vk 
and dk. Most buses in typical power flows are load buses.
3.	 Voltage controlled (PV) bus—Pk and Vk are input data. The power 
flow program computes Qk and dk. Examples are buses to which gen-
erators, switched shunt capacitors, or static var systems are connected. 
Maximum and minimum reactive power (var) limits QGkmax and QGkmin 
that this equipment can supply are also input data. If an upper or  
lower reactive power limit is reached, then the reactive power output  
of the generator is held at the limit, and the bus is modeled as a PQ  
bus. Another example is a bus to which a tap-changing transformer is 
connected; the power flow then computes the tap setting.
Note that when bus k is a load bus with no generation, Pk 5 2PLk is negative; 
that is, the real power supplied to bus k in Figure 6.1 is negative. If the load is induc-
tive, Qk 5 2QLk is negative.
Transmission lines are represented by the equivalent p circuit, shown in Figure 5.7.  
Transformers are also represented by equivalent circuits, as shown in Figure 3.9 for a 
two-winding transformer, Figure 3.20 for a three-winding transformer, or Figure 3.25 for 
a tap-changing transformer.
Input data for each transmission line include the per-unit equivalent p circuit 
series impedance Z9 and shunt admittance Y9, the two buses to which the line is 
connected, and maximum MVA rating. Similarly, input data for each transformer 
include per-unit winding impedances Z, the per-unit exciting branch admittance Y, 
the buses to which the windings are connected, and maximum MVA ratings. Input 
data for tap-changing transformers also include maximum tap settings.
The bus admittance matrix Ybus can be constructed from the line and trans-
former input data. From (2.4.3) and (2.4.4), the elements of Ybus are
Diagonal elements: Ykk 5 sum of admittances connected to bus k
Off-diagonal elements: Ykn 5 2(sum of admittances connected  
between buses k and n) k Þ n
(6.4.2)
Power flow input data and Ybus
Figure 6.2 shows a single-line diagram of a five-bus power system. Input data 
are given in Tables 6.1, 6.2, and 6.3. As shown in Table 6.1, bus 1, to which a 
generator is connected, is the swing bus. Bus 3, to which a generator and a load 
are connected, is a voltage-controlled bus. Buses 2, 4, and 5 are load buses. Note 
that the loads at buses 2 and 3 are inductive since Q2 5 2QL2 5 22.8 and2QL3 5 
20.4 are negative.
For each bus k, determine which of the variables Vk, dk, Pk, and Qk are input 
data and which are unknowns. Also, compute the elements of the second row of Ybus.
EXAMPLE 6.9

	
Section 6.4 The Power Flow Problem	
347
FIGURE 6.2
Single-line diagram 
for Example 6.9
Bus
Type
V  
per 
unit
d  
degrees
PG  
per 
unit
QG 
per 
unit
PL  
per 
unit
QL  
per 
unit
QGmax 
per 
unit
QGmin  
per 
unit
1
Swing
1.0
0
—
—
0
0
—
—
2
Load
—
—
0
0
8.0
2.8
—
—
3
Constant 
voltage
1.05
—
5.2
—
0.8
0.4
4.0
22.8
4
Load
—
—
0
0
0
0
—
—
5
Load
—
—
0
0
0
0
—
—
TABLE  6.1
Bus input data for Example 6.9*
*Sbase 5 100 MVA, Vbase 5 15 kV at buses 1, 3, and 345 kV at buses 2, 4, 5
Bus-to-Bus
R9 
per unit
X9 
per unit
G9 
per unit
B9 
per unit
Maximum 
MVA  
per unit
2–4
0.0090
0.100
0
1.72
12.0
2–5
0.0045
0.050
0
0.88
12.0
4–5
0.00225
0.025
0
0.44
12.0
TABLE  6.2
Line input data for Example 6.9
(Continued )

348	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
SOLUTION
The input data and unknowns are listed in Table 6.4. For bus 1, the swing bus, 
P1 and Q1 are unknowns. For bus 3, a voltage-controlled bus, Q3 and d3 are un-
knowns. For buses 2, 4, and 5, load buses, V2, V4, V5 and d2, d4, d5 are unknowns.
The elements of Ybus are computed from (6.4.2). Since buses 1 and 3 are not 
directly connected to bus 2,
Y21 5 Y23 5 0
Using (6.4.2),
Y24 5
21
R924 1 jX924
5
21
0.009 1 j0.1 5 20.89276 1 j 9.91964   per unit
                                                        5 9.95972/95.1438   per unit
Y25 5
21
R9251 jX925
5
21
0.0045 1 j0.05 5 21.78552 1 j19.83932   per unit
                                                             5 19.9195/95.1438   per unit
Y22 5
1
R924 1 jX924
1
1
R925 1 jX925
1 j B924
2
1 j B925
2
Bus-to-Bus
R 
per unit
X 
per unit
Gc  
per unit
Bm 
per unit
Maximum 
MVA  
per unit
Maximum 
TAP Setting  
per unit
1–5
0.00150
0.02
0
0
6.0
—
3–4
0.00075
0.01
0
0
10.0
—
TABLE  6.3
Transformer input data for Example 6.9
Bus
Input Data
Unknowns
1
V1 5 1.0, d1 5 0
P1, Q1
2
P2 5 PG2 2 PL2 5 2 8
Q2 5 QG2 2 QL2 5 22.8
V2, d2
3
V3 5 1.05
P3 5 PG3 2 PL3 5 4.4
Q3, d4
4
P4 5 0, Q4 5 0
V4, d4
5
P5 5 0, Q5 5 0
V5, d5
TABLE  6.4
Input data and unknowns for Example 6.9

	
Section 6.4 The Power Flow Problem	
349
5 (0.89276 2 j9.91964) 1 (1.78552 2 j19.83932) 1 j 1.72
2
1 j 0.88
2
5 2.67828 2 j28.4590 5 28.5847/284.6248   per unit
where half of the shunt admittance of each line connected to bus 2 is included in 
Y22 (the other half is located at the other ends of these lines).
This five-bus power system is modeled in PowerWorld Simulator case  
Example 6_9 (see Figure 6.3). To view the input data, first click on the Edit  
Mode but­ton (on the far left-hand side of the ribbon) to switch into the Edit mode  
(the Edit mode is used for modifying system parameters). Then by selecting the Case  
Information tab, you can view tabular displays showing the various parameters for 
FIGURE 6.3
Screen for Example 6.9
(Continued )

350	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
Using Ybus, the nodal equations for a power system network are written as 
I5YbusV
(6.4.3)
where I is the N vector of source currents injected into each bus and V is the N vector 
of bus voltages. For bus k, the kth equation in (6.4.3) is
Ik 5 o
N
n51
YknVn
(6.4.4)
The complex power delivered to bus k is
Sk 5 Pk 1 jQk 5 VkI *
k
(6.4.5)
Power flow solutions by Gauss-Seidel are based on nodal equations, (6.4.4), where 
each current source Ik is calculated from (6.4.5). Using (6.4.4) in (6.4.5),
Pk 1 jQk 5 Vk3o
N
n51
YknVn4
*
       k 5 1, 2, Á , N
(6.4.6)
With the following notation,
Vn 5 Vnejdn
(6.4.7)
Ykn 5 Yknejukn 5 Gkn 1 jBkn            k,n 5 1, 2, Á , N
(6.4.8)
(6.4.6) becomes
Pk 1 jQk 5 Vko
N
n51
YknVnejsdk 2 dn 2 uknd
(6.4.9)
the system. For example, use Network, Buses to view the parameters for each bus, 
and Network, Lines and Transformers to view the parameters for the transmission 
lines and transformers. Fields shown in blue on the screen can be directly changed 
simply by typing over them, and those shown in green can be toggled by clicking on 
them. Note that the values shown on these displays match the per unit values from  
Tables 6.1 to 6.3, except the power values are shown in actual MW/Mvar units.
The elements of Ybus also can be displayed by selecting Solution Details, Ybus. 
Since the Ybus entries are derived from other system parameters, they cannot be 
changed directly. Notice that several of the entries are blank, indicating that there 
is no transmission line or transformer directly connecting these two buses (a blank 
entry is equivalent to zero). For larger networks, most of the elements of the Ybus 
are zero since any single bus usually only has a few incident lines (such sparse 
matrices are considered in Section 6.8). The elements of the Ybus can be saved in a 
Matlab compatible format by first right-clicking within the Ybus matrix to display 
the local menu, and then selecting Save Ybus in Matlab Format from the local menu.
Finally, notice that no flows are shown on the oneline because the nonlinear 
power flow equations have not yet been solved, and the solution of these equa-
tions are covered next.

	
Section 6.5 Power Flow Solution by Gauss-Seidel	
351
Taking the real and imaginary parts of (6.4.9), the power balance equations are writ-
ten as either
Pk 5 Vko
N
n51
YknVn cos sdk 2 dn 2 uknd
(6.4.10)
Qk 5 Vko
N
n51
YknVn sin sdk 2 dn 2 uknd           k 5 1, 2, Á , N
(6.4.11)
or when the Ykn is expressed in rectangular coordinates as
Pk 5 Vko
N
n51
VnfGkn cos sdk 2 dnd 1 Bkn sin sdk 2 dndg
(6.4.12)
Qk 5 Vko
N
n51
Vn fGkn sinsdk 2 dnd 2 Bkn cossdk 2 dndg            k 5 1, 2, Á , N (6.4.13)
Power flow solutions by Newton-Raphson are based on the nonlinear power flow 
equations given by (6.4.10) and (6.4.11) [or alternatively by (6.4.12) and (6.4.13)].
6.5  Power Flow Solution by Gauss-Seidel
Nodal equations I 5 YbusV are a set of linear equations analogous to y 5 Ax, solved 
in Section 6.2 using Gauss-Seidel. Since power flow bus data consists of Pk and Qk for 
load buses or Pk and Vk for voltage-controlled buses, nodal equations do not directly 
fit the linear equation format; the current source vector I is unknown and the equa-
tions are actually nonlinear. For each load bus, Ik can be calculated from (6.4.5), giving
Ik 5 Pk 2 jQk
V *
k

(6.5.1)
Applying the Gauss-Seidel method (6.2.9) to the nodal equations with Ik given above, 
obtain
Vksi 1 1d 5 1
Ykk
 3
Pk 2 jQk
V *
k sid
2 o
k21
n51
YknVnsi 1 1d 2 o
N
n5k11
YknVnsid4
(6.5.2)
Equation (6.5.2) can be applied twice during each iteration for load buses, first using 
V *
k(i), then replacing V *
k(i), by V *
k(i 1 1) on the right side of (6.5.2).
For a voltage-controlled bus, Qk is unknown but can be calculated from (6.4.11), 
giving
Qk 5 Vksido
N
n51
YknVnsid sin fdksid 2 dnsid 2 ukng
(6.5.3)
Also,
QGk 5 Qk 1 QLk

352	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
If the calculated value of QGk does not exceed its limits, then Qk is used in (6.5.2) to 
calculate Vksi 1 1d 5 Vksi 1 1d/dksi 1 1d. Then the magnitude Vk(i 1 1) is changed 
to Vk, which is input data for the voltage-controlled bus. Thus, use (6.5.2) to compute 
only the angle dk(i 1 1) for voltage-controlled buses.
If the calculated value exceeds its limit QGkmax or QGkmin during any iteration, 
then the bus type is changed from a voltage-controlled bus to a load bus, with QGk set 
to its limit value. Under this condition, the voltage-controlling device (e.g., generator, 
capacitor bank, static var compensator) is not capable of maintaining Vk as specified 
by the input data. The power flow then calculates a new value of Vk.
For the swing bus, denoted bus 1, V1 and d1 are input data. As such, no itera-
tions are required for the swing bus. After the iteration process has converged, one 
pass through (6.4.10) and (6.4.11) can be made to compute P1 and Q1.
Power flow solution by Gauss-Seidel
For the power system of Example 6.9, use Gauss-Seidel to calculate V2(1), the 
phasor voltage at bus 2 after the first iteration. Use zero initial phase angles and 
1.0 per-unit initial voltage magnitudes (except at bus 3, where V3 5 1.05) to start 
the iteration procedure.
SOLUTION 
Bus 2 is a load bus. Using the input data and bus admittance values from  
Example 6.9 in (6.5.2),
V2s1d 5 1
Y22
 5
P2 2 jQ2
V *
2 s0d
2 [Y21V1s1d 1 Y23V3s0d 1 Y24V4s0d 1 Y25V5s0d]6
5
1
28.5847/284.6248 5
28 2 js22.8d
1.0/08
2 [s21.78552 1 j19.83932ds1.0d 1 s20.89276 1 j9.91964ds1.0d]6
5 s28 1 j2.8d 2 s22.67828 1 j29.7589d
28.5847/284.6248
5 0.96132/216.5438    per unit
Next, the above value is used in (6.5.2) to recalculate V2(1);
V2s1d 5
1
28.5847/284.6248 5
28 1 j2.8
0.96132/16.5438 2 [22.67828 1 j29.75829]6
EXAMPLE 6.10

	
Section 6.6 Power Flow Solution by Newton-Raphson	
353
6.6  Power Flow Solution 
by Newton-Raphson
Equations (6.4.10) and (6.4.11) are analogous to the nonlinear equation y 5 f(x), 
solved in Section 6.3 by Newton-Raphson. The x, y, and f vectors for the power flow 
problem are defined as
5 24.4698 2 j24.5973
28.5847/284.6248 5 0.87460/215.6758    per unit
Computations are next performed at buses 3, 4, and 5 to complete the first Gauss-
Seidel iteration.
To see the complete convergence of this case, open PowerWorld Simulator 
case Example 6_10. By default, PowerWorld Simulator uses the Newton-Raphson 
method described in the next section since Gauss-Seidel, while being a useful 
technique for introducing the power flow to students, is now seldom used com-
mercially. However, the free educational version of PowerWorld still allows cases 
to be solved with the Gauss-Seidel approach by selecting Tools, Solve, Gauss-
Seidel Power Flow. To avoid getting stuck in an infinite loop if a case does not 
converge, PowerWorld Simulator places a limit on the maximum number of iter-
ations. Usually for a Gauss-Seidel procedure this number is rather high, perhaps 
equal to 100 iterations. However, in this example to demonstrate the conver-
gence characteristics of the Gauss-Seidel method, it has been set to a single iter-
ation, allowing the voltages to be viewed after each iteration. To step through the 
solution one iteration at a time, just repeatedly select Tools, Solve, Gauss-Seidel 
Power Flow. 
A common stopping criterion for the Gauss-Seidel is to use the scaled 
differences in the voltages from one iteration to the next (6.2.2). When the 
voltage differences for each bus are below a specified convergence tolerance «, 
the problem is considered solved. An alternative approach, implemented in 
PowerWorld Simulator, is to examine the real and reactive mismatch equa-
tions, defined as the difference between the right- and left-hand sides of 
(6.4.10) and (6.4.11). PowerWorld Simulator continues iterating until all the 
bus mismatches are below an MVA (or kVA) tolerance. When single-stepping 
through the solution, the bus mismatches can be viewed after each iteration on 
the Case Information, Mismatches display. The solution mismatch tolerance 
can be changed on the Power Flow Solution page of the PowerWorld Simu-
lator Options dialog (select Tools, Simulator Options, then select the Power 
Flow Solution category to view this dialog); the maximum number of iterations  
can also be changed from this page. A typical convergence tolerance is about 
0.1 MVA.

354	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
x 53
d
V4 5    
d2
o
dN
V2
o
VN
    ;    y 53
P
Q4 5    
P2
o
PN
Q2
o
QN
fsxd 53
Psxd
Qsxd4   5    
P2sxd
o
PNsxd
Q2sxd
o
QNsxd

(6.6.1)
where all V, P, and Q terms are in per-unit and d terms are in radians. The swing bus 
variables d1 and V1 are omitted from (6.6.1), since they are already known. Equa-
tions (6.4.10) and (6.4.11) then have the following form:
yk 5 Pk 5 Pksxd 5 Vko
N
n51
YknVn cossdk 2 dn 2 uknd
(6.6.2)
yk1N 5 Qk 5 Qksxd 5 Vko
N
n51
YknVn sinsdk 2 dn 2 uknd
     k 5 2, 3, Á , N

(6.6.3)
The Jacobian matrix of (6.3.10) has the form
J1                                  J2
≠P2
≠d2
      Á      ≠P2
≠dN
          ≠P2
≠V2
     Á      ≠P2
≠VN
  o                                       o
≠PN
≠d2
     Á      ≠PN
≠dN
          ≠PN
≠V2
     Á      ≠PN
≠VN
≠Q2
≠d2
     Á      ≠Q2
≠dN
          ≠Q2
≠V2
     Á      ≠Q2
≠VN
  o                                      o

(6.6.4)
≠QN
≠d2
    Á      ≠QN
≠dN
         ≠QN
≠V2
     Á     ≠QN
≠VN
J3                                    J4
Equation (6.6.4) is partitioned into four blocks. The partial derivatives in each block, 
derived from (6.6.2) and (6.6.3), are given in Table 6.5.
3 4
3 4
3 4
3
J 5
4

	
Section 6.6 Power Flow Solution by Newton-Raphson	
355
Now apply to the power flow problem the four Newton-Raphson steps outlined 
in Section 6.3, starting with x(i) 5 3
dsid
Vsid4 at the ith iteration.
STEP 1  Use (6.6.2) and (6.6.3) to compute
Dysid 53
DPsid
DQsid4 53
P 2 P[xsid]
Q 2 Q[xsid]4
(6.6.5)
STEP 2  Use the equations in Table 6.5 to calculate the Jacobian matrix.
STEP 3  Use Gauss elimination and back substitution to solve
3
J1sid
J2sid
J3sid
J4sid4 3
Ddsid
DVsid4 53
DPsid
DQsid4
(6.6.6)
TABLE  6.5
Elements of the Jacobian matrix
n Þ k
J1kn 5 −Pk
−dn
5 VkYknVn sin(dk 2 dn 2 ukn)
J2kn 5 −Pk
−Vn
5 VkYkn cos(dk 2 dn 2 ukn)
J3kn 5 −Qk
−dn
5 2VkYknVn cos(dk 2 dn 2 ukn)
J4kn 5 −Qk
−Vn
5 VkYkn sin(dk 2 dn 2 ukn)
n 5 k
J1kk 5 −Pk
−dk
5 2Vk o
N
n51
nÞk
YknVn  sin(dk 2 dn 2 ukn)
J2kk 5 −Pk
−Vk
5 VkYkk cos ukk 1 o
N
n51
YknVn  cos(dk 2 dn 2 ukn)
J3kk 5 −Qk
−dk
5 Vk o
N
n51
nÞk
YknVn  cos(dk 2 dn 2 ukn)
J4kk 5 −Qk
−Vk
5 2VkYkk sin ukk 1 o
N
n51
YknVn  sin(dk 2 dn 2 ukn)
k, n 5 2, 3, Á , N

356	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
STEP 4  Compute
xsi 1 1d 53
dsi 1 1d
Vsi 1 1d4 53
dsid
Vsid4 13
Ddsid
DVsid4
(6.6.7)
Starting with initial value x(0), the procedure continues until convergence is obtained 
or until the number of iterations exceeds a specified maximum. Convergence criteria 
are often based on Dy(i) (called power mismatches) rather than on Dx(i) (phase angle 
and voltage magnitude mismatches).
For each voltage-controlled bus, the magnitude Vk is already known, and the 
function Qk(x) is not needed. Therefore, Vk from the x vector can be omitted, as well 
as Qk from the y vector. The column corresponding to partial derivatives with respect 
to Vk and the row corresponding to partial derivatives of Qk(x) can also be omit-
ted from the Jacobian matrix. Alternatively, rows and corresponding columns for 
voltage-controlled buses can be retained in the Jacobian matrix. Then during each 
iteration, the voltage magnitude Vk(i 1 1) of each voltage-controlled bus is reset to 
Vk which is input data for that bus.
At the end of each iteration, Qk (x) is computed using (6.6.3) and QGk 5 Qk(x) 1 
QLk for each voltage-controlled bus. If the computed value of QGk exceeds its limits, 
then the bus type is changed to a load bus with QGk set to its limit value. The power 
flow program also computes a new value for Vk.
Jacobian matrix and power flow solution  
by Newton-Raphson
Determine the dimension of the Jacobian matrix for the power system in  
Example 6.9. Also calculate DP2(0) in Step 1 and Jl24(0) in Step 2 of the first 
Newton-Raphson iteration. Assume zero initial phase angles and 1.0 per-unit ini-
tial voltage magnitudes (except V3 5 1.05).
SOLUTION 
Since there are N 5 5 buses for Example 6.9, (6.6.2) and (6.6.3) constitute  
2(N 2 1) 5 8 equations, for which J(i) has dimension 8 3 8. However, there is  
one voltage-controlled bus, bus 3. Therefore, V3 and the equation for Q3(x) could 
be eliminated, with J(i) reduced to a 7 3 7 matrix.
From Step 1 and (6.6.2),
DP2(0) 5 P2 2 P2(x) 5 P2 2 V2(0){Y21V1 cos[d2(0) 2 d1 (0) 2 u21]
1 Y22V2 cos[2u22] 1 Y23V3 cos[d2(0) 2 d3(0) 2 u23]
1 Y24V4 cos[d2(0) 2 d4(0) 2 u24]
1 Y25V5 cos[d2(0) 2 d5(0) 2 u25]}
EXAMPLE 6.11

	
Section 6.6 Power Flow Solution by Newton-Raphson	
357
DP2(0) 5 28.0 2 1.0{28.5847(1.0) cos (84.624°)
1 9.95972(1.0) cos(295.143°)
1 19.9159(1.0) cos(295.143°)}
5 28.0 2 (22.89 3 1024) 5 27.99972 per unit
From Step 2 and Jl given in Table 6.5
J124(0) 5 V2(0)Y24V4(0) sin[d2(0) 2 d4(0) 2 u24]
5 (1.0)(9.95972)(1.0) sin[295.143°]
5 29.91964 per unit
To see the complete convergence of this case, open PowerWorld Simulator case 
Example 6_11 (see Figure 6.4). Select Case Information, Network, Mismatches 
to see the initial mismatches, and Case Information, Solution Details, Power Flow 
Jacobian to view the initial Jacobian matrix. As is common in commercial power 
flows, PowerWorld Simulator actually includes rows in the Jacobian for voltage-
controlled buses. When a generator is regulating its terminal voltage, this row cor-
responds to the equation setting the bus voltage magnitude equal to the generator 
voltage setpoint. However, if the generator hits a reactive power limit, the bus type 
is switched to a load bus.
To step through the Newton-Raphson solution, from the ribbon select Solve, 
Single Solution–Full Newton. Ordinarily this selection would perform a complete 
Newton-Raphson iteration, stopping only when all the mismatches are less than the 
desired tolerance. However, for this case, in order to allow you to see the solution 
process, the maximum number of iterations has been set to 1, allowing the voltages, 
mismatches and the Jacobian to be viewed after each iteration. To complete the 
solution, continue to select Single Solution—Full Newton until the solution con-
vergence to the values shown in Tables 6.6, 6.7, and 6.8 (in about three iterations).
Bus #
Voltage  
Magnitude  
(per unit)
Phase  
Angle  
(degrees)
Generation
Load
PG  
(per unit)
QG  
(per unit)
PL  
(per unit)
QL  
(per unit)
1
1.000
0.000
3.948
1.144
0.000
0.000
2
0.834
–22.407
0.000
0.000
8.000
2.800
3
1.050
–0.597
5.200
3.376
0.800
0.400
4
1.019
–2.834
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
5
0.974
–4.548
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
TOTAL
9.148
4.516
8.800
3.200
TABLE  6.6
Bus output data for the power system given in Example 6.9
(Continued )

358	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
Line #
Bus to Bus
P
Q
S
1
2    4
22.920
21.392
3.232
4    2
3.036
1.216
3.272
2
2    5
25.080
21.408
5.272
5    2
5.256
2.632
5.876
3
4    5
1.344
1.504
2.016
5    4
21.332
21.824
2.260
TABLE  6.7
Line output data for the power system given in Example 6.9
FIGURE 6.4
Screen for Example 6.11 showing Jacobian matrix at first iteration

	
Section 6.6 Power Flow Solution by Newton-Raphson	
359
Power flow program: change in generation
Using the power-flow system given in Example 6.9, determine the acceptable gen-
eration range at bus 3, keeping each line and transformer loaded at or below 100% 
of its MVA limit.
SOLUTION
Load PowerWorld Simulator case Example 6_9. Select Single Solution-Full Newton 
to perform a single power flow solution using the Newton-Raphson approach. Then 
view the Case Information displays to verify that the PowerWorld Simulator solu-
tion matches the solution shown in Tables 6.6, 6.7, and 6.8. Additionally, the pie 
charts on the onelines show the percentage line and transformer loadings. Initially 
transformer Tl, between buses 1 and 5, is loaded at about 69% of its maximum 
MVA limit, while transformer T2, between buses 3 and 4, is loaded at about 53%.
Next, the bus 3 generation needs to be varied. This can be done a number of 
different ways in PowerWorld Simulator. The easiest (for this example) is to use the 
bus 3 generator MW oneline field to manually change the generation (see Figure 6.5).  
Right-click on the 520 MW field to the right of the bus 3 generator and select 
Generator Field Information dialog to view the Generator Field Options dialog. Set 
the Delta Per Mouse Click field to 10 and select OK. Small arrows are now visible 
next to this field on the oneline; clicking on the up arrow increases the generator’s 
MW output by 10 MW, while clicking on the down arrow decreases the generation 
by 10 MW. Select Tools, Play to begin the simulation. Increase the generation until 
the pie chart for the transformer from bus 3 to 4 is loaded to 100%. This occurs at 
about 1000 MW. Notice that as the bus 3 generation is increased, the bus 1 slack 
generation decreases by a similar amount. Repeat the process, except now decreas-
ing the generation. This unloads the transformer from bus 3 to 4, but increases the 
loading on the transformer from bus 1 to bus 5. The bus 1 to 5 transformer should 
reach 100% loading with the bus 3 generation equal to about 330 MW.
EXAMPLE 6.12
(Continued )
Tran. #
Bus to Bus
P
Q
S
1
1    5
3.948
1.144
4.112
5    1
23.924
20.804
4.004
2
3    4
4.400
2.976
5.312
4    3
24.380
22.720
5.156
TABLE  6.8
Transformer output data for the power system given in Example 6.9

360	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
Voltage-controlled buses to which tap-changing or voltage-regulating trans-
formers are connected can be handled by various methods. One method is to treat 
each of these buses as a load bus. The equivalent p circuit parameters (Figure 3.25 )  
are first calculated with tap setting c 5 1.0 for starting. During each iteration, 
the computed bus voltage magnitude is compared with the desired value specified 
by the input data. If the computed voltage is low (or high), c is increased (or de-
creased) to its next setting, and the parameters of the equivalent p circuit as well 
as Ybus are recalculated. The procedure continues until the computed bus voltage 
magnitude equals the desired value within a specified tolerance or until the high 
FIGURE 6.5
Screen for Example 6.12, Minimum Bus 3 Generator Loading

	
Section 6.6 Power Flow Solution by Newton-Raphson	
361
or low tap-setting limit is reached. Phase-shifting transformers can be handled in 
a similar way by using a complex turns ratio c 5 1.0/a and by varying the phase-
shift angle a.
A method with faster convergence makes c a variable and includes it in the x 
vector of (6.6.1). An equation is then derived to enter into the Jacobian matrix [4].
In comparing the Gauss-Seidel and Newton-Raphson algorithms, experience 
from power flow studies has shown that Newton-Raphson converges in many cases 
where Jacobi and Gauss-Seidel diverge. Furthermore, the number of iterations re-
quired for convergence is independent of the number of buses N for Newton-Raphson, 
but increases with N for Jacobi and Gauss-Seidel. The principal advantage of the 
Jacobi and Gauss-Seidel methods had been their more modest memory storage re-
quirements and their lower computational requirements per iteration. However, with 
the vast increases in low-cost computer memory over the last several decades, cou-
pled with the need to solve power flow problems with tens of thousands of buses, 
these advantages have been essentially eliminated. Therefore the Newton-Raphson, 
or one of the derivative methods discussed in Sections 6.9 and 6.10, are the preferred 
power flow solution approaches.
Power flow program: 37-bus system
To see a power flow example of a larger system, open PowerWorld Simulator case 
Example 6_13 (see Figure 6.6). This case models a 37-bus, 9-generator power 
system containing three different voltage levels (345 kV, 138 kV, and 69 kV) with 
57 transmission lines or transformers. The oneline can be panned by pressing the 
arrow keys, and it can be zoomed by pressing the ,ctrl. with the up arrow key to 
zoom in or with the down arrow key to zoom out. Use Tools, Play to animate the 
oneline and Tools, Pause to stop the animation.
Determine the lowest per-unit voltage and the maximum line/transformer 
loading both for the initial case and for the case with the line from bus OAK69 to 
WALNUT69 out of service.
SOLUTION
Use single solution to initially solve the power flow, and then Case Information, 
Network, Buses… to view a listing of all the buses in the case. To quickly deter-
mine the lowest per-unit voltage magnitude, left-click on the PU Volt column 
header to sort the column (clicking a second time reverses the sort). The lowest 
initial voltage magnitude is 0.990 at bus LOCUST69. Next, select Case Infor-
mation, Network, Lines and Transformers… to view the Line and Transformer 
Records display. Left-click on % of Max Limit to sort the lines by percentage 
loading. Initially the highest percentage loading is 64.9% on the line between 
PEAR69 and PECAN69, circuit 1.
EXAMPLE 6.13
(Continued )

362	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
In the software, there are several ways to open the line between OAK69 and 
WALNUT69. One approach is to locate the line on the Line and Transformer 
Records display and then double-click on the Status field to change its value. 
An alternative approach is to find the line on the oneline (it is in the up-
per-lefthand portion) and then click on one of its circuit breakers. Once the 
line is removed, use single solution to resolve the power flow. The lowest per-
unit voltage is now 0.911 at MAPLE69, and the highest percentage line load-
ing is 135% on the line between PEACH69 to POPLAR69. Since there are 
now several bus and line violations, the power system is no longer at a reliable 
operating point. Control actions and/or design improvements are needed to 
correct these problems. The design projects at the end of the chapter discuss 
these options.
FIGURE 6.6
Screen for Example 6.13 showing the initial flows

	
Section 6.7 Control of Power Flow	
363
6.7  Control of Power Flow
The following means are used to control system power flows:
1.	 Prime mover and excitation control of generators
2.	 Switching of shunt capacitor banks, shunt reactors, and static var systems
3.	 Control of tap-changing and regulating transformers
A simple model of a generator operating under balanced steady-state conditions is 
the Thévenin equivalent shown in Figure 6.7. Vt is the generator terminal voltage, Eg 
is the excitation voltage, d is the power angle, and Xg is the positive-sequence syn-
chronous reactance. From the figure, the generator current is
I 5
Ege jd 2 Vt
jXg

(6.7.1)
and the complex power delivered by the generator is
S 5 P 1 jQ 5 VtI *5 Vt 1
Ege2jd 2 Vt
2jXg 2
5
VtEgs  j cos d 1 sin dd 2 j V 2
t
Xg

(6.7.2)
The real and reactive powers delivered are then
P 5 Re S 5
VtEg
Xg
 sin d
(6.7.3)
Q 5 Im S 5 Vt
Xg
 sEg cos d 2 Vtd
(6.7.4)
Equation (6.7.3) shows that the real power P increases when the power angle d in-
creases. From an operational standpoint, when the prime mover increases the power 
input to the generator while the excitation voltage is held constant, the rotor speed 
increases. As the rotor speed increases, the power angle d also increases, causing  
an increase in generator real power output P. There is also a decrease in reactive 
power output Q, given by (6.7.4). However, when d is less than 15°, the increase in P 
is much larger than the decrease in Q. From the power flow standpoint, an increase in  
prime-move power corresponds to an increase in P at the constant-voltage bus to 
FIGURE 6.7
Generator Thévenin 
equivalent

364	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
which the generator is connected. The power flow program computes the increase in 
d along with the small change in Q.
Equation (6.7.4) shows that reactive power output Q increases when the 
excitation voltage Eg increases. From the operational standpoint, when the gene­
rator exciter output increases while holding the prime-mover power constant, the 
rotor current increases. As the rotor current increases, the excitation voltage Eg also 
increases, causing an increase in generator reactive power output Q. There is also 
a small decrease in d required to hold P constant in (6.7.3). From the power flow 
standpoint, an increase in generator excitation corresponds to an increase in voltage  
magnitude at the constant-voltage bus to which the generator is connected. The 
power flow program computes the increase in reactive power Q supplied by the gene­
rator along with the small change in d.
Figure 6.8 shows the effect of adding a shunt capacitor bank to a power system bus. 
The system is modeled by its Thévenin equivalent. Before the capacitor bank is connected, 
the switch SW is open and the bus voltage equals ETh. After the bank is connected, SW is 
closed, and the capacitor current IC leads the bus voltage Vt by 90°. The phasor diagram 
shows that Vt is larger than ETh when SW is closed. From the power flow standpoint, 
the addition of a shunt capacitor bank to a load bus corresponds to the addition of a 
negative reactive load, since a capacitor absorbs negative reactive power. The power flow 
program computes the increase in bus voltage magnitude along with the small change in 
d. Similarly, the addition of a shunt reactor corresponds to the addition of a positive re-
active load, wherein the power flow program computes the decrease in voltage magnitude.
Tap-changing and voltage-magnitude-regulating transformers are used to con-
trol bus voltages as well as reactive power flows on lines to which they are connected. 
Similarly, phase-angle regulating transformers are used to control bus angles as well 
as real power flows on lines to which they are connected. Both tap-changing and reg-
ulating transformers are modeled by a transformer with an off-nominal turns ratio c 
(Figure 3.25). From the power flow standpoint, a change in tap setting or voltage reg-
ulation corresponds to a change in c. The power flow program computes the changes 
in Ybus, bus voltage magnitudes and angles, and branch flows.
Besides the above controls, the power flow program can be used to investigate 
the effect of switching in or out lines, transformers, loads, and generators. Proposed 
FIGURE 6.8
Effect of adding a shunt capacitor bank to a power system bus

	
Section 6.7 Control of Power Flow	
365
Power flow program: effect of shunt capacitor banks
Determine the effect of adding a 200-Mvar shunt capacitor bank at bus 2 on the 
power system in Example 6.9.
SOLUTION 
Open PowerWorld Simulator case Example 6_14 (see Figure 6.9). This case 
is identical to Example 6.9 except that a 200-Mvar shunt capacitor bank has 
been added at bus 2. Initially this capacitor is open. Click on the capacitor’s 
circuit to close the capacitor and then solve the case. The capacitor increases 
the bus 2 voltage from 0.834 per unit to a more acceptable 0.959 per unit. The 
insertion of the capacitor has also substantially decreased the losses, from 
34.84 to 25.37 MW.
EXAMPLE 6.14
FIGURE 6.9
Screen for Example 6.14
(Continued )
system changes to meet future load growth, including new transmission, new trans-
formers, and new generation can also be investigated. Power flow design studies are 
normally conducted by trial and error. Using engineering judgment, adjustments in 
generation levels and controls are made until the desired equipment loadings and 
voltage profile are obtained.

366	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
Notice that the amount of reactive power actually supplied by the capacitor 
is only 184 Mvar. This discrepancy arises because a capacitor’s reactive output 
varies with the square of the terminal voltage, Qcap 5 Vcap
2∙Xc (see 2.3.5). A capac-
itor’s Mvar rating is based on an assumed voltage of 1.0 per unit.
PowerWorld Simulator Case Example 6_15 (see Figure 6.10) modifies the Exam-
ple 6.13 case by (1) opening one of the 138∙69 kV transformers at the PEACH 
substation and (2) opening the 69-kV transmission line between CHERRY69 
and OLIVE69. This causes a flow of 116 MVA on the remaining 138∙69 kV 
EXAMPLE 6.15
FIGURE 6.10
Screen for Example 6.15

	
Section 6.7 Control of Power Flow	
367
transformer at PEACH. Since this transformer has a limit of 101 MVA, it results in 
an overload at 115%. Redispatch the generators in order to remove this overload.
SOLUTION 
There are a number of solutions to this problem and several solution techniques. 
One solution technique would be to use engineering intuition, along with a trial- 
and-error approach (see Figure 6.11). Since the overload is from the 138 kV level 
to the 69 kV level and there is a generator directly connected to at the PEACH 
69 kV bus, it stands to reason that increasing this generation would decrease the 
overload. Using this approach, the overload is removed by increasing the PEACH 
generation until the transformer flow is reduced to 100%. This occurs when the 
generation is increased from 20 MW to 51 MW. Notice that as the generation is 
(Continued )
FIGURE 6.11
A solution to Example 6.15

368	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
increased, the slack bus (SLACK345) generation automatically decreases in order 
to satisfy the requirement that total system load plus losses must be equal to total 
generation.
An alternative possible solution is seen by noting that, since the overload is 
caused by power flowing from the 138 kV bus, decreasing the generation at ELM345 
might also decrease this flow. This is indeed the case, but now the trial-and-error 
approach requires a substantial amount of work and ultimately doesn’t solve the 
problem. Even when the total ELM345 generation is decreased from 300 MW to 
0 MW, the overload is still present, albeit with its percentage decreased to 105%.
Another solution approach would be to first determine the generators with 
the most sensitivity to this violation and then adjust these (see Figure 6.12). This 
FIGURE 6.12
Example 6.15 Flow Sensitivities Dialog

	
Section 6.8 Sparsity Techniques	
369
6.8  Sparsity Techniques
A typical large power system has an average of fewer than three lines connected to 
each bus. As such, each row of Ybus has an average of fewer than four nonzero ele-
ments: one off-diagonal for each line and the diagonal. Such a matrix, which has only 
a few nonzero elements, is said to be sparse.
Newton-Raphson power flow programs employ sparse matrix techniques to re-
duce computer storage and time requirements [2]. These techniques include compact 
storage of Ybus and J(i) and reordering of buses to avoid fill-in of J(i) during Gauss 
elimination steps. Consider the following matrix:
S 53
1.0
21.1
22.1
23.1
24.1
2.0
0
25.1
26.1
0
3.0
0
27.1
0
0
4.04

(6.8.1)
One method for compact storage of S consists of the following four vectors:
DIAG 5 [1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0]
(6.8.2)
OFFDIAG 5 [1.1 22.1 23.1 24.1 25.1 26.1 27.1]
(6.8.3)
COL 5 [2 3 4 1 4 1 1]
(6.8.4)
ROW 5 [3 2 1 1]
(6.8.5)
can be done in PowerWorld Simulator by selecting Tools, Sensitivities, Flows and 
Voltage Sensitivities to calculate sensitivities. On the top of the page, select the 
PEACH138 to PEACH69 circuit 1 transformer; then click on the Calculate Sen-
sitivities button, and select the Generator Sensitivities tab towards the bottom 
of the dialog. The “P Sensitivity” field tells how increasing the output of each 
generator by one MW would affect the MVA flow on this transformer. Note 
that the sensitivity for the PEACH69 generator is 20.508, indicating that if this 
generation is increased by 1 MW, the transformer MVA flow would decrease 
by 0.508 MVA. Hence, in order to decrease the flow by 15.2 MVA, increase 
the PEACH69 generator by 30 MW, which is exactly what was gotten by the 
trial-and-error approach. It is also clear that the ELM345 generators, with a 
sensitivity of just 0.033, would be relatively ineffective. In actual power system 
operation, these sensitivities, known as generator shift factors, are used exten-
sively. These sensitivities are also used in the Optimal Power Flow (introduced 
in Section 6.13).

370	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
DIAG contains the ordered diagonal elements and OFFDIAG contains the 
nonzero off-diagonal elements of S. COL contains the column number of each 
off-diagonal element. For example, the fourth element in COL is 1, indicating that 
the fourth element of OFFDIAG, 24.1, is located in column 1. ROW indicates the 
number of off-diagonal elements in each row of S. For example, the first element of 
ROW is 3, indicating the first three elements of OFFDIAG, 21.1, 22.1, and 23.1, 
are located in the first row. The second element of ROW is 2, indicating the next two 
elements of OFFDIAG, 24.1 and 25.1, are located in the second row. The S matrix 
can be completely reconstructed from these four vectors. Note that the dimension of 
DIAG and ROW equals the number of diagonal elements of S, whereas the dimen-
sion of OFFDIAG and COL equals the number of nonzero off-diagonals.
Now assume that computer storage requirements are 4 bytes to store each 
magnitude and 4 bytes to store each phase entry in Ybus in an N-bus power system. 
Also assume Ybus has an average of 3N nonzero off-diagonals (three lines per bus) 
along with its N diagonals. Using the preceding compact storage technique, (4 1 4) 
3N 5 24N bytes are required for OFFDIAG and (4 1 4)N 5 8N bytes for DIAG. 
Also, assuming 2 bytes to store each integer, 6N bytes are required for COL and 
2N bytes for ROW. Total computer memory required is then (24 1 8 1 6 1 2)N 5 
40N bytes with compact storage of Ybus, compared to 8N2 bytes without compact 
storage. For a 1000-bus power system, this means 40 instead of 8000 kilobytes  
to store Ybus. 
The Jacobian matrix is also sparse. From Table 6.5, whenever Ykn 5 0, J1kn 5 
J2kn 5 J3kn 5 J4kn 5 0. Compact storage of J for a 30,000-bus power system requires 
less than 10 megabytes with the above assumptions.
The other sparsity technique is to reorder buses. Suppose Gauss elimination is 
used to triangularize S in (6.8.1). After one Gauss elimination step, as described in 
Section 6.1, the result is
Ss1d 53
1.0
21.1
22.1
23.1
0
22.51
28.61
27.61
0
26.71
29.81
218.91
0
27.81
214.91
218.014

(6.8.6)
Note that the zeros in columns 2, 3, and 4 of S are filled in with nonzero elements in 
S(1). The original degree of sparsity is lost.
One simple reordering method is to start with those buses having the fewest 
connected branches and to end with those having the most connected branches. For 
example, S in (6.8.1) has three branches connected to bus 1 (three off-diagonals in 
row 1), two branches connected to bus 2, and one branch connected to buses 3 and 
4. Reordering the buses 4, 3, 2, 1 instead of 1, 2, 3, 4 results in
Srecordered 53
4.0
0
0
27.1
0
3.0
0
26.1
25.1
0
2.0
24.1
23.1
22.1
21.1
1.04

(6.8.7)

	
Section 6.8 Sparsity Techniques	
371
Now, after one Gauss elimination step,
Ss1d
recorderd 53
4.0
0
0
27.1
0
3.0
0
26.1
0
0
2.0
213.15
0
22.1
21.1
24.50254

(6.8.8)
Note that the original degree of sparsity is not lost in (6.8.8).
Reordering buses according to the fewest connected branches can be per-
formed once, before the Gauss elimination process begins. Alternatively, buses can 
be renumbered during each Gauss elimination step in order to account for changes 
during the elimination process.
Sparsity techniques similar to those described in this section are a standard 
feature of today’s Newton-Raphson power flow programs. As a result of these tech-
niques, typical 30,000-bus power flow solutions require less than 10 megabytes of 
storage, less than one second per iteration of computer time, and less than 10 itera-
tions to converge.
Sparsity in a 37-bus system
To see a visualization of the sparsity of the power flow Ybus and Jacobian matrices 
in a 37-bus system, open PowerWorld Simulator case Example 6_13.
Select Case Information, Solution Details, Ybus to view the bus admittance ma-
trix. Then press ,ctrl. Page Down to zoom the display out. Blank entries in the 
matrix correspond to zero entries. The 37 3 37 Ybus has a total of 1369 entries, 
with only about 10% nonzero (see Figure 6.13). Select Case Information, Solution 
Details, Power Flow Jacobian to view the Jacobian matrix.
EXAMPLE 6.16
FIGURE 6.13
Screen for Example 6.16

372	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
6.9  Fast Decoupled Power Flow
Contingencies are a major concern in power system operations. For example, 
operating personnel need to know what power flow changes will occur due to a 
particular generator outage or transmission-line outage. Contingency informa-
tion, when obtained in real time, can be used to anticipate problems caused by 
such outages and can be used to develop operating strategies to overcome the 
problems.
Fast power flow algorithms have been developed to give power flow solutions in 
seconds or less [8]. These algorithms are based on the following simplification of the 
Jacobian matrix. Neglecting J2(i) and J3(i), (6.6.6) reduces to two sets of decoupled 
equations:
J1(i) Dd(i) 5 DP(i)
(6.9.1)
J4(i) DV(0) 5 DQ(i)
(6.9.2)
The computer time required to solve (6.9.1) and (6.9.2) is significantly less than that 
required to solve (6.6.6). Further reduction in computer time can be obtained from 
additional simplification of the Jacobian matrix. For example, assume Vk ≈ Vn ≈ 
1.0 per unit and that the angle differences are small so the sin terms can be ignored. 
Then J1 and J4 are constant matrices whose elements in Table 6.5 are the negative of 
the imaginary components of Ybus. As such, J1 and J4 do not have to be recalculated 
during successive iterations.
The above simplifications can result in rapid power flow solutions for most 
systems. While the fast decoupled power flow usually takes more iterations to 
converge, it is usually significantly faster than the Newton-Raphson algorithm 
since the Jacobian does not need to be recomputed each iteration. And since the 
mismatch equations themselves have not been modified, the solution obtained by 
the fast decoupled algorithm is the same as that found with the Newton-Raphson 
algorithm. However, in some situations in which only an approximate power 
flow solution is needed, the fast decoupled approach can be used with a fixed 
number of iterations (typically one) to give an extremely fast, albeit approximate 
solution.
6.10  The “DC” Power Flow
The power flow problem can be further simplified by extending the fast decoupled 
power flow to completely neglect the Q-V equations by assuming that the voltage 
magnitudes are constant at 1.0 per unit. With these simplifications, the power flow on 
the line from bus j to bus k with reactance Xjk becomes

	
Section 6.10 The “DC” Power Flow	
373
Pjk 5
dj 2 dk
Xjk

(6.10.1)
and the real power balance equations reduce to a completely linear problem
2Bd 5 P
(6.10.2)
where B is the imaginary component of the of Ybus calculated neglecting line resis-
tance and excepting the slack bus row and column and P is the vector of real power 
injections (with generation assumed positive).
Because (6.10.2) is a linear equation with a form similar to that found in solv-
ing dc resistive circuits, this technique is referred to as the dc power flow. However, 
in contrast to the previous power flow algorithms, the dc power flow only gives an 
approximate solution with the degree of approximation system dependent. Never-
theless, with the advent of power system restructuring, the dc power flow has become 
a commonly used analysis technique.
Determine the dc power flow solution for the five bus system from Example 6.9.
SOLUTION 
With bus 1 as the system slack, the B matrix and P vector for this system are
B 53
230
0
10
20
0
2100
100
0
10
100
2150
40
20
0
40
21104
  P 53
28.0
4.4
0
0 4
d 5 2B21P 53
20.3263
0.0091
20.0349
20.07204
 radians 53
218.70
0.5214
22.000
24.1254
 degrees
To view this example in PowerWorld Simulator, open case Example 6_17, which 
has this example solved using the dc power flow (see Figure 6.14). To view the dc 
power flow options, select Options, Simulator Options to show the PowerWorld 
Simulator Options dialog. Then select the Power Flow Solution category and the 
DC Options page.
EXAMPLE 6.17
(Continued )

374	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
6.11  Power Flow Modeling 
of Wind Generation
As was mentioned in Chapter 1, the amount of renewable generation, particularly 
wind, being integrated into electric grids around the world is rapidly growing. For 
example, in 2013 Denmark obtained 33% of their total electric energy from wind 
while Spain got over 20%. In the United States the amount of wind capacity has 
been rapidly escalating from less than 2.5 GW in 2000 to more than 68 GW in 2015 
(out of a total generation capacity of about 1065 GW), while worldwide, it was more 
than 360 GW in 2014.
FIGURE 6.14
Screen for Example 6.17

	
Section 6.11 Power Flow Modeling of Wind Generation	
375
Whereas most energy from traditional synchronous generators comes from 
large units with ratings of hundreds of MWs, comparatively speaking, individual 
wind turbine generator (WTG) power ratings are quite low, with common values 
for new land-based WTGs between one to three MWs, and offshore WTGs up to  
6 MWs. This power is generated at low voltage (e.g., 600 V) and then usually stepped-
up with a pad-mounted transformer at the base of the turbine to a distribution-level 
voltage (e.g., 34.5 kV). Usually dozens or even hundreds of individual WTGs are 
located in wind “farms” or “parks” that cover an area of many square miles, with 
most of the land still available for other uses such as farming. An underground and/
or overhead collector system is used to transmit the power to a single interconnection 
point at which its voltage is stepped-up to a transmission level voltage (. 100 kV). 
The layout of such a system is shown in Figure 6.15.
From a power system analysis perspective for large-scale studies, the entire 
wind farm can usually be represented as a single equivalent generator that is either 
directly connected at the interconnection point transmission system bus or con-
nected to this bus through an equivalent impedance that represents the impedance 
of the collector system and the step-up transformers. The parameters associated 
with the equivalent generator are usually just scaled values of the parameters for the 
individual WTGs.
There are four main types of WTGs [13,15] with more details on each type pro-
vided in Chapter 11. Here the focus is on their power flow characteristics. As is the 
case with traditional synchronous generators, the real power outputs for all the WTG 
types are considered to be a constant value in power flow studies. Of course how 
much real power a wind farm can actually produce at any moment depends upon 
the wind speed, with a typical wind speed versus power curve shown in Figure 6.16.
Type 1 WTGs are squirrel-cage induction machines. Since induction machines 
consume reactive power and their reactive power output cannot be independently 
POI or
Connection
to the Grid
Interconnection
Transmission Line
Collector System
Station
Individual WTGs
Feeders and Laterals
(overhead and/or underground)
FIGURE 6.15
Wind power plant 
collector system 
topology [14] (Figure 1  
from WECC Wind 
Generation Modeling 
Group, “WECC Wind 
Power Plant Power 
Flow Model Guide,” 
WECC, May 2008, 
p. 2.)

376	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
controlled, typically these machines are modeled as a constant power factor PQ bus. 
By themselves these machines have under-excited (consuming reactive power) power 
factors of between 0.85 and 0.9, but banks of switched capacitors are often used 
to correct the wind farm power factor. Type 2 WTGs are wound rotor induction 
machines in which the rotor resistance can be controlled. The advantages of this 
approach are discussed in Chapter 11; from a power flow perspective, they perform 
like Type 1 WTGs. 
Most of the installed wind capacity and almost all new WTGs are either Type 3  
or Type 4. Type 3 wind turbines are used to represent doubly-fed asynchronous gen-
erators (DFAGs), also sometimes referred to as doubly-fed induction generators 
(DFIGs). This type models induction machines in which the rotor circuit is also con-
nected to the ac network through an ac-dc-ac converter, allowing for much greater 
control of the WTG. Type 4 wind turbines are fully asynchronous machines in which 
the full power output of the machine is coupled to the ac network through an ac-dc-
ac converter. From a power flow perspective, both types are capable of full voltage 
control like a traditional bus generator with reactive power control between a power 
factor of up to 60.9. However, like traditional synchronous generators, how their 
reactive power is actually controlled depends on commercial considerations, with 
many generator owners desiring to operate at unity power factor to maximize their 
real power outputs.
6.12  Economic Dispatch
This section describes how the real power output of a controlled generating unit is 
selected to meet a given load and to minimize the total operating costs. This is the 
economic dispatch problem [16]. In interconnected power systems, economic dispatch 
is often solved for smaller portions of the system, known as areas, in which the total 
generation in each area is controlled to match the total area load; further details are 
provided in Chapter 12. 
This section begins by considering only fossil-fuel generating units, with no 
constraints on maximum and minimum generator outputs, and with no transmission 
losses. The economic dispatch problem is first solved for this idealized case. Then it is 
100
80
60
40
20
0
0
5
10
15
20
Wind Speed (m/s)
Percent of Rated Output
25
30
FIGURE 6.16
Typical wind speed 
versus power curve

	
Section 6.12 Economic Dispatch	
377
expanded to include inequality constraints on generator outputs and to consider the 
impact of transmission losses. Finally, the dispatch of other types of units including 
solar and wind, nuclear, pumped-storage hydro, and hydro units is briefly discussed.
FOSSIL-FUEL UNITS, NO INEQUALITY CONSTRAINTS,  
NO TRANSMISSION LOSSES
Figure 6.17 shows the operating cost Ci, of a fossil-fuel generating unit versus its real 
power output Pi. Fuel cost is the major portion of the variable cost of operation, 
although other variable costs, such as maintenance, could have been included in the 
figure. Fixed costs, such as the capital cost of installing the unit, are not included. 
Only those costs that are a function of unit power output—that is, those costs that can 
be controlled by operating strategy—enter into the economic dispatch formulation.
In practice, Ci is constructed of piecewise continuous functions valid for ranges 
of output Pi based on empirical data. The discontinuities in Figure 6.17 may be due 
to the firing of equipment such as additional boilers or condensers as power output is 
increased. It is often convenient to express Ci in terms of BTU∙hr, which is relatively 
constant over the lifetime of the unit, rather than $∙hr, which can change monthly 
or daily. Ci can be converted to $∙hr by multiplying the fuel input in BTU∙hr by the 
cost of fuel in $∙BTU.
Figure 6.18 shows the unit incremental operating cost dCi∙dPi versus unit out-
put Pi, which is the slope or derivative of the Ci versus Pi curve in Figure 6.17. When 
Ci consists of only fuel costs, dCi∙dPi is the ratio of the incremental fuel energy input 
in BTU to incremental energy output in kWh, which is called the incremental heat 
rate. Note that the reciprocal of the heat rate, which is the ratio of output energy  
to input energy, gives a measure of fuel efficiency for the unit. For the unit shown  
in Figure 6.17, maximum efficiency occurs at Pi 5 600 MW, where the heat rate is  
Ci∙Pi 5 5.4 3 109∙600 3 103 5 9000 BTU∙kWh. The efficiency at this output is
percentage efficency 51
1
9000 kWh
BTU2 13413 BTU
kWh2 3 100 5 37.92%
FIGURE 6.17
Unit operating cost 
versus real power 
output—fossil-fuel 
generating unit

378	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
The dCi∙dPi curve in Figure 6.18 is also represented by piecewise continuous 
functions valid for ranges of output Pi. For analytical work, the actual curves are of-
ten approximated by straight lines. The ratio dCi∙dPi can also be converted to $∙kWh 
by multiplying the incremental heat rate in BTU∙kWh by the cost of fuel in $∙BTU.
For the area of an interconnected power system consisting of N units operating 
on economic dispatch, the total variable cost CT of operating these units is
CT 5 o
N
i5i
Ci
5 C1sP1d 1 C2sP2d 1 Á 1 CNsPNd   $yhr
(6.12.1)
where Ci, expressed in $∙hr, includes fuel cost as well as any other variable costs of 
unit i. Let PT equal the total load demand in the area. Neglecting transmission losses.
P1 1 P2 1 Á 1 PN 5 PT
(6.12.2)
Due to relatively slow changes in load demand, PT may be considered constant for 
periods of 2 to 10 minutes. The economic dispatch problem can be stated as follows:
Find the values of unit outputs P1, P2, …, PN that minimize CT given by (6.12.1), 
subject to the equality constraint given by (6.12.2).
A criterion for the solution to this problem is: All units on economic dispatch should 
operate at equal incremental operating cost. That is,
dC1
dP1
5 dC2
dP2
5 Á 5 dCN
dPN

(6.12.3)
An intuitive explanation of this criterion is the following. Suppose one unit is oper-
ating at a higher incremental operating cost than the other units. If the output power 
of that unit is reduced and transferred to units with lower incremental operating 
costs, then the total operating cost CT decreases. That is, reducing the output of 
the unit with the higher incremental cost results in a greater cost decrease than the 
FIGURE 6.18
Unit incremental 
operating cost versus 
real power output— 
fossil-fuel generating 
unit

	
Section 6.12 Economic Dispatch	
379
cost increase of adding that same output reduction to units with lower incremental 
costs. Therefore, all units must operate at the same incremental operating cost (the 
economic dispatch criterion).
A mathematical solution to the economic dispatch problem also can be given. 
The minimum value of CT occurs when the total differential dCT is zero. That is,
dCT 5 ≠CT
≠P1
 d P1 1 ≠CT
≠P2
 d P2 1 Á 1 ≠CT
≠PN
 d PN 5 0
(6.12.4)
Using (6.12.1), (6.12.4) becomes
dCT 5 dC1
d P1
 d P1 1 dC2
d P2
 d P2 1 Á 1 dCN
d PN
 d PN 5 0
(6.12.5)
Also, assuming PT is constant, the differential of (6.12.2) is
d P1 1 d P2 1 Á 1 d PN 5 0
(6.12.6)
Multiplying (6.12.6) by l and subtracting the resulting equation from (6.12.5),
1
dC1
d P1
2 l2 d P1 11
dC2
d P2
2 l2 d P2 1 Á 11
dCN
d PN
2 l2 d PN 5 0
(6.12.7)
Equation (6.12.7) is satisfied when each term in parentheses equals zero. That is,
dC1
d P1
5 dC2
d P2
5 Á 5 dCN
d PN
5 l
(6.12.8)
Therefore, all units have the same incremental operating cost, denoted here by l, in 
order to minimize the total operating cost CT.
Economic dispatch solution neglecting generator limits  
and line losses
An area of an interconnected power system has two fossil-fuel units operating on 
economic dispatch. The variable operating costs of these units are given by
C1 5 10P1 1 8 3 1023P2
1   $yhr
C2 5 8P2 1 9 3 1023P2
2   $yhr
where P1 and P2 are in megawatts. Determine the power output of each unit, the 
incremental operating cost, and the total operating cost CT that minimizes CT as 
the total load demand PT varies from 500 to 1500 MW. Generating unit inequality 
constraints and transmission losses are neglected.
EXAMPLE 6.18
(Continued  )

380	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
SOLUTION
The incremental operating costs of the units are 
dC1
dP1
5 10 1 16 3 1023P1   $yMWh
dC2
dP2
5 8 1 18 3 1023P2   $yMWh
Using (6.12.8), the minimum total operating cost occurs when
dC1
dP1
5 10 1 16 3 1023P1 5 dC2
dP2
5 8 1 18 3 1023P2
Using P2 5 PT 2 P1, the preceding equation becomes
10 1 16 3 1023P1 5 8 1 18 3 1023sPT 2 P1d
Solving for P1,
P1 5 18 3 1023PT 2 2
34 3 1023
5 0.5294PT 2 58.82   MW
Also, the incremental operating cost when CT is minimized is
dC2
d P2
5 dC1
d P1
5 10 1 16 3 1023P1 5 10 1 16 3 1023s0.5294PT 2 58.82d
5 9.0589 1 8.4704 3 1023PT   $yMWh
PT
P1
P2
dCi ∙dP1
CT
MW
MW
MW
$/MWh
$/hr
500
206
294
13.29
5529
600
259
341
14.14
6901
700
312
388
14.99
8358
800
365
435
15.84
9899
900
418
482
16.68
11,525
1000
471
529
17.53
13,235
1100
524
576
18.38
15,030
1200
576
624
19.22
16,910
1300
629
671
20.07
18,875
1400
682
718
20.92
20,924
1500
735
765
21.76
23,058
TABLE  6.9
Economic dispatch solution for Example 6.18

	
Section 6.12 Economic Dispatch	
381
EFFECT OF INEQUALITY CONSTRAINTS
Each generating unit must not operate above its rating or below some minimum 
value. That is.
Pimin , Pi , Pimax    i 5 1, 2, …, N
(6.12.9)
Other inequality constraints also may be included in the economic dispatch problem. 
For example, some unit outputs may be restricted so that certain transmission lines 
or other equipment are not overloaded. Also, under adverse weather conditions, gen-
eration at some units may be limited to reduce emissions.
When inequality constraints are included, modify the economic dispatch solu-
tion as follows. If one or more units reach their limit values, then these units are held 
at their limits, and the remaining units operate at equal incremental operating cost 
l. The incremental operating cost of the area equals the common l for the units that 
are not at their limits.
and the minimum total operating cost is
CT 5 C1 1 C2 5 s10P1 1 8 3 1023P2
1d 1 s8P2 1 9 3 1023P2
2d   $yhr
The economic dispatch solution is shown in Table 6.9 for values of PT from 500 
to 1500 MW.
Economic dispatch solution including generator limits
Rework Example 6.18 if the units are subject to the following inequality  
constraints:
100 % P1 % 600   MW
400 % P2 % 1000   MW
SOLUTION
At light loads, unit 2 operates at its lower limit of 400 MW, where its incremental 
operating cost is dC2∙dP2 5 15.2 $∙MWh. Additional load comes from unit 1 
until dC1∙dP1 5 15.2 $∙MWh, or
dC1
d P1
5 10 1 16 3 1023P1 5 15.2
P1 5 325   MW
EXAMPLE 6.19
(Continued  )

382	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
For PT less than 725 MW, where P1 is less than 325 MW, the incremental operating 
cost of the area is determined by unit 1 alone.
At heavy loads, unit 1 operates at its upper limit of 600 MW, where its in-
cremental operating cost is dC1yd P1 5 19.60   $yMWh. Additional load comes  
from unit 2 for all values of dC2yd P2 greater than 19.60 $∙MWh. At dC2∙dP2 5 
19.60 $∙MWh,
dC2
d P2
5 8 1 18 3 1023P2 5 19.60
P2 5 644   MW
For PT greater than 1244 MW, where P2 is greater than 644 MW, the incremental 
operating cost of the area is determined by unit 2 alone.
For 725 , PT , 1244 MW, neither unit has reached a limit value, and the 
economic dispatch solution is the same as that given in Table 6.9.
The solution to this example is summarized in Table 6.10 for values of PT 
from 500 to 1500 MW.
PT 
MW
P1 
MW
P2 
MW
dC∙dP 
$/MWh
CT 
$/hr
500
100
400
11.60
5720
600
200
400
13.20
6960
700
300
400
14.80 
8360
725
325
400
15.20
8735
800
365
435
15.84
9899
900
418
482
16.68
11,525
1000
471
529
17.53
13,235
1100
524
576
18.38
15,030
1200
576
624
19.22
16,910
1244
600
644
19.60
17,765
1300
600
700
20.60
18,890
1400
600
800
22.40
21,040
1500
600
900
24.20
23,370
d C1
d P1
 5
TABLE  6.10
Economic dispatch solution for Example 6.19
d C2
d P2
 5
PowerWorld Simulator–economic dispatch,  
including generator limits
PowerWorld Simulator case Example 6_20 uses a five-bus, three-generator loss-
less case to show the interaction between economic dispatch and the transmission 
EXAMPLE 6.20

	
Section 6.12 Economic Dispatch	
383
system (see Figure 6.19). The variable operating costs for each of the units are 
given by
C1 5 10P1 1 0.016P2
1   $yhr
C2 5 8P2 1 0.018P2
2   $yhr
C4 5 12P4 1 0.018P2
4   $yhr
where P1, P2, and P4 are the generator outputs in megawatts. Each generator has 
minimum/maximum limits of
100 # P1 # 400   MW
150 # P2 # 500   MW
50 # P4 # 300   MW
In addition to solving the power flow equations, PowerWorld Simulator can si-
multaneously solve the economic dispatch problem to optimally allocate the gen-
eration in an area. To turn on this option, select Case Information, Aggregation,  
Areas… to view a list of each of the control areas in a case (just one in this example). 
Then toggle the AGC Status field to ED. Now anytime the power flow equations 
are solved, the generator outputs are also changed using the economic dispatch.
FIGURE 6.19
Example 6.20 with maximum economic loading
(Continued  )

384	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
EFFECT OF TRANSMISSION LOSSES
Although one unit may be very efficient with a low incremental operating cost, it also 
may be located far from the load center. The transmission losses associated with this 
unit may be so high that the economic dispatch solution requires the unit to decrease 
its output, while other units with higher incremental operating costs but lower trans-
mission losses increase their outputs.
When transmission losses are included in the economic dispatch problem, 
(6.12.2) becomes
P1 1 P2 1 Á 1 PN 2 PL 5 PT
(6.12.10)
where PT is the total load demand and PL is the total transmission loss in the area. In 
general, PL is not constant but depends on the unit outputs P1, P2, …, PN, The total 
differential of (6.12.10) is
sd P1 1 d P2 1 Á 1 d PNd 21
≠PL
≠P1
 d P1 1 ≠PL
≠P2
 d P2 1 Á 1 ≠PL
≠PN
 d PN2 5 0
(6.12.11)
Multiplying (6.12.11) by l and subtracting the resulting equation from (6.12.5),
1
dC1
d P1
1 l≠PL
≠P1
2 l2
 
d P1 11
dC2
d P2
1 l≠PL
≠P2
2 l2
 
d P2
Initially, the case has a total load of 392 MW with an economic dispatch 
of P1 5 141 MW, P2 5 181, and P4 5 70, and an incremental operating cost, l, 
of 14.52 $∙MWh. To view a graph showing the incremental cost curves for all of 
the area generators, right-click on any generator to display the generator’s local 
menu, and then select All Area Gen IC Curves (right-click on the graph’s axes to 
change their scaling).
To see how changing the load impacts the economic dispatch and power 
flow solutions, first select Tools, Play to begin the simulation. Then, on the 
oneline, click on the up/down arrows next to the Load Scalar field. This field is 
used to scale the load at each bus in the system. Notice that the change in the To-
tal Hourly Cost field is well approximated by the change in the load multiplied by 
the incremental operating cost.
Determine the maximum amount of load this system can supply without 
overloading any transmission line with the generators dispatched using economic 
dispatch.
SOLUTION 
The maximum system economic loading is determined numerically to be 655 MW 
(which occurs with a Load Scalar of 1.67) with the line from bus 2 to bus 5 being 
the critical element.

	
Section 6.12 Economic Dispatch	
385
1 Á 11
dCN
d PN
1 l≠PL
≠PN
2 l2
 
d PN 5 0
(6.12.12)
Equation (6.12.12) is satisfied when each term in parentheses equals zero. That is.
dCi
d Pi
1 l≠PL
≠Pi
2 l 5 0
or
l 5 dCi
d Pi
 sLid 5 dCi
d Pi
 1
1
1 2 ≠PL
≠Pi2
    i 5 1, 2, …, N
(6.12.13)
Equation (6.12.13) gives the economic dispatch criteria, including transmission 
losses. Each unit that is not at a limit value operates such that its incremental 
operating cost dCi∙dPi multiplied by the penalty factor Li is the same. Note that 
when transmission losses are negligible ≠PLy≠Pi 5 0, Li 5 1, and (6.12.13) reduces 
to (6.12.8).
Economic dispatch solution including generator limits  
and line losses
Total transmission losses for the power system area given in Example 6.18 are 
given by
PL 5 1.5 3 1024P1
2 1 2 3 1025P1P2 1 3 3 1025P2
2   MW
where P1 and P2 are given in megawatts. Determine the output of each unit, total 
transmission losses, total load demand, and total operating cost CT when the area 
l 5 16.00 $∙MWh.
SOLUTION 
Using the incremental operating costs from Example 6.18 in (6.12.13),
dC1
d P1
 1
1
1 2 ≠PL
≠P12
5
10 1 16 3 1023P1
1 2 s3 3 1024P1 1 2 3 1025P2) 5 16.00
dC2
d P2
 1
1
1 2 ≠PL
≠P22
5
8 1 18 3 1023P2
1 2 s6 3 1025P2 1 2 3 1025P1) 5 16.00
EXAMPLE 6.21
(Continued )

386	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
Rearranging the two equations,
20.8 3 1023P1 1 32 3 1025P2 5 6.00
32 3 1025P1 1 18.96 3 1023P2 5 8.00
Solving,
P1 5 282   MW      P2 5 417   MW
Using the equation for total transmission losses,
PL 5 1.5 3 1024(282)2 1 2 3 1025(282)(417) 1 3 3 1025(417)2  
5 19.5   MW
From (6.12.10), the total load demand is
PT 5 P1 1 P2 PL 5 282 1 417 2 19.5 5 679.5   MW
Also, using the cost formulas given in Example 6.18, the total operating cost is
    CT 5 C1 1 C2 5 10s282d 1 8 3 1023s282d2 1 8s417d 1 9 3 1023s417d2
    5 8357   $yh
Note that when transmission losses are included, l given by (6.12.13) is no longer 
the incremental operating cost of the area. Instead, l is the unit incremental op-
erating cost dCi∙dPi multiplied by the unit penalty factor Li.
PowerWorld Simulator—economic dispatch, including 
generator limits and line losses
This example repeats the Example 6.19 power system, except that now losses 
are included with each transmission line modeled with an R∙X ratio of 1∙3 (see 
Figure 6.20). The current value of each generator’s loss sensitivity, −PLy−Pi, is 
shown immediately below the generator’s MW output field. Calculate the penalty 
factors Li, and verify that the economic dispatch shown in the figure is optimal. 
Assume a Load Scalar of 1.0.
SOLUTION
From (6.12.13), the condition for optimal dispatch is
      l 5 dCiyd Pis1ys1 2 ≠PLy≠Pid 5 dCiyd PiLi       i 5 1, 2, Á , N
with
      Li 5 1ys1 2 ≠PLy≠Pid
Therefore, L1 5 1.0, L2 5 0.9733, and L4 5 0.9238.
      with P1 5 130.1 MW,    dC1yd P1 *  L1 5 s10 1 0.032 * 130.1d * 1.0
                                             5 14.16   $yMWh
EXAMPLE 6.22

	
Section 6.12 Economic Dispatch	
387
In Example 6.21, total transmission losses are expressed as a quadratic func-
tion of unit output powers. For an area with N units, this formula generalizes to
PL 5 o
N
i51o
N
j51
PiBijPj
(6.12.14)
where the Bij terms are called loss coefficients or B coefficients. The B coefficients are 
not truly constant but vary with unit loadings. However, the B coefficients are often 
assumed constant in practice since the calculation of ≠PLy≠Pi is thereby simplified. 
Using (6.12.14),
≠PL
≠Pi
5 2o
N
j51
BijPj
(6.12.15)
This equation can be used to compute the penalty factor Li, in (6.12.13).
With P2 5 181.8 MW,    dC2yd P2 * L2 5 s8 1 0.036 * 181.8d * 0.9733
                                        5 14.16   $yMWh
With P4 5 92.4 MW,    dC4yd P4 * L4 5 s12 1 0.036 * 92.4d * 0.9238
                                        5 14.16   $yMWh
FIGURE 6.20
Example 6.22 five-bus case with transmission line losses

388	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
Various methods of evaluating B coefficients from power flow studies are avail-
able [17]. In practice, more than one set of B coefficients may be used during the daily 
load cycle.
When the unit incremental cost curves are linear, an analytic solution to the 
economic dispatch problem is possible, as illustrated by Examples 6.18 through 6.20. 
However, in practice, the incremental cost curves are nonlinear and contain disconti-
nuities. In this case, an iterative solution can be obtained. Given the load demand PT, 
the unit incremental cost curves, generator limits, and B coefficients, such an iterative 
solution can be obtained by the following nine steps. Assume that the incremental 
cost curves are stored in tabular form, such that a unique value of Pi can be read for 
each dCi∙dPi.
STEP 1	 Set iteration index m 5 1.
STEP 2	 Estimate mth value of l.
STEP 3	 Skip this step for all m . 1. Determine initial unit outputs Pi, (i 5 1, 
2, …, N). Use dCi∙dPi 5 l and read Pi from each incremental  
operating cost table. Transmission losses are neglected here.
STEP 4	 Compute ≠PLy≠Pi from (6.12.15) (i 5 1, 2, …, N).
STEP 5	 Compute dCi∙dPi from (6.12.13) (i 5 1, 2, …, N).
STEP 6	 Determine updated values of unit output Pi (i 5 1, 2, …, N). Read 
Pi from each incremental operating cost table. If Pi exceeds a limit 
value, set Pi to the limit value.
STEP 7	 Compare Pi determined in Step 6 with the previous value (i 5 1,  
2, …, N). If the change in each unit output is less than a specified 
tolerance «1, go to Step 8. Otherwise, return to Step 4.
STEP 8	 Compute PL from (6.12.14).
STEP 9	 If *1o
N
i51
Pi2 2 PL 2 PT* is less than a specified tolerance «2, stop. 
Otherwise, set m 5 m 1 1 and return to Step 2.
Instead of having their values stored in tabular form for this procedure, the incre-
mental cost curves instead could be represented by nonlinear functions such as poly-
nomials. Then, in Step 3 and Step 5, each unit output Pi would be computed from the 
nonlinear functions instead of being read from a table. Note that this procedure as-
sumes that the total load demand PT is constant. In practice, this economic dispatch 
program is executed every few minutes with updated values of PT.
OTHER TYPES OF UNITS
The economic dispatch criterion has been derived for a power system area consisting 
of fossil-fuel generating units. In practice, however, an area has a mix of different 
types of units including fossil-fuel, nuclear, pumped-storage hydro, hydro, wind, and 
other types.
Wind and solar generation, which have no fuel costs, are represented with very 
low or negative cost. As such, they are preferred sources for economic dispatch and 

	
Section 6.13 Optimal Power Flow	
389
are used by system operators whenever possible, unless there are generator operating 
limits or transmission constraints.
Although the fixed costs of a nuclear unit may be high, their operating costs are 
low due to inexpensive nuclear fuel. As such, nuclear units are normally base-loaded 
at their rated outputs. That is, the reference power settings of turbine-governors for 
nuclear units are held constant at rated output; therefore, these units do not partici-
pate in economic dispatch.
Pumped-storage hydro is a form of energy storage. During off-peak hours, 
these units are operated as synchronous motors to pump water to a higher elevation. 
Then during peak-load hours the water is released, and the units are operated as syn-
chronous generators to supply power. As such, pumped-storage hydro units are used 
for light-load build-up and peak-load shaving. Economic operation of the area is im-
proved by pumping during off-peak hours when the area l is low, and by generating 
during peak-load hours when l is high. Techniques are available for incorporating 
pumped-storage hydro units into economic dispatch of fossil-fuel units [18].
In an area consisting of hydro plants located along a river, the objective is to 
maximize the energy generated over the yearly water cycle rather than to minimize 
total operating costs. Reservoirs are used to store water during high-water or light-
load periods, although some water may have to be released through spillways. Also, 
there are constraints on water levels due to river transportation, irrigation, or fish-
ing requirements. Optimal strategies are available for coordinating outputs of plants 
along a river [19]. Economic dispatch strategies for mixed fossil-fuel/hydro systems 
are also available [20, 21, 22].
Techniques are also available for including reactive power flows in the eco-
nomic dispatch formulation, whereby both active and reactive powers are selected 
to minimize total operating costs. In particular, reactive injections from generators, 
switched capacitor banks, and static var systems, along with transformer tap settings, 
can be selected to minimize transmission-line losses [22]. However, electric utility 
companies usually control reactive power locally. That is, the reactive power output 
of each generator is selected to control the generator terminal voltage, and the re-
active power output of each capacitor bank or static var system located at a power 
system bus is selected to control the voltage magnitude at that bus. In this way, the 
reactive power flows on transmission lines are low, and the need for central dispatch 
of reactive power is eliminated.
6.13  Optimal Power Flow
Economic dispatch has one significant shortcoming—it ignores the limits imposed 
by the devices in the transmission system. Each transmission line and transformer 
has a limit on the amount of power that can be transmitted through it, with the 
limits arising because of thermal, voltage, or stability considerations (Section 5.6). 
Traditionally, the transmission system was designed so that when the generation was 
dispatched economically there would be no limit violations. Hence, just solving eco-
nomic dispatch was usually sufficient. However, with the worldwide trend toward 
deregulation of the electric utility industry, the transmission system is becoming 

390	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
increasingly constrained (with these constraints sometimes called congestion). For 
example, in the PJM power market in the eastern United States, the costs associated 
with active transmission line and transformer limit violations (congestion) increased 
from $65 million in 1999 to almost $2.1 billion in 2005 and have averaged about  
$1 billion per year from 2008 to 2013 [23].
The solution to the problem of optimizing the generation while enforcing the 
transmission lines is to combine economic dispatch with either the full ac power flow, 
or a dc power flow. The result is known as the optimal power flow (OPF). There are 
several methods for solving the OPF with [24] providing a nice summary. One com-
mon approach is sequential linear programming (LP); this is the technique used with 
the PowerWorld Simulator. The LP OPF solution algorithm iterates between solving 
the power flow to determine the flow of power in the system devices and solving an 
LP to economically dispatch the generation (and possibility other controls) subject 
to the transmission system limits. In the absence of system elements loaded to their 
limits, the OPF generation dispatch is identical to the economic dispatch solution, 
and the marginal cost of energy at each bus is identical to the system l. However, 
when one or more elements are loaded to their limits, the economic dispatch becomes 
constrained, and the bus marginal energy prices are no longer identical. In some 
electricity markets, these marginal prices are known as the Locational Marginal 
Prices (LMPs) and are used to determine the wholesale price of electricity at various  
locations in the system. For example, the real-time LMPs for the Midcontinent ISO 
(MISO) are available online at www.misoenergy.org/MarketsOperations.
PowerWorld Simulator—optimal power flow
PowerWorld Simulator case Example 6_23 duplicates the five-bus case from Ex-
ample 6.20, except that the case is solved using PowerWorld Simulator’s LP OPF 
algorithm (see Figure 6.21). To turn on the OPF option, first select Case Infor-
mation, Aggregation, Areas…, and toggle the AGC Status field to OPF. Then, 
rather than solving the case with the “Single Solution” button, select Add-ons, 
Primal LP to solve using the LP OPF. Initially the OPF solution matches the 
ED solution from Example 6.20 since there are no overloaded lines. The green-
colored fields on the screen immediately to the right of the buses show the mar-
ginal cost of supplying electricity to each bus in the system (i.e., the bus LMPs). 
With the system initially unconstrained, the bus marginal prices are all identical 
at $14.5∙MWh, with a Load Scalar of 1.0.
Now increase the Load Scalar field from 1.00 to the maximum economic 
loading value, determined to be 1.67 in Example 6.20, and again select Add-ons, 
Primal LP. The bus marginal prices are still all identical, now at a value of 
$17.5∙MWh, and with the line from bus 2 to 5 just reaching its maximum value. 
For load scalar values above 1.67, the line from bus 2 to bus 5 becomes con-
strained, with a result that the bus marginal prices on the constrained side of the 
line become higher than those on the unconstrained side.
EXAMPLE 6.23

With the load scalar equal to 1.80, numerically verify that the price of power 
at bus 5 is approximately $40.60∙MWh.
SOLUTION 
The easiest way to numerically verify the bus 5 price is to increase the load at bus 5  
by a small amount and compare the change in total system operating cost. With 
a load scalar of 1.80, the bus 5 MW load is 229.3 MW with a case hourly cost of 
$11,073.90. Increasing the bus 5 load by 0.9 MW and resolving the LP OPF gives 
a new cost of $11,110.40, which is a change of about $40.60∙MWh (note that this 
increase in load also increases the bus 5 price to over $41∙MWh). Because of the 
constraint, the price of power at bus 5 is actually more than double the incremen-
tal cost of the most expensive generator!
FIGURE 6.21
Example 6.23 optimal power flow solution with load multiplier = 1.80
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS
SECTION 6.1
	
6.1	 For a set of linear algebraic equations in matrix format, Ax 2 y, for a 
unique solution to exist, det(A) should be ________. 
	 6.2	 For an N 3 N square matrix A, in (N 2 1) steps, the technique of Gauss 
elimination can transform into an ________ matrix. 
	
Multiple Choice Questions	
391

392	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
SECTION 6.2
	
6.3	 For the iterative solution to linear algebraic equations Ax 2 y, the D 
matrix in the Jacobi method is the ________ portion of A, whereas D for 
Gauss-Siedel is the ________ portion of A.
	 6.4	 Is convergence guaranteed always with Jacobi and Gauss-Siedel meth-
ods, as applied to iterative solutions of linear algebraic equations?
(a) Yes                 (b) No
SECTION 6.3
	
6.5	 For the iterative solutions to nonlinear algebraic equations with the 
Newton-Raphson method, the Jacobian matrix J (i) consists of the par-
tial derivatives. Write down the elements of first row of J (i).
	 6.6	 For the Newton-Raphson method to work, one should make sure that 
J21 exists.
(a) True                 (b) False
	 6.7	 The Newton-Raphson method in four steps makes use of Gauss elimina-
tion and back substitution.
(a) True                 (b) False
	 6.8	 The number of iterations required for convergence is dependent/indepen-
dent of the dimension N for Newton-Raphson method. Choose one.
SECTION 6.4
	
6.9	 The swing bus or slack bus is a reference bus for which V1/d1, typi-
cally 1.0/08 per unit, is input data. The power flow program computes 
__________. Fill in the blank.
	
6.10	 Most buses in a typical power flow program are load buses, for which Pk 
and Qk are input data. The power flow program computes __________. 
	
6.11	 For a voltage-controlled bus k, __________ are input data, while the 
power flow program computes __________. 
	
6.12	 When the bus k is a load bus with no generation and inductive load, in 
terms of generation and load, Pk 5 __________, and Qk 5 __________. 
	
6.13	 Starting from a single-line diagram of a power system, the input data 
for a power flow problem consists of __________, __________, and 
__________. 
SECTION 6.5
	6.14	 Nodal equations I 5 Ybus V are a set of linear equations analogous to  
y 5 Ax.
(a) True                 (b) False
	6.15	 Because of the nature of the power flow bus data, nodal equations do 
not directly fit the linear-equation format, and power flow equations are 

actually nonlinear. However, the Gauss-Siedel method can be used for 
the power flow solution.
(a) True                 (b) False
SECTION 6.6
	6.16	 The Newton-Raphson method is most well suited for solving the nonlin-
ear power flow equations.
(a) True                 (b) False
	6.17	 By default, PowerWorld Simulator uses ___________ method for the 
power flow solution. 
SECTION 6.7
	
6.18	 Prime-mover control of a generator is responsible for a significant 
change in ___________, whereas excitation control significantly changes 
__________. 
	
6.19	 From the power flow standpoint, the addition of a shunt-capacitor bank 
to a load bus corresponds to the addition of a positive/negative reactive 
load. Choose the right word.
	6.20	 Tap-changing and voltage-magnitude-regulating transformers are used 
to control bus voltages and reactive power flows on lines to which they 
are connected.
(a) True                 (b) False
SECTION 6.8
	
6.21	 A matrix, which has only a few nonzero elements, is said to be ________. 
	
6.22	 Sparse-matrix techniques are used in Newton-Raphson power flow 
programs in order to reduce computer ___________ and ___________ 
requirements. 
	6.23	 Reordering buses can be an effective sparsity technique in power flow 
solutions.
(a) True                 (b) False
SECTION 6.9
	6.24	 While the fast decoupled power flow usually takes more iterations to con-
verge, it is usually significantly faster than the Newton-Raphson method.
(a) True                 (b) False
SECTION 6.10
	6.25	 The “dc” power flow solution, giving approximate answers, is based on 
completely neglecting the Q-V equation and solving the linear real-power 
balance equations.
(a) True                 (b) False
	
Multiple Choice Questions	
393

394	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
PROBLEMS
SECTION 6.1
6.1	
Using Gauss elimination, solve the following linear algebraic equations:
225x1 1 10x2 1 10x3 1 10x4 5 0
5x1 2 10x2 1 10x3 5 2
10x1 1 5x2 2 10x3 1 10x4 5 1
10x1 2 20x4 5 22
6.2	
Using Gauss elimination and back substitution, solve
3
8
2
1
4
6
2
3
4
144
 3
x1
x2
x34
53
3
4
24
6.3	
Rework Problem 6.2 with the value of 8 changed to 4.
6.4	
What is the difficulty in applying Gauss elimination to the following lin-
ear algebraic equations?
25x1 1 5x2 5 5
10x1 2 10x2 5 25
6.5	
Show that, after triangularizing Ax 5 y, the back substitution method of 
solving A(N21)x 5 y(N21) requires N divisions, N(N 2 l)∙2 multiplications, 
and N(N 2 l)∙2 subtractions. Assume that all the elements of A(N21) and 
y(N21)are nonzero and real.
SECTION 6.2
6.6	
Solve Problem 6.2 using the Jacobi iterative method. Start with x1(0) 5 
x2(0) 5 x3(0) 5 0, and continue until (6.2.2) is satisfied with « 5 0.01.
6.7	
Repeat Problem 6.6 using the Gauss-Seidel iterative method. Which 
method converges more rapidly?
6.8	
Express the following set of equations in the form of (6.2.6), and then 
solve using the Jacobi iterative method with « 5 0.05 and with x1(0) 5 l, 
and x2(0) 5 l, x3(0) 5 0.
3
10
22
24
22
6
22
24
22
104
 3
x1
x2
x34
53
22
3
214

6.9	
Solve for x1 and x2 in the system of equations given by
x2 2 3x1 1 1.9 5 0
x2 1 x1
2 2 3.0 5 0
	
using the Gauss method with an initial guess of x1 5 1 and x2 5 1.
6.10	 Solve x2 2 4x 1 1 5 0 using the Jacobi iterative method with x(0) 5 1. 
Continue until (6.2.2) is satisfied with « 5 0.01. Check using the qua-
dratic formula.
6.11	 Try to solve Problem 6.2 using the Jacobi and Gauss-Seidel iterative meth-
ods with the value of A33 changed from 14 to 0.14 and with x1(0) 5 x2(0) 5 
x3(0) 5 0. Show that neither method converges to the unique solution.
6.12	 Using the Jacobi method (also known as the Gauss method), solve for x1 
and x2 in the following system of equations.
x2 2 3x1 1 1.9 5 0
x2 1 x1
2 2 1.8 5 0
	
Use an initial guess of x1(0) 5 1.0 and x25 (0) 5 1.0. Also, see what hap-
pens when you choose an uneducated initial guess of x1(0) 5 x2(0) 5 100.
6.13	 Use the Gauss-Seidel method to solve the following equations that con-
tain terms that are often found in power flow equations.
x1 5 s1ys220jdd * [s21 1 0.5jdy(x1d* 2 s j10d * x2 2 s j10d]
x2 5 s1ys220jdd * [s23 1 jdysx2d* 2 s j10d * x1 2 s j10d]   
	
Use an initial estimate of x1(0) 5 1 and x2(0) 5 1, and a stopping of « 5 0.05.
6.14	 Find a root of the following equation by using the Gauss-Seidel method: 
(use an initial estimate of x 5 2) f(x) 5 x3 2 6x2 1 9x – 4 5 0.
6.15	 Use the Jacobi method to find a solution to x2 cos x 2 x 1 0.5 5 0. Use 
x(0) 5 1 and « 5 0.01. Experimentally determine the range of initial val-
ues that results in convergence.
6.16	 Take the z-transform of (6.2.6) and show that X(z) 5 G(z)Y(z), where 
G(z) 5 (zU 2 M)21 D21 and U is the unit matrix.
	
Note: G(z) is the matrix transfer function of a digital filter that rep-
resents the Jacobi or Gauss-Seidel methods. The filter poles are obtained 
by solving det(zU 2 M) 5 0. The filter is stable if and only if all the poles 
have magnitudes less than 1.
6.17	 Determine the poles of the Jacobi and Gauss-Seidel digital filters for the 
general two-dimensional problem (N 5 2):
3
A11
A12
A21
A224 3
x1
x24 53
y1
y24
	
Then determine a necessary and sufficient condition for convergence of 
these filters when N 5 2.
	
Problems	
395

396	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
SECTION 6.3
6.18	 Use Newton-Raphson to find a solution to the polynomial equation  
f(x) 5 y where y 5 0 and f(x) 5 x3 1 8x2 1 2x 2 40. Start with x(0) 5 1 
and continue until (6.2.2) is satisfied with « 5 0.001.
6.19	 Repeat 6.19 using x(0) 5 22.
6.20	 Use Newton-Raphson to find one solution to the polynomial equation 
f(x) 5 y, where y 5 7 and f(x) 5 x4 1 3x3 2 15x2 2 19x 1 30. Start with 
x(0) 5 0 and continue until (6.2.2) is satisfied with « 5 0.001.
6.21	 Repeat Problem 6.20 with an initial guess of x(0) 5 4.
6.22	 For Problem 6.20, plot the function f(x) between x 5 0 and 4. Then 
provide a graphical interpretation why points close to x 5 2.2 would be 
poorer initial guesses.
6.23	 Use Newton-Raphson to find a solution to
3
ex1x2
cossx1 1 x2d4 53
1.2
0.54
	
where x1 and x2 are in radians. (a) Start with x1(0) 5 1.0 and x2(0) 5 
0.5 and continue until (6.2.2) is satisfied with « 5 0.005. (b) Show that 
Newton-Raphson diverges for this example if x1(0) 5 1.0 and x2(0) 5 2.0.
6.24	 Solve the following equations by the Newton-Raphson method:
2x1 1 x2
2 2 8 5 0
x1
2 2 x2
2 1 x1x2 2 3 5 0
	
Start with an initial guess of x1 5 1 and x2 5 1.
6.25	 The following nonlinear equations contain terms that are often found in 
the power flow equations:
f1(x) 5 10x1 sin x2 1 2 5 0
f2(x) 5 10 (x1)2 2 10x1 cos x2 1 1 5 0
	
Solve using the Newton-Raphson method starting with an initial guess of 
x1 (0) 5 1 and x2(0) 5 0 radians and a stopping criteria of « 5 10–4.
6.26	 Repeat Problem 6.25 except using x1(0) 5 0.25 and x2(0) 5 0 radians as 
an initial guess.
6.27	 For the Newton-Raphson method, the region of attraction (or basin of 
attraction) for a particular solution is the set of all initial guesses that 
converge to that solution. Usually initial guesses close to a particular 
solution will converge to that solution. However, for all but the sim-
plest of multi-dimensional, nonlinear problems, the region of attraction 
boundary is often fractal. This makes it impossible to quantify the region 
of attraction and hence to guarantee convergence. Problem 6.25 has two 

solutions when x2 is restricted to being between 2p and p. With the x2 
initial guess fixed at 0 radians, numerically determine the values of the x1 
initial guesses that converge to the Problem 6.25 solution. Restrict your 
search to values of x1 between 0 and 1.
SECTION 6.4
6.28	 Consider the simplified electric power system shown in Figure 6.22 for 
which the power flow solution can be obtained without resorting to iter-
ative techniques. (a) Compute the elements of the bus admittance matrix 
Ybus. (b) Calculate the phase angle d2 by using the real power equation at 
bus 2 (voltage-controlled bus). (c) Determine |V3| and d3 by using both the 
real and reactive power equations at bus 3 (load bus). (d) Find the real 
power generated at bus 1 (swing bus). (e) Evaluate the total real power 
losses in the system.
6.29	 In Example 6.9, double the impedance on the line from bus 2 to bus 5. 
Determine the new values for the second row of Ybus. Verify your result 
using PowerWorld Simulator case Example 6_9.
5
5
0.8
V
Y
Y
FIGURE 6.22
Problem 6.28
North
South
1
2
5
Elm
Lake
Main
3
4
FIGURE 6.23
Sample System 
Diagram for  
Problem 6.30
	
Problems	
397
6.30	 Determine the bus admittance matrix (Ybus) for the three-phase power 
system shown in Figure 6.23 with input data given in Table 6.11 and par-
tial results in Table 6.12. Assume a three-phase 100 MVA per unit base.

398	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
Bus-to-Bus
R per unit
X per unit
B per unit
1-2
0.02
0.06
0.06
1-3
0.08
0.24
0.05
2-3
0.06
0.18
0.04
2-4
0.08
0.24
0.05
2-5
0.02
0.06
0.02
3-4
0.01
0.04
0.01
4-5
0.03
0.10
0.04
TABLE  6.11
Bus input data for Problem 6.30
6.25 2 j 18.695  
2 5.00 1 j 15.00
–5.00 1 j 15.00
–1.25 1 j 3.75
0 
0
TABLE  6.12
Partially Completed Bus Admittance Matrix (Ybus) for Problem 6.30
6.31	 For the system from Problem 6.30, assume that a 75-Mvar shunt capac-
itance (three phase assuming one per unit bus voltage) is added at bus 4. 
Calculate the new value of Y44.
SECTION 6.5
6.32	 For a two-bus power system, a 0.7 1 j0.4 per unit load at bus 2 is supplied 
by a generator at bus 1 through a transmission line with series impedance 
of 0.05 1 j0.1 per unit. With bus 1 as the slack bus with a fixed per-unit 
voltage of 1.0/0, use the Gauss-Seidel method to calculate the voltage at 
bus 2 after three iterations.
6.33	 Repeat Problem 6.32 with the slack bus voltage changed to 1.0/308 
per unit.
6.34	 For the three-bus system whose Ybus is given, calculate the second iteration 
value of V3 using the Gauss-Seidel method. Assume bus 1 as the slack 
(with V1 5 1.0/08), and buses 2 and 3 are load buses with a per-unit load 
of S2 5 1 1j0.5 and S3 5 1.5 1 j0.75. Use voltage guesses of 1.0/08 at 
both buses 2 and 3. The bus admittance matrix for a three-bus system is
Ybus 53
2j10
j5
j5
j5
2j10
j5
j5
j5
2j104

6.35	 Repeat Problem 6.34 except assume the bus 1 (slack bus) voltage of V1 5 
1.05/08.
6.36	 The bus admittance matrix for the power system shown in Figure 6.24 is 
given by
Ybus 53
3 2 j9
22 1 j6
21 1 j3
0
22 1 j6
3.666 2 j11
20.666 1 j2
21 1 j3
21 1 j3
20.666 1 j2
3.666 2 j11
22 1 j6
0
21 1 j3
22 1 j6
3 2 j9 4
  per unit
	
With the complex powers on load buses 2, 3, and 4 as shown in Figure 6.24,  
determine the value for V2 that is produced by the first and second iter-
ations of the Gauss-Seidel procedure. Choose the initial guess V2(0) 5 
V3 (0) 5 V4 (0) 5 1.0/08 per unit.
FIGURE 6.24
Problem 6.36
6.37	 The bus admittance matrix of a three-bus power system is given by
Ybus 5 2j3
7
22
25
22
6
24
25
24
94
 per unit
	
with V1 5 1.0/08 per unit; V2 5 1.0 per unit; P2 5 60 MW; P3 5 280 MW;  
Q3 5 260 Mvar (lagging) as a part of the power flow solution of the sys-
tem. Find V2 and V3 within a tolerance of 0.01 per unit by using the Gauss-
Seidel iteration method. Start with d2 5 0, V3 5 1.0 per unit, and d3 5 0.
	
Problems	
399

400	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
SECTION 6.6
6.38	 A generator bus (with a 1.0 per unit voltage) supplies a 180 MW, 60 Mvar 
load through a lossless transmission line with per unit (100 MVA base) 
impedance of j0.l and no line charging. Starting with an initial voltage 
guess of 1.0/08, iterate until converged using the Newton-Raphson power 
flow method. For convergence criteria, use a maximum power flow mis-
match of 0.1 MVA.
6.39	 Repeat Problem 6.38 except use an initial voltage guess of 1.0/308.
6.40	 Repeat Problem 6.38 except use an initial voltage guess of 0.25/08.
6.41	 Determine the initial Jacobian matrix for the power system described in 
Problem 6.34.
6.42	 Use the Newton-Raphson power flow to solve the power system described 
in Problem 6.34. For convergence criteria, use a maximum power flow 
mismatch of 0.1 MVA.
6.43	 For a three-bus power system, assume bus 1 is the slack with a per unit 
voltage of 1.0/08, bus 2 is a PQ bus with a per unit load of 2.0 1 j0.5, and 
bus 3 is a PV bus with 1.0 per unit generation and a 1.0 voltage setpoint. 
The per unit line impedances are j0.1 between buses 1 and 2, j0.4 between 
buses 1 and 3, and j0.2 between buses 2 and 3. Using a flat start, use the 
Newton-Raphson approach to determine the first iteration phasor volt-
ages at buses 2 and 3.
6.44	 Repeat Problem 6.43 except with the bus 2 real power load changed to  
1.0 per unit.
6.45	 Load PowerWorld Simulator case Example 6_11; this case is set to per-
form a single iteration of the Newton-Raphson power flow each time 
Single Solution is selected. Verify that initially the Jacobian element J33 is 
104.41. Then, give and verify the value of this element after each of the 
next three iterations (until the case converges).
6.46	 Load PowerWorld Simulator case Problem 6_46. Using a 100 MVA base, 
each of the three transmission lines have an impedance of 0.05 1 j0.l p.u. 
There is a single 180 MW load at bus 3, while bus 2 is a PV bus with gen-
eration of 80 MW and a voltage setpoint of 1.0 p.u. Bus 1 is the system 
slack with a voltage setpoint of 1.0 p.u. Manually solve this case using 
the Newton-Raphson approach with a convergence criteria of 0.1 MVA. 
Show all your work. Then verify your solution by solving the case with 
PowerWorld Simulator.
6.47	 As was mentioned in Section 6.4, if a generator’s reactive power output 
reaches its limit, then it is modeled as though it were a PQ bus. Repeat 
Problem 6.46, except assume the generator at bus 2 is operating with 
its reactive power limited to a maximum of 50 Mvar. Then verify your 
solution by solving the case with PowerWorld Simulator. To increase 
the reactive power output of the bus 2 generator, select Tools, Play to 
PW
PW
PW

begin the power flow simulation, then click on the up arrow on the bus 2 
magenta voltage setpoint field until the reactive power output reaches its 
maximum.
6.48	 Load PowerWorld Simulator case Problem 6_46. Plot the reactive power 
output of the generator at bus 2 as a function of its voltage setpoint 
value in 0.005 p.u. voltage steps over the range between its lower limit 
of 250 Mvar and its upper limit of 50 Mvar. To change the generator  
2 voltage set point first select Tools, Play to begin the power flow simula-
tion, and then click on the up/down arrows on the bus 2 magenta voltage 
setpoint field.
SECTION 6.7
6.49	 Open PowerWorld Simulator case Problem 6_49. This case is identical 
to Example 6.9, except that the transformer between buses 1 and 5 is 
now a tap-changing transformer with a tap range between 0.9 and 1.1 
and a tap step size of 0.00625. The tap is on the high side of the trans-
former. As the tap is varied between 0.975 and 1.1, show the variation 
in the reactive power output of generator 1, V5, V2, and the total real 
power losses.
6.50	 Use PowerWorld Simulator to determine the Mvar rating of the shunt 
capacitor bank in the Example 6_14 case that increases V2 to 1.0 per unit. 
Also determine the effect of this capacitor bank on line loadings and the 
total real power losses (shown immediately below bus 2 on the oneline). 
To vary the capacitor’s nominal Mvar rating, right-click on the capacitor 
symbol to view the Switched Shunt Dialog, and then change Nominal 
Mvar field.
6.51	 Use PowerWorld Simulator to modify the Example 6_9 case by inserting 
a second line between bus 2 and bus 5. Give the new line a circuit iden-
tifier of “2” to distinguish it from the existing line. The line parameters 
of the added line should be identical to those of the existing lines 2 to 5. 
Determine the new line’s effect on V2, the line loadings, and on the total 
real power losses.
6.52	 Open PowerWorld Simulator case Problem 6_52. Open the 69 kV line 
between buses REDBUD69 and PEACH69 (shown towards the bottom 
of the oneline). With the line open, determine the amount of Mvar (to 
the nearest 1 Mvar) needed from the REDBUD69 capacitor bank to cor-
rect the REDBUD69 voltage to at least 1.0 p.u.
6.53	 Open PowerWorld Simulator case Problem 6_53. Plot the variation in the 
total system real power losses as the generation at bus PEAR138 is varied 
in 20 MW blocks between 0 MW and 400 MW. What value of PEAR138 
generation minimizes the total system losses?
6.54	 Repeat Problem 6.53, except first remove the 69 kV line between 
LOCUST69 and PEAR69.
PW
PW
PW
PW
PW
PW
PW
	
Problems	
401

402	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
SECTION 6.8
6.55	 Using the compact storage technique described in Section 6.8, determine 
the vectors DIAG, OFFDIAG, COL, and ROW for the following matrix:
S 5   
17
29.1
0
0
22.1
27.1
29.1
25
28.1
21.1
26.1
0
0
28.1
9
0
0
0
0
21.1
0
2
0
0
22.1
26.1
0
0
14
25.1
27.1
0
0
0
25.1
15
6.56	 For the triangular factorization of the corresponding Ybus, number the 
nodes of the graph shown in Figure 6.9 in an optimal order.
SECTION 6.10
6.57	 Compare the angles and line flows between the Example 6_17 case and 
results shown in Tables 6.6, 6.7, and 6.8.
6.58	 Redo Example 6.17 with the assumption that the per-unit reactance on 
the line between buses 2 and 5 is changed from 0.05 to 0.03.
6.59	 Open PowerWorld Simulator case Problem 6_59, which models a seven-bus  
system using the dc power flow approximation. Bus 7 is the system slack. 
The real power generation/load at each bus is as shown, while the per-unit 
reactance of each of the lines (on a 100 MVA base) is as shown in yellow 
on the oneline. (a) Determine the six-by-six B matrix for this system and 
the P vector. (b) Use a matrix package such as Matlab to verify the angles 
as shown on the oneline.
6.60	 Using the PowerWorld Simulator case from Problem 6.59, if the rating on 
the line between buses 1 and 2 is 150 MW, the current flow is 101 MW (from 
bus 1 to bus 3), and the bus 1 generation is 160 MW, analytically determine 
the amount this generation can increase until this line reaches 100% flow. 
Assume any change in the bus 1 generation is absorbed at the system slack.
SECTION 6.11
6.61	 PowerWorld Simulator cases Problem 6_61_PQ and 6_61_PV model a seven- 
bus power system in which the generation at bus 4 is modeled as a Type 1 
or 2 wind turbine in the first case and as a Type 3 or 4 wind turbine in the 
second. A shunt capacitor is used to make the net reactive power injec-
tion at the bus the same in both cases. Compare the bus 4 voltage between 
the two cases for a contingency in which the line between buses 2 and 4 is 
opened. What is an advantage of a Type 3 or 4 wind turbine with respect 
to voltage regulation following a contingency? What is the variation in the 
Mvar output of a shunt capacitor with respect to bus voltage magnitude?
3
4
PW
PW
PW

SECTION 6.12
6.62	 The fuel-cost curves for two generators are given as follows:
C1(P1) 5 600 1 18 ? P1 10.04 ? (P1)2
C2(P2) 5 700 1 20 ? P2 1 0.03 ? (P2)2 
	
Assuming the system is lossless, calculate the optimal dispatch values of 
P1 and P2 for a total load of 1000 MW, the incremental operating cost, 
and the total operating cost.
6.63	 Rework Problem 6.62, except assume that the limit outputs are subject to 
the following inequality constraints:
200 # P1 # 800 MW
100 # P2 # 400 MW
6.64	 Rework Problem 6.62, except assume the 1000 MW value also includes 
losses, and the penalty factor for the first unit is 1.0 and for the second 
unit 0.95.
6.65	 The fuel-cost curves for a two-generator power system are given as follows:
C1(P1) 5 600 1 15 ? P1 1 0.05 ? (P1)2
C2(P2) 5 700 1 20 ? P2 1 0.04 ? (P2)2
	
while the system losses can be approximated as
PL 5 2 3 1024sP1d2 1 3 3 1024sP2d2 2 4 3 1024P1P2   MW
	
If the system is operating with a marginal cost (l) of $60∙hr, determine 
the output of each unit, the total transmission losses, the total load 
demand, and the total operating cost.
6.66	 Expand the summations in (6.12.14) for N 5 2, and verify the formula for 
−PLy−Pi given by (6.12.15). Assume Bij 5 Bji.
6.67	 Given two generating units with their respective variable operating costs as
C1 5 0.01P2
G1 1 2PG1 1 100   $yhr         for 25 # PG1 # 150  MW
C2 5 0.004P2   
G2 1 2.6PG2 1 80   $yhr         for 30 # PG2 # 200  MW
	
determine the economically optimum division of generation for 55 # 
PL # 350 MW. In particular, for PL 5 282 MW, compute PG1 and PG2. 
Neglect transmission losses.
6.68	 Resolve Example 6.20, except with the generation at bus 2 set to a fixed 
value (i.e., modeled as off of Automatic Generation Control). Plot the 
variation in the total hourly cost as the generation at bus 2 is varied 
between 1000 and 200 MW in 5 MW steps, resolving the economic dis-
patch at each step. What is the relationship between bus 2 generation at 
the minimum point on this plot and the value from economic dispatch in 
Example 6.20? Assume a Load Scalar of 1.0.
PW
	
Problems	
403

404	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
6.69	 Using PowerWorld case Example 6_22 with the Load Scalar equal to 1.0, 
determine the generation dispatch that minimizes system losses (Hint: 
Manually vary the generation at buses 2 and 4 until their loss sensitivity 
values are zero). Compare the operating cost between this solution and 
the Example 6_22 economic dispatch result. Which is better?
6.70	 Repeat Problem 6.69, except with the Load Scalar equal to 1.4.
SECTION 6.13
6.71	 Using LP OPF with PowerWorld Simulator case Example 6_23, plot the 
variation in the bus 5 marginal price as the Load Scalar is increased from 
1.0 in steps of 0.02. What is the maximum possible load scalar without 
overloading any transmission line? Why is it impossible to operate with-
out violations above this value?
6.72	 Load PowerWorld Simulator case Problem 6_72. This case models a 
slightly modified, lossless version of the 37-bus case from Example 6.13 
with generator cost information, but also with the transformer between 
buses PEAR138 and PEAR69 open. When the case is loaded, the “Total 
Cost” field shows the economic dispatch solution, which results in an 
overload on several lines. Before solving the case, select Add-Ons, OPF 
Case Info, OPF Buses to view the bus LMPs, noting that they are all 
identical. Then Select Add-Ons, Primal LP to solve the case using the 
OPF, and again view the bus LMPs. Verify the LMP at the PECAN69 
bus by manually changing the load at the bus by one MW, and then not-
ing the change in the Total Cost field. Repeat for the LOCUST69 bus.  
Note: Because of solution convergence tolerances, the manually calcu-
lated results may not exactly match the OFP calculated bus LMPs.
CASE STUDY QUESTIONS
a.	
What are the operational impacts on fossil-fueled power plants due to 
high penetrations of wind and solar generation into a power grid?
b.	
Do high penetrations of wind and solar generation increase the wear and 
tear costs of fossil-fueled generation? Why?
c.	
Which has more forecast uncertainty, wind generation or solar genera-
tion? Why?
Design Project I: New Load
As a result of the low electric rates from the local utility, Metropolis Light and Power 
(MLP), several large server farms and a new factory are going to be built in the east-
ern portion of the MLP service territory (see Figure 6.25). With an anticipated peak 
load of about 75 MW and 20 Mvar, this new load also brings additional revenue 
to MLP. However, in order to supply this additional load, the new TULIP substa-
tion will need to be constructed. While they would like to receive electricity at the  
PW
PW
PW
PW

69 kV level, the new substation location is large enough to accommodate a 138∙69 
kV transformer if needed. Additionally, for reliability purposes, the TULIP substa-
tion needs to have at least two separate lines into their substation.
As a planning engineer for MLP, your job is to make recommendations to 
ensure that, with new TULIP loads under peak loading conditions, the transmis-
sion system in the eastern region is adequate for any base case or first contingency 
loading situation. This is also a good opportunity not only to meet the new load, 
but also to fix some existing first contingency violations in the eastern portion of 
the MLP service territory. Table 6.13 shows the available right-of-way distances that 
Right-of-Way/Substation
Right-of-Way Distance (km)
TULIP to ELM
15
TULIP to PLUM
12
TULIP to OLIVE
8
TULIP to CEDAR
10
TULIP to BIRCH
14
CEDAR to PLUM
13
WILLOW to PLUM
8
OLIVE TO CEDAR
10
TABLE 6.13
Available New Rights-of-Way
FIGURE 6.25
Design Case 1  
System Oneline 
Diagram
	
Design Project I: New Load	
405

406	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
can be used for the construction of new 69 kV and/or new 138 kV lines. All existing  
69 kV-only substations are large enough to accommodate 138 kV as well. The 
DesignCase1_2015 provides a power flow model of the initial conditions.
Design Procedure
1.	 Load DesignCase1_2015 into PowerWorld Simulator. Perform an initial 
power-flow solution to verify the base case system operation without the 
TULIP load. Note that the entire line flows and bus voltage magnitudes are 
within their limits. Assume all line MVA flows must be at or below 100% of 
the limit A values, and all voltages must be between 0.95 and 1.10 per unit.
2.	 Repeat the above analysis considering the impact of any single transmis-
sion line or transformer outage. This is known as contingency analysis. 
To simplify this analysis, PowerWorld Simulator has the ability to au-
tomatically perform a contingency analysis study. Select Tools, Contin-
gency Analysis to show the Contingency Analysis display. Note that the 
57 single line/transformer contingencies are already defined. Select Start 
Run to automatically see the impact of removing any single element. 
This system has line violations for several different contingencies. 
3.	 Using the rights-of-way and the transmission line parameters/costs given 
in the cost section (see page 409), iteratively determine the least expensive 
system additions so that the base case and all the contingences result in 
reliable operation points (i.e., one with no violations) with the new TULIP 
load. The parameters of the new transmission lines(s) need to be derived 
using the tower configurations and conductor types. Tower configurations 
are provided by the instructor with default values given with the cost data. 
Several different conductor types are available in the cost section. The total 
cost of an addition is defined as the construction costs minus the savings 
associated with any decrease in system losses over the next 5 years. 
4.	 Write a detailed report discussing the initial system problems, your 
approach to optimally solving the system problems, and the justification 
for your final recommendation.
Simplifying Assumptions 
To simplify the analysis, several assumptions are made:
1.	 You need only consider the base case loading level given in Design-
Case1_2015. In a real design, typically a number of different operating 
points/loading levels must be considered.
2.	 You should consider the generator outputs as fixed values; any changes 
in the losses and the new TULIP load are always picked up by the sys-
tem slack generator. 
3.	 You should not modify the status of the capacitors or the transformer taps. 
4.	 You should assume that the system losses remain constant over the 
5-year period and need only consider the impact the new design has on 
the base case losses. Electricity is priced at $60∙MWh.

DESIGN PROJECT 2: NEW WIND GENERATION 
and GENERATION RETIREMENT
As a planning engineer for Island Electric Company (IEC), you have been tasked 
with determining the transmission system changes required to locate a new 600 MW 
wind farm in the western portion of your service territory (see Figure 6.26). IEC uses 
345 and 161 kV transmission grids, so your changes are restricted to these existing 
voltages. The wind farm would like to connect at the 161 kV level and requires at 
least two transmission lines into the NewWind substation (which can be at either  
161 and/or 345 kV). Since the location is usually quite windy, it is expected to have a 
capacity factor of at least 40%. However, the wind also can be quite variable, includ-
ing during times of maximum system loading, so this generation cannot be counted 
on for firm capacity. Simultaneous with the addition of the new wind farm, IEC 
would like to retire the existing 300 MW generator at the Pheasant substation.
Hence, your job is to make recommendations on the least-cost design for the 
construction of new lines and transformers to ensure that the transmission system in 
the IEC system is adequate for any base case or first-contingency loading situation 
when then wind farm is installed and operating at either its maximum output of  
600 or 0 MW and with the Pheasant generator removed from service. Note, this will 
also involve fixing some existing first-contingency violations. Since the wind farm 
will be built with Type 3 DFAG wind turbines, you can model the wind farm in the 
power flow as a single equivalent, traditional PV bus generator with a fixed output 
of either 0 or 600 MW, a voltage setpoint of 1.03 per unit, and with reactive power 
limits of 6250 Mvar.
Table 6.14 shows the right-of-way distances that are available for the construc-
tion of new 161 kV and/or new 345 kV lines. All existing 161-kV only substations 
are large enough to accommodate 345 kV as well, as is the NewWind substation.
FIGURE 6.26
Design Case 2 System 
Oneline Diagram
	
Design Project 2: New Wind Generation and Generation Retirement	
407

408	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
Design Procedure
1.	 Load DesignCase2_2015 into PowerWorld Simulator, which contains 
the system power flow case and the disconnected NewWind generator 
and bus. Perform an initial power flow solution to verify the base case 
system operation. Note that all of the line flows and bus voltage mag-
nitudes are within their limits. Assume all line MVA flows must be at or 
below 100% of their limit values, and all voltages must be between 0.92 
and 1.10 per unit.
2.	 Repeat the above analysis, considering the impact of any single trans-
mission line or transformer outage. This is known as contingency 
analysis. To simplify this analysis, PowerWorld Simulator has the ability 
to automatically perform a contingency analysis study. Select Tools, 
Contingency Analysis to show the Contingency Analysis display. Note 
that the 60 single line/transformer contingencies are already defined. 
Select Start Run (towards the bottom right corner of the display) to 
automatically see the impact of removing any single element. Note that 
there are several existing violations.
3.	 Open the existing 300 MW generator at the Pheasant substation, and 
repeat parts 1 and 2. 
4.	 Using the rights-of-way given in Table 6.14 and the transmission line pa-
rameters/costs, iteratively determine the least-expensive system additions 
so that the base case and all the contingences result in reliable opera-
tion points with the NewWind generation connected with an output of 
either 0 or 600 MW. When the output is at 0 MW, the wind farm is still 
considered on-line and hence should be modeled as a PV bus regulating 
its voltage to 1.03 p.u. The parameters of the new transmission lines(s) 
need to be derived using the tower configurations and conductor types 
provided by the instructor. In addition, the transmission changes you 
propose will modify the total system losses, indicated by the large field 
Right-of-Way∙Substation
Right-of-Way Distance (km)
NewWind to Ostrich
15
NewWind to Dove
55
NewWind to Crow
30
NewWind to Peacock
53
NewWind to Hen
70
Ostrich to Mallard
45
Peakcock to Hen
20
Dove to Cardinal
40
TABLE 6.14
Available New Rights-of-Way

on the oneline diagram. In your design, you should consider the im-
pact on total system losses in the studied condition for the next 5 years. 
Hence, you should minimize the total construction costs minus the sav-
ings associated with any decrease in system losses over the next 5 years.
5.	 Write a detailed report discussing the initial system problems, your 
approach to optimally solving the system problems, and the justification 
for your final recommendation.
Simplifying Assumptions 
To simplify the analysis, several assumptions are made:
1.	 You need only consider the base case loading level given with the modi-
fication of opening the Pheasant generation. In a real design, typically a 
number of different operating points/loading levels must be considered.
2.	 You should consider all the generator real power outputs as fixed values 
with the exception that the NewWind generator should be studied at 
both 0 and 600 MW. The change in the total system generation and any 
changes in the system losses are always picked up by the system slack. 
3.	 You should not modify the status of the capacitors or the transformer 
taps. 
4.	 You should assume that the system losses remain constant over the 
5-year period and need only consider the impact the new design has on 
the base case losses, assuming the NewWind generation is at 600 MW. 
The price for losses can be assumed to be $50∙MWh.
5.	 You do not need to consider contingencies involving the new transmis-
sion lines and possibly any transformers you may be adding.
6.	 While an appropriate control response to a contingency might be to de-
crease the wind farm output (by changing the pitch on the wind turbine 
blades), your supervisor has specifically asked you not to consider this 
possibility. Therefore the NewWind generator should always have either 
a 0 or 600 MW output.
Design Projects 1 and 2: Sample Transmission 
System Design Costs
Transmission Lines (69 kV, 138 kV, 161 kV, 345 kV) 
New transmission lines include a fixed cost and a variable cost. The fixed cost is 
for the design work, the purchase/installation of the three-phase circuit breakers, 
associated relays, and changes to the substation bus structure. The fixed costs are 
$2,400,000 for a 345 kV line, $1,100,000 for at 161 kV line, $850,000 for a 138 kV line, 
and $500,000 for a 69 kV line. The variable costs depend on the type of conductor 
and the length of the line. The assumed cost in $∙km are given in Table 6.15.
	
Design Projects 1 and 2: Sample Transmission System Design Costs	
409

410	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
Lined impedance data and MVA ratings are determined based on the conductor 
type and tower configuration. The conductor characteristics are given in Table A.4 
of the book. For these design problems, assume a symmetric tower configurations. 
Often the spacings between conductors are provided by the instructor and may  
be student specific. If no values are given, assume a GMD of 2 m for 69 kV, 4 m for 
138 kV, 5 m for 161 kV, and 8 m for 345 kV.
Transformers 
Transformer costs include associated circuit breakers, relaying, and installation.
138∙69 kV, 101 MVA	
	
$1,500,000
138∙69 kV, 168 MVA 	
	
$1,800,000
345∙161 kV, 560 MVA	
	
$7,500,000
Assume any new 138∙69 kV transformer has 0.0025 per unit resistance and 0.07 per 
unit reactance, and any new 345∙161 kV transformer has 0.0004 per unit resistance 
and 0.025 per unit reactance (all on a 100 MVA base).
Bus Work
Upgrade 69-kV substation to also include 138 kV	
$900,000
Upgrade 161-kV substation to also include 345 kV	
$3,500,000
Design Project 3: Power Flow/Short Circuits
Time given: 3 weeks
Approximate time required: 15 hours
Each student is assigned one of the single-line diagrams shown in Figures 6.27 and 
6.28. Also, the length of line 2 in these figures is varied for each student.
Assignment I: Power Flow Preparation 
For the single-line diagram that you have been assigned (Figure 6.27 or 6.28), convert 
all positive-sequence impedance, load, and voltage data to per unit using the given 
Conductor 
Type
Current Rating 
(Amps)
345-kV Lines
161-kV Lines
138-kV Lines
69-kV Lines
Rook
770
$200,000/km
Crow
830
$390,000/km
$330,000/km
$220,000/km
Condor
900
$410,000/km
$350,000/km
$240,000/km
Cardinal
1110
$600,000/km
$430,000/km
$370,000/km
Pheasant
1200
$650,000/km
$450,000/km
Falcon
1380
$700,000/km
TABLE 6.15
Assumed costs

system base quantities. Then using the PowerWorld Simulator, create three input 
data files: bus input data, line input data, and transformer input data. Note that  
bus 1 is the swing bus. Your output for this assignment consists of three power-flow 
input data files.
The purpose of this assignment is to get started and to correct errors before 
going to the next assignment. It requires a knowledge of the per-unit system, which 
was covered in Chapter 3, but may need review.
Assignment 2: Power Flow
Case 1. Run the power flow program and obtain the bus, line, and transformer  
input/output data files that you prepared in Assignment 1.
Case 2. Suggest one method of increasing the voltage magnitude at bus 4 by 5%. 
Demonstrate the effectiveness of your method by making appropriate changes to the 
input data of case 1 and by running the power flow program.
Your output for this assignment consists of 12 data files, 3 input, and 3 output 
data files for each case, along with a one-paragraph explanation of your method for 
increasing the voltage at bus 4 by 5%.
During this assignment, course material contains voltage control methods, in-
cluding use of generator excitation control, tap changing and regulating transform-
ers, static capacitors, static var systems, and parallel transmission lines.
This project continues in Chapters 7 and 9.
FIGURE 6.27
Single-line diagram 
for Design Project 3 
—transmission loop
	
Design Project 3: Power Flow/Short Circuits	
411

412	
Chapter 6  |  Power Flows
REFERENCES
1.	
W. F. Tinney and C. E. Hart, “Power Flow Solutions by Newton’s 
Method,” IEEE Trans. PAS, 86 (November 1967), p. 1449.
2.	
W. F. Tinney and J. W. Walker, “Direct Solution of Sparse Network 
Equations by Optimally Ordered Triangular Factorization,” Proc. IEEE, 
55 (November 1967), pp. 1801–1809.
3.	
Glenn W. Stagg and Ahmed H. El-Abiad, Computer Methods in Power 
System Analysis (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1968).
4.	
N. M. Peterson and W. S. Meyer, “Automatic Adjustment of Transformer 
and Phase Shifter Taps in Newton Power Flow,” IEEE Trans. PAS, 90 
(January-February 1971), pp. 103–108.
5.	
W. D. Stevenson, Jr., Elements of Power Systems Analysis, 4th ed. (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1982).
6.	
A. Bramellar and R. N. Allan, Sparsity (London: Pitman, 1976).
7.	
C. A. Gross, Power Systems Analysis (New York: Wiley, 1979).
8.	
B. Stott, “Fast Decoupled Load Flow,” IEEE Trans. PAS, Vol. PAS 91 
(September–October 1972), pp. 1955–1959.
9.	
T. Overbye and J. Weber, “Visualizing the Electric Grid,” IEEE Spectrum, 
38, 2 (February 2001), pp. 52–58.
10.	
Westinghouse Electric Corporation, Transmission and Distribution Refer-
ence Book, 4th ed. (Pittsburgh: Westinghouse, 1964).
FIGURE 6.28
Single-line diagram 
for Design Project 3 
—radial distribution 
feeder

11.	
Aluminum Association, The Aluminum Electrical Conductor Handbook 
(Washington, D.C.: Aluminum Association).
12.	
A. J. Wood and B. F. Wollenberg, Power Generation, Operation and Con-
trol, 2nd ed. (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1996).
13.	
A. Ellis, “Wind Power Plant Models for System Studies,” Tutorial on 
Fundamentals of Wind Energy, Section V, IEEE PES GM (Calgary, AB: 
July 2009).
14.	
WECC Wind Generator Modeling Group, “WECC Wind Power Plant 
Power Flow Modeling Guide,” WECC, May 2008.
15.	
E.H. Camm et al., “Characteristics of Wind Turbine Generators for 
Wind Power Plants,” Proc. IEEE 2009 General Meeting (Calgary, AB: 
July 2009).
16.	
L. K. Kirchmayer, Economic Operation of Power Systems (New York: 
Wiley, 1958).
17.	
L. K. Kirchmayer and G. W. Stagg, “Evaluation of Methods of Coor-
dinating Incremental Fuel Costs and Incremental Transmission Losses,” 
Transactions AIEE, vol. 71, part III (1952), pp. 513–520.
18.	
G. H. McDaniel and A. F. Gabrielle, “Dispatching Pumped Storage 
Hydro,” IEEE Transmission PAS, vol. PAS-85 (May 1966), pp. 465–471.
19.	
E. B. Dahlin and E. Kindingstad, “Adaptive Digital River Flow Predictor 
for Power Dispatch,” IEEE Transactions PAS, vol. PAS-83 (April 1964), 
pp. 320–327.
20.	
L. K. Kirchmayer, Economic Control of Interconnected Systems (New 
York: Wiley, 1959).
21.	
J. H. Drake et al., “Optimum Operation of a Hydrothermal System,” 
Transactions AIEE (Power Apparatus and Systems), vol. 62 (August 
1962), pp. 242–250.
22.	
A. J. Wood and B. F. Wollenberg, Power Generation, Operation, and Con-
trol (New York: Wiley, 1989).
23.	
2005 and 2014 PJM State of the Market Report, available online at http://
www.monitoringanalytics.com/reports/PJM_State_of_the_Market/2014 
.shtml.
24.	
A. Castillo and R. P. O’Neill, “Survey of Approaches to Solving the 
ACOPF,” U.S. FERC (March 2013).
	
References	
413


415
Symmetrical Faults
7
S
hort circuits occur in power systems when equipment insulation fails due to 
system overvoltages caused by lightning or switching surges, to insulation con-
tamination (salt spray or pollution), or to other mechanical causes. The re-
sulting short circuit or “fault” current is determined by the internal voltages of the 
synchronous machines and by the system impedances between the machine voltages 
and the fault. Short-circuit currents may be several orders of magnitude larger than 
normal operating currents and, if allowed to persist, may cause thermal damage to 
equipment. Windings and busbars may also suffer mechanical damage due to high 
345-kV SF6 circuit 
breaker installation 
at Goshen 
Substation, Idaho 
Falls, Idaho, USA. 
This circuit breaker 
has a continuous 
current rating 
of 2000A and 
an interrupting 
current rating of 
40 kA (Courtesy of 
PacifiCorp.)

416	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
magnetic forces during faults. It is therefore necessary to remove faulted sections of a 
power system from service as soon as possible. Standard EHV protective equipment 
is designed to clear faults within 3 cycles (50 ms at 60 Hz). Lower voltage protective 
equipment operates more slowly (for example, 5 to 20 cycles).
Section 7.1 begins by reviewing series R–L circuit transients followed in  
Section 7.2 by a description of three-phase short-circuit currents at unloaded syn-
chronous machines, analyzing both the ac component, including subtransient, 
transient, and steady-state currents, and the dc component of fault current. These 
results are extended in Sections 7.3 and 7.4 to power system three-phase short 
circuits by means of the superposition principle. We observe that the bus imped-
ance matrix is the key to calculating fault currents. Section 7.5 discusses circuit 
breaker and fuse selection.
Balanced three-phase power systems are assumed throughout this chapter, 
working in per unit.
CASE STUDY
The following case study investigates the short-circuit behavior of wind 
power plants (WPPs) [11]. Conventional power plants including fossil-fueled, 
nuclear, and hydro plants consist of single or several synchronous generat-
ing units, wherein for each unit the rotational speed is fixed and the mag-
netic flux is controlled via exciter windings; the magnetic flux and the rotor 
rotate synchronously. A WPP consists of several wind turbine generators 
(WTGs), presently available in sizes between 1 and 5 MW, which are dis-
persed over a wide geographical area. There are four main types of WTGs: 
Type 1—fixed-speed turbine with a squirrel-cage induction generator;  
Type 2—variable-speed turbine with a wound-rotor induction genera-
tor that has a variable resistor in series with the rotor winding; Type 3—
variable-speed turbine with a doubly fed induction generator; and Type 
4—variable-speed turbine with a permanent-magnet synchronous genera-
tor and ac-dc-ac power-electronic converter. The short-circuit current char-
acteristics for both symmetrical and unsymmetrical faults are examined for 
each of the four types of WTGs.
Short-Circuit Modeling of a Wind Power Plant
E. Muljadi
Fellow, IEEE
V. Gevorgian
Member, IEEE
National Renewable Energy Laboratory

	
Case Study	
417
Introduction
Energy and environmental issues have 
become one of the biggest challenges 
facing the world. In response to energy 
needs and environmental concerns, 
renewable energy technologies are 
considered the future technologies of 
choice [1, 2]. Renewable energy is har-
vested from nature, and it is clean and 
free. However, it is widely accepted that 
renewable energy is not a panacea that 
comes without challenges. With the 
federal government’s aggressive goal of 
achieving 20% wind energy penetration 
by 2030, it is necessary to understand 
the challenges that must be overcome 
when using renewable energy.
In the years to come, there will 
be more and more wind power plants 
(WPPs) connected to the grid. With the 
goal of 20% wind penetration by 2030, 
the WPP’s operation should be well 
planned. The power system switch-
gear and power system protection for 
WPPs should be carefully designed 
to be compatible with the operation 
of conventional synchronous genera-
tors connected to the same grid. This  
paper attempts to illustrate the behav-
ior of short-circuit current (SCC) con-
tributions for different types of WTGs.
Conventional Power Plants 
versus Wind Power Plants
A conventional power plant con-
sists of a single or several large (e.g.,  
100 MW) generators. The prime 
mover of the generator can be steam, 
gas, or a combustion engine. The gen-
erator is controllable and is adjustable 
up to a maximum limit and down to 
minimum limit. The power output is 
dispatched according to the load fore-
cast, influenced by human operation, 
and is based on optimum operation 
(i.e., scheduled operation). The power 
plant is usually located relatively close 
to the load center.
The typical conventional gener-
ator used is a synchronous generator. 
The rotational speed is fixed—no slip; 
and the flux is controlled via exciter 
windings. The magnetic flux and the 
rotor rotate synchronously.
A WPP consists of many (hun-
dreds) of wind turbine generators 
(WTGs). Currently, available WTG 
sizes are between 1 MW and 5 MW. 
The prime mover of the WTG is wind, 
and it is free, natural, and pollution-
free. The controllability of the WPP 
is typically curtailment (spilling the 
wind). The energy production of a 
WPP depends on the wind variability, 
and its dispatch capability is based on 
wind forecasting. It is influenced more 
by nature (wind) than human factors, 
with the goal set on maximizing energy 
production from renewable resources  
(i.e., unscheduled operation). Large- 
scale WPPs are located in high-wind 
resource regions, and these may be far 
from the load center.
Because a WPP covers a very 
large area, there are power output di-
versities found in a typical WPP. Each 
WTG in a WPP will be located at dif-
ferent electrical distances from the 
substation (diversity in line imped-
ance). Each turbine may be driven by 
different instantaneous wind speeds. 
Short-Circuit Modeling of a Wind Power Plant 
by E. Muljadi and V. Gevorgian, Conference 
Paper NREL/CP-5500-50632, Power & Energy 
Society General Meeting, July 24 –29, 2011, 
Detroit MI, p i–ii, 1–10.

418	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
Thus, the operating condition of each 
turbine may be slightly different from 
others within the WPP.
Operation of Wind Turbine  
Generators
The generator at each turbine should 
be protected individually and inde-
pendently because of the electrical di-
versity of the WPP. In practice, this is 
an advantage of a WPP compared to 
a conventional power plant. During a 
disturbance, the electrical characteris-
tics at each terminal of the turbine is 
different from the other turbines, and 
only the most affected WTGs will 
be disconnected from the grid. For 
general faults (distance faults at the 
transmission point), only 5% – 15% 
of the turbines are disconnected from 
the grid [3]. This is partially because 
WPPs are required to have zero voltage 
ride-through capability. Thus, the loss 
of generation is not as severe as in a 
power plant with large generators.
At the turbine level, the WTG 
generates at low voltage levels (480 V 
to 690 V). For the Type 1 and Type 2  
WTGs, it is typically compensated 
by switched capacitor banks to gen-
erate at a unity power factor. Type 3 
and Type 4 generators are operated 
to generate a constant voltage at a 
designated bus, or may be operated 
at constant power factor or constant 
reactive power. The generator is con-
nected to a pad-mounted transformer 
to step up the voltage to 34.5 kV.
Collector System
The collector system consists of 
miles of line feeders connecting the 
high side of the pad-mounted trans-
former to the substation. Usually, 
wind turbines are divided into groups 
of turbines connected in a daisy-chain 
fashion using underground cables. 
These groupings are then connected to 
the substation by either underground 
cables or overhead lines at 34.5 kV. 
Since it is not practical to model hun-
dreds of tur bines in a power flow cal-
culation or in a dynamic simulation, 
it is common to find the equivalent of 
the turbines as either a single equiva-
lent turbine representation or multiple 
turbine representation [4, 5].
Short Circuit Behavior under 
Symmetrical Faults
A utility-sized wind turbine is larger 
than non-grid wind turbine applica-
tions. In the early days, the turbines 
were sized from 10 kW to 100 kW. 
Nowadays, wind turbines are sized 
above 1000 kW (1 MW).
R–L Circuits
Short-circuit faults can occur in vari-
ous locations of the power system in 
a number of different ways including 
line-to-ground and line-to-line faults. 
For simplicity purposes, we’ll con-
sider a symmetrical three-phase fault 
since it is the easiest to analyze. A 
simple equivalent diagram of a power 
system under such fault conditions is 
shown in Figure 1(a).
The fault in Figure 1(a) is rep-
resented by a shorting switch. Im-
mediately after the fault, the SCC  
contribution from the generator can 
be found using the following equation:
ug 5 Ldi
dt 1 iR
(1)
Where ug is the instantaneous 
voltage on the generator terminals, and 

R and L are line resistance and induc-
tance. Solving equation (1) for current
i 5
Vg
Z  sin 1vt 1 a 2 atan1
X
R22
2 e2R
Lt3
Vg
Z  sin 1a 2 atan 1
X
R224(2)
Where Vg is peak generator volt-
age, Z 5 ÏR2 1 X 2 is line impedance, 
and a is the voltage phase. The solu-
tion (2) has two components; the first 
component is stationary and varies  
sinusoidally with time as shown in  
Figure 1(b). It represents the steady 
SCC driven by the voltage source Eg. 
	
Case Study	
419
(b) ac component
R
Fault
X
Xg
Vg
Vgrid
Isc
Eg
Generator
Transmission Line
Grid
(d) Fault current
0
210
0
10
20
(a) Equivalent diagram of symmetrical fault 
10
210
0
0
0.05
0.1
0
210
25
0
0.05
0.1
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
(c) dc component 
Figure 1 Symmetrical Three-Phase Fault

420	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
The second component decays expo-
nentially [as shown in Figure 1(c)] with 
a time constant equal to R
L. It represents 
the dc component of the current and 
the natural response of the circuit 
without the excitation provided by Eg.
The steady-state symmetrical 
fault rms value of the SCC Isc from 
the generator can be calculated from 
the first component of equation (2) 
and is shown in
Isc 5
Vg /Ï2
ÏR2 1 X 2
(3)
Obviously, the steady-state fault 
current depends on the impedance of 
the line. The closer the fault occurrence 
location to generator terminals, the 
larger the SCC contributed to the fault.
The peak magnitude of the 
transient component in equation (2) 
depends on line impedance as well, 
but it also depends on impedance  
angle w 5 atan _X 
R+ at the point of the 
fault. The dc term does not exist if 
f 5 0, and will have its maximum ini-
tial value of 
Vg
Z, where a 2 w 5 6p
2 .
The worst case scenario for the 
SCC peak value (including the dc 
component) for the circuit presented 
in Figure 1(a) is shown in equation (3).
So, depending on the time when 
the fault occurs, the circuit character-
istics and the transient current wave-
form will be different. This means 
that in three-phase systems, the phase 
transient currents will have different 
peaks due to a 1208 shift in voltages.
In large power systems with many 
generators and transmission lines, the 
actual fault current at any location 
in the grid will be the sum of collec-
tive contributions from all generators, 
making the above described analysis  
extremely complicated. So, some sort 
of simplification is needed for the fault 
current calculation in such a case.
SCC from a Type 1 WTG
The first generation of utility-sized 
WTGs is a fixed-speed turbine with 
a squirrel-cage induction generator 
(SCIG) and is called a Type 1 gener-
ator in wind-related applications. The 
SCIG generates electricity when it is 
driven above synchronous speed. The 
difference between the synchronous 
speed and the operating speed of the 
induction generator is measured by its 
slip (in per unit or in percent). A nega-
tive slip indicates that the wind turbine 
operates in generating mode. Nor-
mal operating slips for an induction 
generator are between 0% and 21%. 
The simplified single-phase equivalent 
circuit of a squirrel-cage induction  
machine is shown in Figure 2 [6].
The circuit in Figure 2 is referred 
to the stator where RS and Rr are sta-
tor and rotor resistances, Lss and Lrs 
are stator and rotor leakage inductan­
ces, Lm is magnetizing reactance, and 
s is rotor slip. The example single- 
line connection diagram of a Type 1 
generator is shown in Figure 3. In the 
case of a voltage fault, the inertia of 
the wind rotor drives the generator  
after the voltage drops at the generator  
Figure 2  Equivalent circuit of a Type 1 
generator
Lss
Lrs
Ir
Is
Rs
Lm
Vs
Rr/s

terminals. The rotor flux may not 
change instantaneously right after the 
voltage drop due to a fault. Therefore, 
voltage is produced at the generator 
terminals causing fault current flow 
into the fault until the rotor flux de-
cays to zero. This process takes a few 
electrical cycles. The fault current 
produced by an induction generator 
must be considered when selecting the 
rating for circuit breakers and fuses. 
The fault current is limited by genera-
tor impedance (and can be calculated 
from parameters in Figure 2) and im-
pedance of the system from the short 
circuit to the generator terminals.
The initial value of fault cur-
rent fed in by the induction genera-
tor is close to the locked rotor-inrush 
current. Assuming a three-phase 
symmetrical fault, an analytical solu-
tion can be found to estimate the  
current contribution of the generator. 
The SCC of an induction generator 
can be calculated as [7]:
i(t) 5 Ï2VS
Z9S
 3e2 t
TS9
  sin(a)
2 (1 2 s) e2 t
Tr9
 sin(vt 1 a)4 (4)
where a is the voltage phase  
angle for a given phase, s is the 
leakage factor, Z9S 5 X9S 5 vL9S is 
stator transient reactance, and T9S  
and T9r  are stator and rotor time con-
stants representing the damping of 
the dc component in stator and rotor 
windings. The transient stator and 
rotor inductances L9S  and L9r  can be 
determined from the circuits shown  
in Figure 4.
L9S 5 LSs 1
Lrs Lm
Lrs 1 Lm
L9r 5 Lr s 1
LSs Lm
LSs 1 Lm

T9S 5 L9S
RS
	
T9r 5 L9r
Rr

(6)
s 5 1 2
L2
m
LSLr

(7)
LS 5 LSs 1 Lm 
Lr 5 Lrs 1 Lm
(5)
(8)
	
Case Study	
421
Induction
Generator
Turbine
Transformer
Collector
Bus
Grid
Gearbox
Figure 3 Type 1 WTG
Lr
Ls
Lss
Lrs
Lss
Lrs
Lm
Lm
Figure 4  Stator and rotor transient 
inductances

422	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
Equation (4) is different from 
equation (2). The first distinction is 
that there is no voltage source driv-
ing the fault current as in equa- 
tion (2). The fault current is driven 
by the decaying flux trapped in the 
rotor winding as represented by the 
right portion of the equation (4). 
The second distinction is the rotor 
time constant T9r  governs the dy-
namic of the decaying rotor flux [ac 
component of the SCC as shown in 
Figure 5(a)] and the decaying dc com-
ponent of the fault current [refer to 
Figure 5(b)] is governed by the sta-
tor time constant T9S . The larger the 
leakage inductances (s), the smaller 
is the fault current amplitude. The 
third distinction is that the fault cur-
rent dies out after the flux driving the 
fault current depleted to zero. Note, 
the dc and ac transient components  
of the SCC flowing out of the stator 
windings induce fault currents in the 
rotor winding and vice versa until the 
magnetic flux is depleted.
The current calculated from 
equation (4) is shown in Figure 6  
using parameters for a typical 2-MW 
induction generator when the pre-
fault voltage is 0.7 p.u. As can be seen 
from Figure 6, the current reaches 
the maximum value at p (first half a 
period). Therefore, it may be a good 
approximation to calculate the max-
imum (peak) current by substituting  
t 5 T/2 into equation (4). The result-
ing equation for peak current will be
imax 5 Ï2VS
Z9S
 3e2
T
2TS9 1 (1 2 s) e2 T
2T  9r 4  (9)
It was demonstrated experi-
mentally in [8] that equation (9) gives 
satisfactory accuracy for peak current 
assessment. The resulting current 
is shown in Figure 7. A detailed dy-
namic model of a Type 1 WTG is sim-
ulated in PSCAD™. A symmetrical 
three-phase fault is simulated and the 
resulting SCC is compared to the sim-
ulation result of the simplified repre-
sentation as described in equation (4). 
It is shown in Figure 7 that the two 
traces are very closely matched.
From equation (4), it is shown 
that the operating slip does not influ-
ence the short-circuit transient behav-
ior. To check the influence of the slip, 
we performed symmetrical three-phase 
faults on a Type 1 WTG for two differ-
ent slips using the detailed model. As 
shown in Figure 8, the prefault current 
and the postfault current for the two 
different operating slips are very dis-
tinct. Similarly, the frequencies of the 
(a) ac component 
(b) dc component 
10
5
0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
4
3
2
1
0
25
210
Figure 5 The two components of the SCC for a Type 1 WTG

	
Case Study	
423
Figure 6  SCC from a Type 1 WTG
Min Isc-peak
Max Isc-peak
0
8
6
4
2
0
22
24
0.1
0.2
TIME (sec)
0.3
0.4
Short circuit current
dc component
CURRENT (P.U.)
15
10
5
0
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
25
CURRENT (P.U.)
PSCAD model
Using Equation (4)
TIME (sec)
Figure 7  SCC comparison between the output of the 
detailed model and the output of the simplified 
model simulated for a Type 1 WTG
PHASE A CURRENTS
8
6
4
1.05
1.1
1.15
1.2
1.25
TIME (sec)
CURRENT (kA)
1.3
1.35
1.4
2
0
22
24
13-rated slip
13-close to 0 slip
Figure 8  SCC comparison for two different slips

424	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
SCC during the fault are not the same 
for two different operating slips. How-
ever, the peak values of the SCC of the 
induction generator operating at two 
different slips are very closely matched.
SCC from a Type 2 WTG
The variable slip generator is essen-
tially a wound-rotor induction gener-
ator with a variable resistor connected 
in series to the rotor winding (Type 2  
generator). This external resistor is 
controlled by a high-frequency switch. 
Below rated power, the resistor con-
trol is inactive, so the system operates 
as a conventional induction generator. 
Above rated power, the resistor con-
trol allows the slip to vary, so variable 
speed operation is possible for a speed 
range of about 10% [9]. If the blade 
pitch angle is kept constant at zero de-
grees, the rotor speed, and thus the slip, 
will vary with wind speed. However, 
operation at higher slips generate a lot 
of loss because of the rotor resistance. 
Thus, the heat loss can be excessive. On 
the other hand, if the blade pitch angle 
is controlled to keep the rotor speeds 
within a small deviation from the rated 
slip, the losses in rotor resistance can 
be minimized. An equivalent electrical 
diagram of a variable-slip induction 
generator is shown in Figure 9, with a 
variable external resistor Rext.
The connection diagram exam-
ple for this type of generator is shown 
in Figure 10. In case of three-phase 
symmetrical fault, the same equations 
as for a Type 1 generator are applied. 
The only difference is for rotor time 
constant that needs to account for ad-
ditional external resistance.
The modified rotor time constant 
can be calculated by adding the effect 
of the external resistor Rext (refer to  
Table 2, p. 429), where Rext is the value 
of external resistance that happens to 
be in the circuit at the time of the fault. 
The effect of such additional resistance 
on SCC is shown in Figure 11. So, add-
ing the external resistors doubles the 
overall rotor resistance. The modified 
equation for SCC, maximum current, 
and the rotor transient time constant 
can then be derived using the values 
shown in Table 1 (see p. 428).
The maximum current occurs 
at DT, the time after a fault when cur-
rent reaches its first peak. In this case, 
this additional resistance decreases the 
overall ac component in current, but 
does not much affect the first peak 
value of the current since the increase 
in resistance is relatively small. The 
same conclusion can be made by ana-
lyzing equations (4) and (9), where the 
additional external resistance has an 
effect on a second term that represents 
Rs
Lss
Lrs
Ir
Is
Lm
Vs
Rr/s
Rext/s
Figure 9  Equivalent circuit for a Type 2 generator

	
Case Study	
425
the ac component of the current. As 
shown in Tables 1 and 2, the impact 
of the external rotor resistance on the 
SCC is two-fold: it reduces the SCC 
magnitude, and it shortens the rotor 
time constant (decay time of the SCC).
SCC from a Type 3 WTG
A Type 3 WTG is implemented by 
a doubly fed induction generator 
(DFIG). It is a variable-speed WTG 
where the rotor speed is allowed to 
vary within a slip range of 630%. 
Thus, the power converter can be 
sized to about 30% of rated power. 
The equivalent electrical diagram of 
a DFIG is shown in Figure 12.
It is similar to one for a regular 
induction generator except for addi-
tional rotor voltage, representing volt-
age produced by a power converter. 
Under normal operation, this voltage 
is actually from a current-controlled 
power converter with the ability to con-
trol the real and reactive power output 
instantaneously and independently. 
The capability to control flux (flux- 
oriented controller—FOC) in induc-
tion machines has been used in the  
motor drive industry since the seventies.
The typical connection diagram 
for a DFIG (Type 3) WTG is shown 
in Figure 12. In an ideal situation, the 
power converter connected to the rotor 
winding should be able to withstand 
the currents induced by the dc and 
ac components flowing in the stator 
winding. However, the components 
of the power converter (IGBT, diode, 
capacitor, etc.) are designed to han-
dle only normal currents and normal 
dc bus voltage. A crowbar system is 
Gearbox
Induction
Generator
Turbine
Transformer
Variable
Resistor
Collector
Bus
Grid
Figure 10  Connection diagram for a Type 2 WTG
Figure 11  Effect of external resistance for a Type 2 WTG
0
8
6
4
2
0
22
24
0.1
0.2
TIME (sec)
0.3
0.4
Rotor resistance only
Rotor 1 external resistance
CURRENT (P.U.)

426	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
Rs
Lss
Lrs
Ir
Is
Lm
Vs
Rr/s
Vs/s
Figure 12  Simplified equivalent circuit of a DFIG
DFIG
Turbine
Transformer
Collector
Bus Grid
Power Converter
Thyristors
Crowbar resistors
Gearbox
Figure 13  Connection diagram for a Type 3 WTG
CURRENT (KA)
CURRENT (KA)
POWER (MW)
TIME (sec)
TIME (sec)
0
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1
2
3
4
24
2.00E202
1.50E202
1.00E202
5.00E203
0.00E100
25.00E203
1
0
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
TIME (sec)
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
23
22
21
20.5
21
21.5
1.5
0.5
Figure 14 The fault currents, the rotor currents, and the power 
consumed by the crowbar circuits in a Type 3 WTG

usually used for protecting the power 
electronics converter from overvolt-
age and thermal breakdown during 
short-circuit faults. A crowbar is usu-
ally implemented to allow the insertion 
of additional resistance into the rotor 
winding to divert the SCC in the ro-
tor winding from damaging the power 
converter. Additional dynamic braking 
on the dc bus is also used to limit the dc 
bus voltage.
During faults, the rotor wind-
ings are essentially short circuited by 
an equivalent adjustable crowbar re-
sistance RCB. The modified equation 
for SCC, maximum current, and the 
rotor transient time constant can then 
be derived using the values shown in 
Table 1 [7]. In a Type 3 WTG, how-
ever, the size of the crowbar is usually 
controlled, such that the actual fault 
current is more controllable than the 
simplified assumption. In Figure 14, 
three-phase fault currents are shown 
to be well regulated by proper control 
of the crowbar resistance. In this case, 
the crowbar circuit installed on the 
rotor winding is controlled to main-
tain the dc bus voltage constant.
A dynamic braking resistor is 
also installed on the dc bus to help reg-
ulate the dc bus. Figure 14 shows the 
size of the real power modulated in  
the crowbar during the faults. There 
are also dynamic braking resistors and 
a dc chopper installed on the dc bus to 
help regulate the dc bus voltage during 
transients. The corresponding rotor 
currents are also shown in Figure 14.  
Because of differences in crowbar  
implementation from one turbine man-
ufacturer to the other, a protection engi-
neer should evaluate the recommended 
value provided by the manufacturers.  
However, if none is available, the val-
ues of minimum and maximum SCCs 
presented in Table 1 can be used.
Type 4 WTGs
An example of a Type 4 direct-drive 
WTG with permanent-magnet syn-
chronous generator (PMSG) is shown 
in Figure 15. This is a variable-speed 
WTG implemented with full power 
conversion. Recent advances and 
lower cost of power electronics make 
it feasible to build variable-speed 
wind turbines with power converters 
with the same rating as the turbines. 
The full power conversion allows sepa-
ration between the WTG and the grid, 
thus, the mechanical dynamic can be 
buffered from entering the grid and 
the transient dynamic on the grid can 
be buffered from entering the wind tur-
bine dynamic. Thus, while the grid is at 
60 Hz, the stator winding of the gen-
erator may operate at variable frequen-
cies. The temporary imbalance between 
aerodynamic power and generated 
power during a transient is handled by 
the pitch control, dynamic brake, and 
power converter control.
The SCC contribution for a 
three-phase fault is limited to its rated 
current or a little above its rated cur-
rent. It is common to design a power 
converter for a Type 4 wind turbine 
with an overload capability of 10% 
above rated. Note that in any fault 
condition, the generator stays con-
nected to the power converter and is 
buffered from the faulted lines on the 
grid. Thus, although there is a fault on 
the grid, the generator output current 
is controlled to stay within the current 
limit (e.g., 1.1 p.u.). However, keep in 
mind that with a fault on the grid, the  
	
Case Study	
427

428	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
output power delivered to the grid is 
less than rated power. Although the 
currents can be made to balance, due 
to reduced voltage and/or unbalanced 
voltage, only a reduced output power 
can be delivered. In Type 4 WTGs, the 
SCC is a controlled parameter. So, such 
WTGs can be represented as a constant 
three-phase balanced current source in a 
short-circuit models. The priority of the 
real power versus reactive power during 
the fault depends on the prior setting 
of the controller. However, the current 
limit of the power converter must be fol-
lowed to protect the power switches.
SCC Comparison for  
Symmetrical Faults
The SCCs for different types of wind 
turbines are not the same. For each 
turbine type, the peak value of the 
magnitude of the SCC is affected by 
the transient reactance, the prefault 
voltage, the effective rotor resistances, 
and the instant the fault occurs.
For turbine Types 1 through 3, 
the SCC declines as the fault progresses 
and eventually ceases as the rotor flux is 
depleted. For Type 4 WTGs, the SCC 
can be maintained constant.
The SCC transient behavior is 
affected by the stator time constant 
and the rotor time constant for Type 1  
through Type 3 WTGs. The Type 4  
generators can generate constant cur-
rent during the fault.
In Table 1, the list parameters 
are shown. These parameters can 
be used to substitute the parameters 
from equation (4) and equation (6) 
for different types of WTGs. Table 2 
lists the maximum and minimum pos-
sible values of the peak of SCC. It is 
shown that the Type 1 WTG can pro-
duce the largest SCC. The instant of 
the fault has affects on the magnitude 
of the SCC. The maximum value is 
based on the peak of the ac compo-
nent and the highest value of the dc 
component, and the minimum value 
is based on the peak value of the ac 
component only.
For a Type 2 WTG, the maximum 
value is computed when Rext 5 0 V. 
Turbine
Transformer
Collector
Bus
Grid
PWM Converter
PMSG
Figure 15  PMSG direct-drive WTG diagram
WTG
Type 1
Type 2
Type 3
Z 9S
X 9S 5 vL9S
ÏX 92
S 1 R 2
ext
ÏX 92
S 1 R 2
CB
T 9r
L9r
Rr
L9r
Rr 1 Rext
L9r
Rr 1 RCB
TABLE  1
Modified Values for Scc Calculation for Different Types of Wtgs

The minimum value is computed when 
the slip reaches 10% above synchro-
nous speed. And for a Type 3 WTG, 
the maximum value is computed when 
the crowbar shorts the rotor winding 
and the minimum value is computed 
when the power converter can fol-
low the commanded current (i.e., in 
case the fault occurs far away from 
the point of interconnection, the re-
maining terminal voltage is relatively 
high enough to let the power conver-
ter operate normally and supply the 
commanded currents). Note, that 
for a symmetrical fault, the actual  
fault current for each phase is different 
from the other phases due to the fact 
that the time of the fault occurs at a  
different phase angle for different 
phases, thus affecting the dc offset. 
For a Type 4 WTG, the stator current 
can always be controlled because of 
the nature of power converter which 
is based on current controlled voltage 
source converter.
An example of SCC for Type 
4 WTGs is given in the next section. 
In this section, the SCC is analyzed 
at the terminals of the generator. 
In an actual WPP, the faults will 
likely occur at the transmission 
side. Thus, the impact of the cable 
capacitance, plant level reactive 
compensation, and wind plant trans-
former connections are not included. 
References [10 –14] provide good 
sources of information for the WPP  
environment.
Unsymmetrical Faults
The nature of the fault produces a 
different response for different wind 
turbine types. In this section, the ob-
servation of the short-circuit behavior 
for unsymmetrical faults on different 
types of WTGs is presented. Note 
that operating an induction genera-
tor under an unbalanced condition 
creates torque pulsation and unbal-
anced currents. If this condition per-
sists for a long period of time, it may 
excite other parts of the wind turbine, 
and the unbalanced currents may 
create unequal heating in the three-
phase windings and, thus, shorten the  
life of the winding insulation.
Unlike in a symmetrical three-
phase fault, the positive-sequence 
voltage source continues to drive the 
fault current until the fault or the 
generator is removed from the circuit. 
The remaining un-faulted (normal) 
phases continue to maintain the air 
gap flux. The initial conditions of the 
fault currents are different for each 
phase. The three line currents usually 
	
Case Study	
429
WTG
Type 1
Type 2
Type 3
Type 4
Max
ISC_PEAK
2 Ï2Vs
X 9S
2 Ï2Vs
X 9S
2 Ï2Vs
X 9S
1.1
IRATED
Min
ISC_PEAK
Ï2Vs
X 9S
Ï2Vs
ÏX92
S 1 (9R9r)2
1.1
IRATED
0
TABLE  2
Maximum and Minimum Possible Value of the Scc

430	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
show a different dc offset, which 
eventually settles out over time.
To explore the short-circuit 
behavior of unsymmetrical faults 
presented in this section, a detailed 
model of the system is developed in 
PSCAD™.
Single Line-to-Ground (SLG) Faults
The single line-to-ground fault is the 
most likely to occur in the power sys-
tem. The magnetic flux in the air gap, 
although smaller than normal and 
unbalanced, is maintained by the re-
maining un-faulted lines. Thus, the 
short circuit in SLG faults will con-
tinue to flow until the circuit breaker 
removes the fault from the circuit.
Figure 16 shows the SCC of 
a Type 1 WTG for three lines-to-
ground (3LG) and an SLG fault. In 
the symmetrical fault, the SCC dies 
out rather quickly, while in a SLG 
fault, the SCC is driven by the re-
maining two phases and it continues  
to flow until the short circuit is re-
moved from the circuit. The peak 
current during a SLG fault is typ-
ically higher than for a 3LG fault 
(there is a quicker decay of current 
during symmetrical a 3LG fault due 
to magnetic field collapse). The dif-
ference in peak currents for both 3LG 
and SLG faults depends on generator 
parameters, fault location, etc. Note 
also that the presence of the posi-
tive sequence, the negative sequence, 
and zero sequence currents in the 
unsymmetrical faults influence the 
size of the SCC. No comparison has 
been made between dynamic simula-
tion results and results obtained via 
symmetrical component calculations 
(this is planned for future work).
In Figure 17, the SCC for a 
Type 3 WTG is shown both for the 
three-phase currents and the corre-
sponding sequence components. The 
changes in positive sequence and the 
sudden appearance of the negative se-
quence are also shown. The absence 
of the zero sequence current is a  
consequence of transformer winding 
connections.
215
210
25
0
5
10
15
1
1.05
1.1
1.15
1.2
1.25
1.3
1.35
1.4
CURRENT (kA)
TIME (sec)
I3a
I3b 
I3c  
210
25
0
5
10
15
20
1
1.05
1.1
1.15
1.2
1.25
1.3
1.35
1.4
CURRENT (kA)
TIME (sec)
I3a
I3b 
I3c  
Figure 16 Voltage and SCC for 3LG and SLG for a Type 1 WTG

Line-to-Line (LL) and  
Line-to-Line-to-Ground (LLG) 
Faults
The line-to-line fault and the line-to-
line-to-ground fault also maintain  
the air-gap flux during the fault. 
Output power of the generator will 
be limited and pulsating due to an 
unbalanced condition. The SCC 
will continue to flow until the circuit 
breaker removes the fault from the 
circuit.
As shown on Figures 18 and 19, 
the type of fault affects the existence 
of the zero sequence component in 
the SCC of the WPP. Thus, the line 
currents in the three phases are dis-
tributed differently based on its pos-
itive sequence, negative sequence, and 
the zero sequence magnitudes and 
phase angles.
	
Case Study	
431
6
1.5
1
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.7
Positive
Negative
0.8
0.9
1
20.5
0
4
2
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
22
24
26
CURRENT (KA)
CURRENT (kA)
TIME (sec)
TIME (sec)
(a)
Three phase currents 
(b)
Positive, negative and zero sequence currents 
Zero
Figure 17  SCC for SLG for a Type 3 WTG
215
210
25
0
5
10
15
CURRENT (kA)
TIME (sec)
I3a 
I3b 
I3c  
20.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
1
CURRENT (kA)
TIME (sec)
I3+ 
I3-
I3o 
1.05
1.1
1.15
1.2
1.25
1.3
1.35
1.4
1
1.05
1.1
1.15
1.2
1.25
1.3
1.35
1.4
Figure 18 The SCC for a LL fault of a Type 2 WTG

432	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
 
 
220
210
0
10
20
CURRENT (kA)
TIME (sec)
I3a 
I3b 
I3c  
21
0
1
2
3
CURRENT (kA)
TIME (sec)
I3+ 
I3-
I3o 
1
1.05
1.1
1.15
1.2
1.25
1.3
1.35
1.4
1
1.05
1.1
1.15
1.2
1.25
1.3
1.35
1.4
Figure 19 The SCC for LLG fault of a Type 2 WTG
Figure 20  SCC for Type 4 WTG for different types of faults
(a) 3 LG 
(b) SLG 
(c) LLG 
LL
(d)
24
22
0
2
4
2.95
3
3.05
3.1
3.15
3.2
3.25
3.3
CURRENT (kA)
TIME (sec)
24
22
0
2
4
2.95
3
3.05
3.1
3.15
3.2
3.25
3.3
CURRENT (kA)
TIME (sec)
24
22
0
2
4
2.95
3
3.05
3.1
3.15
3.2
3.25
3.3
CURRENT (kA)
TIME (sec)
24
22
0
2
4
2.95
3
3.05
3.1
3.15
3.2
3.25
3.3
CURRENT (kA)
TIME (sec)

SCC for the Type 4 WTG  
under Different Faults
In Figure 20, the fault currents for 
a Type 4 WTG are shown. Note, 
that the power converter buffers the 
generator from the grid. The SCC 
is basically controlled by the power 
converter. Hence, the line currents 
are symmetrical currents at different 
types of unsymmetrical faults. The 
postfault recovery may slightly differ 
for different faults.
Conclusions
In this case study, the SCC contribu-
tions of different WTGs for faults at 
the terminal of the generator were 
simulated using simplified model to 
determine SCC characteristics for 
symmetrical faults. The simplified 
model represents the size and the 
time constants governing the SCC 
behavior. A table summarizing dif-
ferent fault impedance and transient 
rotor time constants is provided. An-
other table summarizing the range of 
SCCs for different types of WTGs is 
presented in Table 2. For Type 1 and 
Type 2 WTGs, the maximum and the 
minimum values depend on timing of 
the fault and the parameters and the 
operating condition of the induction 
generator. For Type 3 WTGs, the con-
trol and the operation of the crowbar 
and dynamic braking affects the char-
acteristics of the SCC. For Type 4  
WTGs, the SCC is controllable by the 
power converter.
To 
compute 
unsymmetrical 
faults, detailed models were used to 
demonstrate the behavior of SCCs 
of different WTGs. As expected, the 
SCC continues to flow until the fault 
is cleared from the circuit or the gen-
erator is disconnected from the grid. 
The terminal voltage and currents are 
sustained longer because the line volt-
ages, except from the faulted phase, 
are able to sustain air gap flux. The 
nature of SCC is not only affected 
by the type of WTG, but also by 
the nature of the faults, the winding 
connections of the generator, and 
the transformers between the fault 
and the generator. Auxiliary compo-
nents (reactive compensations), cable 
length and capacitance, and the di-
versity of the WPP contribute to the 
size and nature of the SCC, one way 
or another.
Each WPP is unique. Therefore, 
recommended practice from local re-
liability organizations, the manufac-
turers, transmission planners, wind 
plant developers, and the local util-
ities should be followed very closely.
Acknowledgment 
This work is supported by the U.S. 
Department of Energy and California  
Energy Commission.
References
1.	 U.S. Department of Energy—
Energy Efficiency and Renew-
able Energy, “20% Wind Energy 
by 2030—Increasing Wind 
Energy’s Contribution to U.S. 
Electricity Supply,” May, 2008.
2.	 J. Charles Smith, Michael R. 
Milligan, Edgar A. DeMeo, 
and Brian Parsons, “Utility 
wind Integration and operating 
impact state of the art,” IEEE 
Trans. Power Systems, vol. 22, 
pp. 900–908, Aug. 2007.
	
Case Study	
433

434	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
3.	 E. Muljadi, Z. Mills, A. Ellis, 
and R. Foster, “Fault Analysis 
at a Wind Power Plant for a One 
Year of Observation,” presented 
at the IEEE Power Engineering 
Society, General Meeting, Pitts-
burgh, PA, July 20–24, 2008.
4.	 E. Muljadi, S. Pasupulati, 
A. Ellis, and D. Kosterev, 
“Method of Equivalencing for 
a Large Wind Power Plant with 
Multiple Turbine Representa-
tion,” presented at the IEEE 
Power Engineering Society, 
General Meeting, Pittsburgh, 
PA, July 20–24, 2008.
5.	 E. Muljadi, C. P. Butterfield,  
A. Ellis, J. Mechenbier, J.  
Hochheimer, R. Young, N. 
Miller, R. Delmerico, R. 
Zavadil, and J. C. Smith, 
“Equivalencing the collector 
system of a large wind power 
plant,” in Proc. 2006 IEEE 
Power Engineering Society 
General Meeting. June 18–22, 
2006.
6.	 Nader Samaan, Robert 
Zavadil, J. Charles Smith, and 
Jose Conto, “Modeling of 
Wind Power Plants for Short 
Circuit Analysis in the Trans-
mission Network,” in Proc. of 
IEEE/PES Transmission and 
Distribution Conference, Chi-
cago, USA, April 2008.
7.	 J. Moren, and S.W.H. de Haan, 
“Short-Circuit Current of 
Wind Turbines with Doubly 
Fed Induction Generator,” 
IEEE Transactions on Energy 
Conversion, Vol. 22, No. 1, 
March 2007.
8.	 Sulawa, Zabara, et al. “Short 
circuit current of induction 
generators.” IEEE ISCAS 2007 
proceedings.
9.	 O. Anaya-Lara, N. Jenkins,  
et al. Wind energy generation: 
modeling and control. Wiley. 
ISBN 9780470714331.
10.	 IEEE PES Wind Plant Collec-
tor System Design Working 
Group,“Wind Power Plant 
Substation and Collector 
System Redundancy, Reliabil-
ity and Economics,” Proceed-
ings of the 2009 IEEE Power 
and Energy Society General 
Meeting.
11.	 IEEE PES Wind Plant Collec-
tor System Design Working 
Group, “Power Transformer 
Application for Wind Plant 
Substation,” Proceedings of the 
2009 IEEE Power and Energy 
Society General Meeting.
12.	 IEEE PES Wind Plant 
Collector System Design 
Working Group, “Wind 
Power Plant Grounding, 
Overvoltage Protection, and 
Insulation Coordination,” 
Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE 
Power and Energy Society 
General Meeting.
13.	 WECC Modeling and Vali-
dation Work Group, “WECC 
Wind Power Plant Power Flow 
Modeling Guide Prepared.” 
May 2008.
14.	 “Short-circuit currents in 
three-phase a.c. systems–Part 
0: Calculation of currents,” 
IEC Standard 60909-0, July 
2001.

Biographies
Eduard 
Muljadi 
(M’82-SM’94-F’10) 
received his PhD 
(in Electrical Engi-
neering) from the 
University of Wis-
consin, 
Madison. 
From 1988 to 1992, he taught at Califor-
nia State University, Fresno, California. 
In June 1992, he joined the National  
Renewable 
Energy 
Laboratory 
in 
Golden, Colorado. His current research 
interests are in the fields of electric ma-
chines, power electronics, and power 
systems in general with emphasis on 
renewable energy applications. He is 
a member of Eta Kappa Nu, Sigma 
Xi, and a Fellow of the IEEE. He is 
involved in the activities of the IEEE 
Industry Application Society (IAS), 
Power Electronics Society, and Power 
and Energy Society (PES).
He is currently a member of 
various committees of the IAS, and 
a member of the Working Group 
on Renewable Technologies and Dy-
namic Performance Wind Generation 
Task Force of the PES. He holds two 
patents in power conversion for re-
newable energy.
Vahan 
Gevorgian 
(M’97) 
graduated 
from the Yerevan 
Polytechnic Institute 
(Armenia) in 1986. 
During his studies, 
he concentrated on 
electrical machines. 
His thesis research dealt with doubly 
fed induction generators for stand-
alone power systems. He obtained his 
PhD degree in electrical engineering 
from the State Engineering University 
of Armenia in 1993. His dissertation 
was devoted to a modeling of electri-
cal transients in large wind turbine 
generators.
Dr. Gevorgian is currently 
working at the National Wind Tech-
nology Center (NWTC) of Natio­
nal Renewable Energy Laboratory  
(NREL) 
in 
Golden, 
Colorado, 
USA, as a research engineer. His 
current interests include modeling 
and testing of various applications 
of small wind turbine based power 
systems.  ■
7.1  Series R–L Circuit Transients
Consider the series R–L circuit shown in Figure 7.1. The closing of switch SW at t 5 0 
represents to a first approximation a three-phase short circuit at the terminals of an 
unloaded synchronous machine. For simplicity, assume zero fault impedance; that is, 
the short circuit is a solid or “bolted” fault. The current is assumed to be zero before 
SW closes, and the source angle a determines the source voltage at t 5 0. Writing a 
KVL equation for the circuit,
Ldistd
dt
1 Ristd 5 Ï2V sin svt 1 ad  t $ 0
(7.1.1)
	
Section 7.1 Series R–L Circuit Transients	
435

436	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
The solution to (7.1.1) is
istd 5 iacstd 1 idcstd
	
  5 Ï2V
Z
 f sin svt 1 a 2 ud 2 sinsa 2 ude2t / Tg    A
(7.1.2)
where
iacstd 5 Ï2V
Z
 sin svt 1 a 2 ud    A
(7.1.3)
idc(t) 5 2Ï2V
Z
 sin (a 2 u) e2t/T A
(7.1.4)
Z 5 ÏR2 1 svLd2 5 ÏR2 1 X2    V
(7.1.5)
 u 5  tan21 vL
R 5 tan21 X
R
(7.1.6)
T 5 L
R 5 X
vR 5
X
2pfR    s
(7.1.7)
The total fault current in (7.1.2), called the asymmetrical fault current, is 
plotted in Figure 7.1 along with its two components. The ac fault current (also 
called symmetrical or steady-state fault current), given by (7.1.3), is a sinusoid. 
The dc offset current, given by (7.1.4), decays exponentially with time constant  
T 5 L/R.
The rms ac fault current is Iac 5 V/Z. The magnitude of the dc offset, which 
depends on a, varies from 0 when a 5 u to Ï2Iac when a 5 su 6 py2d. Note that a 
short circuit may occur at any instant during a cycle of the ac source; that is, a can 
FIGURE 7.1
Current in a series 
R–L circuit with ac 
voltage source

	
Section 7.1 Series R–L Circuit Transients	
437
have any value. To find the largest fault current, choose a 5 su 2 py2d. Then (7.1.2) 
becomes
istd 5 Ï2Iac fsin svt 2 p/2d 1 e2t/ T]    A
(7.1.8)
where
Iac 5 V
Z A
(7.1.9)
The rms value of i(t) is of interest. Since i(t) in (7.1.8) is not strictly periodic, its rms 
value is not strictly defined. However, to calculate the rms asymmetrical fault current 
with maximum dc offset, treat the exponential term as a constant, stretching the rms 
concept as follows:
Irmsstd 5 Ï[Iac]2 1 [Idcstd]2
	
5 Ï[Iac]2 1 [Ï2Iace2t/T]2
	
5 IacÏ1 1 2e22tyT A
(7.1.10)
It is convenient to use T 5 X/(2pf R) and t 5 t /f, where t is time in cycles, and 
write (7.1.10) as
Irmsstd 5 KstdIac    A
(7.1.11)
where
Kstd 5 Ï1 1 2e24ptysXyRd per unit
(7.1.12)
From (7.1.11) and (7.1.12), the rms asymmetrical fault current equals the rms ac 
fault current times an “asymmetry factor,” Kstd. Irmsstd decreases from Ï3Iac when 
t 5 0 to Iac when t is large. Also, higher X to R ratios (XyR) give higher values of 
Irms(t). The above series R–L short-circuit currents are summarized in Table 7.1.
Component
Instantaneous Current (A)
rms Current (A)
Symmetrical (ac)
iacstd 5 Ï2V
Z
 sin svt 1 a 2 ud
Iac 5 V
Z
dc offset
idcstd 5 2Ï2V
Z
 sin sa 2 ude2t / T
Asymmetrical (total)
istd 5 iacstd 1 idcstd
Irmsst d 5 ÏI2
ac 1 idcstd2
with maximum dc offset:
Irmsstd 5 KstdIac
TABLE 7.1
Short-circuit current—series R–L circuit*
*See Figure 7.1 and (7.1.l) through (7.1.12).

438	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
Fault currents: R–L circuit with ac source
A bolted short circuit occurs in the series R–L circuit of Figure 7.1 with V 5  
20 kV, X 5 8 V, R 5 0.8 V, and with maximum dc offset. The circuit breaker opens 
3 cycles after fault inception. Determine (a) the rms ac fault current, (b) the rms 
“momentary” current at t 5 0.5 cycle, which passes through the breaker before it 
opens, and (c) the rms asymmetrical fault current that the breaker interrupts.
SOLUTION
a.  From (7.1.9),
Iac 5
20 3 103
Ïs8d2 1 s0.8d2 5 20 3 103
8.040
5 2.488   kA
b.  From (7.1.11) and (7.1.12) with (X/R) 5 8/(0.8) 5 10 and t 5 0.5 cycle,
Ks0.5 cycled 5 Ï1 1 2e24ps0.5dy10 5 1.438
Imomentary 5 Ks0.5 cycledIac 5 s1.438ds2.488d 5 3.576 kA
c.  From (7.1.11) and (7.1.12) with (X/R) 5 10 and t 5 3 cycles,
Ks3 cyclesd 5 Ï1 1 2e24ps3dy10 5 1.023
Irmss3 cyclesd 5 s1.023ds2.488d 5 2.544 kA
EXAMPLE 7.1
7.2  Three-Phase Short Circuit—Unloaded 
Synchronous Machine
One way to investigate a three-phase short circuit at the terminals of a synchronous 
machine is to perform a test on an actual machine. Figure 7.2 shows an oscillogram 
of the ac fault current in one phase of an unloaded synchronous machine during 
such a test. The dc offset has been removed from the oscillogram. As shown, the 
amplitude of the sinusoidal waveform decreases from a high initial value to a lower 
steady-state value.
A physical explanation for this phenomenon is that the magnetic flux caused by 
the short-circuit armature currents (or by the resultant armature MMF) is initially 
forced to flow through high-reluctance paths that do not link the field winding or 
damper circuits of the machine. This is a result of the theorem of constant flux link-
ages that states that the flux linking a closed winding cannot change instantaneously. 
The armature inductance, which is inversely proportional to reluctance, is therefore 

	
Section 7.2 Three-Phase Short Circuit—Unloaded Synchronous Machine	
439
initially low. As the flux then moves toward the lower reluctance paths, the armature 
inductance increases.
The ac fault current in a synchronous machine can be modeled by the series  
R–L circuit of Figure 7.1 if a time-varying inductance L(t) or reactance X(t) 5 
vL(t) is employed. In standard machine theory texts [3, 4], the following reactances 
are defined:
X0d 5 direct axis subtransient reactance
Xd9 5 direct axis transient reactance
Xd 5 direct axis synchronous reactance
where X0d , Xd9 , Xd . The subscript d refers to the direct axis. There are similar 
quadrature axis reactances X0q , Xq9, and Xq [3, 4]. However, if the armature resistance 
is small, the quadrature axis reactances do not significantly affect the short-circuit 
current. Using the above direct axis reactances, the instantaneous ac fault current 
can be written as
iacstd 5 Ï2Eg31
1
X0d
2 1
Xd92e2tyT d0
	
 11
1
X9d
2 1
Xd2e2tyT9d 1 1
Xd4 sin 1vt 1 a 2 p
22
(7.2.1)
where Eg is the rms line-to-neutral prefault terminal voltage of the unloaded syn-
chronous machine. Armature resistance is neglected in (7.2.1). Note that at t 5 0, 
when the fault occurs, the rms value of iac(t) in (7.2.1) is
Iacs0d 5
Eg
X0d
5 I0
(7.2.2)
which is called the rms subtransient fault current, I0. The duration of I0 is determined 
by the time constant T0d, called the direct axis short-circuit sub-transient time constant.
FIGURE 7.2
The ac fault current 
in one phase of an 
unloaded synchronous 
machine during a 
three-phase short 
circuit (the dc offset 
current is removed)

440	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
At a later time, when t is large compared to T0d but small compared to the direct 
axis short-circuit transient time constant T 9d, the first exponential term in (7.2.1) has 
decayed almost to zero, but the second exponential has not decayed significantly. The 
rms ac fault current then equals the rms transient fault current, given by
I9 5
Eg
X9d

(7.2.3)
When t is much larger than T9d, the rms ac fault current approaches its steady-state 
value, given by
Iacs`d 5
Eg
Xd
5 I
(7.2.4)
Since the three-phase no-load voltages are displaced 120° from each other, the 
three-phase ac fault currents are also displaced 120° from each other. In addition to 
the ac fault current, each phase has a different dc offset. The maximum dc offset in 
any one phase, which occurs when a 5 0 in (7.2.1), is
idcmaxstd 5
Ï2Eg
X0d
 e2tyTA 5 Ï2I0 e2tyTA
(7.2.5)
where TA is called the armature time constant. Note that the magnitude of the max-
imum dc offset depends only on the rms subtransient fault current I0. The above 
synchronous machine short-circuit currents are summarized in Table 7.2.
Component
Instantaneous Current (A)
rms Current (A)
Symmetrical (ac)
(7.2.1)
Iac(t) 5 Eg31
1
X0d
2 1
X9d 2e2t/Td0
        	11
1
X9d
2 1
Xd2e2tyT9d 1 1
Xd4
  Subtransient 
  Transient 
  Steady-state 
I0 5 EgyX0d
I9 5 EgyX9d
I 5 EgyXd
Maximum dc offset 
Asymmetrical (total)
idcstd 5 Ï2I0e2t/TA
istd 5 iacstd 1 idcstd
Irmsstd 5 ÏIacstd2 1 idcstd2 
  with maximum dc offset:
Irms(t) 5 ÏIac(t)2 1 [Ï2I0e2t/TA]2
TABLE 7.2
Short-circuit current—unloaded synchronous machine*
*See Figure 7.2 and (7.2.1) through (7.2.5).

	
Section 7.2 Three-Phase Short Circuit—Unloaded Synchronous Machine	
441
Machine reactances X0d, X9d, and Xd as well as time constants T0d, T9d. and TA are 
usually provided by synchronous machine manufacturers. They also can be obtained 
from a three-phase short-circuit test by analyzing an oscillogram such as that in 
Figure 7.2 [2]. Typical values of synchronous machine reactances and time constants 
are given in Appendix Table A.1.
Three-phase short-circuit currents, unloaded  
synchronous generator
A 500-MVA, 20-kV, 60-Hz synchronous generator with reactances X0d 50.15, X9d 5 
0.24, and Xd 5 1.1 per unit and time constants T0d 5 0.035, T9d 5 2.0, TA 5 0.20 
s is connected to a circuit breaker. The generator is operating at 5% above rated 
voltage and at no-load when a bolted three-phase short circuit occurs on the 
load side of the breaker. The breaker interrupts the fault three cycles after fault 
inception. Determine (a) the subtransient fault current in per-unit and kA rms; 
(b) maximum dc offset as a function of time; and (c) rms asymmetrical fault 
current, which the breaker interrupts, assuming maximum dc offset.
SOLUTION
a.  The no-load voltage before the fault occurs is Eg 5 1.05 per unit. From 
(7.2.2), the subtransient fault current that occurs in each of the three phases is
I0 5 1.05
0.15 5 7.0 per unit
The generator base current is
Ibase 5
Srated
Ï3Vrated
5
500
sÏ3ds20d 5 14.43 kA
The rms subtransient fault current in kA is the per-unit value multiplied by the 
base current:
I0 5 s7.0ds14.43d 5 101.0 kA
b.  From (7.2.5), the maximum dc offset that may occur in any one phase is
idcmax std 5 Ï2s101.0de2ty0.20 5 142.9e2ty0.20 kA
EXAMPLE 7.2
(Continued )

442	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
7.3  Power System Three-Phase Short Circuits
In order to calculate the subtransient fault current for a three-phase short circuit in a 
power system, make the following assumptions:
1.	 Transformers are represented by their leakage reactances. Winding  
resistances, shunt admittances, and D–Y phase shifts are neglected.
2.	 Transmission lines are represented by their equivalent series reactances. 
Neglect series resistances and shunt admittances.
3.	 Synchronous machines are represented by constant-voltage sources 
behind subtransient reactances. Neglect armature resistance, saliency, 
and saturation.
4.	 Neglect all nonrotating impedance loads.
5.	 Especially for small motors rated less than 50 hp, either neglect induction 
motors or represent them in the same manner as synchronous machines.
These assumptions are made for simplicity in this text, and in practice they should not be 
made for all cases. For example, in distribution systems, resistances of primary and sec-
ondary distribution lines may in some cases significantly reduce fault current magnitudes.
Figure 7.3 shows a single-line diagram consisting of a synchronous genera-
tor feeding a synchronous motor through two transformers and a transmission line. 
c.  From (7.2.1), the rms ac fault current at t 5 3 cycles 5 0.05 s is
Iacs0.05 sd 5 1.0531
1
0.15 2
1
0.242
 e20.05y0.035
	
11
1
0.24 2 1
1.12
 e20.05y2.0 1 1
1.14
	
5 4.920 per unit
	
5 s4.920ds14.43d 5 71.01 kA
Modifying (7.1.10) to account for the time-varying symmetrical component of 
fault current,
Irmss0.05d 5 Ï [Iacs0.05d]2 1 [Ï2I0e2t/Ta]2
	
5 Iacs0.05dÎ1 1 23
I0
Iacs0.05d4
2
e22tyTa
	
5 s71.01dÎ1 1 2 3
101
71.014
2
e22s0.05dy0.20
	
5 s71.01ds1.8585d
	
5 132 kA

	
Section 7.3 Power System Three-Phase Short Circuits	
443
Consider a three-phase short circuit at bus 1. The positive-sequence equivalent cir-
cuit is shown in Figure 7.4(a), where the voltages E0g and E0m are the prefault inter-
nal voltages behind the subtransient reactances of the machines, and the closing of 
switch SW represents the fault. For purposes of calculating the subtransient fault 
current, E0g and E0m are assumed to be constant-voltage sources.
In Figure 7.4(b) the fault is represented by two opposing voltage sources with 
equal phasor values VF. Using superposition, the fault current then can be calculated 
from the two circuits shown in Figure 7.4(c). However, if VF equals the prefault 
FIGURE 7.3
Single-line diagram 
of a synchronous 
generator feeding a 
synchronous motor
FIGURE 7.4
Application of 
superposition to  
a power system  
three-phase short 
circuit

444	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
voltage at the fault, then the second circuit in Figure 7.4(c) represents the system 
before the fault occurs. As such, I 0F2 5 0 and VF, which has no effect, can be removed 
from the second circuit, as shown in Figure 7.4(d). The subtransient fault current is 
then determined from the first circuit in Figure 7.4(d), I 0F 5 I 0F1. The contribution 
to the fault from the generator is I 0g 5 I0 g1 1 I 0g2 5 I 0g1 1 IL, where IL is the prefault 
generator current. Similarly, I 0m 5 I 0m1 2 IL.
Three-phase short-circuit currents, power system
The synchronous generator in Figure 7.3 is operating at rated MVA, 0.95 p.f. 
lagging and at 5% above rated voltage when a bolted three-phase short circuit 
occurs at bus 1. Calculate the per-unit values of (a) subtransient fault current; 
(b) subtransient generator and motor currents neglecting prefault current; and 
(c) subtransient generator and motor currents including prefault current.
SOLUTION
a.  Using a 100-MVA base, the base impedance in the zone of the transmission 
line is
Zbase, line 5 s138d2
100 5 190.44 V
and
Xline 5
20
190.44 5 0.1050 per unit
Figure 7.4 shows the per-unit reactances. From the first circuit in Figure 7.4(d), 
the Thévenin impedance as viewed from the fault is
ZTh 5 jXTh 5 j s0.15ds0.505d
s0.15 1 0.505d 5 j0.11565 per unit
and the prefault voltage at the generator terminals is
VF 5 1.05/08 per unit
The subtransient fault current is then
I 0F 5 VF
ZTh
5
1.05/08
j0.11565 5 2j9.079 per unit
b.  Using current division in the first circuit of Figure 7.4(d),
I0g1 51
0.505
0.505 1 0.152I 0F 5 s0.7710ds2j9.079d 5 2j 7.000 per unit
EXAMPLE 7.3

	
Section 7.4 Bus Impedance Matrix	
445
7.4  Bus Impedance Matrix
Now to extend the results of the previous section to calculate subtransient fault cur-
rents for three-phase faults in an N-bus power system, the system is modeled by its 
positive-sequence network, where lines and transformers are represented by series  
reactances and synchronous machines are represented by constant-voltage sources be-
hind subtransient reactances. As before, all resistances, shunt admittances, and nonro-
tating impedance loads, and also for simplicity prefault load currents, are neglected. 
Consider a three-phase short circuit at any bus n. To analyze two separate circuits, 
use the superposition method described in Section 7.3. [For example, see Figure 7.4(d).] 
I0m1 51
0.15
0.505 1 0.152I 0F 5 s0.2290ds2j 9.079d 5 2j2.079 per unit
c.  The generator base current is
Ibase,gen 5
100
sÏ3ds13.8d 5 4.1837 kA
and the prefault generator current is
IL 5
100
sÏ3ds1.05 3 13.8d/2cos21 0.95 5 3.9845/218.198 kA
	
5
3.9845/218.198
4.1837
5 0.9524/218.198
	
5 0.9048 2 j0.2974 per unit
The subtransient generator and motor currents, including prefault current,  
are then
I 0g 5 I 0g1 1 IL 5 2j 7.000 1 0.9048 2 j 0.2974
	
5 0.9048 2 j7.297 5 7.353/282.98 per unit
I 0m 5 I 0m1 2 IL 5 2j 2.079 2 0.9048 1 j 0.2974
	
5 20.9048 2 j1.782 5 1.999/243.18 per unit
  An alternate method of solving Example 7.3 is to first calculate the internal 
voltages E 0g and E 0m using the prefault load current IL. Then, instead of using 
superposition, the fault currents can be resolved directly from the circuit in  
Figure 7.4(a) (see Problem 7.11). However, in a system with many synchronous 
machines, the superposition method has the advantage that all machine voltage 
sources are shorted, and the prefault voltage is the only source required to cal-
culate the fault current. Also, when calculating the contributions to fault current 
from each branch, prefault currents are usually small, and hence can be neglected. 
Otherwise, prefault load currents could be obtained from a power-flow program.

446	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
In the first circuit, all machine-voltage sources are short-circuited, and the only source 
is due to the prefault voltage at the fault. Writing nodal equations for the first circuit,
Ybus E s1d 5 I s1d
(7.4.1)
where Ybus is the positive-sequence bus admittance matrix, E(1) is the vector of bus 
voltages, and I(1) is the vector of current sources. The superscript (1) denotes the first 
circuit. Solving (7.4.1),
Zbus Is1d 5 E s1d
(7.4.2)
where
Zbus 5 Y 21
bus
(7.4.3)
Zbus, the inverse of Ybus, is called the positive-sequence bus impedance matrix. Both 
Zbus and Ybus are symmetric matrices.
Since the first circuit contains only one source, located at faulted bus n, the 
current source vector contains only one nonzero component, Is1d
n 5 2I 0Fn. Also, the 
voltage at faulted bus n in the first circuit is Es1d
n 5 2VF. Rewriting (7.4.2),
Z11
Z12
Á
Z1n
Á
Z1N
Z21
Z22
Á
Z2n
Á
Z2N
o
Zn1
Zn2
Á
Znn
Á
ZnN
o
ZN1
ZN2
Á
ZNn
Á
ZNN
 
0
0
o
2I 0Fn
o
0
  2  
E1
s1d
Es1d
2
o
2VF
o
Es1d
N

(7.4.4)
The minus sign associated with the current source in (7.4.4) indicates that the current 
injected into bus n is the negative of I 0Fn, since I 0Fn flows away from bus n to the neutral. 
From (7.4.4), the subtransient fault current is
I 0Fn 5 VF
Znn

(7.4.5)
Also from (7.4.4) and (7.4.5), the voltage at any bus k in the first circuit is
Es1d
k 5 Zkns2I 0Fnd 5  2Zkn
Znn
VF
(7.4.6)
The second circuit represents the prefault conditions. Neglecting prefault load 
current, all voltages throughout the second circuit are equal to the prefault voltage; 
that is, E(2)
k 5 VF for each bus k. Applying superposition,
Ek 5 Es1d
k 1 Es2d
k 5 2Zkn
Znn
VF 1 VF
	
511 2 Zkn
Znn2VF  k 5 1, 2, Á , N
(7.4.7)

	
Section 7.4 Bus Impedance Matrix	
447
Using Zbus to compute three-phase short-circuit currents  
in a power system
The faults at bus 1 and 2 in Figure 7.3 are of interest. The prefault voltage is  
1.05 per unit, and prefault load current is neglected. (a) Determine the 2 3 2  
positive-sequence bus impedance matrix. (b) For a bolted three-phase short cir-
cuit at bus 1, use Zbus to calculate the subtransient fault current and the contribu-
tion to the fault current from the transmission line. (c) Repeat part (b) for a bolted 
three-phase short circuit at bus 2.
SOLUTION
a.  The circuit of Figure 7.4(a) is redrawn in Figure 7.5 showing per-unit  
admittance rather than per-unit impedance values. Neglecting prefault load 
current, E 0g 5 E 0m 5 VF 5 1.05/08 per unit. From Figure 7.5, the positive- 
sequence bus admittance matrix is
Ybus 5 2j 3
9.9454
23.2787
23.2787
8.27874  per unit
Inverting Ybus,
Zbus 5 Y21
bus 5 1 j 3
0.11565
0.04580
0.04580
0.138934  per unit
b.  Using (7.4.5), the subtransient fault current at bus 1 is
I 0F1 5 VF
Z11
5
1.05/08
j0.11565 5 2j9.079 per unit
which agrees with the result in Example 7.3, part (a). The voltages at buses 1 and 
2 during the fault are, from (7.4.7),
EXAMPLE 7.4
FIGURE 7.5
Circuit of Figure 7.4(a) 
showing per-unit 
admittance values
(Continued)

448	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
E1 511 2 Z11
Z112VF 5 0
E2 511 2 Z21
Z112VF 511 2 j0.04580
j0.1156521.05/08 5 0.6342/08
  The current to the fault from the transmission line is obtained from the voltage 
drop from bus 2 to 1 divided by the impedance of the line and transformers T1 
and T2:
I21 5
E2 2 E1
jsXline 1 XT1 1 XT2d 5 0.6342 2 0
j0.3050
5 2j2.079 per unit
which agrees with the motor current calculated in Example 7.3, part (b), where 
prefault load current is neglected.
c.  Using (7.4.5), the subtransient fault current at bus 2 is
I 0F2 5 VF
Z22
5
1.05/08
j0.13893 5 2j 7.558 per unit
and from (7.4.7),
E1 511 2 Z12
Z222VF 511 2 j0.04580
j0.1389321.05/08 5 0.7039/08
E2 511 2 Z22
Z222VF 5 0
The current to the fault from the transmission line is
I12 5
E1 2 E2
jsXline 1 XT1 1 XT2d 5 0.7039 2 0
j0.3050
5 2j2.308 per unit
Figure 7.6 shows a bus impedance equivalent circuit that illustrates the short-circuit 
currents in an N-bus system. This circuit is given the name rake equivalent in Neuen-
swander [5] due to its shape, which is similar to a garden rake.
The diagonal elements Z11, Z22, …, ZNN of the bus impedance matrix, which 
are the self-impedances, are shown in Figure 7.6. The off-diagonal elements, or the 
mutual impedances, are indicated by the brackets in the figure.
Neglecting prefault load currents, the internal voltage sources of all synchronous 
machines are equal both in magnitude and phase. As such, they can be connected, as  
shown in Figure 7.7, and replaced by one equivalent source VF from neutral bus 
0 to a references bus, denoted r. This equivalent source is also shown in the rake 
equivalent of Figure 7.6.

	
Section 7.4 Bus Impedance Matrix	
449
FIGURE 7.6
Bus impedance 
equivalent circuit 
(rake equivalent)
FIGURE 7.7
Parallel connection of 
unloaded synchronous 
machine internal-
voltage sources
Using Zbus, the fault currents in Figure 7.6 are given by
Z11
Z12
Á
Z1n
Á
Z1N
Z21
Z22
Á
Z2n
Á
Z2N
o
Zn1
Zn2
Á
Znn
Á
ZnN
o
ZN1
ZN2
Á
ZNn
Á
ZNN
 
I1
I2
o
In
o
IN
  5  
VF 2 E1
VF 2 E2
o
VF 2 En
o
VF 2 EN

(7.4.8)
where I1, I2, … are the branch currents and (VF – E1), (VF – E2), … are the voltages 
across the branches.
If switch SW in Figure 7.6 is open, all currents are zero and the voltage at each 
bus with respect to the neutral equals VF. This corresponds to prefault conditions, 
neglecting prefault load currents. If switch SW is closed, corresponding to a short 
circuit at bus n, En 5 0 and all currents except In remain zero. The fault current is 

450	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
I 0Fn 5 In5 VF/Znn, which agrees with (7.4.5). This fault current also induces a voltage 
drop Zkn In 5 (Zkn/Znn)VF across each branch k. The voltage at bus k with respect to 
the neutral then equals VF minus this voltage drop, which agrees with (7.4.7).
As shown by Figure 7.6 as well as (7.4.5), subtransient fault currents throughout 
an N-bus system can be determined from the bus impedance matrix and the prefault 
voltage. Zbus can be computed by first constructing Ybus, via nodal equations, and then 
inverting Ybus. Once Zbus has been obtained, these fault currents are easily computed.
PowerWorld Simulator case Example 7_5 models the 5-bus power system whose 
oneline diagram is shown in Figure 6.2. Machine, line, and transformer data are 
given in Tables 7.3, 7.4, and 7.5. This system is initially unloaded. Prefault volt-
ages at all the buses are 1.05 per unit. Use PowerWorld Simulator to determine the 
fault current for three-phase faults at each of the buses.
EXAMPLE 7.5
Bus
Machine Subtransient Reactance—X0d
1
0.045
3
0.0225
TABLE 7.3
Synchronous machine data for the SYMMETRICAL SHORT CIRCUITS program*
*Sbase 5 100MVA
  Vbase 5 15 kV at buses 1, 3
      5 345 kV at buses 2, 4, 5
Bus-to-Bus
Equivalent Positive-Sequence Series Reactance (per unit)
2–4
0.1
2–5
0.05
4–5
0.025
TABLE 7.4
Line data for the SYMMETRICAL SHORT CIRCUITS program
Bus-to-Bus
Leakage Reactance—X (per unit)
1–5
0.02
3–4
0.01
TABLE 7.5
Transformer data for the SYMMETRICAL SHORT CIRCUITS program

	
Section 7.4 Bus Impedance Matrix	
451
SOLUTION
To fault a bus from the oneline, first right-click on the bus symbol to display the lo-
cal menu, and then select Fault to display the Fault Analysis dialog (see Figure 7.8).  
In the list on the left side of the dialog, set the Fault Definitions to Single Fault; the 
Faulted Bus should be automatically selected to the selected bus location. Verify 
that the Fault Location field is Bus Fault and the Fault Type is 3-Phase Balanced 
(unbalanced faults are covered in Chapter 9). Then select Calculate, located in 
the upper left portion of the dialog, to determine the fault currents and voltages. 
The results are shown in the tables at the bottom of the dialog. Additionally, the 
fault currents can be shown on the oneline by selecting Options in the left list, and 
changing the Oneline Display Field value. Since with a three-phase fault the sys-
tem remains balanced, the magnitudes of the a phase, b phase, and c phase values 
are identical. The 5 3 5 Zbus matrix for this system is shown in Table 7.6, and the 
fault currents and bus voltages for faults at each of the buses are given in Table 7.7. 
Note that these fault currents are subtransient fault currents, since the machine 
reactance input data consist of direct axis subtransient reactances.
0.0279725
0.0177025
0.0085125
0.0122975
0.020405
0.0177025
0.0569525
0.0136475
0.019715
0.02557
j
0.0085125
0.0136475
0.0182425
0.016353
0.012298
0.0122975
0.019715
0.016353
0.0236
0.017763
0.020405
0.02557
0.012298
0.017763
0.029475
TABLE 7.6
Zbus for Example 7.5
FIGURE 7.8
Fault Analysis Dialog for Example 7.5—fault at bus 1
(Continued)

452	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
Contributions to Fault Current
Fault Bus
Fault Current 
(per unit)
Gen Line  
or TRSF
Bus-to-Bus
Current  
(per unit)
1
37.536
G 1
GRND–1
23.332
T 1
5–1
14.204
2
18.436
L 1
4–2
  6.864
L 2
5–2
11.572
3
57.556
G 2
GRND-3
46.668
T 2
4–3
10.888
4
44.456
L 1
2–4
  1.736
L 3
5–4
10.412
T 2
3–4
32.308
5
35.624
L 2
2–5
2.78
L 3
4–5
16.688
T 1
1–5
16.152
VF 5 1.05 
Fault Bus
Per-Unit Bus Voltage Magnitudes during the Fault
Bus 1
Bus 2
Bus 3
Bus 4
Bus 5
1
0.0000
0.7236
0.5600
0.5033
0.3231
2
0.3855
0.0000
0.2644
0.1736
0.1391
3
0.7304
0.7984
0.0000
0.3231
0.6119
4
0.5884
0.6865
0.1089
0.0000
0.4172
5
0.2840
0.5786
0.3422
0.2603
0.0000
TABLE 7.7
Fault currents and bus voltages for Example 7.5 

	
Section 7.4 Bus Impedance Matrix	
453
FIGURE 7.9
Screen for Example 7.5—fault at bus 1
Redo Example 7.5 with an additional line installed between buses 2 and 4. This 
line, whose reactance is 0.075 per unit, is not mutually coupled to any other line.
SOLUTION
The modified system is contained in PowerWorld Simulator case Example 7_6.  
The Zbus along with the fault currents and bus voltages are shown in Tables 7.8 
and 7.9. Notice the fault currents have increased, particularly at bus 2, since with the 
new line the total impedance between the faulted bus and the generators has decreased.
EXAMPLE 7.6
(Continued)

454	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
0.027723
0.01597
0.00864
0.01248
0.02004
0.01597
0.04501
0.01452
0.02097
0.02307
j 
0.00864
0.01452
0.01818
0.01626
0.01248
0.01248
0.02097
0.01626
0.02349
0.01803
0.02004
0.02307
0.01248
0.01803
0.02895
TABLE 7.8
Zbus for Example 7.6
Contributions to Fault Current
Fault Bus
Fault Current 
(per unit)
Gen Line  
or TRSF
Bus-to-Bus
Current  
(per unit)
1
37.872
G 1
GRND–1
23.332
T 1
5–1
14.544
2
23.328
L 1
4–2
 5.608
L 2
5–2
10.24
L 4
4–2
7.48
3
57.756
G 2
GRND–3
46.668
T 2
4–3
11.088
4
44.704
L 1
2–4
  1.128
L 3
5–4
  9.768
L 4
2–4
  1.504
T 2
3–4
32.308
5
36.268
L 2
2–5
  4.268
L 3
4–5
15.848
T 1
1–5
16.152
VF 5 1.05 
Fault Bus
Per-Unit Bus Voltage Magnitudes during the Fault
Bus 1
Bus 2
Bus 3
Bus 4
Bus 5
1
0.0000
0.6775
0.5510
0.4921
0.3231
2
0.4451
0.0000
0.2117
0.1127
0.2133
3
0.7228
0.7114
0.0000
0.3231
0.5974
4
0.5773
0.5609
0.1109
0.0000
0.3962
5
0.2909
0.5119
0.3293
0.2442
0.0000
TABLE 7.9
Fault currents and bus voltages for Example 7.6

	
Section 7.5 Circuit Breaker and Fuse Selection	
455
7.5  Circuit Breaker and Fuse Selection
A SHORT CIRCUITS computer program may be utilized in power system design to 
select, set, and coordinate protective equipment such as circuit breakers, fuses, relays, 
and instrument transformers. In this section, basic principles of circuit breaker and 
fuse selection are discussed.
AC CIRCUIT BREAKERS
A circuit breaker is a mechanical switch capable of interrupting fault currents and 
of reclosing. When circuit-breaker contacts separate while carrying current, an arc 
forms. The breaker is designed to extinguish the arc by elongating and cooling it. The 
fact that ac arc current naturally passes through zero twice during its 60 Hz cycle  
aids the arc extinction process.
Circuit breakers are classified as power circuit breakers when they are intended 
for service in ac circuits above 1500 V and as low-voltage circuit breakers in ac cir-
cuits up to 1500 V. There are different types of circuit breakers depending on the 
medium—air, oil, SF6 gas, or vacuum—in which the arc is elongated. Also, the arc 
can be elongated either by a magnetic force or by a blast of air.
Some circuit breakers are equipped with a high-speed automatic reclosing 
capability. Since most faults are temporary and self-clearing, reclosing is based on 
the idea that, if a circuit is deenergized for a short time, it is likely that whatever 
caused the fault has disintegrated and the ionized arc in the fault has dissipated.
When reclosing breakers are employed in EHV systems, standard practice is 
to reclose only once, approximately 15 to 50 cycles (depending on operating voltage) 
after the breaker interrupts the fault. If the fault persists and the EHV breaker 
recloses into it, the breaker reinterrupts the fault current and then “locks out,” 
requiring operator resetting. Multiple-shot reclosing in EHV systems is not standard 
practice because transient stability (Chapter 11) may be compromised. However, for 
distribution systems (2.4 to 46 kV) where customer outages are of concern, standard 
reclosers are equipped for two or more reclosures.
For low-voltage applications, molded case circuit breakers with dual trip 
capability are available. There is a magnetic instantaneous trip for large fault currents 
above a specified threshold and a thermal trip with time delay for smaller fault currents.
Modern circuit-breaker standards are based on symmetrical interrupting current 
(Table 7.10). It is usually necessary to calculate only symmetrical fault current at a 
system location, and then select a breaker with a symmetrical interrupting capability 
equal to or above the calculated current. The breaker has the additional capability to 
interrupt the asymmetrical (or total) fault current if the dc offset is not too large.
Recall from Section 7.1 that the maximum asymmetry factor K (t 5 0) is Ï3, 
which occurs at fault inception (t 5 0). After fault inception, the dc fault current 
decays exponentially with time constant T 5 (L/R) 5 (X/vR), and the asymmetry 
factor decreases. Power circuit breakers with a 2-cycle rated interruption time are de-
signed for an asymmetrical interrupting capability up to 1.4 times their symmetrical 
interrupting capability, whereas slower circuit breakers have a lower asymmetrical 
interrupting capability.

456	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
Rated Values
Insulation Level
Current
Identification
Voltage
Rated Withstand  
Test Voltage
Rated 
Continuous
Rated 
Short-Circuit
Nominal  
Voltage Class 
(kV, rms)
Nominal 
3-Phase 
MVA Class
Rated Max 
Voltage  
(kV, rms)
Rated  
Voltage 
Range  
Factor (K)
Low  
Frequency 
(kV, rms)
Impulse 
(kV, Crest)
Current  
at 60 Hz 
(Amperes, 
rms)
Current  
at Rated 
Max kV  
(kA, rms)
Col 1
Col 2
Col 3
Col 4
Col 5
Col 6
Col 7
Col 8
    14.4
  250
15.5
  2.67
  600
 8.9
    14.4
  500
15.5
  1.29
1200
18
  23
  500
25.8
  2.15
1200
11
    34.5
1500
38
  1.65
1200
22
  46
1500
48.3
  1.21
1200
17
  69
2500
72.5
  1.21
1200
19
115
121
1.0
1200
20
115
121
1.0
1600
40
115
121
1.0
2000
40
115
121
1.0
2000
63
115
121
1.0
3000
40
115
121
1.0
3000
63
138
145
1.0
1200
20
138
Not
145
1.0
1600
40
138
145
1.0
2000
40
138
145
1.0
2000
63
138
145
1.0
2000
80
138
Applicable
145
1.0
3000
40
138
145
1.0
3000
63
138
145
1.0
3000
80
161
169
1.0
1200
16
161
169
1.0
1600
31.5
161
169
1.0
2000
40
161
169
1.0
2000
50
230
242
1.0
1600
31.5
230
242
1.0
2000
31.5
230
242
1.0
3000
31.5
230
242
1.0
2000
40
230
242
1.0
3000
40
230
242
1.0
3000
63
345
362
1.0
2000
40
345
362
1.0
3000
40
500
550
1.0
2000
40
500
550
1.0
3000
40
700
765
1.0
2000
40
700
765
1.0
3000
40
TABLE 7.10
Preferred ratings for outdoor circuit breakers (symmetrical current basis of rating) [10]
Source: ANSI C 37.010-1999 (R 2005) Application Guide for AC High-Voltage Circuit Breakers Rated on a Symmetrical Current 
Basis. Reprinted with permission from IEEE. Copyright IEEE 1972. All rights reserved.

	
Section 7.5 Circuit Breaker and Fuse Selection	
457
Related Required Capabilities
Current Values
Rated Values
Max Symmetrical 
Interrupting 
Capability
3-Second Short-
Time Current  
Carrying Capability
Closing and  
Latching Capability  
1.6K Times
Rated Short-Circuit 
Current
(kA, rms)
Rated  
Interrupting 
Time (Cycles)
Rated Permis-
sible Tripping 
Delay (Seconds)
Rated Max 
Voltage Divided 
by K (k  V, rms)
K Times Rated  
Short-Circuit Current
(kA, rms)
(kA, rms)
Col 9
Col 10
Col 11
Col 12
Col 13
Col 14
5
2
    5.8
24
24
38
5
2
  12
23
23
37
5
2
  12
24
24
38
5
2
  23
36
36
58
5
2
  40
21
21
33
5
2
  60
23
23
37
3
1
121
20
20
32
3
1
121
40
40
64
3
1
121
40
40
64
3
1
121
63
63
101
3
1
121
40
40
64
3
1
121
63
63
101
3
1
145
20
20
32
3
1
145
40
40
64
3
1
145
40
40
64
3
1
145
63
63
101
3
1
145
80
80
128
3
1
145
40
40
64
3
1
145
63
63
101
3
1
145
80
80
128
3
1
169
16
16
26
3
1
169
31.5
   31.5
50
3
1
169
40
40
64
3
1
169
50
50
80
3
1
242
31.5
   31.5
50
3
1
242
31.5
   31.5
50
3
1
242
31.5
   31.5
50
3
1
242
40
40
64
3
1
242
40
40
64
3
1
242
63
63
101
3
1
362
40
40
64
3
1
362
40
40
64
2
1
550
40
40
64
2
1
550
40
40
64
2
1
765
40
40
64
2
1
765
40
40
64

458	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
A simplified method for breaker selection is called the “E/X simplified method” 
[1, 7]. The maximum symmetrical short-circuit current at the system location in ques-
tion is calculated from the prefault voltage and system reactance characteristics using 
computer programs. Resistances, shunt admittances, nonrotating impedance loads, 
and prefault load currents are neglected. Then, if the X/R ratio at the system location 
is less than 15, a breaker with a symmetrical interrupting capability equal to or above 
the calculated current at the given operating voltage is satisfactory. However, if X/R is 
greater than 15, the dc offset may not have decayed to a sufficiently low value. In this 
case, a method for correcting the calculated fault current to account for dc and ac time 
constants as well as breaker speed can be used [10]. If X/R is unknown, the calculated 
fault current should not be greater than 80% of the breaker interrupting capability.
When selecting circuit breakers for generators, two cycle breakers are employed 
in practice, and the subtransient fault current is calculated; therefore subtransient 
machine reactances X 0d  are used in fault calculations. For synchronous motors, sub-
transient reactances X 0d  or transient reactances X 9
d are used, depending on breaker 
speed. Also, induction motors can momentarily contribute to fault current. Large in-
duction motors are usually modeled as sources in series with X 0d  or X 9
d, depending on 
breaker speed. Smaller induction motors (below 50 hp ) are often neglected entirely.
Table 7.10 shows a schedule of preferred ratings for outdoor power circuit 
breakers. Some of the more important ratings shown are described next.
Voltage ratings
Rated maximum voltage: Designates the maximum rms line-to-line operating 
voltage. The breaker should be used in systems with an operating voltage less 
than or equal to this rating.
Rated low frequency withstand voltage: The maximum 60-Hz rms line-to-line 
voltage that the circuit breaker can withstand without insulation damage.
Rated impulse withstand voltage: The maximum crest voltage of a voltage pulse 
with standard rise and delay times that the breaker insulation can withstand.
Rated voltage range factor K: The range of voltage for which the symmetrical 
interrupting capability times the operating voltage is constant.
Current ratings
Rated continuous current: The maximum 60-Hz rms current that the breaker 
can carry continuously while it is in the closed position without overheating.
Rated short-circuit current: The maximum rms symmetrical current that the 
breaker can safely interrupt at rated maximum voltage.
Rated momentary current: The maximum rms asymmetrical current that the breaker 
can withstand while in the closed position without damage. Rated momentary cur-
rent for standard breakers is 1.6 times the symmetrical interrupting capability.
Rated interrupting time: The time in cycles on a 60-Hz basis from the instant 
the trip coil is energized to the instant the fault current is cleared.
Rated interrupting MVA: For a three-phase circuit breaker, this is Ï3 times 
the rated maximum voltage in kV times the rated short-circuit current in 

	
Section 7.5 Circuit Breaker and Fuse Selection	
459
kA. It is more common to work with current and voltage ratings than with 
MVA rating. 
As an example, the symmetrical interrupting capability of the 69-kV class 
breaker listed in Table 7.10 is plotted versus operating voltage in Figure 7.10. As 
shown, the symmetrical interrupting capability increases from its rated short-circuit 
current I 5 19 kA at rated maximum voltage Vmax 5 72.5 kV up to Imax 5 KI 5 (1.21) 
(19) 5 23 kA at an operating voltage Vmax 5 Vmax/K 5 72.5/1.21 5 60 kV. At oper-
ating voltages V between Vmin and Vmax, the symmetrical interrupting capability is  
I 3 Vmax/V 5 1378/V kA. At operating voltages below Vmin, the symmetrical inter-
rupting capability remains at Imax 5 23 kA.
Breakers of the 115 kV class and higher have a voltage range factor K 5 1.0; 
that is, their symmetrical interrupting current capability remains constant.
FIGURE 7.10 
Symmetrical 
interrupting capability 
of a 69-kV class 
breaker
Circuit breaker selection
The calculated symmetrical fault current is 17 kA at a three-phase bus where the 
operating voltage is 64 kV. The X/R ratio at the bus is unknown. Select a circuit 
breaker from Table 7.10 for this bus.
SOLUTION
The 69-kV-class breaker has a symmetrical interrupting capability I(Vmax/V) 5 
19(72.5/64) 5 21.5 kA at the operating voltage V 5 64 kV. The calculated sym-
metrical fault current, 17 kA, is less than 80% of this capability (less than 0.80 3 
21.5 5 17.2 kA), which is a requirement when X/R is unknown. Therefore, select 
the 69-kV-class breaker from Table 7.10.
EXAMPLE 7.7

460	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
FUSES
Figure 7.11(a) shows a cutaway view of a fuse, which is one of the simplest overcur-
rent devices. The fuse consists of a metal “fusible” link or links encapsulated in a 
tube, packed in filler material, and connected to contact terminals. Silver is a typical 
link metal, and sand is a typical filler material.
During normal operation, when the fuse is operating below its continuous 
current rating, the electrical resistance of the link is so low that it simply acts as a 
conductor. If an overload current from one to about six times its continuous current 
rating occurs and persists for more than a short interval of time, the temperature of 
the link eventually reaches a level that causes a restricted segment of the link to melt. 
As shown in Figure 7.11(b), a gap is then formed and an electric arc is established. As 
the arc causes the link metal to burn back, the gap width increases. The resistance of 
the arc eventually reaches such a high level that the arc cannot be sustained and it is 
extinguished, as in Figure 7.11(c). The current flow within the fuse is then completely 
cut off.
FIGURE 7.11
Typical fuse

	
Section 7.5 Circuit Breaker and Fuse Selection	
461
If the fuse is subjected to fault currents higher than about six times its con-
tinuous current rating, several restricted segments melt simultaneously, resulting in 
rapid arc suppression and fault clearing. Arc suppression is accelerated by the filler 
material in the fuse.
Many modern fuses are current limiting. As shown in Figure 7.12, a cur-
rent-limiting fuse has such a high speed of response that it cuts off a high fault cur-
rent in less than a half cycle—before it can build up to its full peak value. By limiting 
fault currents, these fuses permit the use of motors, transformers, conductors, and 
bus structures that could not otherwise withstand the destructive forces of high fault 
currents.
Fuse specification is normally based on the following four factors.
1.	 Voltage rating. This rms voltage determines the ability of a fuse to  
suppress the internal arc that occurs after the fuse link melts. A blown 
fuse should be able to withstand its voltage rating. Most low-voltage 
fuses have 250 or 600 V ratings. Ratings of medium-voltage fuses range 
from 2.4 to 34.5 kV.
2.	 Continuous current rating. The fuse should carry this rms current  
indefinitely, without melting and clearing.
3.	 Interrupting current rating. This is the largest rms asymmetrical current 
that the fuse can safely interrupt. Most modern, low-voltage current- 
limiting fuses have a 200-kA interrupting rating. Standard interrupting 
ratings for medium-voltage current-limiting fuses include 65, 80,  
and 100 kA.
4.	 Time response. The melting and clearing time of a fuse depends on the 
magnitude of the overcurrent or fault current and is usually specified 
by a “time-current” curve. Figure 7.13 shows the time-current curve of 
a 15.5-kV, 100-A (continuous) current-limiting fuse. As shown, the fuse 
link melts within 2 s and clears within 5 s for a 500-A current. For a 5 kA 
current, the fuse link melts in less than 0.01 s and clears within 0.015 s.
FIGURE 7.12
Operation of a 
current-limiting fuse

462	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
It is usually a simple matter to coordinate fuses in a power circuit such that 
only the fuse closest to the fault opens the circuit. In a radial circuit, fuses with larger 
continuous-current ratings are located closer to the source, such that the fuse closest 
to the fault clears before other, upstream fuses melt.
Fuses are inexpensive, fast operating, easily coordinated, and reliable, and they 
do not require protective relays or instrument transformers. Their chief disadvantage 
is that the fuse or the fuse link must be manually replaced after it melts. They are 
basically one-shot devices that are, for example, incapable of high-speed reclosing.
FIGURE 7.13
Time-current curves 
for a 15.5-kV, 100-A 
current-limiting fuse

	
Multiple Choice Questions	
463
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS
SECTION 7.1
	
7.1	 The asymmetrical short-circuit current in series R–L circuit for a simu-
lated solid or “bolted fault” can be considered as a combination of sym-
metrical (ac) component that is a _____, and dc-offset current that decays 
_____ and depends on _____. 
	
7.2	 Even though the fault current is not symmetrical and not strictly peri-
odic, the rms asymmetrical fault current is computed as the rms ac fault 
current times an “asymmetry factor,” which is a function of _____.
SECTION 7.2
	
7.3	 The amplitude of the sinusoidal symmetrical ac component of the 
three-phase short-circuit current of an unloaded synchronous machine 
decreases from a high initial value to a lower steady-state value, going 
through the stages of _____ and _____ periods. 
	
7.4	 The duration of subtransient fault current is dictated by _____ time 
constant and that of transient fault current is dictated by _____ time 
constant. 
	
7.5	 The reactance that plays a role under steady-state operation of a syn-
chronous machine is called _____. 
	
7.6	 The dc-offset component of the three-phase short-circuit current of an 
unloaded synchronous machine is different in the three phases and its 
exponential decay is dictated by _____. 
SECTION 7.3
	
7.7	 Generally, in power-system short-circuit studies, for calculating subtran-
sient fault currents, transformers are represented by their _____, trans-
mission lines by their equivalent _____, and synchronous machines by 
_____ behind their subtransient reactances. 
	
7.8	 In power-system fault studies, all nonrotating impedance loads are usu-
ally neglected.
(a) True 	
(b) False
	
7.9	 Can superposition be applied in power-system short-circuit studies for 
calculating fault currents?
(a) Yes	
(b) No
	
7.10	 Before proceeding with per-unit fault current calculations, based on the 
single-line diagram of the power system, a positive-sequence equivalent 
circuit is set up on a chosen base system.
(a) True	
(b) False

464	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
SECTION 7.4
	
7.11	 The inverse of the bus-admittance matrix is called a _____ matrix. 
	
7.12	 For a power system, modeled by its positive-sequence network, both bus-
admittance matrix and bus-impedance matrix are symmetric.
(a) True	
(b) False
	
7.13	 The bus-impedance equivalent circuit can be represented in the form of a 
“rake” with the diagonal elements, which are _____, and the non-diagonal  
(off-diagonal) elements, which are _____. 
SECTION 7.5
	
7.14	 A circuit breaker is designed to extinguish the arc by _____. 
	
7.15	 Power-circuit breakers are intended for service in the ac circuit above 
_____ V. 
	
7.16	 In circuit breakers, besides air or vacuum, what gaseous medium, in 
which the arc is elongated, is used?
	
7.17	 Oil can be used as a medium to extinguish the arc in circuit breakers.
(a) True	
(b) False
	
7.18	 Besides a blast of air/gas, the arc in a circuit breaker can be elongated  
by _____. 
	
7.19	 For distribution systems, standard reclosers are equipped for two or more 
reclosures, whereas multiple-shot reclosing in EHV systems is not a stan-
dard practice.
(a) True	
(b) False
	
7.20	 Breakers of the 115 kV class and higher have a voltage range factor  
K 5 _____, such that their symmetrical interrupting current capability 
remains constant. 
	
7.21	 A typical fusible link metal in fuses is _____, and a typical filler material 
is _____. 
	
7.22	 The melting and clearing time of a current-limiting fuse is usually speci-
fied by a _____ curve.
PROBLEMS
SECTION 7.1
7.1	
In the circuit of Figure 7.1, V 5 277 volts, L 5 2 mH, R 5 0.4 V, and 
v 5 2p60 radys. Determine (a) the rms symmetrical fault current; (b) the 
rms asymmetrical fault current at the instant the switch closes, assuming 
maximum dc offset; (c) the rms asymmetrical fault current five cycles 
after the switch closes, assuming maximum dc offset; and (d) the dc offset 

	
Problems	
465
as a function of time if the switch closes when the instantaneous source 
voltage is 300 volts.
7.2	
Repeat Example 7.1 with V 5 4 kV, X 5 2 V, and R 5 1 V
7.3	
In the circuit of Figure 7.1, let R 5 0.125 V., L 5 10 mH, and the 
source voltage is e(t) 5 151 sin(377t 1 a) V. Determine the current respo­
nse after closing the switch for the following cases: (a) no dc offset or  
(b) maximum dc offset. Sketch the current waveform up to t 5 0.10 s 
corresponding to parts (a) and (b).
7.4	
Consider the expression for i(t) given by
istd 5 Ï2Irms[sinsvt 2 uzd 1 sin uz.e2svRyXdt]
where uz 5 tan21svLyRd.
(a)  For (XyR) equal to zero and infinity, plot i(t) as a function of svtd.
(b)  Comment on the dc offset of the fault current waveforms.
(c)  Find the asymmetrical current factor and the time of peak, tp, in mil-
liseconds, for (XyR) ratios of zero and infinity.
7.5	
If the source impedance at a 13.2-kV distribution substation bus is (0.5 1  
j1.5) V per phase, compute the rms and maximum peak instantaneous 
value of the fault current for a balanced three-phase fault. For the system 
(X/R) ratio of 3.0, the asymmetrical factor is 1.9495 and the time of 
peak is 7.1 ms (see Problem 7.4). Comment on the withstanding peak 
current capability to which all substation electrical equipment need to 
be designed.
SECTION 7.2
7.6	
A 1000-MVA, 20-kV, 60-Hz, three-phase generator is connected through 
a 1000-MVA, 20-kV, Dy345-kV, Y transformer to a 345-kV circuit 
breaker and a 345-kV transmission line. The generator reactances are 
X0d 5 0.17, X9d 5 0.30, and Xd 5 1.5 per unit, and its time constants are 
T0d 5 0.05, T9d 5 1.0, and TA 5 0.10 s. The transformer series reactance 
is 0.10 per unit; transformer losses and exciting current are neglected. A 
three-phase short-circuit occurs on the line side of the circuit breaker 
when the generator is operated at rated terminal voltage and at no-load. 
The breaker interrupts the fault three cycles after fault inception. Deter-
mine (a) the subtransient current through the breaker in per-unit and 
in kA rms and (b) the rms asymmetrical fault current the breaker inter-
rupts, assuming maximum dc offset. Neglect the effect of the transformer 
on the time constants.
7.7	
For Problem 7.6, determine (a) the instantaneous symmetrical fault cur-
rent in kA in phase a of the generator as a function of time, assuming 
maximum dc offset occurs in this generator phase, and (b) the maximum 
dc offset current in kA as a function of time that can occur in any one 
generator phase.

466	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
7.8	
A 300-MVA, 13.8-kV, three-phase, 60-Hz, Y-connected synchronous 
generator is adjusted to produce rated voltage on open circuit. A bal-
anced three-phase fault is applied to the terminals at t 5 0. After analyz-
ing the raw data, the symmetrical transient current is obtained as
iacstd 5 104s1 1 e2tyt1 1 6e2tyt2d A
where t1 5 200 ms and t2 5 15 ms. (a) Sketch iac(t) as a function of time for  
0 # t # 500 ms. (b) Determine Xd0 and Xd in per unit based on the 
machine ratings.
7.9	
Two identical synchronous machines, each rated 60 MVA and 15 kV with a 
subtransient reactance of 0.1 p.u., are connected through a line of reactance 
0.1 p.u. on the base of the machine rating. One machine is acting as a syn-
chronous generator, while the other is working as a motor drawing 40 MW at 
0.8 p.f. leading with a terminal voltage of 14.5 kV, when a symmetrical three-
phase fault occurs at the motor terminals. Determine the subtransient cur-
rents in the generator, the motor, and the fault by using the internal voltages 
of the machines. Choose a base of 60 MVA and 15 kV in the generator circuit.
SECTION 7.3
7.10	
Recalculate the subtransient current through the breaker in Problem 7.6 
if the generator is initially delivering rated MVA at 0.80 p.f. lagging and 
at rated terminal voltage.
7.11	
Solve Example 7.3 parts (a) and (c) without using the superposition prin-
ciple. First calculate the internal machine voltages Eg0 and Em0 using the 
prefault load current. Then determine the subtransient fault, generator, 
and motor currents directly from Figure 7.4(a). Compare your answers 
with those of Example 7.3.
7.12	
Equipment ratings for the four-bus power system shown in Figure 7.14 
are as follows:
Generator Gl:	
500 MVA, 13.8 kV, X0 5 0.20 per unit
Generator G2:	
750 MVA, 18 kV, X0 5 0.18 per unit
Generator G3:	
1000 MVA, 20 kV, X0 5 0.17 per unit
Transformer Tl:	
500 MVA, 13.8 D/500 Y kV, X 5 0.12 per unit
Transformer T2:	
750 MVA, 18 D/500 Y kV, X 5 0.10 per unit
Transformer T3:	
1000 MVA, 20 D/500 Y kV, X 5 0.10 per unit
Each 500 kV line:	
X1 5 50 V.
A three-phase short circuit occurs at bus 1, where the prefault voltage is 
525 kV. Prefault load current is neglected. Draw the positive-sequence 
reactance diagram in per unit on a 1000-MVA, 20-kV base in the zone 
of generator G3. Determine (a) the Thévenin reactance in per unit at the 
fault, (b) the subtransient fault current in per unit and in kA rms, and  
(c) contributions to the fault current from generator Gl and from line 1–2.

7.13	
For the power system given in Problem 7.12, a three-phase short circuit 
occurs at bus 2, where the prefault voltage is 525 kV. Prefault load current 
is neglected. Determine the (a) Thévenin equivalent at the fault, (b) sub-
transient fault current in per unit and in kA rms, and (c) contributions to 
the fault from lines 1–2, 2–3, and 2–4.
7.14	
Equipment ratings for the five-bus power system shown in Figure 7.15 
are as follows:
Generator Gl:	
50 MVA, 12 kV, X0 5 0.2 per unit
Generator G2:	
100 MVA, 15 kV, X0 5 0.2 per unit
Transformer Tl:	
50 MVA, 10 kV Y/138 kV Y, X 5 0.10 per unit
Transformer T2:	
100 MVA, 15 kV D/138 kV Y, X 5 0.10 per unit
Each 138-kV line:	
X1 5 40 V.
A three-phase short circuit occurs at bus 5, where the prefault voltage is 
15 kV. Prefault load current is neglected. (a) Draw the positive-sequence 
reactance diagram in per unit on a 100-MVA, 15-kV base in the zone of 
generator G2. Determine (b) the Thévenin equivalent at the fault, (c) the 
subtransient fault current in per unit and in kA rms, and (d) contribu-
tions to the fault from generator G2 and from transformer T2.
FIGURE 7.14
Problems 7.12, 7.13, 
7.19, 7.24, 7.25, and 
7.26
FIGURE 7.15
Problems 7.14,  
7.15, 7.20
	
Problems	
467

468	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
7.15	
For the power system given in Problem 7.14, a three-phase short circuit 
occurs at bus 4, where the prefault voltage is 138 kV. Prefault load current 
is neglected. Determine (a) the Thévenin equivalent at the fault, (b) the 
subtransient fault current in per unit and in kA rms, and (c) contribu-
tions to the fault from transformer T2 and from line 3–4.
7.16	
In the system shown in Figure 7.16, a three-phase short circuit occurs at 
point F. Assume that prefault currents are zero and that the generators 
are operating at rated voltage. Determine the fault current.
FIGURE 7.16
Problem 7.16
7.17	
A three-phase short circuit occurs at the generator bus (bus 1) for the 
system shown in Figure 7.17. Neglecting prefault currents and assuming 
that the generator is operating at its rated voltage, determine the subtran-
sient fault current using superposition.
FIGURE 7.17
Problem 7.17
SECTION 7.4
7.18	
(a) The bus impedance matrix for a three-bus power system is
Zbus 5 j 3
0.12
0.08
0.04
0.08
0.12
0.06
0.04
0.06
0.084  per unit
where subtransient reactances were used to compute Zbus. Prefault volt-
age is 1.0 per unit and prefault current is neglected. (a) Draw the bus 
impedance matrix equivalent circuit (rake equivalent). Identify the per-
unit self- and mutual impedances as well as the prefault voltage in the 
circuit. (b) A three-phase short circuit occurs at bus 2. Determine the 
subtransient fault current and the voltages at buses 1, 2, and 3 during  
the fault.

(c) Repeat for the case of
Zbus 5 j 
0.4
0.1
0.3
30.1
0.8
0.5
0.3
0.5
1.24  per unit
7.19	
Determine Ybus in per unit for the circuit in Problem 7.12. Then invert 
Ybus to obtain Zbus.
7.20	
Determine Ybus in per unit for the circuit in Problem 7.14. Then invert 
Ybus to obtain Zbus.
7.21	
Figure 7.18 shows a system reactance diagram. (a) Draw the admittance 
diagram for the system by using source transformations. (b) Find the 
bus admittance matrix Ybus. (c) Find the bus impedance Zbus matrix by 
inverting Ybus.
FIGURE 7.18
Problem 7.21
7.22	
For the network shown in Figure 7.19, impedances labeled 1 through 6 are 
in per unit. (a) Determine Ybus, preserving all buses. (b) Using MATLAB 
or a similar computer program, invert Ybus to obtain Zbus.
FIGURE 7.19
Problem 7.22
	
Problems	
469

470	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
7.23	
A single-line diagram of a four-bus system is shown in Figure 7.20, for 
which Zbus is given below: 
Zbus 5 j 3
0.25
0.2
0.16
0.14
0.2
0.23
0.15
0.151
0.16
0.15
0.196
0.1
0.14
0.151
0.1
0.1954
  per unit
Let a three-phase fault occur at bus 2 of the network.
(a) Calculate the initial symmetrical rms current in the fault.
(b) Determine the voltages during the fault at buses 1, 3, and 4.
(c) Compute the fault currents contributed to bus 2 by the adjacent 
unfaulted buses 1, 3, and 4.
(d) Find the current flow in the line from bus 3 to bus 1. Assume the pre-
fault voltage Vf at bus 2 to be 1/08 p.u., and neglect all prefault currents. 
Bus 2
Bus 1
Bus 3
Bus 4
FIGURE 7.20
Single-line diagram 
for Problem 7.23
7.24	
PowerWorld Simulator case Problem 7_24 models the system shown in 
Figure 7.14 with all data on a 1000 MVA base. Using PowerWorld Simu-
lator, determine the current supplied by each generator and the per-unit 
bus voltage magnitudes at each bus for a fault at bus 3.
7.25	
Repeat Problem 7.24, except place the fault at bus 4.
7.26	
Repeat Problem 7.24, except place the fault midway between buses 2 and 3.  
Determining the values for line faults requires that the line be split with 
a fictitious bus added at the point of the fault. The original line’s imped-
ance is then allocated to the two new lines based on the fault location, 
which is 50% each for this problem. Fault calculations are then the same 
as for a bus fault. This is done automatically in PowerWorld Simulator 
by first right-clicking on a line, and then selecting Fault. The Fault dialog 
appears as before, except now the fault type is changed to In-Line Fault. 
PW
PW
PW

Set the location percentage field to 50% to model a fault midway between 
buses 2 and 4.
7.27	
One technique for limiting fault current is to place reactance in series with 
the generators. Such reactance can be modeled in PowerWorld Simula-
tor by increasing the value of the generator’s positive sequence internal 
impedance. For the Problem 7.24 case, how much per-unit reactance must 
be added to G2 to limit its maximum fault current to 2.5 per unit for all 
three-phase bus faults? Where is the location of the most severe bus fault?
7.28	
Using PowerWorld Simulator case Example 6_13, determine the per-unit 
current and actual current in amps supplied by each of the generators for 
a fault at the POPLAR69 bus. During the fault, what percentage of the 
system buses have voltage magnitudes below 0.75 per unit?
7.29	
Repeat Problem 7.28, except place the fault at the REDBUD69 bus.
7.30	
Using PowerWorld Simulator case Example 7_5, open the line connect-
ing buses 4 and 5. Then, determine the per unit current supplied by the 
generator at bus 3 due a fault at bus 2.
SECTION 7.5
7.31	
A three-phase circuit breaker has a 15.5-kV rated maximum voltage, 9.0-kA  
rated short-circuit current, and a 2.50-rated voltage range factor. 
(a) Determine the symmetrical interrupting capability at 10-kV and 5-kV 
operating voltages. (b) Can this breaker be safely installed at a three-
phase bus where the symmetrical fault current is 10 kA, the operating 
voltage is 13.8 kV, and the (X/R) ratio is 12?
7.32	
A 345-kV, three-phase transmission line has a 2.2-kA continuous current 
rating and a 2.5-kA maximum short-time overload rating with a 356-kV 
maximum operating voltage. The maximum symmetrical fault current on 
the line is 30 kA. Select a circuit breaker for this line from Table 7.10.
7.33	
A 69-kV circuit breaker has a voltage range factor K 5 1.25, a continuous 
current rating of 1200 A, and a rated short-circuit current of 19,000 A 
at the maximum rated voltage of 72.5 kV. Determine the maximum sym-
metrical interrupting capability of the breaker. Also, explain its signifi-
cance at lower operating voltages.
7.34	
As shown in Figure 7.21, a 25-MVA, 13.8-kV, 60-Hz, synchronous gener-
ator with Xd0 5 0.15 per unit is connected through a transformer to a bus 
that supplies four identical motors. The rating of the three-phase trans-
former is 25 MVA and 13.8/6.9 kV with a leakage reactance of 0.1 per  
unit. Each motor has a subtransient reactance Xd0 5 0.2 per unit on a 
base of 5 MVA and 6.9 kV. A three-phase fault occurs at point P, when 
the bus voltage at the motors is 6.9 kV. Determine (a) the subtran-
sient fault current, (b) the subtransient current through breaker A, and  
(c) the symmetrical short-circuit interrupting current (as defined for 
circuit breaker applications) in the fault and in breaker A.
PW
PW
PW
PW
	
Problems	
471

472	
Chapter 7  |  Symmetrical Faults
CASE STUDIES QUESTIONS
a.	
What are the four main types of wind-turbine generators (WTG)? How 
do WTGs differ from conventional generators?
b.	
Which type of WTG can produce the largest three-phase short-circuit 
current?
c.	
For which type of WTG can the short-circuit current be controlled? Why?
DESIGN PROJECT 3 (CONTINUED): POWER FLOW/ 
SHORT CIRCUITS
Additional time given: 3 weeks
Additional time required: 10 hours
This is a continuation of Design Project 3. Assignments 1 and 2 are given in  
Chapter 6.
Assignment 3: Symmetrical Short Circuits
For the single-line diagram that you have been assigned (Figure 6.13 or 6.14), 
convert the positive-sequence reactance data to per unit using the given base 
quantities. For synchronous machines, use subtransient reactance. Then using 
PowerWorld Simulator, create the machine, transmission line, and transformer 
input data files. Next, run the program to compute subtransient fault currents for 
a bolted three-phase-to-ground fault at bus 1, then at bus 2, then at bus 3, and so 
on. Also compute bus voltages during the faults and the positive-sequence bus 
impedance matrix. Assume 1.0 per-unit prefault voltage. Neglect prefault load 
currents and all losses.
  Your output for this assignment consists of three input data files and three output 
data (fault currents, bus voltages, and the bus impedance matrix) files.
This project continues in Chapter 9.
A
P
FIGURE 7.21
Problem 7.34

	
References	
473
REFERENCES
1.	
Westinghouse Electric Corporation, Electrical Transmission and Distri-
bution Reference Book, 4th ed. (East Pittsburgh, PA: 1964).
2.	
E. W. Kimbark, Power System Stability, Synchronous Machines, vol. 3 
(New York: Wiley, 1956).
3.	
A. E. Fitzgerald, C. Kingsley, and S. Umans, Electric Machinery, 5th ed. 
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1990).
4.	
M. S. Sarma, Electric Machines, 2nd ed. (Boston: PWS Publishing, 1994).
5.	
J. R. Neuenswander, Modern Power Systems (New York: Intext Educa-
tional Publishers, 1971).
6.	
H. E. Brown, Solution of Large Networks by Matrix Methods (New York: 
Wiley, 1975).
7.	
G. N. Lester, “High Voltage Circuit Breaker Standards in the USA—
Past, Present and Future,” IEEE Transactions PAS, vol. PAS-93 (1974): 
pp. 590–600.
8.	
W. D. Stevenson, Jr., Elements of Power System Analysis, 4th ed. (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1982).
9.	
C. A. Gross, Power System Analysis (New York: Wiley, 1979).
10.	
Application Guide for AC High-Voltage Circuit Breakers Rated on a Sym-
metrical Current Basis, ANSI C 37.010 (New York: American National 
Standards Institute, 1999/R2005).
11.	
E. Muljadi and V. Grevorgian, “Short-Circuit Modeling of a Wind Power 
Plant,” Conference Paper NREL/CP-5500-50632, Power & Energy Soci-
ety General Meeting, July 24–29, 2011.    


475
T
he method of symmetrical components, first developed by C. L. Fortescue in 
1918, is a powerful technique for analyzing unbalanced three-phase systems. 
Fortescue defined a linear transformation from phase components to a new set 
of components called symmetrical components. The advantage of this transforma-
tion is that for balanced three-phase networks the equivalent circuits obtained for the 
symmetrical components, called sequence networks, are separated into three uncou-
pled networks. Furthermore, for unbalanced three-phase systems, the three sequence 
networks are connected only at points of unbalance. As a result, sequence networks 
for many cases of unbalanced three-phase systems are relatively easy to analyze.
8 Symmetrical Components
Generator stator 
showing completed 
windings for a  
757-MVA,  
3600-RPM, 60-Hz 
synchronous  
generator  
(Courtesy of  
General Electric.)

476	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
The symmetrical component method is basically a modeling technique that 
permits systematic analysis and design of three-phase systems. Decoupling a  
detailed three-phase network into three simpler sequence networks reveals compli-
cated phenomena in more simplistic terms. Sequence network results then can be 
superposed to obtain three-phase network results. As an example, the application 
of symmetrical components to unsymmetrical short-circuit studies (see Chapter 9) 
is indispensable.
The objective of this chapter is to introduce the concept of symmetrical com-
ponents in order to lay a foundation and provide a framework for later chapters cov-
ering both equipment models as well as power system analysis and design methods. 
Section 8.1 defines symmetrical components. In Sections 8.2 through 8.7, sequence 
networks of loads, series impedances, transmission lines, rotating machines, and 
transformers are presented. Complex power in sequence networks is presented in 
Section 8.8. Although Fortescue’s original work is valid for polyphase systems with n 
phases, this chapter considers only three-phase systems.
CASE STUDY
The following case study traces the development of gas-insulated substa-
tions and switchgear (GIS) since GIS technology originated in 1936. GIS 
advantages include enhanced reliability, compact modular design, reduced 
maintenance and cost, prolonged life, and advanced monitoring capabili-
ties. GIS circuit breakers are now available at voltages up to 1100 kV and 
interrupting currents up to 63 kA. Sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) is the most com-
monly used gas for electrical insulation in GIS. This case study presents 
an overview of the environmental impacts of switchgear, where SF6 as a 
greenhouse gas is an ongoing environmental concern [4].
Technological Progress in High-Voltage  
Gas-Insulated Substations
Ibrahim A. Metwally
In the last two decades, the evolution-
ary development of gas-insulated sub-
stations/switchgear (GIS) has resulted 
in higher integration of a number 
of new technologies to enhance per-
formance and reliability by reducing  
defects, having more compact designs, 
and reducing maintenance intervals 
and costs. Incremental improvements 
are continuing in interrupter technol-
ogy, such as self-extinguishing fea-
tures at medium voltage (MV) and 
resistance interruption at extra- and 
© 2010 IEEE. Reprinted, with permission, 
from I. A. Metwally, “Technological Progress 
in High-Voltage Gas-Insulated Substations,” 
IEEE Potentials Magazine, November/ 
December 2010, pp. 25–32.

	
Case Study	
477
ultra-high voltages (EHV and UHV). 
In addition, sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) 
gas technology for circuit breakers, 
zinc oxide (ZnO) for arresters, radio 
communication for condition moni-
toring, and a choice of porcelain or 
polymer composite for the full range 
of equipment are also some of the 
technologies integrated or innovated 
by GIS manufacturers in recent years. 
Recently, ac GIS ratings have reached 
up to 1100-kV rated voltage and  
50-kArms rated short-circuit break-
ing current. In addition, 1200-kV 
ac GIS are going to be visible very 
soon. Moreover, 500-kV dc GIS for 
dc transmission systems have become 
available.
GIS Construction
GIS is commonly used to designate 
gas-insulated, metal-clad electrical 
switchgear. GIS includes air entrance 
bushings, power cable connections, 
transformer connections, busbars, 
circuit breakers (CB), bus and cable 
isolators, earthing switches, current 
and voltage transformers “measur-
ing devices” (CT and VT), and surge 
arresters. Figure 1 illustrates a sin-
gle-line diagram and components of 
GIS. Many new SF6-to-air bushings 
are now composed of composite con-
struction, consisting of a fiberglass/
epoxy inner cylinder that contains 
the SF6 gas and provides structural 
strength. The external weather shed 
is made of silicone rubber.
SF6 is the most common gas used 
for electrical insulation; its pressure 
values range from 0.29 MPa to 0.51 
MPa (at 20 8C). Recently, SF6 has been 
replaced with the 95% mixture of ni-
trogen (N2) and 5% of SF6 at 1.3 MPa 
pressure, or with a 90% mixture of N2 
and 10% of SF6 at 0.94 MPa pressure, 
as well as with a 80% mixture of N2 
and 20% of SF6 at 0.71 MPa pressure. 
The latter corresponds to the 0.4 MPa 
pressure when pure SF6 is used.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
 1)  Busbar I
 2)  Busbar II
 3)  Bus Isolator I
 4)  Bus Isolator II
 5)  Surge Arrester
 6)  Grounding Switch
 7)  Grounding Switch
 8)  Make-Proof Grounding Switch
 9)  Circuit Breaker
10) Current Transformer
11) Cable Isolator
12) Cable Sealing End
13) Voltage Transformer
Figure 1  Single-line diagram and components of GIS

478	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
Today, the environmental con-
sideration related to the “greenhouse” 
effect grows, especially for using SF6 
and its mixtures in the compressed-gas 
electric power apparatus. SF6 gas 
is one of the strongest manmade 
“greenhouse” gases; its global warm-
ing potential is estimated to be ap-
proximately 25,000 times larger than 
that of carbon dioxide (CO2) gas. At 
equal gas pressure, SF6∙N2 mixtures 
are less sensitive to insulation defects 
than undiluted SF6. The recent trend 
is to use ultra-diluted SF6∙N2 gas mix-
tures with SF6 content # 1%.
Typically, solid insulators are  
required to provide support to stre­ssed 
conductors in such systems. Solid in-
sulating spacers represent the weakest 
points in these systems. Several trou-
bles and system outages have been 
reported worldwide due to spacer fail-
ures. Normally, pure SF6 or SF6∙N2 
mixtures at high pressures are used as 
an insulating medium. Complete fail-
ure or partial discharge may occur on 
the spacer surfaces, but they rarely oc-
cur at the highly pressurized gas unless 
there are solid conducting particles in 
the gas, as will be discussed later.
Spacers used in GIS are usually 
made of epoxy or cast resin. These 
spacers fundamentally are divided 
into two types according to their 
shapes, namely, discs and cones. The 
presence of spacers results in complex 
dielectric field distribution. It often 
intensifies the electric field, particu-
larly on the spacer surface. The insu-
lation ability of SF6 is highly sensitive 
to the maximum electric field, and 
furthermore, the insulation strength 
along a spacer surface is usually 
lower than that in the gas space. Due 
to the previously mentioned spacer 
troubles, they should be precisely 
designed to realize a quasi-uniform 
electric field distribution along their 
surfaces. In addition, functionally 
graded materials (FGM) find ex-
tensive application in the insulation 
system such as GIS. FGM consist of 
materials of different permittivities 
(dielectric constants), i.e., with a spa-
tial distribution of permittivity. This 
new spacer material can be optimized 
to control the electric field along the 
spacer surface, especially at the triple 
junction “gas/spacer/enclosure.”
Advantages
Gas-insulated systems, such as gas­
insulated lines and switchgear (GIL 
and GIS), are widely used in the elec-
tric power industry for transmitting 
and controlling bulk power, respec-
tively. The concept of SF6 HV GIS 
has proved itself in several thousands 
of installations worldwide. It offers 
the following outstanding advantages:
●
●
Minimal space requirements, 
where the availability and price 
of land play an important part 
in selecting the type of switch-
gear to be used. It resolves the 
problems that arise in large 
towns, industrial conurbations, 
mountainous regions with nar-
row valleys, and underground 
power stations.
●
●
Full protection against contact 
with live parts because the metal 
enclosure 
affords 
maximum 
safety for personnel under all 
operating and fault conditions.

	
Case Study	
479
●
●
Protection against pollution 
due to the fact that the metal 
enclosure fully protects the 
switchgear 
internal 
compo-
nents against environmental 
pollutants such as salt deposits 
in coastal regions, industrial 
vapors, and precipitates, as well 
as sandstorms. The compact 
switchgear can be installed in 
buildings 
of 
uncomplicated 
design in order to minimize the 
cost of cleaning and inspec-
tion and to make necessary 
repairs independent of weather 
conditions.
●
●
Free choice of installation site 
that leads to potential sav-
ings for the expensive grading 
and foundation work, e.g., in 
permafrost zones, and short 
delivery and erection times 
for indoor switchgear installa-
tion regardless of the weather 
conditions.
●
●
Protection of the environment 
because of its very flexible 
modular system that can meet 
all requirements of configura-
tion given by network design 
and operating conditions.
●
●
Longevity means an expected 
lifetime of at least 50 years 
and being maintenance-free for 
more than 20 years.
History and Technological  
Progress
Historically, air-insulated substations  
(AISs) were the only available tech-
nology until 1936. However, this 
resulted in a number of difficulties, 
namely, (1) pollution in desert areas 
or in close proximity to industrial or 
coastal areas, (2) insufficient space 
for AIS when constructing new sub-
stations/extensions (e.g., inside cit-
ies), and (3) restrictions by planning 
laws that only permit AIS substations 
where there is “no demonstrable  
alternative.”
If GIS and AIS are compared 
in the need of space for the same 
function, the space reduction by  
using GIS is in the ratio of 1:5. 
That means less than 20% of the 
space of AISs is needed to install 
a GIS. In 2007, more than 20,000 
bays in over 2000 substations are 
installed worldwide, in all kinds of 
environmental conditions and with 
the whole spectrum of voltage and 
current ratings.
Following the invention of 
SF6 gas in 1900, the applications of 
this gas have significantly advanced 
since 1940. Alternating current (ac) 
GIS technology originated in 1936, 
when a Freon-GIS assembly, rated 
at 33 kV, was demonstrated in the 
United States. Later, in the mid-
1950s, the excellent insulating and 
arc­-extinguishing properties of SF6 
gas were recognized. By the mid-
1960s, GIS was sufficiently well- 
developed to be commercially viable 
and appealing to a broader market. 
Over time, progressive innovative 
steps have allowed manufacturers to 
develop a range of GIS voltage rat-
ings of 550 kV in 1976, 800 kV in 
1979, and recently up to 1100 kV as 
shown in Figure 2 for the ac systems. 
The use of 1100-kV ac transmission 
lines, (i.e., doubling the voltage from 

480	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
the traditional level of 550 kV) re-
duces the transmission losses by a 
factor of four, which is a significant 
savings of energy. Moreover, the 
1200-kV ac GIS are going to be seen 
very soon.
Recent trends in power trans-
mission and distribution technologies 
involve high-voltage direct-current 
(HVDC) installations in the electric 
system. This improves the overall 
system reliability and achieves eco-
nomical benefits. Direct current (dc) 
GIS are considered integral parts of 
these installations. Therefore, there 
has been a resurgence of interest 
in HVDC SF6 equipment in recent 
years. Recently, 500-kV dc GIS for 
dc transmission systems have become 
available in Japan.
The phenomenon of accumu-
lated charges on a solid insulator sur-
face is one of the critical parameters 
at the insulation design stage even 
for both ac and dc all gas-insulated  
equipment (e.g., GIS and GIL). There 
are three kinds of electric charging 
mechanisms: 
volume 
conduction, 
surface conduction, and electric field 
emission. These mechanisms are 
characterized in terms of the time 
constant, applied voltage, and charge 
distribution. The behavior of metal-
lic particles left on the enclosure is 
one of the largest differences. Also, 
degradation of metal-oxide arrester 
blocks under dc stress is of significant  
importance.
Figure 3 illustrates the percent-
age evolution and development of 
different types of HV substations 
in the market from 1960 to 2020. 
Highly integrated switchgear (HIS) 
is a compact switchgear solution 
for a rated voltage of up to 550 kV. 
HIS is mainly used for renewal or 
expansion of air-insulated outdoor 
and indoor substations, particularly 
if the operator wants to carry out 
modifications while the switchgear 
is in service. With the HIS solution, 
the circuit-breakers, disconnectors, 
earthing switches, and transformers 
are accommodated in compressed 
0
72.5
123
145
170
245
300
362
420
550
800
1,100
63
50
40
31.5
25
0
Voltage Rating (kVrms)
Rated Short-Circuit
Breaking Current (kArms)
Figure 2  Rated short-circuit breaking current of ac GIS 
for a wide voltage range

	
Case Study	
481
gas-tight enclosures and at a min-
imum number of independent gas 
compartments. 
This 
makes 
the 
switchgear extremely compact. The 
modularity and flexibility of today’s 
switchgear allows designing highly 
optimized GIS using a reduced min-
imum number of junction elements 
(elbows and cross junctions, among 
others). This concept allows deliv-
ering subtransmission and distri-
bution substations made of one or 
two shipping units only, fully assem-
bled and tested in factory. This will  
result in quasielimination of the site 
assembly and tests, which is a real 
benefit of the customer’s project 
management. These optimized GIS 
can shorten the time needed from 
ordering to commissioning to about 
44% (i.e., by about 5–6 months). It 
is worth mentioning that the recent 
size of building, space requirement, 
and packing volume have been  
reduced for the 145 kV GIS, to be 
less than 20%, 15%, and 25% of 
those in 1968, respectively.
Gas-insulated modules have 
recently been seen at all voltage lev-
els up to 550 kV, as an intermediary 
between GIS and AIS. They are suit-
able for the following categories of 
applications: standardization and op-
timization of new substation and/or 
extensions in large networks, recon-
struction or refurbishment of AIS 
with operational constraints and/or 
space limitations, and the extension 
of AIS with space limitations. There-
fore, the market of these applications 
will most likely increase as shown in 
Figure 3.
Recently, disconnecting circuit 
breaker technology, which integrates 
the disconnecting function into the 
circuit breaker and eliminates the 
need for two separate free-standing 
disconnectors, has led to shrinking 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1960
1980
2000
2020
AIS
AIS Compact
Bay Module
HIS
GIS
Figure 3  Percentage evolution and development of HV 
substations in the market

482	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
footprint, equipment, and construc-
tion costs, and increases availability. 
The solution makes it possible—for 
the first time—to build compact EHV 
AIS substations and load hubs close 
to large cities and urban areas, where 
high land prices and space restric-
tions usually prohibit the construc-
tion of large AIS.
Transmission system growth 
may lead to higher requirements 
with regard to short-circuit current 
and/or nominal current ratings af-
ter the initial GIS installation. An 
upgrade of busbars, circuit break-
ers, and metering transformers may 
have to be investigated. Upgrades 
may also consist of an addition of 
isolated earthing switches for offline 
monitoring, voltage indicators, and 
partial discharge sensors. The plan-
ning for an extension or upgrade  
option should begin during the ini-
tial GIS design stage.
In some designs of bay mod-
ule type used for GIS extensions and 
upgrades, the following elements 
are integrated into one bay: circuit 
breakers, bus disconnectors, earthing 
switches, voltage transformers, cur-
rent transformers, outgoing feeder 
disconnectors with earthing switches, 
and surge arresters. In addition, the 
circuit breaker is integrated with cur-
rent transformers, and disconnector 
contacts are directly mounted on cir-
cuit breaker. The key benefits of this 
compact design are: space-saving by 
optimized system design, modular-
ity and flexibility for application in 
all possible substation designs, low 
overall height, optimized mainte-
nance management, reduction in life 
cycle cost, and short on-site erection 
due to prefabricated and type-tested 
modules.
New Development Trends
Increased equipment loading and 
an inability to build new or expand 
conventional stations to accommo-
date additional loads has lowered 
the relative GIS costs compared 
with those of AIS. Manufactur-
ing improvements have lowered the 
real GIS costs as well. Changes in 
the utility business environment 
and ownership have led to a greater 
acceptance of these changes. The 
above factors will increase the mar-
ket share of GIS. This is expected 
even without further GIS technical 
improvements.
The evolutionary development 
of GIS has resulted in higher integra-
tion, reduced opportunity for defects, 
and more compact designs. Incre-
mental improvements are continuing 
in interrupter technology, such as 
self-extinguishing features at MV 
and resistance interruption at EHV  
and UHV.
The latest GIS technological 
achievement is in the 1100-kV AC 
GIS. The 1100 kV system has the 
following 
features: 
multi-bundle 
conductors, larger line-charging ca-
pacity (approximately four times as 
large as that of the 550 kV system), 
larger power plants that are located 
relatively close to the UHV system, 
and 
large-capacity 
transformers 
(3000 MVA∙bank) that interconnect 
the UHV system with the 550 kV  
system. To reduce corona noise, mul-
tibundle “eight” conductors with a 

large diameter are employed, which 
leads to a decrease in the line surge 
impedances and an increase in the 
time constant of dc component asso-
ciated with fault current. In addition, 
the use of large power generators 
and large capacity power trans-
formers lead to larger reactance-to- 
resistance ratio and contribute to 
an increase of the dc time constant 
in the fault currents. Consequently, 
the rate of decrease of current  
(di/dt) around current zero is taken 
as 28 A∙ms, which is equivalent to  
63 kArms with 10% component. As a 
result, the rated short-circuit break-
ing current, which is the highest short-
circuit current that a circuit breaker is 
capable of breaking at the instant of 
contact separation in kArms, is taken 
as 50 kArms (see Figure 2).
Generally, there are two main 
problems for network expansion in 
the 550 kV to transfer power from re-
mote plants:
●
●
It is very difficult to secure mul-
tiple power transmission routes, 
which enable sufficient power 
transmission from remote power 
plants, thus, the construction of 
the 1100-kV transmission lines 
with a capability three to four 
times greater than that of 550-kV  
transmission lines.
●
●
Short-circuit current in the 550-kV  
network will increase above the 
expected level (63 kArms).
Highly sophisticated system 
design technologies are necessary 
to deal with the following technical 
issues of the 1100-kV transmission 
system:
●
●
Solutions for network problems 
and technology, such as second-
ary arc extinction. Secondary 
arc extinction is a serious con-
cern in UHV systems and needs 
to be addressed at the design 
stage of such projects. Miti-
gation measures, such as neu-
tral reactors, special switching 
schemes of shunt reactors, and 
high-speed grounding switches, 
have to be studied.
●
●
Insulation coordination issues, 
such as overvoltages on trans-
mission lines and in substations, 
can be effectively controlled 
by high-performance, heavy-
duty surge arresters. Therefore, 
these arresters are selected with 
an individual energy rating of  
ù 55 MJ. These metal-oxide 
surge arresters are a key tech-
nology for 1100-kV insulation 
coordination, where their I-V 
characteristics become more  
flat (i.e., higher energy aborption  
capability). 
Lightning 
over­­
voltages dominate the nonself- 
restoring 
internal 
insulation 
design of substation equip-
ment; 
it 
is 
important 
to 
suppress lightning overvolt-
ages effectively by arranging 
metal-oxide surge arresters at 
adequate locations, such as at 
line entrances, busbars, trans-
formers, and also within GIS. 
To control switching overvolt-
ages below the ground fault 
overvoltage level, the closing/ 
opening 
resistor 
can 
be 
emp­loyed as shown in Figure 4,  
where the total length and  
	
Case Study	
483

484	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
the height of the 4-interrupter/
closing resistor and its close/
open (CO) switch unit are 10 m 
and 3.8 m, respectively.
For MV networks, on the other 
hand, the interrupting chamber of 
the self-extinguishing CB is divided 
into two main compartments at the 
same pressure of about 0.51 MPa 
during the closed condition. During 
opening, the gas pressure increases 
by heat generated in the arc, then 
the gas blasts from one arc compart-
ment to the other one. By applying 
an external magnetic field, one arc 
rotates around the contact periphery 
and cools, and no pitting of contacts 
occurs.
Life Cycle Assessment
The switchgear only makes a minor 
contribution to the total global warm-
ing potential of a representative urban 
distribution grid. On the contrary, 
other grid components such as  
cables and transformers play the deci-
sive role—regardless of whether AIS 
or GIS technology is used. Figure 5 
shows an overview of the percentage 
environmental impact categories that 
were examined in a study at switchgear 
level. It is based on a representative  
mix of all switchgear types in the MV 
range. Clear advantages for GIS com-
pared to AIS are also shown in regard 
to global warming potential, except 
the SF6 emission as was explained ear-
lier. 
It is worth mentioning that 
the contributions to global warming 
potential of an urban power distri-
bution grid is 92% from grid com-
ponents, such as cables and lines, 
and 8% from switchgear, where the 
latter can be divided as 7% from 
switchgear in ring-main units and 
only 1% from switchgear of substa-
tion transformers.
GIS Failures
GIS have been in operation for more 
than 35 years, and they have shown 
a high level of reliability with ex-
tremely low failure rates. This is the 
result of quality assurance during 
the design and manufacturing pro-
cesses as well as during the erection 
and on-site commissioning. How-
ever, the return of experiences has 
shown that some of the in-service 
failures are related to defects in the 
insulation system.
The main components involved 
in failures of 300–500 kV GIS are 
4 Interrupters
Closing Resistor
CO
Switch
Figure 4  Four-interrupter and closing resistor and its 
close/open (CO) switch unit of the 1100-kV 
gas circuit breaker

given in Figure 6, where the major 
components that cause failures by 
about 72% are circuit breakers (CB), 
disconnectors, and bus ducts and in-
terconnecting parts. Major failure of 
GIS is a collapse of one of its ma-
jor components or elements, which 
causes the lack of one or more of its  
Materials and Manufacturing
Ohmic Losses
SF6 Emissions
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
AIS
AIS
AIS
AIS
GIS
GIS
GIS
GIS
Primary
Energy
Demand
Global
Warming
Potential
Acidification
Potential
Nitrification
Potential
Figure 5  Environmental impact of AIS and GIS
Surge Arrester, 1.90%
Transformer
Interface, 2.50%
Cable Box, 0.60%
SF6/Air
Bushing,
9.30% 
Busducts
and Interconnecting
Parts, 24.30%
Busbars, 6.20%
VT, 4.30%
CT, 1.90%
Earthing Switch, 0.60%
Disconnector, 20.50%
Circuit Breaker or Switch,
27.30%
Other, 0.60%
Figure 6  Main components involved in failures of 300–500 kV GIS
	
Case Study	
485

486	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
fundamental functions. A major fail-
ure will result in an immediate change 
in the system operating conditions. 
The major failure rate is equal to the 
number of major failures divided by 
the sum of circuit-breaker bays, mul-
tiplied by the number of in-service 
years. The dielectric failure rates pre-
sented in Figure 7 are taken from dif-
ferent sources. In range 1 (from 100 kV  
to 200 kV), the failure rate is in good 
correspondence and amounts to be 
about 0.25 failures per 100 CB-bay 
years. In range 2 (from 300 kV to  
500 kV), the failure rate is signifi-
cantly higher due to the higher elec-
tric field strength. The deviations are 
between 0.95 and 1.8 failures per 100 
CB-bay years.
When analyzing the failure 
causes, it must be stated that a lot 
of failures do not occur in GIS of 
modern design (e.g., insufficient insu-
lation coordination of disconnectors 
and earthing switches or imperfec-
tions in solid material). Furthermore, 
a reduction of teething faults is likely 
due to the application of advanced 
testing methods. Therefore, a tar-
get failure rate of 0.1 failures per  
100 CB-bay years should be achiev-
able, where about 61% of the failures 
could have been detected and clas-
sified by monitoring and diagnostic 
systems, respectively.
Origin of PD in GIS
Partial discharges (PD) are electri-
cal discharges that do not completely 
bridge between the electrodes. Al-
though PD magnitudes are usually 
small, they cause progressive deterio-
ration and may lead to ultimate failure. 
It is essential to detect their presence in 
a nondestructive controlled test. There 
are two types of the fine contaminants 
in both GIS and GIL systems: either 
insulating or metallic particles. The 
former has a relatively innocuous  
effect, while the latter drastically re-
duces the corona onset and break-
down voltages of the system.
GIS equipment is made com-
pact; hence the working field strength 
within 
the 
equipment 
increases 
and becomes very sensitive to field  
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
CIGRE
Inquiry
CIGRE
WG33/23-12
5 German
System
Operators
Failures/100 CB-Bay Years
100–200 kV
300–500 kV
Figure 7  Rates of dielectric failures in GIS

perturbations due to defects. PD in 
compressed SF6 GIS arise from pro-
trusions, free conducting particles, 
floating components, and bulk insula-
tion defects, such as voids and delam-
inations. PD resulting from the third 
and the fourth sources will, in turn, 
lead to failure of the GIS. In the case of 
a floating component (one not bonded 
to the conductor or sheath), the dis-
charge magnitude is normally suffi-
cient to decompose SF6 in quantities.  
Treeing is a failure process in solid 
dielectrics, which, once initiated, will 
normally proceed to a failure through 
the bulk of dielectric. The most im-
portant defects are shown in Figure 8.  
Typical defects may result from errors 
in manufacturing, shipping, and as-
sembly, including loose or electrically 
floating corona shields, undetected 
scratches, and poor electrical contacts.
Figure 9 illustrates the contri-
bution of each of these defects and 
Figure 8  Possible defects in the insulation system of GIS
Conductor
Protrusion on
HV Conductor
Electrically
Floating Shield
Free Particle
Particle on
Spacer 
Void Inside
Spacer
Enclosure
Protrusion on
Enclosure
Not Related to
Insulation, 8%
Insulation
Coordination of
Disconnectors,
10%
Particles and
Foreign Bodies,
20% 
Protrusions/
Particles on HV, 5%
Current
Carrying
Contacts, 11%
Bulk Insulation
of Spacers, 10%
Shields and
Electrostatic
Contacts, 18%
Moisture, 7%
Unknown,
11%
Figure 9  Main failure causes in GIS
	
Case Study	
487

488	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
other sources in the failure of GIS. 
It can be seen from Figure 9 that 
the defects shown in Figure 8 rep-
resent about 53% of the total main 
failure causes in GIS. A protrusion 
from live or grounded parts creates 
a local field enhancement. Such de-
fects have little influence on the ac 
withstand level because the volt-
age varies slowly and the corona 
at the tip will have time to build 
up a space charge that shields the 
tip. Under switching and lightning 
surges, however, there is not enough 
time to build up such space charges. 
Consequently, the basic lightning 
impulse withstand level (BIL) will 
be drastically reduced. Usually, pro-
trusions exceeding 1 mm are consid-
ered harmful.
Free moving particles have lit-
tle impact on the BIL, while the ac 
withstand level can be significantly 
reduced. This reduction depends on 
their shape and position; the longer 
they are and the closer they get to the 
HV conductor, the more dangerous 
they become. If they move onto a 
spacer, they become even more dan-
gerous. A particle on a spacer may, 
with time, lead to deterioration of the 
spacer surface. Under typical condi-
tions for GIS, particles have incep-
tion electric fields of several kV∙mm 
and true charges of several 10 pC to  
100 pC. Wire particles approximately 
correspond to the type of particles 
encountered in practice.
Voids and defects inside spacers 
could create discharges once the ini-
tiation voltage is exceeded. Usually, 
such voids are found during quality 
control in the factory. A defect within 
a spacer will give rise to discharges, 
electrical trees, and eventually lead to 
breakdown. Since the sound absorp-
tion in epoxy is very high, the chance 
to detect them with acoustic measure-
ment is small.
A floating component is a con-
ducting element that is not bonded 
to, or in electrical contact with, the 
conductor or sheath. Generally, 
floating components should not be 
present in GIS. The most common 
types of components that may be-
come floating are spacer inserts or 
field-grading shields at either the 
conductor or the sheath “enclosure.” 
If a field-grading shield becomes 
mechanically loose, it may become 
electrically floating. A floating shield 
adjacent to an electrode could give 
rise to large discharges between the 
shield and the electrode, which can 
eventually lead to failure.
Floating components normally 
cause PD with magnitudes in the range 
of 104 to 106 pC∙pulse with repeti-
tion rates of 120 to several thousand  
discharges per second, in multi-
ples of 120 Hz (for 60 Hz power 
frequency). An electrically float-
ing shield takes a potential, which 
is determined by the relationship 
between its capacitance to the con-
ductor versus that to ground, which 
exceeds the insulation level to the 
conductor or to ground, and the ca-
pacitance will then discharge. Such  
discharges tend to be repetitive with a 
charge transfer in the range of nC to  
mC. The discharge pattern is usually  
regular and with PD magnitude  
larger than that for a void in an  
insulator.

PD Mitigation Methods
If the effects of defects/contaminants 
are mitigated or controlled, then  
improvement in the reliability of SF6 
GIS could be achieved. Moreover, 
this could lead to higher working 
stresses for future compressed gas 
apparatus, and consequently to a 
considerable reduction in SF6 GIS 
size and cost. Some techniques that 
are used for the mitigation and con-
trol of particle contaminations in 
GIS are particle traps, dielectric coat-
ing of the electrodes, and the use of 
SF6 gas mixtures.
GIS systems are typically con-
ditioned before service by raising 
the voltage in discrete steps so as to 
move particles over a period of time 
into particle traps, but additional 
particles may be generated due to the 
switching operation of circuit break-
ers and conductor movement under 
load cycling. Particles adhering to 
the support insulators can result in 
significant reduction in the impulse 
flashover voltage of the system. In 
order to prevent the particles from 
interacting with solid support insula-
tors, electrostatic particle drivers and 
traps are used. In ac GIS, the par-
ticle traps are usually fixed around, 
or near to, the insulators, which rep-
resent low-field areas, to prevent the 
attachment of the particles on the 
insulators and so reduce the chance 
of 
particle-initiated 
breakdowns 
associated with the insulators. In 
dc GIS, the bus consists of three 
regions, namely, a spacer region 
where an electric shield is installed 
at the triple junction, a particle  
scavenging region where both the 
particle driver and the particle trap 
exist, and a non-levitating region 
where the electrodes are coated. In 
such dc GIS, a shield ring “field-well 
ring” is placed at the end of the par-
ticle driver for two purposes: (1) to 
reduce the electric field and assist the 
particle trapping and (2) to prevent 
the firefly phenomenon, where the 
particle sometimes stays very close 
to the HV conductor under negative 
polarity.
Dielectric coatings of conduc-
tors in GIS systems improve the di-
electric strength. This is due to coating  
over the conductor roughness and 
decreasing the high local field; coat-
ing resistance reduces the develop-
ment of pre-discharges in the gas, 
and significance reduction in the 
particle charge during impacts and 
a consequent increase in the lifting 
field. However, coating the conduc-
tor can also create problems. If the 
coating is damaged, it could create 
particles. The coating lowers the par-
ticle mobility and thus, makes more 
difficult the use of particle traps. 
By increasing the lift-off voltage, it 
can be more dangerous because the 
particles can then lift off and induce 
direct breakdown without previous 
warning or possibility of PD detec-
tion “spring effect.”
SF6-N2 is often considered to 
be the best substitute for SF6 in both 
GIS and GIL because of the follow-
ing reasons:
●
●
N2 is a cheap gas, and its dielec-
tric strength in a uniform 
field is higher than that of gas 
	
Case Study	
489

490	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
mixtures of SF6 with most com-
mon gases.
●
●
It avoids SF6 liquefaction at low 
ambient temperatures.
●
●
It reduces the quantity of SF6 
and hence reduces environmen-
tal impact.
●
●
At equal gas pressure, SF6-N2 
mixtures are less sensitive to 
insulation defects than undi-
luted SF6.
The effective ionization coef-
ficient (a) for the SF6-N2 mixture 
decreases with the ratio of N2∙SF6. 
In addition, the PD magnitude for 
fixed protrusions increases with gas 
pressure, where pure SF6 gives the 
greatest increase. For free moving 
particles, the PD magnitude is inde-
pendent of both the type and pres-
sure of the gas.
Generally, the field strength 
near the triple junction can be reduced 
by devising the spacer shape such that 
an obtuse angle exists at each spacer- 
electrode interface, as well as by elec-
trode-inserted spacers. In addition, 
FGM has recently been introduced, 
as was discussed earlier. Furthermore, 
the conducting particles can be ef-
fectively trapped and prevented from 
reaching the HV conductor by elec-
trode-inserted rib spacers or trap-rib 
spacers with dielectric coating of the 
earthed enclosure.
Partial Discharge  
Monitoring Systems
Ultra-high frequency (UHF) tech-
nique can be applied for PD mea-
surement in GIS, either using 
internal or external UHF couplers. 
The internally fitted UHF couplers 
have some limitations, such as the 
risk of breakdown (if they are not 
positioned in the hatchcover, where 
the field is very low), a large num-
ber of sensors is required to detect 
PD for a GIS (e.g., from six to nine 
per three-phase bay), and possible 
focusing of the UHF signal be-
cause the enclosure may act as a 
reflector. External UHF couplers 
also have some limitations, such as 
some loss of sensitivity as they may 
contain internal protection circuitry 
or preamplifiers that prevent pulse 
injection during the sensitivity ver-
ification test. However, external 
UHF couplers have many advan-
tages such as: sensors are movable, 
the UHF technique is applicable to 
GIS having dielectric windows, it is 
a cost-effective method, and it of-
fers a more effective and flexible PD 
location system.
The acoustic emission (AE) 
technique offers several advantages: 
movable sensors, good sensitivity, 
immunity to external noise, defects 
may be localized and recognized, 
and risk assessment based on source 
characterization. Its disadvantages 
are the high attenuation and, for 
some cast enclosures and defects in 
cast epoxy (e.g., voids) attenuation 
may be significant, requiring too 
many sensors. Therefore, the UHF 
technique has many characteristics 
that make it advantageous over that 
of the AE.
The world’s first GIS online 
partial discharge monitoring (PDM) 
system was introduced in 1993, and 
they are now installed worldwide 

at voltages of 230–800 kV. Today, 
different PDM systems are avail-
able and utilize the same principle  
of UHF technology. Based on prac-
tical experiences with actual moni-
toring and diagnostic systems, the 
GIS system’s reliability can be im-
proved with exploitation of service 
life. The cost benefits of using PDM 
systems can be deduced from the 
dramatic reduction in failure rates 
when comparing the in-service fail-
ure statistics with and without using 
such systems.
A PDM system normally op-
erates as a “black box” that captures 
UHF signals and submits warning 
and alarm signals to the substa-
tion control system only in the case 
of in-service relevant PD activity. 
Therefore, the most important PDM 
system features are the applied noise 
suppression techniques and the  
efficiency of the PD identification  
algorithms.
Today, the suppression of noise 
and other background signals like  
radar or mobile phone signals is re-
alized by combined hardware and 
software filters. Actual PD identifica-
tion algorithms are based on phase- 
resolved pulse sequence analysis. The 
applied redundant diagnosis systems 
(RDS) with hierarchical or hybrid 
structures consist of PD feature ex-
traction and defect classification in 
combination with a proper reference 
data base to identify the type and 
nature of the insulation defect. The 
results from such RDS can have an 
accuracy of correct identification in 
the range of over 95%. Only a very 
small number of captured PD data 
sets are classified as unknown defect 
or identified in a wrong way.
Conclusion
GIS are widely used in the electric 
power industry as a key element for 
controlling bulk power from MV to 
UHV range. SF6 and SF6∙N2 mix-
ture HV GIS have proved themselves 
in several thousands of installations 
worldwide because of their many out-
standing advantages.
Epoxy or cast-resin solid in-
sulators are used as spacers in GIS. 
They represent the weakest points in 
GIS systems as the electric field on 
their surfaces is higher than that in 
the gas space.
Historically, AIS were the only 
available technology until 1936, and 
it will continue to share more than 
60% in the coming decade with the 
introduction of compact AIS and 
HIS types.
Highly optimized GIS, us-
ing a minimum number of junction 
elements (elbows and cross junc-
tions), allows delivering much smaller 
subtransmission 
and 
distribution 
substations fully assembled and 
tested in factory (i.e., shortening the 
time to commissioning).
AC GIS rated 1100 kV and 
short-circuit breaking current of  
50 kArms is the latest GIS technologi-
cal achievement. The 1200-kV ac GIS 
are going to be visible very soon. DC 
GIS rated 500 kV for HVDC trans-
mission systems have become avail-
able, too.
Circuit breakers, disconnectors, 
bus ducts, and interconnecting parts 
are the major components that cause 
	
Case Study	
491

492	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
failures by about 72% in GIS. Gen-
erally, the higher the operating volt-
age of GIS, the higher is the failure 
rate due to the higher electric field 
strength.
A target failure rate of 0.1 fail-
ures per 100 CB-bay years should be 
achievable, in particular by means of 
monitoring and diagnostic systems, 
as about 61% of the failures could 
have been detected.
PD in compressed SF6 GIS 
arise from protrusions, free conduct-
ing particles, floating components, 
and bulk insulation defects (voids). 
These defects represent about 53% 
of the total main failure causes  
in GIS.
Some techniques used for the 
mitigation and control of particle 
contaminations in GIS are parti-
cle traps, dielectric coating of the 
electrodes, the use of SF6 gas mix-
tures, and the use of FGM as solid 
spacers for optimizing its profile.
The ultra-high frequency and 
acoustic emission techniques can be 
used for GIS PD monitoring system, 
where the former has many advanta-
geous characteristics over the latter. 
A dramatic reduction in failure rates 
can be achieved when using such 
systems.
Further Reading
I. A. Metwally, “Status review on 
partial discharge measurement tech-
niques in gas-insulated switchgears/
lines,” J. Electr. Power Syst. Res.,  
vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 25–36, 2004.
IEEE Guide for Recommended 
Electrical Clearances and Insulation 
Levels in Air-Insulated Electrical 
Power Substations, IEEE Standard 
2007.359971, May 4, 2007.
High-Voltage Switchgear and 
Control Gear—Part 205: Compact 
Switchgear Assemblies for Rated 
Voltages Above 52 kV, IEC Standard 
62271-205, Edition 1.0, 2008.
J. D. McDonald, Electric Power 
Substations Engineering, 2nd ed. Boca  
Raton, FL: CRC, May 2007.
P. Ponchon, M. Bues, H. Bosia, 
and G. F. Montillet, “World applica-
tions of gas-insulated modules (GIMs) 
to HV and EHV substations,” IEEE 
Trans. Power Delivery, vol. 21, no. 4, 
pp. 1935–1940, 2006.
S. Yanabu, E. Zaima, and T. 
Hasegawa, “Historical review of high 
voltage switchgear developments in 
the 20th century for power trans-
mission and distribution system in 
Japan,” IEEE Trans. Power Delivery, 
vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 659–664, 2006.
About the Author
Ibrahim A. Metwally (metwally@squ 
.edu.om) earned a B.Eng. in electri-
cal engineering, and both an M.Eng. 
and a PhD in high-voltage engineer-
ing. He is a permanent professor 
with the Department of Electrical 
Engineering at Mansoura Univer-
sity, Egypt, and currently on leave 
as a professor with the Department 
of Electrical and Computer Engi-
neering, Sultan Qaboos University, 
Oman. He is a senior member of the 
IEEE and a fellow of the Alexander 
von Humboldt Foundation in Bonn, 
Germany.  ■

	
Section 8.1 Definition of Symmetrical Components	
493
8.1  Definition of Symmetrical Components
Assume that a set of three-phase voltages designated Va, Vb, and Vc is given. In ac-
cordance with Fortescue, these phase voltages are resolved into the following three 
sets of sequence components:
1.	 Zero-sequence components, consisting of three phasors with equal mag-
nitudes and with zero phase displacement, as shown in Figure 8.1(a) 
2.	 Positive-sequence components, consisting of three phasors with equal 
magnitudes, 1120° phase displacement, and positive sequence, as in 
Figure 8.1(b)
3.	 Negative-sequence components, consisting of three phasors with equal 
magnitudes, 1120° phase displacement, and negative sequence, as in 
Figure 8.1(c)
The zero-, positive-, and negative-sequence components of phase a, which are 
Va0, Va1, and Va2, respectively, are presented in this section. For simplicity, drop the 
subscript a and denote these sequence components as V0, V1, and V2. They are de-
fined by the following transformation:
3
Va
Vb
Vc4
53
1
1
1
1
a2
a
1
a
a243
V0
V1
V24

(8.1.1)
where
a 5 1/1208 5 21
2 1 j Ï3
2 
(8.1.2)
FIGURE 8.1
Resolving phase 
voltages into three 
sets of sequence 
components

494	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
Writing (8.1.1) as three separate equations:
Va 5 V0 1 V1 1 V2
(8.1.3)
Vb 5 V0 1 a2V1 1 aV2
(8.1.4)
Vc 5 V0 1 aV1 1 a2V
(8.1.5)
In (8.1.2), a is a complex number with unit magnitude and a 1208 phase angle. 
When any phasor is multiplied by a, that phasor rotates by 120° (counterclockwise). 
Similarly, when any phasor is multiplied by a2 5 (1/1208) (1/1208) 5 1/2408, the 
phasor rotates by 2408. Table 8.1 lists some common identities involving a.
The complex number a is similar to the well-known complex number j 5
Ï21 5 1/908, Thus, the only difference between j and a is that the angle of j is 908, 
and that of a is 1208.
Equation (8.1.1) can be rewritten more compactly using matrix notation. De-
fine the following vectors VP and VS, and matrix A:
VP 53
Va
Vb
Vc4

(8.1.6)
VS 53
V0
V1
V24

(8.1.7)
A 53
1
1
1
1
a2
a
1
a
a24
(8.1.8)
TABLE  8.1
Common identities involving a 5 1/1208
a4 5 a 5 1/1208
a2 51/2408
a3 51/08
1 1 a 1 a2 5 0
1 2 a 5 Ï3/2308
1 2 a2 5 Ï3/1308
a2 2 a 5 Ï3/2708
ja 51/2108
1 1 a 5 2a2 5 1/608
1 1 a2 5 2a 5 1/2608
a 1 a2 5 21 5 1/1808

	
Section 8.1 Definition of Symmetrical Components	
495
where VP is the column vector of phase voltages, VS is the column vector of sequence 
voltages, and A is a 3 3 3 transformation matrix. Using these definitions, (8.1.1) becomes
VP 5 AVS
(8.1.9)
The inverse of the A matrix is
A21 5 1
3 3
1
1
1
1
a
a2
1
a2
a4
(8.1.10)
Equation (8.1.10) can be verified by showing that the product AA21 is the unit  
matrix. Also, premultiplying (8.1.9) by A21 gives
VS 5 A21VP
(8.1.11)
Using (8.1.6), (8.1.7), and (8.1.10), then (8.1.11) becomes
3
V0
V1
V24
5 1
3 3
1
1
1
1
a
a2
1
a2
a43
Va
Vb
Vc4

(8.1.12)
Writing (8.1.12) as three separate equations,
V0 5 1
3 sVa 1 Vb 1 Vcd
(8.1.13)
V1 5 1
3 sVa 1 aVb 1 a2Vcd
(8.1.14)
V2 5 1
3 sVa 1 a2Vb 1 aVcd
(8.1.15)
Equation (8.1.13) shows that there is no zero-sequence voltage in a balanced three-
phase system because the sum of three balanced phasors is zero. In an unbalanced 
three-phase system, line-to-neutral voltages may have a zero-sequence component. 
However, line-to-line voltages never have a zero-sequence component, since by KVL, 
their sum is always zero.
The symmetrical component transformation also can be applied to currents, 
as follows. Let
IP 5 AIS
(8.1.16)
where IP is a vector of phase currents,
IP 53
Ia
Ib
Ic4

(8.1.17)
and IS is a vector of sequence currents,
IS 53
I0
I1
I24

(8.1.18)

496	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
Also,
IS 5 A21IP
(8.1.19)
Equations (8.1.16) and (8.1.19) can be written as separate equations as follows. The 
phase currents are
Ia 5 I0 1 I1 1 I2
(8.1.20)
Ib 5 I0 1 a2I11 aI2
(8.1.21)
Ic 5 I0 1 aI1 1 a2I2
(8.1.22)
and the sequence currents are
I0 5 1
3 sIa 1 Ib 1 Icd
(8.1.23)
I1 5 1
3 sIa 1 aIb 1 a2Icd
(8.1.24)
I2 5 1
3 sIa 1 a2Ib 1 aIcd
(8.1.25)
In a three-phase Y-connected system, the neutral current In is the sum of the line 
currents:
In 5 Ia 1 Ib 1 Ic
(8.1.26)
Comparing (8.1.26) and (8.1.23);
In 5 3I0
(8.1.27)
The neutral current equals three times the zero-sequence current. In a balanced  
Y-connected system, line currents have no zero-sequence component, since the neu-
tral current is zero. Also, in any three-phase system with no neutral path, such as a  
D-connected system or a three-wire Y-connected system with an ungrounded neu-
tral, line currents have no zero-sequence component.
The following three examples further illustrate symmetrical components.
Sequence components: balanced line-to-neutral voltages
Calculate the sequence components of the following balanced line-to-neutral 
voltages with abc sequence:
VP 53
Van
Vbn
Vcn4
53
277/08
277/21208
277/112084   volts
EXAMPLE 8.1

	
Section 8.1 Definition of Symmetrical Components	
497
Sequence components: balanced acb currents
A Y-connected load has balanced currents with acb sequence given by
IP 53
Ia
Ib
Ic4
53
10/08
10/11208
10/212084   A
Calculate the sequence currents.
SOLUTION
Using (8.1.23) through (8.1.25):
I0 5 1
3 f10/08 1 10/1208 1 10/21208 ] 5 0
I1 5 1
3 f10/08 1 10/s1208 1 1208d 1 10/s21208 1 2408d ]
5 1
3 f10/08 1 10/2408 1 10/1208 ] 5 0
I2 5 1
3 f10/08 1 10/s1208 1 2408d 1 10/s21208 1 1208d ]
5 10/08 A 5 Ia
EXAMPLE 8.2
SOLUTION
Using (8.1.13) through (8.1.15),
V0 5 1
3 f277/08 1 277/21208 1 277/11208 ] 5 0
V1 5 1
3 f277/08 1 277/s21208 1 1208d 1 277/s1208 1 2408d ]
5 277/08   volts 5 Van
V2 5 1
3 f277/08 1 277/s21208 1 2408d 1 277/s1208 1 1208d ]
5 1
3 f277/08 1 277/1208 1 277/2408 ] 5 0
This example illustrates the fact that balanced three-phase systems with abc 
sequence (or positive sequence) have no zero-sequence or negative-sequence com-
ponents. For this example, the positive-sequence voltage V1 equals Van, and the 
zero-sequence and negative-sequence voltages are both zero.
(Continued )

498	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
This example illustrates the fact that balanced three-phase systems with acb 
sequence (or negative sequence) have no zero-sequence or positive-sequence 
components. For this example, the negative-sequence current I2 equals Ia, and the 
zero-sequence and positive-sequence currents are both zero.
Sequence components: unbalanced currents
A three-phase line feeding a balanced-Y load has one of its phases (phase b) 
open. The load neutral is grounded, and the unbalanced line currents are
IP 53
Ia
Ib
Ic4
53
10/08
0
10/12084   A
Calculate the sequence currents and the neutral current.
SOLUTION 
The circuit is shown in Figure 8.2. Using (8.1.23) through (8.1.25):
I0 5 1
3 f10/08 1 0 1 10/1208 ]
5 3.333/608   A
I1 5 1
3 f10/08 1 0 1 10/s1208 1 2408d ] 5 6.667/08   A
I2 5 1
3 f10/08 1 0 1 10/s1208 1 1208d g
5 3.333/2608   A
EXAMPLE 8.3
FIGURE 8.2
Circuit for 
Example 8.3

	
Section 8.2 Sequence Networks of Impedance Loads	
499
8.2  Sequence Networks of Impedance Loads
Figure 8.3 shows a balanced-Y impedance load. The impedance of each phase is des-
ignated ZY, and a neutral impedance Zn is connected between the load neutral and 
ground. Note from Figure 8.3 that the line-to-ground voltage Vag is
 Vag 5 ZYIa 1 ZnIn
    5 ZYIa 1 ZnsIa 1 Ib 1 Icd
    5 sZY 1 ZndIa 1 ZnIb 1 ZnIc

(8.2.1)
Similar equations can be written for Vbg and Veg:
Vbg 5 ZnIa 1 sZY 1 ZndIb 1 ZnIc
(8.2.2)
Vcg 5 ZnIa 1 ZnIb 1 sZY 1 ZndIc
(8.2.3)
Equations (8.2.1) through (8.2.3) can be rewritten in matrix format:
3
Vag
Vbg
Vcg4
53
sZY 1 Znd
Zn
Zn
Zn
sZY 1 Znd
Zn
Zn
Zn
sZY 1 Znd43
Ia
Ib
Ic4

(8.2.4)
Using (8.1.26) the neutral current is
In 5 (10/08 1 0 1 10/1208)
   5 10/608 A 5 3I0
This example illustrates the fact that unbalanced three-phase systems may have 
nonzero values for all sequence components. Also, the neutral current equals 
three times the zero-sequence current, as given by (8.1.27).
FIGURE 8.3
Balanced-Y  
impedance load

500	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
Equation (8.2.4) is written more compactly as
VP 5 ZPIP
(8.2.5)
where VP is the vector of line-to-ground voltages (or phase voltages), IP is the vector 
of line currents (or phase currents), and ZP is the 3 3 3 phase impedance matrix 
shown in (8.2.4). Equations (8.1.9) and (8.1.16) can now be used in (8.2.5) to deter-
mine the relationship between the sequence voltages and currents, as follows:
AVS 5 ZPAIS
(8.2.6) 
Premultiplying both sides of (8.2.6) of A21 gives
VS 5 sA21ZPAdIS
(8.2.7)
or
VS 5 ZSIS
(8.2.8)
where
ZS 5 A21ZPA
(8.2.9)
The impedance matrix ZS defined by (8.2.9) is called the sequence impedance 
matrix. Using the definition of A, its inverse A21, and ZP given by (8.1.8), (8.1.10), 
and (8.2.4), the sequence impedance matrix ZS for the balanced-Y load is
ZS 5 1
3 3
1
1
1
1
a
a2
1
a2
a4 3
sZY 1 Znd
Zn
Zn
Zn
sZY 1 Znd
Zn
Zn
Zn
sZY 1 Znd4
3 3
1
1
1
1
a2
a
1
a
a24
(8.2.10)
Performing the indicated matrix multiplications in (8.2.10), and using the identity  
(1 1 a 1 a2) 5 0,
ZS 5 1
3 3
1
1
1
1
a
a2
1
a2
a4 3
sZY 1 3Znd
ZY
ZY
sZY 1 3Znd
a2ZY
aZY
sZY 1 3Znd
aZY
a2ZY4
53
sZY 1 3Znd
0
0
0
ZY
0
0
0
ZY4

(8.2.11)
As shown in (8.2.11), the sequence impedance matrix ZS for the balanced-Y load of 
Figure 8.3 is a diagonal matrix. Since ZS is diagonal, (8.2.8) can be written as three 
uncoupled equations. Using (8.1.7), (8.1.18), and (8.2.11) in (8.2.8),

	
Section 8.2 Sequence Networks of Impedance Loads	
501
3
V0
V1
V24
53
sZY 1 3Znd
0
0
0
ZY
0
0
0
ZY43
I0
I1
I24

(8.2.12)
Rewriting (8.2.12) as three separate equations,
V0 5 (ZY 1 3Zn)I0 5 Z0I0
(8.2.13)
V1 5 ZYI1 5 Z1I1
(8.2.14)
V2 5 ZYI2 5 Z2I2
(8.2.15)
As shown in (8.2.13), the zero-sequence voltage V0 depends only on the zero- 
sequence current I0 and the impedance (ZY 1 3Zn). This impedance is called the  
zero-sequence impedance and is designated Z0. Also, the positive-sequence voltage V1 
depends only on the positive-sequence current I1 and an impedance Z1 5 ZY called 
the positive-sequence impedance. Similarly, V2 depends only on I2 and the negative- 
sequence impedance Z2 5 ZY.
Equations (8.2.13) through (8.2.15) can be represented by the three networks 
shown in Figure 8.4. These networks are called the zero-sequence, positive-sequence, 
and negative-sequence networks. As shown, each sequence network is separate, un-
coupled from the other two. The separation of these sequence networks is a conse-
quence of the fact that ZS is a diagonal matrix for a balanced-Y load. This separation 
underlies the advantage of symmetrical components.
FIGURE 8.4
Sequence networks 
of a balanced-Y load

502	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
Note that the neutral impedance does not appear in the positive- and neg-
ative-sequence networks of Figure 8.4. This illustrates the fact that positive- and 
negative-sequence currents do not flow in neutral impedances. However, the neutral 
impedance is multiplied by 3 and placed in the zero-sequence network of the figure. 
The voltage I0(3Zn) across the impedance 3Zn is the voltage drop (InZn) across the 
neutral impedance Zn in Figure 8.3, since In 5 3I0.
When the neutral of the Y load in Figure 8.3 has no return path, then the neutral 
impedance Zn is infinite and the term 3Zn in the zero-sequence network of Figure 8.4  
becomes an open circuit. Under this condition of an open neutral, no zero-sequence 
current exists. However, when the neutral of the Y load is solidly grounded with a 
zero-ohm conductor, then the neutral impedance is zero and the term 3Zn in the 
zero-sequence network becomes a short circuit. Under this condition of a solidly 
grounded neutral, zero-sequence current I0 can exist when there is a zero-sequence 
voltage caused by unbalanced voltages applied to the load.
Figure 2.15 shows a balanced-D load and its equivalent balanced-Y load. Since 
the D load has no neutral connection, the equivalent Y load in Figure 2.15 has an 
open neutral. The sequence networks of the equivalent Y load corresponding to a 
balanced-D load are shown in Figure 8.5. As shown, the equivalent Y impedance ZY 5 
ZD∙3 appears in each of the sequence networks. Also, the zero-sequence network 
has an open circuit, since Zn 5 ` corresponds to an open neutral. No zero-sequence 
current occurs in the equivalent Y load.
The sequence networks of Figure 8.5 represent the balanced-D load as viewed 
from its terminals, but they do not represent the internal load characteristics. The 
currents I0, I1, and I2 in Figure 8.5 are the sequence components of the line currents 
feeding the D load, not the load currents within the D. The D load currents, which are 
related to the line currents by (2.5.14), are not shown in Figure 8.5.
FIGURE 8.5
Sequence networks 
for an equivalent Y 
representation of a 
balanced-D load

	
Section 8.2 Sequence Networks of Impedance Loads	
503
Sequence networks: balanced-Y and balanced-D loads
A balanced-Y load is in parallel with a balanced-D-connected capacitor bank. 
The Y load has an impedance ZY 5 (3 1 j4) V per phase, and its neutral is  
grounded through an inductive reactance Xn 5 2 V. The capacitor bank has a 
reactance Xc 5 30 V per phase. Draw the sequence networks for this load and 
calculate the load-sequence impedances.
SOLUTION
The sequence networks are shown in Figure 8.6. As shown, the Y-load impedance 
in the zero-sequence network is in series with three times the neutral impedance. 
Also, the D-load branch in the zero-sequence network is open, since no zero- 
sequence current flows into the D load. In the positive- and negative-sequence  
circuits, the D-load impedance is divided by 3 and placed in parallel with the 
D-load impedance. The equivalent sequence impedances are
 Z0 5 ZY 1 3Zn 5 3 1 j4 1 3sj2d 5 3 1 j10   V
 Z1 5 ZYyy(ZDy3) 5 s3 1 j4ds2j30y3d
3 1 j4 2 js30y3d
    5
s5/53.138ds10/2908d
6.708/263.438
5 7.454/26.578   V
 Z2 5 Z1 5 7.454/26.578  V
EXAMPLE 8.4
FIGURE 8.6
Sequence networks 
for Example 8.4

504	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
Figure 8.7 shows a general three-phase linear impedance load. The load could 
represent a balanced load such as the balanced-Y or balanced-D load, or an unbal-
anced impedance load. The general relationship between the line-to-ground voltages 
and line currents for this load can be written as
3
Vag
Vbg
Vcg4
53
Zaa
Zab
Zac
Zab
Zbb
Zbc
Zac
Zbc
Zcc4
 3
Ia
Ib
Ic4

(8.2.16)
or
VP 5 ZPIP
(8.2.17)
where VP is the vector of line-to-neutral (or phase) voltages, IP is the vector of line 
(or phase) currents, and ZP is a 3 3 3 phase impedance matrix. It is assumed here 
that the load is nonrotating, and that ZP is a symmetric matrix, which corresponds 
to a bilateral network.
Since (8.2.17) has the same form as (8.2.5), the relationship between the se-
quence voltages and currents for the general three-phase load of Figure 8.6 is the 
same as that of (8.2.8) and (8.2.9), which are rewritten here:
VS 5 ZSIS
(8.2.18)
ZS 5 A21ZPA
(8.2.19)
The sequence impedance matrix ZS given by (8.2.19) is a 3 3 3 matrix with nine  
sequence impedances, defined as follows: 
ZS 53
Z0
Z01
Z02
Z10
Z1
Z12
Z20
Z21
Z24

(8.2.20)
The diagonal impedances Z0, Z1, and Z2 in this matrix are the self-impedances of the 
zero-, positive-, and negative-sequence networks. The off-diagonal impedances are 
FIGURE 8.7
General three-phase 
impedance load 
(linear, bilateral 
network, nonrotating 
equipment)

	
Section 8.2 Sequence Networks of Impedance Loads	
505
the mutual impedances between sequence networks. Using the definitions of A, A21, 
ZP, and ZS, (8.2.19) is
3
Z0
Z01
Z02
Z10
Z1
Z12
Z20
Z21
Z24
 5 1
3 3
1
1
1
1
a
a2
1
a2
a4
 3
Zaa
Zab
Zac
Zab
Zbb
Zbc
Zac
Zcb
Zcc4
 3
1
1
1
1
a2
a
1
a
a24 (8.2.21)
Performing the indicated multiplications in (8.2.21), and using the identity (1 1 a 1 
a2) 5 0, the following separate equations can be obtained (see Problem 8.18).
Diagonal sequence impedances
Z0 5 1
3 sZaa 1 Zbb 1 Zcc 1 2Zab 1 2Zac 1 2Zbcd
(8.2.22)
Z1 5 Z2 5 1
3 sZaa 1 Zbb 1 Zcc 2 Zab 2 Zac 2 Zbcd
(8.2.23)
Off-diagonal sequence impedances
Z01 5 Z20 5 1
3 (Zaa 1 a2Zbb 1 aZcc 2 aZab 2 a2Zac 2 Zbc)
(8.2.24)
Z02 5 Z10 5 1
3 (Zaa 1 aZbb 1 a2Zcc 2 a2Zab 2 aZac 2 Zbc)
(8.2.25)
Z12 5 1
3 (Zaa 1 a2Zbb 1 aZcc 1 2aZab 1 2a2Zac 1 2Zbc)
(8.2.26)
Z21 5 1
3 (Zaa 1 aZbb 1 a2Zcc 1 2a2Zab 1 2aZac 1 2Zbc)
(8.2.27)
A symmetrical load is defined as a load whose sequence impedance matrix is diago-
nal; that is, all the mutual impedances in (8.2.24) through (8.2.27) are zero. Equating 
these mutual impedances to zero and solving, the following conditions for a symmet-
rical load are determined. When both
Zaa 5 Zbb 5 Zcc
and
6
Zab 5 Zac 5 Zbc

(8.2.28)
 

(8.2.29)
then
Z01 5 Z10 5 Z02 5 Z20 5 Z12 5 Z21 5 0
(8.2.30)
Z0 5 Zaa 1 2Zab
(8.2.31)
Z1 5 Z2 5 Zaa 2 Zab
(8.2.32)
The conditions for a symmetrical load are that the diagonal phase impedances 
be equal and that the off-diagonal phase impedances be equal. These conditions can 
conditions for a 
symmetrical load

506	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
be verified by using (8.2.28) and (8.2.29) with the identity (1 1 a 1 a2) 5 0 in (8.2.24) 
through (8.2.27) to show that all the mutual sequence impedances are zero. Note that 
the positive- and negative-sequence impedances are equal for a symmetrical load, 
as shown by (8.2.32), and for a nonsymmetrical load, as shown by (8.2.23). This is 
always true for linear, symmetric impedances that represent nonrotating equipment 
such as transformers and transmission lines. However, the positive- and negative- 
sequence impedances of rotating equipment such as generators and motors are gen-
erally not equal. Note also that the zero-sequence impedance Z0 is not equal to the 
positive- and negative-sequence impedances of a symmetrical load unless the mutual 
phase impedances Zab 5 Zac 5 Zbc are zero.
The sequence networks of a symmetrical impedance load are shown in  
Figure 8.8 Since the sequence impedance matrix ZS is diagonal for a symmetrical 
load, the sequence networks are separate or uncoupled.
8.3  Sequence Networks of Series Impedances
Figure 8.9 shows series impedances connected between two three-phase buses de-
noted abc and a9b9c9. Self-impedances of each phase are denoted Zaa, Zbb, and Zcc. In 
general, the series network also may have mutual impedances between phases. The 
voltage drops across the series-phase impedances are given by
3
Van 2 Va9n
Vbn 2 Vb9n
Vcn 2 Vc9n4
53
Vaa9
Vbb9
Vcc94
53
Zaa
Zab
Zac
Zab
Zbb
Zbc
Zac
Zcb
Zcc43
Ia
Ib
Ic4

(8.3.1)
FIGURE 8.8
Sequence networks 
of a three-phase sym-
metrical impedance 
load (linear, bilateral 
network, nonrotating 
equipment)

	
Section 8.3 Sequence Networks of Series Impedances	
507
Both self-impedances and mutual impedances are included in (8.3.1). It is as-
sumed that the impedance matrix is symmetric, which corresponds to a bilateral net-
work. It is also assumed that these impedances represent nonrotating equipment. 
Typical examples are series impedances of transmission lines and of transformers. 
Equation (8.3.1) has the following form:
VP 2 VP9 5 ZPIP
(8.3.2)
where VP is the vector of line-to-neutral voltages at bus abc, VP9 the vector of line-to-
neutral voltages at bus a9b9c9, IP is the vector of line currents, and ZP is the 3 3 3 
phase impedance matrix for the series network. Equation (8.3.2) is now transformed 
to the sequence domain in the same manner that the load-phase impedances were 
transformed in Section 8.2. Thus,
VS 2 VS9 5 ZSIS
(8.3.3)
where
ZS 5 A21 ZPA
(8.3.4)
From the results of Section 8.2, this sequence impedance ZS matrix is diagonal under 
the following conditions: 
Zaa 5 Zbb 5 Zcc
and
6
Zab 5 Zac 5 Zbc

(8.3.5)
When the phase impedance matrix ZP of (8.3.1) has both equal self-impedances and 
equal mutual impedances, then (8.3.4) becomes
ZS 53
Z0
0
0
0
Z1
0
0
0
Z24
(8.3.6)
where
Z0 5 Zaa 1 2Zab
(8.3.7)
conditions for 
symmetrical  
series impedances
FIGURE 8.9
Three-phase series 
impedances (linear, 
bilateral network,  
nonrotating  
equipment)

508	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
and
Z1 5 Z2 5 Zaa 2 Zab
(8.3.8)
and (8.3.3) becomes three uncoupled equations, written as follows:
V0 2 V09 5 Z0I0
(8.3.9)
V1 2 V19 5 Z1I1
(8.3.10)
V2 2 V29 5 Z2I2
(8.3.11)
Equations (8.3.9) through (8.3.11) are represented by the three uncoupled se-
quence networks shown in Figure 8.10. From the figure it is apparent that, for symmet-
rical series impedances, positive-sequence currents produce only positive-sequence  
voltage drops. Similarly, negative-sequence currents produce only negative-sequence 
voltage drops, and zero-sequence currents produce only zero-sequence voltage drops. 
However, if the series impedances are not symmetrical, then ZS is not diagonal, the 
sequence networks are coupled, and the voltage drop across any one sequence net-
work depends on all three sequence currents.
8.4  Sequence Networks of Three-Phase Lines
Section 4.7 develops equations suitable for computer calculation of the series phase im-
pedances, including resistances and inductive reactances, of three-phase overhead trans-
mission lines. The series phase impedance matrix ZP for an untransposed line is given by 
Equation (4.7.19) and Z
⁄
P for a completely transposed line is given by (4.7.21) through 
(4.7.23). Equation (4.7.19) can be transformed to the sequence domain to obtain
ZS 5 A21 ZPA
(8.4.1)
ZS is the 3 3 3 series sequence impedance matrix whose elements are
ZS 53
Z0
Z01
Z02
Z10
Z1
Z12
Z20
Z21
Z24
   V/m
(8.4.2)
FIGURE 8.10
Sequence networks 
of three-phase 
symmetrical 
series impedances 
(linear, bilateral 
network, nonrotating 
equipment)

	
Section 8.4 Sequence Networks of Three-Phase Lines	
509
In general ZS is not diagonal. However, if the line is completely transposed, 
Z
⁄
S 5 A21Z
⁄
PA 53
Z
⁄
0
0
0
0
Z
⁄
1
0
0
0
Z
⁄
24

(8.4.3)
where, from (8.3.7) and (8.3.8),
Z
⁄
0 5 Z
⁄
aaeq 1 2Z
⁄
abeq
(8.4.4)
Z
⁄
1 5 Z
⁄
2 5 Z
⁄
aaeq 2 Z
⁄
abeq
(8.4.5)
A circuit representation of the series sequence impedances of a completely trans-
posed three-phase line is shown in Figure 8.11.
Section 4.11 develops equations suitable for computer calculation of the shunt 
phase admittances of three-phase overhead transmission lines. The shunt admittance 
matrix YP for an untransposed line is given by Equation (4.11.16), and YP
⁄  for a com-
pletely transposed three-phase line is given by (4.11.17).
Equation (4.11.16) can be transformed to the sequence domain to obtain
YS 5 A21YPA
(8.4.6)
where
YS 5 GS 1 j(2pf )CS
(8.4.7)
CS 53
C0
C01
C02
C10
C1
C12
C20
C21
C24
   F/m
(8.4.8)
FIGURE 8.11
Circuit representa-
tion of the series 
sequence impedances 
of a completely 
transposed  
three-phase line

510	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
In general, CS is not diagonal. However, for the completely transposed line, 
YS
⁄ 5 A21 Y
⁄ 
P A 53
y⁄
0
0
0
0
y⁄
1
0
0
0
y⁄
24
5 j(2pf ) 3
C0
⁄
0
0
0
C
⁄
1
0
0
0
C
⁄
24
(8.4.9)
where
C
⁄
0 5 C
⁄
aa 1 2C
⁄
ab   Fym
(8.4.10)
C
⁄
1 5 C
⁄
2 5 C
⁄
aa 2 C
⁄
ab   Fym
(8.4.11)
Since Cab
⁄  is negative, the zero-sequence capacitance C0
⁄  is usually much less than the 
positive- or negative-sequence capacitance.
Circuit representations of the phase and sequence capacitances of a completely 
transposed three-phase line are shown in Figure 8.12.
8.5  Sequence Networks of Rotating Machines
A Y-connected synchronous generator grounded through a neutral impedance Zn is 
shown in Figure 8.13. The internal generator voltages are designated Ea, Eb, and Ec, 
and the generator line currents are designated Ia, Ib, and Ic.
The sequence networks of the generator are shown in Figure 8.14. Since a 
three-phase synchronous generator is designed to produce balanced internal phase 
voltages Ea, Eb, and Ec with only a positive-sequence component, a source voltage 
Eg1 is included only in the positive-sequence network. The sequence components of 
the line-to-ground voltages at the generator terminals are denoted V0, V1, and V2 in 
Figure 8.14.
The voltage drop in the generator neutral impedance is ZnIn, which can be writ-
ten as (3Zn)I0, since, from (8.1.27), the neutral current is three times the zero-sequence 
current. Since this voltage drop is due only to zero-sequence current, an impedance 
(3Zn) is placed in the zero-sequence network of Figure 8.14 in series with the genera-
tor zero-sequence impedance Zg0.
FIGURE 8.12
Circuit represen-
tations of the 
capacitances 
of a completely 
transposed 
three-phase line

	
Section 8.5 Sequence Networks of Rotating Machines	
511
The sequence impedances of rotating machines are generally not equal. A de-
tailed analysis of machine-sequence impedances is given in machine theory texts. 
Here is a brief explanation.
When a synchronous generator stator has balanced three-phase positive- 
sequence currents under steady-state conditions, the net mmf produced by these posi-
tive-sequence currents rotates at the synchronous rotor speed in the same direction as 
that of the rotor. Under this condition, a high value of magnetic flux penetrates the ro-
tor, and the positive-sequence impedance Zg1 has a high value. Under steady-state con-
ditions, the positive-sequence generator impedance is called the synchronous impedance.
When a synchronous generator stator has balanced three-phase negative- 
sequence currents, the net mmf produced by these currents rotates at synchronous 
speed in the direction opposite to that of the rotor. With respect to the rotor, the 
net mmf is not stationary but rotates at twice synchronous speed. Under this condi-
tion, currents are induced in the rotor windings that prevent the magnetic flux from 
penetrating the rotor. As such, the negative-sequence impedance Zg2 is less than the 
positive-sequence synchronous impedance.
When a synchronous generator has only zero-sequence currents, which are line 
(or phase) currents with equal magnitude and phase, then the net mmf produced by 
these currents is theoretically zero. The generator zero-sequence impedance Zg0 is the 
FIGURE 8.13
Y-connected  
synchronous  
generator
FIGURE 8.14
Sequence networks of a Y-connected synchronous generator

512	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
smallest sequence impedance and is due to leakage flux, end turns, and harmonic flux 
from windings that do not produce a perfectly sinusoidal mmf.
Typical values of machine-sequence impedances are listed in Table A.1 in the 
Appendix. The positive-sequence machine impedance is synchronous, transient, or 
subtransient. Synchronous impedances are used for steady-state conditions, such as 
in power-flow studies, which are described in Chapter 6. Transient impedances are 
used for stability studies, which are described in Chapter 13, and subtransient im-
pedances are used for short-circuit studies, which are described in Chapters 7 and 9. 
Unlike the positive-sequence impedances, a machine has only one negative-sequence 
impedance and only one zero-sequence impedance.
The sequence networks for three-phase synchronous motors and for three-phase 
induction motors are shown in Figure 8.15. Synchronous motors have the same se-
quence networks as synchronous generators, except that the sequence currents for syn-
chronous motors are referenced into rather than out of the sequence networks. Also, 
induction motors have the same sequence networks as synchronous motors, except that 
the positive-sequence voltage source Em1 is removed. Induction motors do not have a 
dc source of magnetic flux in their rotor circuits, and therefore Em1 is zero (or a short 
FIGURE 8.15
Sequence networks 
of three-phase motors

	
Section 8.5 Sequence Networks of Rotating Machines	
513
circuit). The sequence networks shown in Figures 8.14 and 8.15 are simplified networks 
for rotating machines. The networks do not take into account such phenomena as 
machine saliency, saturation effects, and more complicated transient effects. These sim-
plified networks, however, are in many cases accurate enough for power system studies.
Currents in sequence networks
Draw the sequence networks for the circuit of Example 2.4 and calculate the 
sequence components of the line current. Assume that the generator neutral is 
grounded through an impedance Zn 5 j10 V, and that the generator sequence 
impedances are Zg0 5 j1 V, Zg1 5 j15 V, and Zg2 5 j3 V.
SOLUTION 
The sequence networks are shown in Figure 8.16. They are obtained by  
interconnecting the sequence networks for a balanced-D load, for series-line 
EXAMPLE 8.5
(Continued )
FIGURE 8.16
Sequence networks 
for Example 8.5

514	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
The following example illustrates the superiority of using symmetrical components 
for analyzing unbalanced systems.
impedances, and for a synchronous generator, which are given in Figures 8.5, 
8.10, and 8.14.
It is clear from Figure 8.16 that I0 5 I2 5 0 since there are no sources in the 
zero- and negative-sequence networks. Also, the positive-sequence generator ter-
minal voltage V1 equals the generator line-to-neutral terminal voltage. Therefore, 
from the positive-sequence network shown in the figure and from the results of 
Example 2.4,
I1 5
V1
_ZL1 1 1
3ZD+
5 25.83/273.788 A 5 Ia
Note that from (8.1.20), I1 equals the line current Ia, since I0 5I2 5 0.
Solving unbalanced three-phase networks using  
sequence components
A Y-connected voltage source with the following unbalanced voltage is applied to 
the balanced line and load of Example 2.4.
3
Vag
Vbg
Vcg4
53
277/08
260/21208
295/111584   volts
The source neutral is solidly grounded. Using the method of symmetrical 
components, calculate the source currents Ia, Ib, and Ic.
SOLUTION 
Using (8.1.13) through (8.1.15), the sequence components of the source voltages are
V0 5 1
3 (277/08 1 260/21208 1 295/1158)
5 7.4425 1 j14.065 5 15.912/62.118   volts
EXAMPLE 8.6

	
Section 8.5 Sequence Networks of Rotating Machines	
515
V1 5 1
3 (277/08 1 260/21208 1 1208 1 295/1158 1 2408)
5 1
3 (277/08 1 260/08 1 295/258)
5 276.96 2 j8.5703 5 277.1/21.7728   volts
V2 5 1
3 s277/08 1 260/21208 1 2408 1 295/1158 1 1208d
5 1
3 (277/08 1 260/1208 1 295/2358)
5 27.4017 2 j5.4944 5 9.218/216.598   volts
These sequence voltages are applied to the sequence networks of the line 
and load, as shown in Figure 8.17. The sequence networks of this figure are 
(Continued )
FIGURE 8.17
Sequence networks 
for Example 8.6

516	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
8.6  Per-Unit Sequence Models of Three-Phase 
Two-Winding Transformers
Figure 8.18(a)  is a schematic representation of an ideal Y–Y transformer grounded 
through neutral impedances ZN and Zn. Figures 8.18(b through d) show the per-unit 
sequence networks of this ideal transformer.
When balanced positive-sequence currents or balanced negative-sequence cur-
rents are applied to the transformer, the neutral currents are zero, and there are no 
voltage drops across the neutral impedances. Therefore, the per-unit positive- and 
negative-sequence networks of the ideal Y–Y transformer, Figures 8.18(b) and (c), 
are the same as the per-unit single-phase ideal transformer, Figure 3.9(a).
uncoupled, and the sequence components of the source currents are easily cal-
culated as follows:
I0 5 0
I1 5
V1
ZL1 1 ZD
3
5
277.1/21.7728
10.73/43.788 5 25.82/245.558   A
I2 5
V2
ZL2 1 ZD
3
5
9.218/216.598
10.73/43.788 5 0.8591/172.818   A
Using (8.1.20) through (8.1.22), the source currents are
Ia 5 s0 1 25.82/245.558 1 0.8591/172.818)
 5 17.23 2 j18.32 5 25.15/246.768   A
Ib 5 s0 1 25.82/245.558 1 2408 1 0.8591/172.818 1 1208)
 5 s25.82/194.458 1 0.8591/292.818)
 5 224.67 2 j7.235 5 25.71/196.348   A
Ic 5 s0 1 25.82/245.558 1 1208 1 0.8591/172.818 1 2408)
 5 s25.82/74.458 1 0.8591/52.818)
 5 7.441 1 j25.56 5 26.62/73.778  A
You should calculate the line currents for this example without using sym-
metrical components in order to verify this result and to compare the two solution 
methods (see Problem 8.33). Without symmetrical components, coupled KVL 
equations must be solved. With symmetrical components, the conversion from 
phase to sequence components decouples the networks as well as the resulting 
KVL equations, as shown above.

	
Section 8.6 Per-Unit Sequence Models of Three-Phase Two-Winding Transformers	
517
Zero-sequence currents have equal magnitudes and equal phase angles. When 
per-unit sequence currents IA0 5 IB0 5 IC0 5 I0 are applied to the high-voltage wind-
ings of an ideal Y–Y transformer, the neutral current I0 flows through the neutral 
impedance ZN, with a voltage drop (3ZN)I0. Also, per-unit zero-sequence current I0 
flows in each low-voltage winding [from (3.3.9)], and therefore 3I0 flows through neu-
tral impedance Zn, with a voltage drop (3I0)Zn.
The per-unit zero-sequence network, which includes the impedances (3ZN) and 
(3Zn), is shown in Figure 8.18(b).
Note that if either one of the neutrals of an ideal transformer is ungrounded, 
then no zero sequence can flow in either the high- or low-voltage windings. For ex-
ample, if the high-voltage winding has an open neutral, then IN 5 3I0 5 0, which in 
turn forces I0 5 0 on the low-voltage side. This can be shown in the zero-sequence 
network of Figure 8.18(b) by making ZN 5`, which corresponds to an open circuit.
FIGURE 8.18
Ideal Y–Y transformer

518	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
The per-unit sequence networks of a practical Y–Y transformer are shown in 
Figure 8.19(a). These networks are obtained by adding external impedances to the 
sequence networks of the ideal transformer, as follows. The leakage impedances of 
the high-voltage windings are series impedances like the series impedances shown 
in Figure 8.9, with no coupling between phases (Zab 5 0). If the phase a, b, and c 
FIGURE 8.19
Per-unit sequence networks of practical Y–Y, Y–D, and D–D transformers

	
Section 8.6 Per-Unit Sequence Models of Three-Phase Two-Winding Transformers	
519
windings have equal leakage impedances ZH 5 RH 1 jXH, then the series impedances 
are symmetrical with sequence networks, as shown in Figure 8.10, where ZH0 5 ZH1 5 
ZH2 5 ZH. Similarly, the leakage impedances of the low-voltage windings are sym-
metrical series impedances with ZX0 5 ZX1 5 ZX2 5 ZX. These series leakage imped-
ances are shown in per unit in the sequence networks of Figure 8.19(a).
The shunt branches of the practical Y–Y transformer, which represent exciting 
current, are equivalent to the Y load of Figure 8.3. Each phase in Figure 8.3 represents 
a core loss resistor in parallel with a magnetizing inductance. Assuming these are  
the same for each phase, then the Y load is symmetrical, and the sequence networks 
are shown in Figure 8.4. These shunt branches are also shown in Figure 8.19(a). Note 
that (3ZN) and 3Zn) have already been included in the zero-sequence network.
The per-unit positive- and negative-sequence transformer impedances of the 
practical Y–Y transformer in Figure 8.19(a) are identical, which is always true for 
nonrotating equipment. The per-unit zero-sequence network, however, depends on 
the neutral impedances ZN and Zn.
The per-unit sequence networks of the Y–D transformer, shown in Fig­ure 8.19(b), 
have the following features:
1.	 The per-unit impedances do not depend on the winding connections. 
That is, the per-unit impedances of a transformer that is connected Y–Y, 
Y–D, D–Y, or D–D are the same. However, the base voltages do depend 
on the winding connections.
2.	 A phase shift is included in the per-unit positive- and negative-sequence 
networks. For the American standard, the positive-sequence voltages 
and currents on the high-voltage side of the Y–D transformer lead the 
corresponding quantities on the low-voltage side by 30°. For negative 
sequence, the high-voltage quantities lag by 30°.
3.	 Zero-sequence currents can flow in the Y winding if there is a neutral 
connection, and corresponding zero-sequence currents flow within  
the D winding. However, no zero-sequence current enters or leaves the  
D winding.
The phase shifts in the positive- and negative-sequence networks of Figure 8.19(b) 
are represented by the phase-shifting transformer of Figure 3.4. Also, the zero- 
sequence network of Figure 8.19(b) provides a path on the Y side for zero-sequence 
current to flow, but no zero-sequence current can enter or leave the D side.
The per-unit sequence networks of the D–D transformer, shown in Figure 8.19(c),  
have the following features:
1.	 The positive- and negative-sequence networks, which are identical, 
are the same as those for the Y–Y transformer. It is assumed that 
the windings are labeled so there is no phase shift. Also, the per-unit 
impedances do not depend on the winding connections, but the base 
voltages do.
2.	 Zero-sequence currents cannot enter or leave either D winding, although 
they can circulate within the D windings.

520	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
Solving unbalanced three-phase networks with  
transformers using per-unit sequence components
A 75-kVA, 480-volt D∙208-volt Y transformer with a solidly grounded neutral 
is connected between the source and line of Example 8.6. The transformer leak-
age reactance is Xeq 5 0.10 per unit; winding resistances and exciting current are  
neglected. Using the transformer ratings as base quantities, draw the per-unit  
sequence networks and calculate the phase a source current Ia.
SOLUTION 
The base quantities are Sbase1f 5 75∙3 5 25 kVA, VbaseHLN 5 480∙Ï3 5 277.1 volts, 
VbaseXLN 5 208∙Ï3 5 120.1 volts, and ZbaseX 5 (120.1)2∙25,000 5 0.5770 V. The 
sequence components of the actual source voltages are given in Figure 8.17. In  
per unit, these voltages are
V0 5
15.91/62.118
277.1
5 0.05742/62.118   per unit
V1 5
277.1/21.7728
277.1
5 1.0/21.7728   per unit
V2 5
9.218/216.598
277.1
5 0.03327/216.598   per unit
The per-unit line and load impedances, which are located on the low-voltage side 
of the transformer, are
ZL0 5 ZL1 5 ZL2 5
1/858
0.577 5 1.733/858   per unit
Zload1 5 Zload2 5
ZD
3s0.577d 5
10/408
0.577 5 17.33/408   per unit
The per-unit sequence networks are shown in Figure 8.20. Note that the per-unit 
line and load impedances, when referred to the high-voltage side of the phase-
shifting transformer, do not change [(see (3.1.26)]. Therefore, from Figure 8.20, 
the sequence components of the source currents are
I0 5 0
I1 5
V1
jXeq 1 ZL1 1 Zload1
5
1.0/21.7728
j0.10 1 1.733/858 1 17.33/408
 5
1.0/21.7728
13.43 1 j12.97 5
1.0/21.7728
18.67/44.08 5 0.05356/245.778   per unit
I2 5
V2
jXeq 1 ZL2 1 Zload2
5
0.03327/216.598
18.67/44.08
 5 0.001782/172.598   per unit
EXAMPLE 8.7

	
Section 8.6 Per-Unit Sequence Models of Three-Phase Two-Winding Transformers	
521
The phase a source current is then, using (8.1.20),
Ia 5 I0 1 I1 1 I2
 5 0 1 0.05356/245.778 1 0.001782/172.598
 5 0.03511 2 j0.03764 5 0.05216/246.198   per unit
Using IbaseH 5 75,000
480Ï3 5 90.21  A,
Ia 5 s0.05216ds90.21d/246.198 5 4.705/246.198   A
FIGURE 8.20
Per-unit sequence 
networks for  
Example 8.7

522	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
8.7  Per-Unit Sequence Models of Three-Phase 
Three-Winding Transformers
Three identical single-phase three-winding transformers can be connected to form 
a three-phase bank. Figure 8.21 shows the general per-unit sequence networks of a 
three-phase three-winding transformer. Instead of labeling the windings 1, 2, and 3,  
as was done for the single-phase transformer, the letters H, M, and X are used to 
denote the high-, medium-, and low-voltage windings, respectively. By convention, 
a common Sbase is selected for the H, M, and X terminals, and voltage bases VbaseH, 
VbaseM, and VbaseX are selected in proportion to the rated line-to-line voltages of the 
transformer.
For the general zero-sequence network, Figure 8.21(a), the connection between 
terminals H and H9 depends on how the high-voltage windings are connected, as 
follows:
1.	 Solidly grounded Y—Short H to H9.
2.	 Grounded Y through ZN —Connect (3ZN) from H to H9.
3.	 Ungrounded Y—Leave H–H9 open as shown.
4.	 D—Short H9 to the reference bus.
FIGURE 8.21
Per-unit sequence 
networks of a 
three-phase 
three-winding 
transformer

	
Section 8.7 Per-Unit Sequence Models of Three-Phase Three-Winding Transformers	
523
Terminals X–X9 and M–M9 are connected in a similar manner.
The impedances of the per-unit negative-sequence network are the same 
as those of the per-unit positive-sequence network, which is always true for non- 
rotating equipment. Phase-shifting transformers, not shown in Figure 8.21(b), can be 
included to model phase shift between D and Y windings.
Three-winding three-phase transformer: per-unit  
sequence networks
Three transformers, each identical to that described in Example 3.9, are con-
nected as a three-phase bank in order to feed power from a 900-MVA, 13.8-kV 
generator to a 345-kV transmission line and to a 34.5-kV distribution line. The 
transformer windings are connected as follows:
13.8-kV windings (X):
D, to generator
199.2-kV windings (H): solidly grounded Y, to 345-kV line
19.92-kV windings (M): grounded Y through Zn 5 j01.0 V, 
to 34.5-kV line
The positive-sequence voltages and currents of the high- and medium-voltage Y 
windings lead the corresponding quantities of the low-voltage D winding by 308. 
Draw the per-unit sequence networks, using a three-phase base of 900 MVA and 
13.8 kV for terminal X.
SOLUTION 
The per-unit sequence networks are shown in Figure 8.22. Since VbaseX 5 13.8 kV 
is the rated line-to-line voltage of terminal X, VbaseM 5 Ï3 (19.92) 5 34.5 kV, 
which is the rated line-to-line voltage of terminal M. The base impedance of the 
medium-voltage terminal is then
ZbaseM 5 s34.5d2
900
5 1.3225   V
Therefore, the per-unit neutral impedance is
Zn 5 j0.10
1.3225 5 j0.07561   per unit
and (3Zn) 5 j0.2268 is connected from terminal M to M9 in the per-unit zero- 
sequence network. Since the high-voltage windings have a solidly grounded  
neutral, H to H9 is shorted in the zero-sequence network. Also, phase-shifting 
transformers are included in the positive- and negative-sequence networks.
EXAMPLE 8.8
(Continued )

524	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
8.8  Power in Sequence Networks
The power delivered to a three-phase network can be determined from the power 
delivered to the sequence networks. Let SP denote the total complex power delivered 
to the three-phase load of Figure 8.7, which can be calculated from
SP 5 VagIa
* 1 VbgI *
b 1 VcgIc
*
(8.8.1)
Equation (8.8.1) is also valid for the total complex power delivered by the 
three-phase generator of Figure 8.13, or for the complex power delivered to any 
three-phase bus. Rewriting (8.8.1) in matrix format, 
FIGURE 8.22
Per-unit sequence 
networks for  
Example 8.8

	
Section 8.8 Power in Sequence Networks	
525
SP 5 [VagVbgVcg] 3
Ia
*
Ib
*
Ic
*4
5 VP
TIP
*
(8.8.2)
where T denotes transpose and * denotes complex conjugate. Now, using (8.1.9) and 
(8.1.16), 
SP 5 sAVsdT sAIsd*
   5  VT
s fATA*gI *
s

(8.8.3)
Using the definition of A, which is (8.1.8), to calculate the term within the brackets 
of (8.8.3), and noting that a and a2 are conjugates, 
ATA* 53
1
1
1
1
a2
a
1
a
a24
T
 3
1
1
1
1
a2
a
1
a
a24
*
53
1
1
1
1
a2
a
1
a
a24 3
1
1
1
1
a
a2
1
a2
a4
53
3
0
0
0
3
0
0
0
34
5 3U
(8.8.4)
Equation (8.8.4) can now be used in (8.8.3) to obtain
SP 5 3VT
S  I S
*
5 3[V0 1 V1 1 V2] 3
I0
*
I1
*
I2
*4

(8.8.5)
SP 5 3(V0I0
* 1 V1I *
1 1 V2I2
* )
5 3SS
(8.8.6)
Thus, the total complex power SP delivered to a three-phase network equals three 
times the total complex power SS delivered to the sequence networks.
The factor of 3 occurs in (8.8.6) because ATA* 5 3U as shown by (8.8.4). It 
is possible to eliminate this factor of 3 by defining a new transformation matrix 
A1 5 s1yÏ3d A such that A1
TA*
1 5 U, which means that A1 is a unitary matrix. 
Using A1 instead of A, the total complex power delivered to three-phase networks 
would equal the total complex power delivered to the sequence networks. How-
ever, standard industry practice for symmetrical components is to use A, defined 
by (8.1.8).

526	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS
SECTION 8.1
	
8.1	 Positive-sequence components consist of three phasors with _____ mag-
nitudes and _____ phase displacement in positive sequence; negative- 
sequence components consist of three phasors with _____ magnitudes 
and _____ phase displacement in negative sequence; and zero-sequence 
components consist of three phasors with _____ magnitudes and _____ 
phase displacement.  
	 8.2	 In symmetrical-component theory, express the complex-number operator 
a 5 1/1208 in exponential and rectangular forms.
	 8.3	 In terms of sequence components of phase a given by Va0 5 V0, Va1 5 V1, 
and Va2 5 V2, give expressions for the phase voltages Va, Vb, and Vc.
	
	
Va 5_______________; Vb 5_______________; Vc 5_______________
Power in sequence networks
Calculate SP and SS delivered by the three-phase source in Example 8.6. Verify 
that SP 5 3SS.
SOLUTION 
Using (8.5.1),
SP 5 (277/08)(25.15/146.768) 1 (260/21208)(25.71/2196.348)
        1 (295/1158)(26.62/273.778)
    5 6967/46.768 1 6685/43.668 1 7853/41.238
    5 15,520 1 j14,870 5 21,490/43.788   VA
In the sequence domain,
SS 5 V0I0
* 1 V1I *
1 1 V2I2
*
5 0 1 (277.1/21.778)(25.82/45.558)
    1 (9.218/216.598)(0.8591/2172.818)
5 7155/43.788 1 7.919/43.788
5 5172 1 j4958 5 7163/43.788   VA
Also,
3SS 5 3(7163/43.788) 5 21,490/43.788 5 SP
EXAMPLE 8.9

	 8.4	 The sequence components V0, V1, and V2 can be expressed in terms of 
phase components Va, Vb, and Vc.
	
	
V0 5_______________; V1 5 _______________; V2 5 _______________
	 8.5	 In a balanced three-phase system, what is the zero-sequence voltage?
	
	 V0 5_______________
	
8.6	 In an unbalanced three-phase system, line-to-neutral voltage  ___________
have a zero-sequence component, whereas line-to-line voltages  __________
have a zero-sequence component.
	 8.7	 Can the symmetrical component transformation be applied to currents, 
just as it is applied to voltages?
(a) Yes                 (b) No
	
8.8	 In a three-phase Y-connected system with a neutral, express the neutral 
current in terms of phase currents and sequence-component terms.
	
	 In 5 _______________ 5 _______________
	
8.9	 In a balanced Y-connected system, what is the zero-sequence component 
of the line currents?
	8.10	 In a D-connected three-phase system, line currents have no zero-sequence 
component.
(a) True                 (b) False
	8.11	 Balanced three-phase systems with positive sequence do not have zero- 
sequence and negative-sequence components.
(a) True                 (b) False
	8.12	 Unbalanced three-phase systems may have nonzero values for all sequence 
components.
(a) True                 (b) False
SECTION 8.2
	
8.13	 For a balanced-Y impedance load with per-phase impedance of ZY and 
a neutral impedance Zn connected between the load neutral and the close 
space ground, the 3 3 3 phase-impedance matrix consists of equal diag-
onal elements given by ___________ and equal nondiagonal elements 
given by ___________.
	8.14	 Express the sequence impedance matrix ZS in terms of the phase- 
impedance matrix ZP, and the transformation matrix A which relates  
VP 5 AVS and IP 5 AIS.
	
	 ZS 5 ___________ . 
	8.15	 The sequence impedance matrix ZS for a balanced-Y load is a diagonal 
matrix and the sequence networks are uncoupled.
(a) True                 (b) False
	
8.16	 For a balanced-Y impedance load with per-phase impedance of ZY and 
a neutral impedance Zn, the zero-sequence voltage V0 5 Z0I0, where 
Z0 5 ___________. 
	
Multiple Choice Questions	
527

528	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
	
8.17	 For a balanced-D load with per-phase impedance of ZD, the equivalent 
Y-load has an open neutral; for the corresponding uncoupled sequence 
networks, Z0 5 ___________ , Z1 5 ___________ , and Z2 5 ___________.
	
8.18	 For a three-phase symmetrical impedance load, the sequence impedance 
matrix is ___________ and hence the sequence networks are (a) coupled 
or (b) uncoupled.
SECTION 8.3
	
8.19	 Sequence networks for three-phase symmetrical series impedances  
are (a) coupled or (b) uncoupled; positive-sequence currents produce 
only ___________ voltage drops.
SECTION 8.4
	
8.20	 The series-sequence impedance matrix of a completely transposed 
three-phase line is ___________ with its nondiagonal elements equal  
to ___________.
SECTION 8.5
	
8.21	 A Y-connected synchronous generator grounded through a neutral 
impedance Zn with a zero-sequence impedance Zg0 has zero-sequence 
impedance Z0 5 ___________ in its zero-sequence network. 
	
8.22	 In sequence networks, a Y-connected synchronous generator is repre-
sented by its source per-unit voltage only in ___________ network, while  
(a) synchronous, (b) transient or (c) sub-transient impedance is used in 
positive-sequence network for short-circuit studies.
	
8.23	 In the positive-sequence network of a synchronous motor, a source voltage 
is represented, whereas in that of an induction motor, the source voltage 
(a) does or (b) does not come into picture.
	8.24	 With symmetrical components, the conversion from phase to sequence 
components decouples the networks and the resulting KVL equations.
(a) True                 (b) False
SECTION 8.6
	8.25	 Consider the per-unit sequence networks of Y–Y, Y–D, and D–D trans-
formers with neutral impedances of ZN on the high-voltage Y-side and Zn 
on the low-voltage Y-side. Answer the following:
(i)  Zero-sequence currents (a) can or (b) cannot flow in the Y winding 
with a neutral connection; corresponding zero-sequence currents  
(a) do or (b) do not flow within the delta winding; however zero- 
sequence current (a) does or (b) does not enter or leave the D winding. 
In a zero-sequence network, (a) 1, (b) 2, or (c) 3 times the neutral 
impedance comes into play in series.

(ii)  In Y(HV)–D(LV) transformers, if a phase shift is included as per  
the American-standard notation, the ratio ___________ is used in 
positive-sequence network, and ___________ the ratio ___________ 
is used in the negative-sequence network.
(iii)  The base voltages depend on the winding connections; the per-unit 
impedances (a) do or (b) do not depend on the winding connections.
SECTION 8.7
	8.26	 In per-unit sequence models of three-phase three-winding transformers, 
for the general zero-sequence network, the connection between terminals 
H and H9 depends on how the high-voltage windings are connected:
(i)  For solidly grounded Y, ___________ H to H9.
(ii)  For grounded Y through Zn connect ___________ from H to H9.
(iii)  For ungrounded Y, leave H–H9 ___________.
(iv)  For D, ___________ H9 to the reference bus.
SECTION 8.8
	
8.27	 The total complex power delivered to a three-phase network equals  
(a) 1, (b) 2, or (c) 3 times the total complex power delivered to the 
sequence networks.
	
8.28	 Express the complex power SS delivered to the sequence networks in terms 
of sequence voltages and sequence currents, where SS 5 ___________.
PROBLEMS
SECTION 8.1
8.1	 Using the operator a 5 1/1208, evaluate the following in polar form:  
(a) (a 2 1)∙(1 1 a 2 a2), (b) (a2 1 a 1 j)∙( ja 1 a2), (c) (1 1 a) (1 1 a2), and 
(d) (a 2 a2) (a2 2 1).
8.2	 Using a 5 1/1208, evaluate the following in rectangular form:
	
a.  a10
	
b.  (ja)10
	
c.  (1 2 a)3
	
d.  ea
	
Hint for (d): esx1jyd 5 exe jy 5 ex/y, where y is in radians.
8.3	 Determine the symmetrical components of the following line currents: 
(a) Ia 5 6/908, Ib 5 6/3208, Ic 5 6/2208 A and (b) Ia 5 j40, Ib 5 40, Ic 5 0 A.
8.4	 Find the phase voltages Van, Vbn, and Vcn whose sequence components are 
V0 5 45/808, V1 5 90/08, V2 5 45/908 V.
8.5	 For the unbalanced three-phase system described by
	
	
Ia 5 10/08 A, Ib 5 8/2908 A, Ic 5 6/1508 A
	
compute the symmetrical components I0, I1, and I2.
	
Problems	
529

530	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
8.6	 (a) Given the symmetrical components to be
	
	
V0 5 10/08V, V1 5 80/308V, V2 5 40/2308V
	
determine the unbalanced phase voltages Va, Vb, and Vc. (b) Using the results 
of part (a), calculate the line-to-line voltages Vab, Vbc, and Vca. Then deter-
mine the symmetrical components of these line-to-line voltages, the sym-
metrical components of the corresponding phase voltages, and the phase 
voltages. Compare them with the result of part (a). Comment on why they 
are different, even though either set results in the same line-to-line voltages.
8.7	 One line of a three-phase generator is open-circuited, while the other two 
are short-circuited to ground. The line currents are Ia 5 0, Ib 51200/1508, 
and Ic 5 1200/1308 A. Find the symmetrical components of these cur-
rents. Also find the current into the ground.
8.8	 Let an unbalanced, three-phase, Y-connected load (with phase imped-
ances of Za, Zb, and Zc) be connected to a balanced three-phase supply, 
resulting in phase voltages of Va, Vb, and Vc across the corresponding 
phase impedances.
	
Choosing Vab as the reference, show that
	
	
Vab,0 5 0;    Vab,1 5 Ï3Va, 1e j308;    Vab,2 5 Ï3Va, 2e2j308 
8.9	 Reconsider Problem 8.8 and choosing Vbc as the reference, show that
	
	
Vbc,0 5 0;    Vbc,1 5 2jÏ3Va, 1;    Vbc,2 5 jÏ3Va, 2
 
8.10	 Given the line-to-ground voltages Vag 5 280/08, Vbg 5 250/21108, and 
Vcg 5 290/1308 volts, calculate (a) the sequence components of the line-
to-ground voltages, denoted VLg0, VLg1 and VLg2; (b) line-to-line voltages 
VLL0, VLL1, and VLL2; and (c) sequence components of the line-to-line 
voltages VLL0 5 0, VLL1, and VLL2. Also, verify the following general rela-
tion: VLL0 5 0, VLL1 5 Ï3VLg1/1308, and VLL2 5 Ï3VLg2/2308 volts.
8.11	 A balanced D-connected load is fed by a three-phase supply for which 
phase C is open and phase A is carrying a current of 10/08 A. Find the 
symmetrical components of the line currents. (Note that zero-sequence 
currents are not present for any three-wire system.)
8.12	 A Y-connected load bank with a three-phase rating of 500 kVA and 2300 V  
consists of three identical resistors of 10.58 V. The load bank has the 
following applied voltages: Vab 5 1840/82.88, Vbc 5 2760/241.48, and 
Vca 5 2300/1808 V. Determine the symmetrical components of (a) the line-
to-line voltages Vab0, Vab1, and Vab2, (b) the line-to-neutral voltages Van0, Van1, 
and Van2, (c) and the line currents Ia0, Ia1, and Ia2. (Note that the absence of 
a neutral connection means that zero-sequence currents are not present.)
SECTION 8.2
8.13	 The currents in a D load are Iab 5 10/08, Ibc 5 12/2908, and Ica 5 15/908 A. 
Calculate (a) the sequence components of the D-load currents, denoted 
ID0, ID1, and ID2; (b) the line currents Ia, Ib, and Ic, which feed the D load; 

and (c) sequence components of the line currents IL0, IL1, and IL2. Also, 
verify the following general relation: IL0 5 0, IL1 5 Ï3ID1/2308, and  
IL2 5 Ï3ID2/1308.
8.14	 The voltages given in Problem 8.10 are applied to a balanced-Y load con-
sisting of (12 1 j16) ohms per phase. The load neutral is solidly grounded. 
Draw the sequence networks and calculate I0, I1, and I2, the sequence 
components of the line currents. Then calculate the line currents Ia, Ib, 
and Ic.
8.15	 Repeat Problem 8.14 with the load neutral open.
8.16	 Repeat Problem 8.14 for a balanced-D load consisting of (12 1 j16) ohms 
per phase.
8.17	 Repeat Problem 8.14 for the load shown in Example 8.4 (Figure 8.6).
8.18	 Perform the indicated matrix multiplications in (8.2.21) and verify the 
sequence impedances given by (8.2.22) through (8.2.27).
8.19	 The following unbalanced line-to-ground voltages are applied to the bal-
anced-Y load shown in Figure 3.3: Vag 5 100/08, Vbg 5 75/1808, and  
Vcg 5 50/908 volts. The Y load has ZY 5 3 1 j4 V per phase with neutral 
impedance Zn 5 j1 V. (a) Calculate the line currents Ia, Ib, and Ic without 
using symmetrical components, (b) Calculate the line currents Ia, Ib, and 
Ic using symmetrical components. Which method is easier?
8.20	 (a) Consider three equal impedances of (j27) V connected in D. Obtain 
the sequence networks.
	
(b) Now, with a mutual impedance of (j6) V between each pair of adjacent 
branches in the D-connected load of part (a), how would the sequence 
networks change?
8.21	 The three-phase impedance load shown in Figure 8.7 has the following 
phase impedance matrix: 
	
ZP 53
s5 1 j10d
0
0
0
s5 1 j10d
0
0
0
s5 1 j10d4
   V
	
Determine the sequence impedance matrix ZS for this load. Is the load 
symmetrical?
8.22	 The three-phase impedance load shown in Figure 8.7 has the following 
sequence impedance matrix: 
	
ZP 53
s6 1 j10d
0
0
0
5
0
0
0
54
   V
	
Determine the phase impedance matrix ZP for this load. Is the load 
symmetrical?
	
Problems	
531

532	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
8.24	 A three-phase balanced voltage source is applied to a balanced Y-connected 
load with ungrounded neutral. The Y-connected load consists of three 
mutually coupled reactances, where the reactance of each phase is j12 V, and 
the mutual coupling between any two phases is j4 V. The line-to-line source 
voltage is 100Ï3 V. Determine the line currents (a) by mesh analysis without 
using symmetrical components and (b) using symmetrical components.
8.25	 A three-phase balanced Y-connected load with series impedances of  
(61 j24) V per phase and mutual impedance between any two phases of 
j3 V is supplied by a three-phase unbalanced source with line-to-neutral  
voltages of Van 5 200/258, Vbn 5 100/21558, Vcn 5 80/1008 V. The load and  
source neutrals are both solidly grounded. Determine: (a) the load 
sequence impedance matrix, (b) the symmetrical components of the 
line-to-neutral voltages, (c) the symmetrical components of the load cur-
rents, and (d) the load currents.
SECTION 8.3
8.26	 Repeat Problem 8.14 but include balanced three-phase line impedances 
of (3 1 j4) ohms per phase between the source and load.
8.27	 Consider the flow of unbalanced currents in the symmetrical three-phase 
line section with neutral conductor as shown in Figure 8.24. (a) Express the 
voltage drops across the line conductors given by Vaa, Vbb, and Vcc in terms of 
line currents, self-impedances defined by ZS 5 Zaa 1 Znn 2 2Zan, and mutual 
impedances defined by Zm 5 Zab 1 Znn 5 2Zan. (b) Show that the sequence 
components of the voltage drops between the ends of the line section can be 
written as Vaa90 5 Z0Ia0, Vaa91 5 Z1Ia1, and Vaa92 5 Z2Ia2, where Z0 5 ZS 1 2Zm 5 
Zaa 1 2Zab 1 3Znn 2 6Zan and Z1 5 Z2 5 ZS 5 Zm 5 Zaa 2 Zab.
FIGURE 8.23
Problem 8.23
8.23	 Consider a three-phase balanced Y-connected load with self and mutual 
impedances as shown in Figure 8.23. Let the load neutral be grounded 
through an impedance Zn. Using Kirchhoff’s laws, develop the equations 
for line-to-neutral voltages, and then determine the elements of the phase 
impedance matrix. Also find the elements of the corresponding sequence 
impedance matrix.

8.28	 Let the terminal voltages at the two ends of the line section shown in 
Figure 8.24 be given by
	
Van 5 s182 1 j70d  kV
Vbn 5 s72.24 2 j32.62d  kV
Vcn 5 s2170.24 1 j88.62d  kV
   
Van9 5 s154 1 j28d  kV
Vbn9 5 s44.24 1 j74.62d  kV
Vcn9 5 s2198.24 1 j46.62d  kV
	
The line impedances are given by:
	
Zaa 5 j60 V	 Zab 5 j20 V	
Znn 5 j80 V	
Zan 5 0
	
(a) Compute the line currents using symmetrical components. (Hint: See 
Problem 8.27.) (b) Compute the line currents without using symmetrical 
components.
8.29	 A completely transposed three-phase transmission line of 200 km in 
length has the following symmetrical sequence impedances and sequence 
admittances: 
	
Z1 5 Z2 5 j0.5 Vykm;     Z0 5 j2 Vykm
	
Y1 5 Y2 5 j3 3 1029  sym;     Y0 5 j1 3 1029  sym
	
Set up the nominal p sequence circuits of this medium-length line.
SECTION 8.5
8.30	 As shown in Figure 8.25, a balanced three-phase, positive-sequence 
source with VAB 5 480/08 volts is applied to an unbalanced D load. Note 
that one leg of the D is open. Determine (a) the load currents IAB and IBC; 
(b) the line currents IA, IB, and IC, which feed the D load; and (c) the zero-, 
positive-, and negative-sequence components of the line currents.
8.31	 A balanced Y-connected generator with terminal voltage Vbc 5 200/08 
volts is connected to a balanced-D load whose impedance is 10/408 ohms 
per phase. The line impedance between the source and load is 0.5/808 
ohm for each phase. The generator neutral is grounded through an 
impedance of j5 ohms. The generator sequence impedances are given by 
Zg0 5 j7, Zg1 5 j15, and Zg2 5 j10 ohms. Draw the sequence networks for 
this system and determine the sequence components of the line currents.
	
Problems	
533
FIGURE 8.24
Problem 8.27

534	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
8.32	 In a three-phase system, a synchronous generator supplies power to a  
200-volt synchronous motor through a line having an impedance of 
0.5/808 ohm per phase. The motor draws 5 kW at 0.8 p.f. leading and 
at rated voltage. The neutrals of both the generator and motor are 
grounded through impedances of j5 ohms. The sequence impedances 
of both machines are Z0 5 j5, Z1 5 j15, and Z2 5 j10 ohms. Draw the 
sequence networks for this system and find the line-to-line voltage at the 
generator terminals. Assume balanced three-phase operation.
8.33	 Calculate the source currents in Example 8.6 without using symmetrical 
components. Compare your solution method with that of Example 8.6. 
Which method is easier?
8.34	 A Y-connected synchronous generator rated 20 MVA at 13.8 kV has a 
positive-sequence reactance of j2.38 V, negative-sequence reactance of 
j3.33 V, and zero-sequence reactance of j0.95 V. The generator neutral is 
solidly grounded. With the generator operating unloaded at rated voltage, 
a so-called single line-to-ground fault occurs at the machine terminals. 
During this fault, the line-to-ground voltages at the generator terminals 
are Vag 5 0, Vbg 5 8.071/2102.258, and Vcg 5 8.071/102.258 kV. Deter-
mine the sequence components of the generator fault currents and the 
generator fault currents. Draw a phasor diagram of the prefault and 
postfault generator terminal voltages. (Note: For this fault, the sequence 
components of the generator fault currents are all equal to each other.)
8.35	 Figure 8.26 shows a single-line diagram of a three-phase, interconnected 
generator-reactor system, in which the given per-unit reactances are 
based on the ratings of the individual pieces of equipment. If a three-
phase short-circuit occurs at fault point F, obtain the fault MVA and 
fault current in kA if the prefault busbar line-to-line voltage is 13.2 kV. 
Choose 100 MVA as the base MVA for the system.
8.36	 Consider Figures 8.13 and 8.14 of the text with reference to a Y-connected 
synchronous generator (grounded through a neutral impedance Zn) oper-
ating at no load. For a line-to-ground fault occurring on phase a of the 
FIGURE 8.25
Problem 8.30

generator, list the constraints on the currents and voltages in the phase 
domain, transform those into the sequence domain, and then obtain a 
sequence-network representation. Also, find the expression for the fault 
current in phase a.
8.37	 Reconsider the synchronous generator of Problem 8.36. Obtain sequence-
network representations for the following fault conditions.
	
(a) A short-circuit between phases b and c.
	
(b) A double line-to-ground fault with phases b and c grounded.
SECTION 8.6
8.38	 Three single-phase, two-winding transformers, each rated 450 MVA,  
20 kV∙288.7 kV, with leakage reactance Xeq 5 0.12 per unit, are connected 
to form a three-phase bank. The high-voltage windings are connected in 
Y with a solidly grounded neutral. Draw the per-unit zero-, positive-, and 
negative-sequence networks if the low-voltage windings are connected  
(a) in D with American standard phase shift or (b) in Y with an open neu-
tral. Use the transformer ratings as base quantities. Winding resistances 
and exciting current are neglected.
8.39	 The leakage reactance of a three-phase, 500-MVA, 345 Y∙23 D-kV trans-
former is 0.09 per unit based on its own ratings. The Y winding has a sol-
idly grounded neutral. Draw the sequence networks. Neglect the exciting 
admittance and assume American standard phase shift.
8.40	 Choosing system bases to be 360∙24 kV and 100 MVA, redraw the 
sequence networks for Problem 8.39.
8.41	 Draw the zero-sequence reactance diagram for the power system shown 
in Figure 3.38. The zero-sequence reactance of each generator and of 
the synchronous motor is 0.05 per unit based on equipment ratings. 
Generator 2 is grounded through a neutral reactor of 0.06 per unit on a  
100-MVA, 18-kV base. The zero-sequence reactance of each transmis-
sion line is assumed to be three times its positive-sequence reactance. Use 
the same base as in Problem 3.41.
	
Problems	
535
FIGURE 8.26
Oneline diagram for 
Problem 8.35

536	
Chapter 8  |  Symmetrical Components
8.42	 Three identical Y-connected resistors of 1.0/08 per unit form a load bank 
that is supplied from the low-voltage Y-side of a Y–D transformer. The 
neutral of the load is not connected to the neutral of the system. The 
positive- and negative-sequence currents flowing toward the resistive load 
are given by
	
	
Ia,1 5 1/4.58 per unit;	
Ia,2 5 0.5/2508 per unit
	
and the corresponding voltages on the low-voltage Y-side of the trans-
former are
	
	
Van,1 5 1/458 per unit (Line-to-neutral voltage base)
	
	
Van,2 5 0.5/2508 per unit (Line-to-neutral voltage base)
	
Determine the line-to-line voltages and the line currents in per unit on the 
high-voltage side of the transformer. Account for the phase shift.
SECTION 8.7
8.43	 Draw the positive-, negative-, and zero-sequence circuits for the trans-
formers shown in Figure 3.34. Include ideal phase-shifting transformers 
showing phase shifts determined in Problem 3.32. Assume that all wind-
ings have the same kVA rating and that the equivalent leakage reactance 
of any two windings with the third winding open is 0.10 per unit. Neglect 
the exciting admittance.
8.44	 A single-phase three-winding transformer has the following parameters: 
Z1 5 Z2 5 Z3 5 0 1 j0.05, Gc 5 0, and Bm 5 0.2 per unit. Three identi-
cal transformers, as described, are connected with their primaries in Y 
(solidly grounded neutral) and with their secondaries and tertiaries in D. 
Draw the per-unit sequence networks of this transformer bank.
SECTION 8.8
8.45	 For Problem 8.14, calculate the real and reactive power delivered to the 
three-phase load.
8.46	 A three-phase impedance load consists of a balanced-D load in parallel 
with a balanced-Y load. The impedance of each leg of the D load is ZD 5 
6 1 j6 V, and the impedance of each leg of the Y load is ZY 5 2 1 j2 V. 
The Y load is grounded through a neutral impedance Zn 5 j1 V. Unbal-
anced line-to-ground source voltages Vag, Vbg, and Vcg with sequence com-
ponents V0 5 10/608, V1 5 100/08, and V2 5 15/2008 volts are applied to 
the load. (a) Draw the zero-, positive-, and negative-sequence networks. 
(b) Determine the complex power delivered to each sequence network.  
(c) Determine the total complex power delivered to the three-phase load.
8.47	 For Problem 8.12, compute the power absorbed by the load using sym-
metrical components. Then verify the answer by computing directly with-
out using symmetrical components.

8.48	 For Problem 8.25, determine the complex power delivered to the load in 
terms of symmetrical components. Verify the answer by adding up the 
complex power of each of the three phases.
8.49	 Using the voltages of Problem 8.6(a) and the currents of Problem 8.5, 
compute the complex power dissipated based on (a) phase components 
and (b) symmetrical components. 
CASE STUDIES QUESTIONS
a.	
What are the components of GIS?
b.	
What are the typical gas pressures in GIS equipment?
c.	
What is the environmental concern for SF6 used in GIS? How is the envi-
ronmental concern being addressed?
REFERENCES
1.	
Westinghouse Electric Corporation, Applied Protective Relaying (Newark,  
NJ: Westinghouse, 1976).
2.	
P. M. Anderson, Analysis of Faulted Power Systems (Ames, IA: Iowa 
State University Press, 1973).
3.	
W. D. Stevenson, Jr., Elements of Power System Analysis, 4th ed. (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1982).
4.	
I. A. Metwally, “Technological Progress in High-Voltage Gas-Insulated 
Substations, IEEE Potentials Magazine, 29, 6 (November/December 
2010), pp. 25–32.
	
References	
537


539
S
hort circuits occur in three-phase power systems as follows, in order of fre-
quency of occurrence: single line-to-ground, line-to-line, double line-to-ground, 
and balanced three-phase faults. The path of the fault current may have either 
zero impedance, which is called a bolted short circuit, or nonzero impedance. Other 
types of faults include one-conductor-open and two-conductors-open, which can 
occur when conductors break or when one or two phases of a circuit breaker inad-
vertently open.
9 Unsymmetrical Faults
The converter 
switchyard at 
Bonneville Power 
Administration’s 
Celilo Converter 
Station in 2009. 
This station  
converts ac power 
to HVDC for 
transmission up 
to 3150 MW at 
6500kV over a 
1360-km bipolar 
line in the USA 
between Dalles,  
OR and  
Los Angeles, 
CA. (Greg 
Wahl-Stephens/
Stringer/Getty 
Images)

540	
Chapter 9  |  Unsymmetrical Faults
Although the three-phase short circuit occurs the least, it was covered first, in 
Chapter 7, because of its simplicity. When a balanced three-phase fault occurs in a 
balanced three-phase system, there is only positive-sequence fault current; the zero-, 
positive-, and negative-sequence networks are completely uncoupled.
When an unsymmetrical fault occurs in an otherwise balanced system, the 
sequence networks are interconnected only at the fault location. As such, the compu-
tation of fault currents is greatly simplified by the use of sequence networks.
As in the case of balanced three-phase faults, unsymmetrical faults have two 
components of fault current: an ac or symmetrical component—including subtran-
sient, transient, and steady-state currents—and a dc component. The simplified  
E/X method for breaker selection described in Section 7.5 is also applicable to 
unsymmetrical faults. The dc offset current need not be considered unless it is too 
large—for example, when the X/R ratio is too large.
This chapter begins by using the per-unit zero-, positive-, and negative-sequence 
networks to represent a three-phase system. Also, certain assumptions are made 
to simplify fault-current calculations, and the balanced three-phase fault is briefly 
reviewed. Single line-to-ground, line-to-line, and double line-to-ground faults are 
presented in Sections 9.2, 9.3, and 9.4. The use of the positive-sequence bus imped-
ance matrix for three-phase fault calculations in Section 7.4 is extended in Section 9.5  
to unsymmetrical fault calculations by considering a bus impedance matrix for each 
sequence network. Examples using PowerWorld Simulator, which is based on the use 
of bus impedance matrices, are also included. The PowerWorld Simulator computes 
symmetrical fault currents for both three-phase and unsymmetrical faults. The Sim-
ulator may be used in power system design to select, set, and coordinate protective 
equipment.
CASE STUDY
The following article traces the development of medium voltage (MV) 
switchgear, starting with air-insulated masonry cubicles in the 1930s, to 
metal-enclosed drawout circuit breakers with air or oil insulation in the 
1950s, to metal-enclosed drawout circuit breakers with compact SF6 or 
vacuum interrupters in the late 1960s [8]. Since the 1990s, fixed circuit 
breakers have replaced drawout circuit breakers for many applications. 
Typical MV switchgear have rated voltages in the 5–40.5 kV range with rated 
interrupting currents up to 63 kA. Advantages of modern MV switchgear  
include safety, reliability, cost-effectiveness, long life, maintenance-free 
design, modularity, and flexibility. Cur-
rent trends with smart grids require 
MV switchgear that have remote 
control and integrated intelligent  
devices.[8]
© 2012 IEEE. Reprinted, with permission, from 
Canpeng Ma, Moesch, G., Cabaret, B., Tobias, 
J., “Innovative MV Switchgear for Today’s 
Applications,” 2012 China International Confer-
ence on Electricity Distribution (2012 CICED), 
Shanghai, September 5 & 6, 2012, pp. 1–4.

	
Case Study	
541
Innovative Medium Voltage Switchgear  
for Today’s Applications
Canpeng Ma et al.
Introduction
Transmission system operators and 
distribution network operators need 
stability. The fact that the expected 
life duration of HV and MV switch-
gear is more than 30 years contributes 
to user’s conservatism. Operational 
life seems easier to manage if there 
is no change in the habits of users. 
However, major evolutions in switch-
gear technology do occur every 20 or 
30 years.
In recent years, the development 
of smart grids has brought in new re-
quirements and ultimately new needs. 
Operators ask for maintenance-free 
circuit breakers able to be used in any 
environment with long life expectancy. 
With network evolution, operators 
require more flexibility and greater 
automation through remote control, 
integrated intelligent devices, and 
more metering points in the network. 
From an economical point of view, 
the acquisition cost is increasingly 
balanced by the notion of total cost 
of ownership, including construction, 
installation, maintenance, and end-
of-life recovery costs. All these trends 
have to be considered when designing 
the new generation of MV switchgear 
for today’s applications.
Historical 
Evolution 
of 
MV 
Switchgear Technology
The past decades have seen the trend 
of fixed devices replacing, slowly  
but surely, the drawout ones for 
many applications. Together with the  
technological 
evolution 
of 
MV 
switchgear, single line diagrams have 
regularly been challenged.
Breaking 
technologies 
have 
moved from air and oil technologies 
to SF6 and vacuum technologies. 
Protection relays have moved from 
electromechanical to electronic and 
then to digital technologies. Current 
and voltage transformers have been 
adapted to the new relay designs and 
to switchgear architecture evolution.
Circuit Breaker Technological 
Evolution
The first technology used for break-
ing in circuit breakers was air. These 
circuit breakers were big as the princi-
ple of breaking was a large expansion 
of the arc in the air. Heavy main-
tenance was required, and for this 
reason they were abandoned. Trying 
to reduce the footprint came the oil 
circuit breakers. But frequent mainte-
nance was still required; for example 
the oil needed to be changed after sev-
eral operations due to carbonization 
Figure 1  Drawout oil circuit breaker 
with arc control

542	
Chapter 9  |  Unsymmetrical Faults
by arcing. Additionally, oil circuit 
breaker failures can easily result in 
fatal accidents among operators and 
the public due to oil fires.
In the late sixties came SF6 and 
vacuum circuit breakers. They are 
compact, thanks to SF6 or vacuum 
insulation. They are much safer, dras-
tically reducing fire risk. Reliability 
was increased with the improvement 
in electrical endurance in terms of 
fault breakings and load breakings. 
As a consequence, preventive and 
corrective maintenance is required 
less and less; thus state-of-the-art 
circuit breakers can now be called 
“maintenance free.”
MV Switchgear and Single Line 
Diagram Evolution
From 1930 to 1950, most of the MV 
switchboards were air insulated ma-
sonry cubicles. Only simple wire 
fencing was used to prevent the access 
to the live parts.
Then with more safety aware-
ness, they were gradually replaced by 
metal-enclosed Air Insulated Switch-
gear (AIS) with integrated removable 
circuit breakers from air or oil to SF6 
and vacuum technology. 
The single line diagram with 
drawout circuit breakers is the oldest 
one and is still in use in some primary 
distribitution applications [1]. Dis-
connection is made by racking out the 
CB truck, providing visible disconnec-
tion. Earthing for safe access to inter-
nal components or cables is made by 
earthing trucks or dedicated earthing 
switches acting directly on cable ends. 
Maintenance 
of 
the 
circuit  
breaker is very easy, and this was nec-
essary for old circuit breakers.
However, some points have 
to be carefully considered. Remote 
control of the disconnector is not 
really practical because of the truck 
to be racked out. Earthing the bus-
bar needs a dedicated earthing truck, 
which is heavy to handle. Testing the 
cables needs a direct access to cables, 
opening the cable compartment. 
And finally, the equipment must be 
installed in clean air rooms as it is 
sensitive to environmental conditions 
because of AIS technology. 
Figure 2  Drawout vacuum and SF6 
circuit breaker
Figure 3  Air-insulated masonry cubicles
Figure 4 Typical AIS panel with  
drawout technology and  
single line diagram

	
Case Study	
543
More recently from the 1990s, 
fixed circuit breakers have been used 
more and more. There are some recent 
variants in metal enclosed cubicles with 
fixed circuit breakers where the insula-
tion components are made of epoxy 
or other resin. These panels are gener-
ally called Solid Insulated Switchgear  
(SIS). However, both AIS and SIS pan-
els could be sensitive to environmental 
conditions (dust, humidity, etc.) if not 
properly installed in protected rooms. 
That was the reason of the arrival of 
metal enclosed Gas Insulated Switch-
gear (GIS) in the nineties with sealed 
tanks filled with SF6.
Among the points to be aware of 
is that the operation is not so intuitive be-
cause of five-position diagram mixing 
upstream three-position disconnector/ 
earthing switch and downstream 
two-position circuit break­er. Particu-
larly, cable earthing is made through 
circuit breaker closing that must re-
main closed to ensure operator safety 
when working.
For secondary applications, due 
to repetitive arrangement, the sim-
plicity, insensitivity to severe installa-
tion conditions, and cost effectiveness 
became the criteria. The Ring Main 
Unit (RMU) configuration appeared 
in the fifties. The RMU evolved from 
oil type with switch fuse to SF6 RMU 
with more and more circuit breakers 
for MV/LV transformer protection. 
Thanks to the all-in-one arrange-
ment, breaking and disconnection 
are performed in a single operation, 
leading to the three-position scheme 
(line, open and disconnected, earthed). 
Local or remote operations become 
simple with an intuitive mimic dia-
gram. Cable earthing is made directly, 
close to the cable connectors. Inter-
locking reliability is inherent between 
the different positions. It is very easy 
to implement a cable testing device, al-
lowing access to cables without open-
ing the cable box or interfering with 
the cable terminations.
The advantages of compact and 
repetitive Ring Main Units solution 
reach their limit when flexibility is 
needed, for larger switchboards over 
4–5 functions or switchgear extension.
Figure 5 Typical primary GIS panel with 
fixed technology and single 
line diagram
Figure 6  SF6 Ring Main Unit with circuit breaker

544	
Chapter 9  |  Unsymmetrical Faults
Evolution of Protection Relays 
and Sensors
Protection relays have moved from 
electromechanical to electronic and 
then to digital technologies. For mod-
ern digital relays, the need of signal 
power from the sensors becomes very 
low. A new category of current sen-
sors were developed, the low power 
current transformers (LPCT). They 
deliver a voltage signal representing 
the primary current, and offer great 
advantages in space and flexibility 
compared to traditional 5 A or 1 A 
current transformers.
Challenges for Future MV 
Switchgear
Strong Interests from Network  
Operators
A huge global market survey was un-
dertaken to identify not only the cur-
rent needs, but to anticipate the needs 
in the future, particularly in countries 
with fast growth and high develop-
ment potential. Distribution network 
operators expressed strong interests 
in safety, reliability, cost-effectiveness, 
simplicity and ease of network evolu-
tion. Maintenance-free circuit break-
ers, able to be used in any environment 
with long life expectancy are more 
and more required. The network op-
erators pay more and more attention 
to the total cost of ownership, in-
cluding the acquisition, construction, 
installation, maintenance and end of 
life treatment costs.
The Challenge of Smart Grids
Smart grids have two main objec-
tives. One is to optimize the relation 
between the demand and the offer 
of energy. The second one is to be 
able to integrate more and more 
distributed and renewable energies.  
The change in network management 
from one-way flow due to centralized 
energy production to two-way flow 
because of distributed generation is 
a big challenge. One question comes 
out: Are MV switchgear ready for 
this challenge?
Looking at the existing grids 
and some experimentations, it is 
possible to highlight some values of 
switchgear that will help to meet this 
challenge.
Smart grids will include more 
circuit breakers in the network to in-
crease electrical energy availability [2]. 
Remote control will be man-
datory for smart grids. One effect is 
that switchgear will include integrated 
intelligent devices providing better 
optimization. Low-power current trans-
formers (LPCT) and low-power voltage 
transformers (LPVT) will be essential 
for the huge development of power 
management. Metering equipment will 
need to be cost-effective, compact, and 
reliable. 
Modularity and flexibility are 
mandatory to meet the infinite num-
ber of different applications.
New Generation of MV  
Switchgear Through Innovations
To satisfy all these needs, it ap-
pears that an optimized solution 
for many applications relies on a 
breakthrough in switchgear design, 
getting benefits from a compact 
all-in-one 
three-position 
scheme 

	
Case Study	
545
and a shielded solid insulation  
system (2SIS).
New Three-Position Diagram
Nowadays, even if the technology is 
not changing much, the trend is to 
use vacuum breakers in secondary 
applications. Recent developments 
brought a new arrangement, keep-
ing the same well-known benefits as 
the three-position diagram of GIS 
RMUs, but using vacuum breaking.
The new proposed arrange-
ment includes an upstream vacuum 
disconnecting load-break switch or 
disconnecting circuit breaker and a  
downstream earthing switch provid-
ing double-gap isolation between 
cables and bus bars.
The three-position scheme, 
closed, open and disconnected, 
and earthed, with intuitive mimic 
diagram is the simplest and safest 
mode to operate the switchgear. The 
switching and disconnection of the 
circuit are done in a single opera-
tion within an innovative vacuum 
interrupter with a larger isolation 
gap compared to traditional design 
and with controlled surface for the 
arcing contacts. The downstream 
cable earthing is done in controlled 
air with a fast-acting earthing 
switch having making capacity and 
breaking capacity of capacitive ca-
ble currents.
Intuitiveness of mimic diagram 
makes the operation very easy. Safety 
interlocks are built in and positively 
driven. Operator safety is further  
enhanced with a dedicated cable  
testing device with front face access, 
complying with the new specifica-
tions on MV switchgear for cable test  
features defined in the recently revised 
switchgear standard IEC 62271-200 
edition 2 [3].
Prior to the cable test, opening 
the disconnecting switch or discon-
necting circuit breaker and closing the 
earthing switch provide a double gap 
of isolation between cable and bus-
bar. Then a safe and fully interlocked 
earth link switch may be opened to 
give direct access to cable conductor. 
During testing, the cable box remains 
closed, the cable connections remain 
intact and the main contacts of the 
earthing switch remain in the same 
position. This recommended test pro-
cedure ensures the highest safety for 
test operators and also avoids any 
damage on the main circuit or cable 
connections.
Closed
Open &
disconnected
Earthed
Figure 7  New three-position diagram and typical 
unit including vacuum disconnecting 
circuit breaker

546	
Chapter 9  |  Unsymmetrical Faults
Shielded Solid Insulation  
System (2SIS)
To meet the same advantages as GIS 
RMUs, the new arrangement must 
be insensitive to harsh environment 
and “maintenance free.” This is en-
sured by an innovative Shielded 
Solid Insulation System (2SIS) for 
the whole MV circuit, using well-
known technologies (epoxy, EPDM) 
in an original way. Busbars, vac-
uum interrupter encapsulation, and 
earthing switch enclosures are made 
of solid insulation that is covered 
by a conductive layer connected to 
the earth. While maintaining a con-
stant electrical field within the solid 
insulation, all surfaces are at earth 
potential with protection grade PA 
according to IEC 62271-201 (can 
be accidentally touched by persons) 
[4]. The earth shield continuity is 
ensured by a patented flat interface, 
which combines installation sim-
plicity, modularity, and flexibility of 
traditional connectors with the com-
pact size and safety of the insulated 
and shielded connectors.
The 2SIS system improves 
safety by internal arc risk reduction, 
makes the switchgear totally insen-
sitive to severe environments and 
extends service life with minimum 
maintenance and lower total cost 
of ownership. The 2SIS system is 
applicable for any switching func-
tion such as load break switches or 
circuit breakers, compact metering 
functions, or current and voltage  
transformers.
Smart Grid Ready
Compared to GIS RMUs, this new 
generation of switchgear with 2SIS 
technology and the new three-position 
scheme offers much better modularity 
as the general architecture is based on 
single units.
Modern control and moni-
toring devices and digital protec-
tion relays are integrated in the new 
switchgear with the possibility of  
using compact LPCTs and LPVTs, 
making the advanced management 
solutions much easier. The modularity 
of the switchgear is extended up to 
the architecture by linking together 
the various embedded intelligent 
electronic devices, in order to achieve 
the necessary functions of control and 
monitoring in the most flexible way.
Conclusion
The necessary evolution of the 
networks brings the opportunity to 
introduce new criteria for the choice 
of MV switchgear, such as flexibility, 
Figure 9  Shielded Solid Insulation 
for the whole MV circuit
Figure 8  Dedicated cable test device

	
Section 9.1 System Representation	
547
insensitivity to harsh environment, 
compactness, optimization of re-
mote control, and so forth.
There is a great confidence that 
the 2SIS modular architecture us-
ing the three-position scheme and 
vacuum interrupters is well adapted 
for the coming deployment of smart 
grids. This architecture can address 
a large number of applications in 
MV secondary distribution and MV 
private networks but thanks to its 
modularity and flexibility, it also 
challenges some low-end applications 
where traditional drawout equipment 
is used. With this respect, this archi-
tecture blurs traditional MV primary 
and secondary boundaries. 
Combining compactness and 
modularity through technological 
innovations, the new generation 
of switchgear creates a real break-
through in MV switchgear habits 
and specifications.
References
[1] G. Moesch, J. M. Biasse, Y. Li,  
M. Adams, 2010: “Advent of fixed 
type Disconnecting Circuit Breakers 
in Medium Voltage secondary switch-
gear: a new arrangement of main cir-
cuit functions for simpler and safer 
operation,” Proceedings CICED 2010 
paper FPOl15.
[2] P. Deschamps, P. Ahbert, J. M. 
Biasse, 2011: “Reduce the number of 
outage by introducing circuit breaker 
in the distribution network: dream 
or reality?” Proceedings CIRED 2011 
paper. 0768.
[3] IEC 62271-200 Ed2.0 2011-10, 
AC metal-enclosed switchgear and 
controlgear for rated voltages above  
1 kV and up to and including 52 kV.  
[4] lEC 62271-201 First Edition 2006-
06, AC metal-enclosed switchgear and 
controlgear for rated voltages above  
1 kV up to and including 52 kV.  ■
9.1  System Representation
A three-phase power system is represented by its sequence networks in this chapter. 
The zero-, positive-, and negative-sequence networks of system components—
generators, motors, transformers, and transmission lines—as developed in Chapter 8  
can be used to construct system zero-, positive-, and negative-sequence networks. 
The following assumptions are made:
1.	 The power system operates under balanced steady-state conditions 
before the fault occurs. Thus the zero-, positive-, and negative-sequence 
networks are uncoupled before the fault occurs. During unsymmetrical 
faults, they are interconnected only at the fault location.
2.	 Prefault load current is neglected. Because of this, the positive-sequence 
internal voltages of all machines are equal to the prefault voltage VF. 
Therefore, the prefault voltage at each bus in the positive-sequence 
network equals VF.

548	
Chapter 9  |  Unsymmetrical Faults
3.	 Transformer winding resistances and shunt admittances are  
neglected.
4.	 Transmission-line series resistances and shunt admittances are  
neglected.
5.	 Synchronous machine armature resistance, saliency, and saturation  
are neglected.
6.	 All nonrotating impedance loads are neglected.
7.	 Induction motors are either neglected (especially for motors rated  
50 hp or less) or represented in the same manner as synchronous 
machines.
Note that these assumptions are made for simplicity in this text, and in prac-
tice should not be made for all cases. For example, in primary and secondary 
distribution systems, prefault currents may be in some cases comparable to 
short-circuit currents, and in other cases line resistances may significantly reduce  
fault currents.
Although fault currents as well as contributions to fault currents on the 
fault side of D–Y transformers are not affected by D–Y phase shifts, contributions 
to the fault from the other side of such transformers are affected by D–Y phase 
shifts for unsymmetrical faults. Therefore, D–Y phase-shift effects are included in  
this chapter.
Consider faults at the general three-phase bus shown in Figure 9.1. Termi-
nals abc, denoted the fault terminals, are brought out in order to make external 
connections that represent faults. Before a fault occurs, the currents Ia, Ib, and Ic 
are zero.
Figure 9.2 (a) shows general sequence networks as viewed from the fault 
terminals. Since the prefault system is balanced, these zero-, positive-, and 
negative-sequence networks are uncoupled. Also, the sequence components of the 
fault currents, I0, I1, and I2, are zero before a fault occurs. The general sequence 
networks in Figure 9.2(a) are reduced to their Thévenin equivalents as viewed from 
the fault terminals in Figure 9.2(b). Each sequence network has a Thévenin equivalent 
impedance. Also, the positive-sequence network has a Thévenin equivalent voltage 
source, which equals the prefault voltage VF.
FIGURE 9.1
General three-phase 
bus

	
Section 9.1 System Representation	
549
FIGURE 9.2
Sequence networks 
at a general three-
phase bus in a 
balanced system
Power-system sequence networks and their  
Thévenin equivalents
A single-line diagram of the power system considered in Example 7.3 is shown 
in Figure 9.3, where negative- and zero-sequence reactances are also given. The 
neutrals of the generator and D–Y transformers are solidly grounded. The motor 
neutral is grounded through a reactance Xn 5 0.05 per unit on the motor base.  
(a) Draw the per-unit zero-, positive-, and negative-sequence networks on a 100-MVA, 
13.8-kV base in the zone of the generator. (b) Reduce the sequence networks to their 
Thévenin equivalents, as viewed from bus 2. Prefault voltage is VF 5 1.05/08 per unit. 
The prefault load current and D–Y transformer phase shift are neglected.
EXAMPLE 9.1
FIGURE 9.3
Single-line diagram 
for Example 9.1
(Continued )

550	
Chapter 9  |  Unsymmetrical Faults
SOLUTION
a.  The sequence networks are shown in Figure 9.4. The positive-sequence net-
work is the same as that shown in Figure 7.4(a). The negative-sequence network 
is similar to the positive-sequence network, except that it shows no sources but 
does show negative-sequence machine reactances. D–Y phase shifts are omit-
ted from the positive- and negative-sequence networks for this example. In the  
zero-sequence network the zero-sequence generator, motor, and transmission-line 
reactances are shown. Since the motor neutral is grounded through a neutral  
reactance Xn, 3Xn is included in the zero-sequence motor circuit. Also, the zero- 
sequence D–Y transformer models are taken from Figure 8.19.
b.  Figure 9.5 shows the sequence networks reduced to their Thévenin equiva-
lents, as viewed from bus 2. For the positive-sequence equivalent, the Thévenin 
voltage source is the prefault voltage VF 5 1.05/08 per unit.
FIGURE 9.4
Sequence networks 
for Example 9.1

	
Section 9.1 System Representation	
551
From Figure 9.4, the positive-sequence Thévenin impedance at bus 2 is the motor 
impedance j0.20, as seen to the right of bus 2, in parallel with j(0.15 1 0.10 1 0.105 1 
0.10) 5 j0.455, as seen to the left; the parallel combination is j0.20// j0.455 5 j0.13893 
per unit. Similarly, the negative-sequence Thévenin impedance is j0.21//j(0.17 1 0.10 1 
0.105 1 0.10) 5 j0.21// j0.475 5 j0.14562 per unit. In the zero-sequence network of 
Figure 9.4, the Thévenin impedance at bus 2 consists only of j(0.10 1 0.15) 5 j0.25 
per unit, as seen to the right of bus 2; due to the D connection of transformer T2, the 
zero-sequence network looking to the left of bus 2 is open.
FIGURE 9.5
Thévenin 
equivalents of 
sequence networks 
for Example 9.1
Recall that for three-phase faults, as considered in Chapter 7, the fault currents 
are balanced and have only a positive-sequence component. Therefore, work only 
with the positive-sequence network when calculating three-phase fault currents.
Three-phase short-circuit calculations using  
sequence networks
Calculate the per-unit subtransient fault currents in phases a, b, and c for a bolted 
three-phase-to-ground short circuit at bus 2 in Example 9.1.
EXAMPLE 9.2
(Continued )

552	
Chapter 9  |  Unsymmetrical Faults
SOLUTION
The terminals of the positive-sequence network in Figure 9.5(b) are shorted, as 
shown in Figure 9.6. The positive-sequence fault current is
I1 5 VF
Z1
5 1.05/08
j 0.13893 5 2 j 7.558  per unit
which is the same result as obtained in part (c) of Example 7.4. Note that since 
subtransient machine reactances are used in Figures 9.4 through 9.6, the cur-
rent calculated above is the positive-sequence subtransient fault current at bus 2. 
Also, the zero-sequence current I0 and negative-sequence current I2 are both zero. 
Therefore, the subtransient fault currents in each phase are, from (8.1.16),
3
I0a
I0b
I0c
 4
53
1
1
1
1
a2
a
1
a
a2
0
43
2j 7.5584
0
53
7.558/2908
7.558/1508
7.558/3084
  per unit
FIGURE 9.6
Example 9.2: Bolted 
three-phase-to-
ground fault at 
bus 2
The sequence components of the line-to-ground voltages at the fault terminals 
are, from Figure 9.2(b),
3
V0
V1
V24
5
03
VF4
0
23
Z0
0
0
0
Z1
0
0
0
Z243
I0
I1
I24

(9.1.1)
During a bolted three-phase fault, the sequence fault currents are I0 5 I2 5 0 
and I1 5 VF/Z1; therefore, from (9.1.1), the sequence fault voltages are V0 5 V1 5 V2 5 0, 
which must be true since Vag 5 Vbg 5 Vcg 5 0. However, fault voltages need not be 
zero during unsymmetrical faults, which is considered next.

	
Section 9.2 Single Line-to-Ground Fault	
553
9.2  Single Line-to-Ground Fault
Consider a single line-to-ground fault from phase a to ground at the general three-
phase bus shown in Figure 9.7 (a). For generality, a fault impedance ZF is included. 
In the case of a bolted fault, ZF 5 0, whereas for an arcing fault, ZF is the arc imped-
ance. In the case of a transmission-line insulator flashover, ZF includes the total fault 
impedance between the line and ground, including the impedances of the arc and the 
transmission tower, as well as the tower footing if there are no neutral wires.
The relations to be derived here apply only to a single line-to-ground fault on 
phase a. However, since any of the three phases can be arbitrarily labeled phase a, 
single line-to-ground faults on other phases are not considered.
From Figure 9.7(a),
Fault conditions in phase domain
Single line{to{ground fault
6   Ib 5 Ic 5 0
Vag 5 ZF Ia
(9.2.1)
(9.2.2)
FIGURE 9.7
Single line-to-ground 
fault

554	
Chapter 9  |  Unsymmetrical Faults
Now transform (9.2.1) and (9.2.2) to the sequence domain. Using (9.2.1) in (8.1.19),
3
I0
I1
I24
5 1
3 3
1
1
1
1
a
a2
1
a2
a43
Ia
0
04
5 1
3 3
Ia
Ia
Ia4
 (9.2.3)
Also, using (8.1.3) and (8.1.20) in (9.2.2),
(V0 1 V1 1 V2) 5 ZF (I0 1 I1 1 I2)
(9.2.4)
From (9.2.3) and (9.2.4),
Fault conditions in sequence domain
Single line{to{ground fault
6   I0 5 I1 5 I2
sV0 1 V1 1 V2d 5 s3ZFdI1
Equations (9.2.5) and (9.2.6) can be satisfied by interconnecting the sequence 
networks in series at the fault terminals through the impedance (3ZF), as shown in 
Figure 9.7(b). From this figure, the sequence components of the fault currents are
I0 5 I1 5 I2 5
VF
Z0 1  Z1 1  Z2 1  s3ZFd
(9.2.7)
Transforming (9.2.7) to the phase domain via (8.1.20),
Ia 5 I0 1 I1 1 I2 5  3I1 5
3VF
Z0 1  Z1 1  Z2 1  s3ZFd
(9.2.8)
Note also from (8.1.21) and (8.1.22),
Ib 5  sI0 1 a2I1 1 aI2d 5  s1 1 a2 1 adI1 5 0
(9.2.9)
Ic 5 sI0 1 aI1 1 a2I2d 5 s1 1 a 1 a2dI1 5 0
(9.2.10)
These are obvious, since the single line-to-ground fault is on phase a, not phase b or c.
The sequence components of the line-to-ground voltages at the fault are deter-
mined from (9.1.1). The line-to-ground voltages at the fault can then be obtained by 
transforming the sequence voltages to the phase domain.
(9.2.5)
(9.2.6)
Single line-to-ground short-circuit calculations using 
sequence networks
Calculate the subtransient fault current in per-unit and in kA for a bolted single 
line-to-ground short circuit from phase a to ground at bus 2 in Example 9.1. Also 
calculate the per-unit line-to-ground voltages at faulted bus 2.
EXAMPLE 9.3

	
Section 9.2 Single Line-to-Ground Fault	
555
SOLUTION
The zero-, positive-, and negative-sequence networks in Figure 9.5 are connected 
in series at the fault terminals, as shown in Figure 9.8.
Since the short circuit is bolted, ZF 5 0. From (9.2.7), the sequence currents are:
I0 5 I1 5 I2 5
1.05/08
js0.25 1 0.13893 1 0.14562d
5
1.05
j0.53455 5 2j1.96427  per unit
From (9.2.8), the subtransient fault current is
Ia0 5 3s2j1.96427d 5 2j5.8928  per unit
The base current at bus 2 is 100ys13.8Ï3d 5 4.1837 kA. Therefore,
Ia0 5 s2j5.8928ds4.1837d 5 24.65/2908 kA
From (9.1.1), the sequence components of the voltages at the fault are
3
V0
V1
V24
53
0
1.05/08
0 4
23
j0.25
0
0
0
j0.13893
0
0
0
j0.1456243
2 j1.96427
2 j1.96427
2 j1.964274
53
2 0.49107
 0.77710
2 0.286044
  per unit
FIGURE 9.8
Example 9.3: Single 
line-to-ground  
fault at bus 2
(Continued )

556	
Chapter 9  |  Unsymmetrical Faults
Transforming to the phase domain, the line-to-ground voltages at faulted bus 2 are
3
Vag
Vbg
Vcg4
53
1
1
1
1
a2
a
1
a
a243
2 0.49107
0.77710
2 0.286044
53
0
1.179/231.38
1.179/128.784
  per unit
Note that Vag 5 0, as specified by the fault conditions. Also I0b 5 I0c 5 0.
Open PowerWorld Simulator case Example 9_3 to see this example. This 
case includes the positive-, negative-, and zero-sequence values for the system  
devices. To see these values, right-click on an object on the oneline (e.g., a genera-
tor), open the object’s Information dialog, and select the Fault tab. The process for 
FIGURE 9.9
Screen for Example 9.3—fault at bus 2

	
Section 9.3 Line-to-Line Fault	
557
simulating an unsymmetrical fault is almost identical to that for a balanced fault. 
That is, from the oneline, first right-click on the bus symbol corresponding to the 
fault location. This displays the local menu. Select “Fault..” to display the Fault 
Analysis dialog, and in the list on the left side of the dialog, set the Fault Defini-
tions to Single Fault. Verify that the correct bus is selected, and then set the Fault 
Type field to Single Line-to-Ground. Finally, click on Calculate to determine the 
fault currents and voltages. The results are shown in the tables at the bottom of 
the dialog. Notice that with an unsymmetrical fault the phase magnitudes are no 
longer identical and the phase angles no longer differ by 1208. The fault values 
can be shown on the oneline by selecting Options in the left list, and changing the 
Oneline Display field value.
9.3  Line-to-Line Fault
Consider a line-to-line fault from phase b to c, shown in Figure 9.10 (a). Again, in-
clude a fault impedance ZF for generality. From Figure 9.10(a),
Fault conditions in phase domain
Line{to{line fault
6   
Ia 5  0
Ic 5 2Ib
Vbg 2 Vcg 5 ZFIb
Transform (9.3.1) through (9.3.3) to the sequence domain. Using (9.3.1) and (9.3.2) 
in (8.1.19),
3
I0
I1
I24
5 1
33
1
1
1
1
a
a2
1
a2
a43
0
Ib
2Ib 4
53
0
1
3sa 2 a2dIb
1
3sa2 2 adIb4

(9.3.4)
Using (8.1.4), (8.1.5), and (8.1.21) in (9.3.3),
sV0 1 a2V1 1 aV2d 2 sV0 1 aV1 1 a2V2d 5 ZFsI0 1 a2I1 1 aI2d
(9.3.5)
Noting from (9.3.4) that I0 5 0 and I2 5 2I1, (9.3.5) simplifies to
sa2 2 adV1 2 sa2 2 adV2 5 ZFsa2 2 adI1
or
V1 2 V2 5 ZFI1
(9.3.6)
Therefore, from (9.3.4) and (9.3.6),
Fault conditions in sequence domain
Line{to{line fault
6   
I0 5  0
I2 5 2I1
V1 2 V2 5 ZFI1
(9.3.1)
(9.3.2)
(9.3.3)
(9.3.7)
(9.3.8)
(9.3.9)

558	
Chapter 9  |  Unsymmetrical Faults
FIGURE 9.10
Line-to-line fault
Equations (9.3.7) through (9.3.9) are satisfied by connecting the positive- and 
negative-sequence networks in parallel at the fault terminals through the fault imped-
ance ZF, as shown in Figure 9.10(b). From this figure, the fault currents are,
I1 5 2I2 5
VF
sZ1 1 Z2 1 ZFd I0 5 0
(9.3.10)
Transforming (9.3.10) to the phase domain and using the identity sa2 2 ad 5 2jÏ3, 
the fault current in phase b is
Ib 5 I0 1 a2I1 1 aI2 5 sa2 2 adI1
5 2jÏ3I1 5
2jÏ3VF
sZ1 1 Z2 1 ZFd
(9.3.11)
Note also from (8.1.20) and (8.1.22) that
Ia 5 I0 1 I1 1 I2 5 0
(9.3.12)

	
Section 9.3 Line-to-Line Fault	
559
and
Ic 5 I0 1 aI1 1 a2I2 5 sa 2 a2dI1 5 2Ib
(9.3.13)
which verify the fault conditions given by (9.3.1) and (9.3.2). The sequence compo-
nents of the line-to-ground voltages at the fault are given by (9.1.1).
Line-to-line short-circuit calculations using  
sequence networks
Calculate the subtransient fault current in per-unit and in kA for a bolted line-to-
line fault from phase b to c at bus 2 in Example 9.1.
SOLUTION
The positive- and negative-sequence networks in Figure 9.5 are connected in par-
allel at the fault terminals, as shown in Figure 9.11. From (9.3.10) with ZF 5 0, 
the sequence fault currents are
I1 5 2I2 5
1.05/08
js0.13893 1 0.14562d 5 3.690/2908
I0 5 0
From (9.3.11), the subtransient fault current in phase b is
I0b 5 s2jÏ3ds3.690/2908 d 5 26.391 5 6.391/1808   per unit
Using 4.1837 kA as the base current at bus 2,
I0b 5 s6.391/1808 ds4.1837d 5 26.74/1808 kA
Also, from (9.3.12) and (9.3.13),
Ia0 5 0  Ic0 5 26.74/08 kA
The line-to-line fault results for this example can be shown in PowerWorld 
Simulator by repeating the Example 9.3 procedure, with the exception that the 
Fault Type field value should be Line-to-Line.
EXAMPLE 9.4
FIGURE 9.11
Example 9.4: Bolted 
three-phase-to-
ground fault at 
bus 2

560	
Chapter 9  |  Unsymmetrical Faults
9.4  Double Line-to-Ground Fault
A double line-to-ground fault from phase b to phase c through fault impedance ZF 
to ground is shown in Figure 9.12 (a). From this figure,
Fault conditions in the phase domain
Double line{to{ground fault
   6   
Ia 5  0
Vcg 5 Vbg
Vbg 5 ZFsIb 1 Icd
Transforming (9.4.1) to the sequence domain via (8.1.20),
I0 1 I1 1 I2 5 0
(9.4.4)
Also, using (8.1.4) and (8.1.5) in (9.4.2),
sV0 1 aV1 1 a2V2d 5 sV0 1 a2V1 1 aV2d
Simplifying,
sa2 2 adV2 5 sa2 2 adV1
(9.4.1)
(9.4.2)
(9.4.3)
FIGURE 9.12
Double line-to-ground 
fault

	
Section 9.4 Double Line-to-Ground Fault	
561
or
V2 5 V1
(9.4.5)
Now, using (8.1.4), (8.1.21), and (8.1.22) in (9.4.3),
sV0 1 a2V1 1 aV2d 5 ZFsI0 1 a2I1 1 aI2 1 I0 1 aI1 1 a2I2d
(9.4.6)
Using (9.4.5) and the identity a2 1 a 5 21 in (9.4.6),
sV0 2 V1d 5 ZFs2I0 2 I1 2 I2d
(9.4.7)
From (9.4.4), I0 5 2(I1 1 I2); therefore, (9.4.7) becomes
V0 2 V1 5 s3ZFdI0
(9.4.8)
In summary, from (9.4.4), (9.4.5), and (9.4.8),
Fault conditions in the sequence domain
Double line{to{ground fault
   6   
I0 1 I1 1 I2 5 0
V2 5 V1
V0 2 V1 5 s3ZFdI0
Equations (9.4.9) through (9.4.11) are satisfied by connecting the zero-, positive-, 
and negative-sequence networks in parallel at the fault terminal; additionally, (3ZF) 
is included in series with the zero-sequence network. This connection is shown in 
Figure 9.12(b). From this figure the positive-sequence fault current is
I1 5
VF
Z1 1 [Z2yysZ0 1 3ZFd] 5
VF
Z1 13
Z2sZ0 1 3ZFd
Z2 1 Z0 1 3ZF
 4

(9.4.12)
Using current division in Figure 9.12(b), the negative- and zero-sequence fault 
currents are
I2 5 (2I1) 1
Z0 1 3ZF
Z0 1 3ZF 1 Z22
(9.4.13)
I0 5 (2I1)1
Z2
Z0 1 3ZF 1 Z22
(9.4.14)
These sequence fault currents can be transformed to the phase domain via (8.1.16). 
Also, the sequence components of the line-to-ground voltages at the fault are given 
by (9.1.1).
  (9.4.9)
(9.4.10)
(9.4.11)

562	
Chapter 9  |  Unsymmetrical Faults
Double line-to-ground short-circuit calculations using 
sequence networks
Calculate (a) the subtransient fault current in each phase, (b) neutral fault cur-
rent, and (c) contributions to the fault current from the motor and from the trans-
mission line, for a bolted double line-to-ground fault from phase b to c to ground 
at bus 2 in Example 9.1. Neglect the D–Y transformer phase shifts.
SOLUTION
a.  The zero-, positive-, and negative-sequence networks in Figure 9.5 are con-
nected in parallel at the fault terminals in Figure 9.13. From (9.4.12) with ZF 5 0,
I1 5
1.05/08
j 30.13893 1 s0.14562ds0.25d
0.14562 1 0.254
5
1.05/08
j0.23095
5 2j4.5464  per unit
From (9.4.13) and (9.4.14),
I2 5 s1j4.5464d1
0.25
0.25 1 0.145622 5 j2.8730  per unit
I0 5 s1j4.5464d1
0.14562
0.25 1 0.145622 5 j1.6734  per unit
Transforming to the phase domain, the subtransient fault currents are:
3
Ia0
Ib0
Ic04
53
1
1
1
1
a2
a
1
a
a243
1j1.6734
2j4.5464
1j2.87304
53
0
6.8983/158.668
6.8983/21.3484
  per unit
Using the base current of 4.1837 kA at bus 2,
3
Ia0
Ib0
Ic04
53
0
6.8983/158.668
6.8983/21.348
 4
s4.1837d 53
0
28.86/158.668
28.86/21.3484 kA
EXAMPLE 9.5
FIGURE 9.13
Example 9.5: 
Double line-to-
ground fault at 
bus 2

	
Section 9.4 Double Line-to-Ground Fault	
563
b.  The neutral fault current is
In 5 sI0b 1 I0c  d 5 3I0 5 j5.0202  per unit
5 sj5.0202ds4.1837d 5 21.00/908 kA
c.  Neglecting D–Y transformer phase shifts, the contributions to the fault cur-
rent from the motor and transmission line can be obtained from Figure 9.4. From 
the zero-sequence network, Figure 9.4(a), the contribution to the zero-sequence 
fault current from the line is zero, due to the transformer connection. That is,
Iline 0 5 0
Imotor 0 5 I0 5 j1.6734  per unit
From the positive-sequence network, Figure 9.4(b), the positive terminals of the 
internal machine voltages can be connected, since E0g 5 E0m. Then, by current 
division,
Iline1 5
Xm0
Xm0 1 sXg0 1 XT1 1 Xline 1 1 XT2dI1
5
0.20
0.20 1 s0.455d s2j4.5464d 5 2j1.3882  per unit
Imotor 1 5
0.455
0.20 1 0.455 s2j4.5464d 5 2j3.1582  per unit
From the negative-sequence network, Figure 9.4(c), using current division,
Iline 2 5
0.21
0.21 1 0.475 sj2.8730d 5 j0.8808  per unit
Imotor 2 5
0.475
0.21 1 0.475 sj2.8730d 5 j1.9922  per unit
Transforming to the phase domain with base currents of 0.41837 kA for the line 
and 4.1837 kA for the motor,
3
I0line a
I0line b
I0line c
 4
53
1
1
1
1
a2
a
1
a
a2
 43
0
2j1.3882
j0.8808
 4
53
0.5074/2908
1.9813/172.6438
1.9813/7.3578 4
  per unit
5  3
0.2123/2908
0.8289/172.6438
0.8289/7.3578
 4
  kA
(Continued )

564	
Chapter 9  |  Unsymmetrical Faults
3
I0motor a
I0motor b
I0motor c
 4
53
1
1
1
1
a2
a
1
a
a2
 43
j1.6734
2j3.1582
j1.9922
 4
5  3
0.5074/908
4.9986/153.178
4.9986/26.838 4
  per unit
5  3
  2.123/908
20.91/153.178
20.91/26.838 4
  kA
The double line-to-line fault results for this example can be shown in  
PowerWorld Simulator by repeating the Example 9.3 procedure, with the excep-
tion that the Fault Type field value should be Double Line-to-Ground.
Effect of D–Y transformer phase shift  
on fault currents
Rework Example 9.5, with the D–Y transformer phase shifts included. Assume 
American standard phase shift.
SOLUTION
The sequence networks of Figure 9.4 are redrawn in Figure 9.14 with ideal phase-
shifting transformers representing D–Y phase shifts. In accordance with the 
American standard, positive-sequence quantities on the high-voltage side of the 
transformers lead their corresponding quantities on the low-voltage side by 308. 
Also, the negative-sequence phase shifts are the reverse of the positive-sequence 
phase shifts.
a.  Recall from Section 3.1 and (3.1.26) that per-unit impedance is unchanged 
when it is referred from one side of an ideal phase-shifting transformer to the 
other. Accordingly, the Thévenin equivalents of the sequence networks in  
Figure 9.14, as viewed from fault bus 2, are the same as those given in Figure 9.5. 
Therefore, the sequence components as well as the phase components of the fault 
currents are the same as those given in Example 9.5(a).
EXAMPLE 9.6

	
Section 9.4 Double Line-to-Ground Fault	
565
b.  The neutral fault current is the same as that given in Example 9.5(b).
c.  The zero-sequence network, Figure 9.14(a), is the same as that given in  
Figure 9.4(a). Therefore, the contributions to the zero-sequence fault current from 
the line and motor are the same as those given in Example 9.5(c).
Iline 0 5 0  Imotor 0 5 I0 5 j1.6734  per unit
FIGURE 9.14
Sequence networks for Example 9.6
(Continued )

566	
Chapter 9  |  Unsymmetrical Faults
The contribution to the positive-sequence fault current from the line in 
Figure 9.13(b) leads that in Figure 9.4(b) by 308. That is,
Iline 1 5 s2j1.3882ds1/308 ) 5 1.3882/2608  per unit
Imotor 1 5 2j3.1582  per unit
Similarly, the contribution to the negative-sequence fault current from the 
line in Figure 9.14(c) lags that in Figure 9.4(c) by 308. That is,
Iline 2 5 (j0.8808) (1/2308) 5 0.8808/608  per unit
Imotor 2 5 j1.9922  per unit
Thus, the sequence currents as well as the phase currents from the motor are the 
same as those given in Example 9.5(c). Also, the sequence currents from the line 
have the same magnitudes as those given in Example 9.5(c), but the positive- and 
negative-sequence line currents are shifted by 1308 and 2308, respectively. Trans-
forming the line currents to the phase domain,
3
I0line a
I0line b
I0line c
 4
53
1
1
1
1
a2
a
1
a
a2
 43
0
1.3882/2608
0.8808/1608
 4
5  3
1.2166/221.178
2.2690/1808
1.2166/21.178 4
  per unit
5  3
0.5090/221.178
0.9492/1808
0.5090/21.178 4
   kA
In conclusion, D–Y transformer phase shifts have no effect on the fault 
currents and no effect on the contribution to the fault currents on the fault 
side of the D–Y transformers. However, on the other side of the D–Y trans-
formers, the positive- and negative-sequence components of the contributions 
to the fault currents are shifted by 6308, which affects both the magnitude 
as well as the angle of the phase components of these fault contributions for 
unsymmetrical faults.
Figure 9.15 summarizes the sequence network connections for both the bal-
anced three-phase fault and the unsymmetrical faults that have been considered. 
Sequence network connections for two additional faults, one-conductor-open and 
two-conductors-open, are also shown in Figure 9.15 and are left as an exercise for 
you to verify (see Problems 9.28 and 9.29).

	
Section 9.5 Sequence Bus Impedance Matrices	
567
9.5  Sequence Bus Impedance Matrices
The positive-sequence bus impedance matrix in Section 7.4 is used for calculating 
currents and voltages during balanced three-phase faults. This method is extended 
here to unsymmetrical faults by representing each sequence network as a bus im-
pedance equivalent circuit (or as a rake equivalent). A bus impedance matrix can be 
computed for each sequence network by inverting the corresponding bus admittance 
network. For simplicity, resistances, shunt admittances, nonrotating impedance 
loads, and prefault load currents are neglected.
Figure 9.16 shows the connection of sequence rake equivalents for both sym-
metrical and unsymmetrical faults at bus n of an N-bus three-phase power system. 
Each bus impedance element has an additional subscript, 0, 1, or 2, that identifies 
the sequence rake equivalent in which it is located. Mutual impedances are not 
shown in the figure. The prefault voltage VF is included in the positive-sequence rake 
equivalent. From the figure the sequence components of the fault current for each 
type of fault at bus n are as follows:
FIGURE 9.15
Summary of faults

568	
Chapter 9  |  Unsymmetrical Faults
Balanced three-phase fault: 
In21 5 VF
Znn21

(9.5.1)
In20 5 In22 5 0
(9.5.2)
Single line-to-ground fault (phase a to ground): 
In20 5 In21 5 In22 5
VF
Znn20 1 Znn21 1 Znn22 1 3ZF

(9.5.3)
FIGURE 9.16
Connection of rake 
equivalent sequence 
networks for three-
phase system faults 
(mutual impedances 
not shown)

	
Section 9.5 Sequence Bus Impedance Matrices	
569
Line-to-line fault (phase b to c): 
In21 5 2In22 5
VF
Znn21 1 Znn22 1 ZF

(9.5.4)
In20 5 0
(9.5.5)
Double line-to-ground fault (phase b to c to ground): 
In21 5
VF
Znn21 13
Znn22sZnn20 1 3ZFd
Znn22 1 Znn20 1 3ZF4

(9.5.6)
In22 5 s2In21d 1
Znn20 1 3ZF
Znn20 1 3ZF 1 Znn222
(9.5.7)
In20 5 s2In21d 1
Znn22
Znn20 1 3ZF 1 Znn222
(9.5.8)
Also from Figure 9.16, the sequence components of the line-to-ground voltages at 
any bus k during a fault at bus n are:
3
Vk20
Vk21
Vk224
53
0
VF
04
23
Zkn20
0
0
0
Zkn21
0
0
0
Zkn224
 3
In20
In21
In224

(9.5.9)
If bus k is on the unfaulted side of a D–Y transformer, then the phase angles of Vk21 
and Vk22 in (9.5.9) are modified to account for D–Y phase shifts. Also, the above se-
quence fault currents and sequence voltages can be transformed to the phase domain 
via (8.1.16) and (8.1.9).
Single line-to-ground short-circuit calculations using Zbus 0, 
Zbus 1, and Zbus 2
Faults at buses 1 and 2 for the three-phase power system given in Example 9.1 
are of interest. The prefault voltage is 1.05 per unit. Prefault load current is ne-
glected. (a) Determine the per-unit zero-, positive-, and negative-sequence bus 
impedance matrices. (b) Find the subtransient fault current in per-unit for a bolted 
single line-to-ground fault current from phase a to ground at bus 1, and (c) at  
bus 2. Find the per-unit line-to-ground voltages at (d) bus 1, and (e) bus 2 during 
the single line-to-ground fault at bus 1.
EXAMPLE 9.7
(Continued )

570	
Chapter 9  |  Unsymmetrical Faults
SOLUTION
a.  Referring to Figure 9.4(a), the zero-sequence bus admittance matrix is
Ybus 0 5 2j 3
20
0
0
44  per unit
Inverting Ybus 0,
Zbus 0 5 j 3
0.05
0
0
0.254  per unit
Note that the transformer leakage reactances and the zero-sequence transmission- 
line reactance in Figure 9.4(a) have no effect on Zbus 0. The transformer D connections 
block the flow of zero-sequence current from the transformers to bus 1 and 2.
The positive-sequence bus admittance matrix, from Figure 9.4(b), is
Ybus 1 5 2j 3
   9.9454
23.2787
23.2787
   8.27874   per unit
Inverting Ybus l,
Zbus 1 5 j 3
0.11565
0.04580
0.04580
0.138934  per unit
Similarly, from Figure 9.4(c)
Ybus 2 5 2j 3
    9.1611
23.2787
23.2787
   8.04064  per unit
Inverting Ybus 2,
Zbus 2 5 j 3
0.12781
0.05212
0.05212
0.145624  per unit
b.  From (9.5.3), with n51 and ZF 5 0, the sequence fault currents are
I120 5 I121 5 I122 5
VF
Z1120 1 Z1121 1 Z1122
5
1.05/08
js0.05 1 0.11565 1 0.12781d 5
1.05
j0.29346 5 2j 3.578  per unit
The subtransient fault currents at bus 1 are, from (8.1.16),
3
I 0
1a
I 01b
I 01c4
53
1
1
1
1
a2
a
1
a
a24
 3
2j3.578
2j3.578
2j3.5784
53
2j10.73
0
0 4
  per unit

	
Section 9.5 Sequence Bus Impedance Matrices	
571
c.  Again from (9.5.3), with n 5 2 and ZF 5 0,
I220 5 I221 5 I222 5
VF
Z2220 1 Z2221 1 Z2222
5
1.05/08
js0.25 1 0.13893 1 0.14562d 5
1.05
j0.53455
5 2j1.96427  per unit
and
3
I 02a
I02b
I 02c4
53
1
1
1
1
a2
a
1
a
a24
 3
2j1.96427
2j1.96427
2j1.964274
 53
2j5.8928
0
0 4
  per unit
This is the same result as obtained in Example 9.3.
d.  The sequence components of the line-to-ground voltages at bus 1 during the 
fault at bus 1 are, from (9.5.9), with k51 and n 5 1,
3
V120
V121
V1224
53
0
1.05/08
0 4
23
j0.05
0
0
0
j0.11565
0
0
0
j0.127814
 3
2j3.578
2j3.578
2j3.5784
53
20.1789
   0.6362
20.45734
  per unit
and the line-to-ground voltages at bus 1 during the fault at bus 1 are
3
V12ag
V12bg
V12cg4
53
1
1
1
1
a2
a
1
a
a24
 3
20.1789
10.6362
20.45734
53
0
0.9843/254.28
0.9843/105.884
  per unit
(Continued )

572	
Chapter 9  |  Unsymmetrical Faults
e.  The sequence components of the line-to-ground voltages at bus 2 during the 
fault at bus 1 are, from (9.5.9), with k 5 2 and n 5 1,
3
V220
V221
V2224
53
0
1.05/08
0 4
23
0
0
0
0
j0.04580
0
0
0
j0.052124
 3
2j3.578
2j3.578
2j3.5784
53
0
0.8861
20.186494
  per unit
Note that since both bus 1 and 2 are on the low-voltage side of the D–Y transform-
ers in Figure 9.3, there is no shift in the phase angles of these sequence voltages. 
From the above, the line-to-ground voltages at bus 2 during the fault at bus 1 are
3
V22ag
V22bg
V22cg4
53
1
1
1
1
a2
a
1
a
a24
 3
0
0.8861
20.186494
53
0.70
0.9926/249.48
0.9926/110.684
  per unit
PowerWorld Simulator computes the symmetrical fault current for each of the 
following faults at any bus in an N-bus power system: balanced three-phase fault, 
single line-to-ground fault, line-to-line fault, or double line-to-ground fault. For each 
fault, the Simulator also computes bus voltages and contributions to the fault cur-
rent from transmission lines and transformers connected to the fault bus.
Input data for the Simulator include machine, transmission-line, and trans-
former data, as illustrated in Tables 9.1, 9.2, and 9.3 as well as the prefault voltage 
VF and fault impedance ZF. When the machine positive-sequence reactance input 
data consist of direct axis subtransient reactances, the computed symmetrical fault 
currents are subtransient fault currents. Alternatively, transient or steady-state fault 
currents are computed when these input data consist of direct axis transient or syn-
chronous reactances. Transmission-line positive- and zero-sequence series reactances 
are those of the equivalent p circuits for long lines or of the nominal p circuit for 
medium or short lines. Also, recall that the negative-sequence transmission-line re-
actance equals the positive-sequence transmission-line reactance. All machine, line, 
and transformer reactances are given in per-unit on a common MVA base. Prefault 
load currents are neglected.

	
Section 9.5 Sequence Bus Impedance Matrices	
573
The Simulator computes (but does not show) the zero-, positive-, and negative- 
sequence bus impedance matrices Zbus 0, Zbus 1, and Zbus 2, by inverting the correspond-
ing bus admittance matrices.
After Zbus 0, Zbus 1, and Zbus 2 are computed, (9.5.1) through (9.5.9) are used to 
compute the sequence fault currents and the sequence voltages at each bus during a 
fault at bus 1 for the fault type selected by the program user (for example, three-phase 
fault, or single line-to-ground fault, and so on). Contributions to the sequence fault 
currents from each line or transformer branch connected to the fault bus are computed 
by dividing the sequence voltage across the branch by the branch sequence impedance. 
The phase angles of positive- and negative-sequence voltages are also modified to ac-
count for D–Y transformer phase shifts. The sequence currents and sequence voltages 
are then transformed to the phase domain via (8.1.16) and (8.1.9). All these computa-
tions are then repeated for a fault at bus 2, then bus 3, and so on to bus N.
Output data for the fault type and fault impedance selected by the user con-
sist of the fault current in each phase, contributions to the fault current from each 
branch connected to the fault bus for each phase, and the line-to-ground voltages at 
each bus—for a fault at bus 1, then bus 2, and so on to bus N.
Bus
X0  
per unit
X1 5 X0d  
per unit
X2  
per unit
Neutral Reactance 
Xn per unit
1
0.0125
0.045
0.045
0
3
0.005
0.0225
0.0225
0.0025
TABLE  9.1
Synchronous machine data for Example 9.8
Bus-to-Bus
X0 per unit
X1 per unit
2–4
0.3
0.1
2–5
0.15
0.05
4–5
0.075
0.025
TABLE  9.2
Line data for Example 9.8
Low-Voltage 
(connection) bus
High-Voltage 
(connection) bus
Leakage Reactance 
per unit
Neutral Reactance 
per unit
1(D)
5(Y)
0.02
0
3(D)
4(Y)
0.01
0
TABLE  9.3
Transformer data for Example 9.8
Sbase 5 100 MVA
Vbase 55
15 kV at buses 1, 3
345 kV at buses 2, 4, 5

574	
Chapter 9  |  Unsymmetrical Faults
PowerWorld Simulator
Consider the five-bus power system whose single-line diagram is shown in  
Figure 6.2. Machine, line, and transformer data are given in Tables 9.1, 9.2,  
and 9.3. Note that the neutrals of both transformers and generator 1 are solidly 
grounded, as indicated by a neutral reactance of zero for this equipment. How-
ever, a neutral reactance equal to 0.0025 per unit is connected to the genera-
tor 2 neutral. The prefault voltage is 1.05 per unit. Using PowerWorld Simulator, 
determine the fault currents and voltages for a bolted single line-to-ground fault 
at bus 1, then bus 2, and so on to bus 5.
SOLUTION
Open PowerWorld Simulator case Example 9_8 to see this example. Tables 9.4 
and 9.5 summarize the PowerWorld Simulator results for each of the faults. Note 
that these fault currents are subtransient currents, since the machine positive- 
sequence reactance input consists of direct axis subtransient reactances.
EXAMPLE 9.8
Contributions to Fault Current
Fault 
Bus
Single Line-to-Ground 
Fault Current (Phase A) 
per unit/degrees
GEN 
LINE  
OR  
TRSF
Bus-to-Bus
Phase A
Current  
Phase B
Phase C
per unit/degrees
1
46.02/–90.00
G1
GRND–1
34.41/–90.00
5.804/290.00
5.804/290.00
T1
5–1
11.61/–90.00
5.804/90.00
5.804/90.00
2
14.14/–90.00
L1
4–2
5.151/290.00
0.1124/90.00
0.1124/90.00
L2
5–2
8.984/–90.00
0.1124/290.00
0.1124/290.00
3
64.30/–90.00
G2
GRND–3
56.19/290.00
4.055/290.00
4.055/290.00
T2
4–3
8.110/–90.00
4.055/90.00
4.055/90.00
4
56.07/–90.00
L1
2–4
1.742/290.00
0.4464/90.00
0.4464/90.00
L3
5–4
10.46/–90.00
2.679/90.00
2.679/90.00
T2
3–4
43.88/290.00
3.125/290.00
3.125/290.00
5
42.16/–90.00
L2
2–5
2.621/290.00
0.6716/90.00
0.6716/90.00
L3
4–5
15.72/290.00
4.029/90.00
4.029/90.00
T1
1–5
23.82/290.00
4.700/290.00
4.700/290.00
TABLE  9.4
Fault currents for Example 9.8

	
Section 9.5 Sequence Bus Impedance Matrices	
575
Vprefault5 1.05 ∠0
Bus Voltages during Fault
Fault Bus
Bus
Phase A
Phase B
Phase C
1
1
0.0000∠0.00
0.9537∠2107.55
0.9537∠107.55
2
0.5069∠0.00
0.9440∠2105.57
0.9440∠105.57
3
0.7888∠0.00
0.9912∠2113.45
0.9912∠113.45
4
0.6727∠0.00
0.9695∠2110.30
0.9695∠110.30
5
0.4239∠0.00
0.9337∠2103.12
0.9337∠103.12
2
1
0.8832∠0.00
1.0109∠2115.90
1.0109∠115.90
2
0.0000∠0.00
1.1915∠2130.26
1.1915∠130.26
3
0.9214∠0.00
1.0194∠2116.87
1.0194∠116.87
4
0.8435∠0.00
1.0158∠2116.47
1.0158∠116.47
5
0.7562∠0.00
1.0179∠2116.70
1.0179∠116.70
3
1
0.6851∠0.00
0.9717∠2110.64
0.9717∠110.64
2
0.4649∠0.00
0.9386∠2104.34
0.9386∠104.34
3
0.0000∠0.00
0.9942∠2113.84
0.9942∠113.84
4
0.3490∠0.00
0.9259∠2100.86
0.9259∠100.86
5
0.5228∠0.00
0.9462∠2106.04
0.9462∠106.04
4
1
0.5903∠0.00
0.9560∠2107.98
0.9560∠107.98
2
0.2309∠0.00
0.9401∠2104.70
0.9401∠104.70
3
0.4387∠0.00
0.9354∠2103.56
0.9354∠103.56
4
0.0000∠0.00
0.9432∠2105.41
0.9432∠105.41
5
0.3463∠0.00
0.9386∠2104.35
0.9386∠104.35
5
1
0.4764∠0.00
0.9400∠2104.68
0.9400∠104.68
2
0.1736∠0.00
0.9651∠2109.57
0.9651∠109.57
3
0.7043∠0.00
0.9751∠2111.17
0.9751∠111.17
4
0.5209∠0.00
0.9592∠2108.55
0.9592∠108.55
5
0.0000∠0.00
0.9681∠2110.07
0.9681∠110.07
TABLE  9.5
Bus voltages for Example 9.8

576	
Chapter 9  |  Unsymmetrical Faults
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS
SECTION 9.1
	
9.1	
For power-system fault studies, it is assumed that the system is operating 
under balanced steady-state conditions prior to the fault, and sequence 
networks are uncoupled before the fault occurs.
(a) True                 (b) False
	9.2	
The first step in power-system fault calculations is to develop sequence 
networks based on the single-line diagram of the system, and then reduce 
them to their Thévenin equivalents, as viewed from the fault location.
(a) True                 (b) False
	9.3	
When calculating symmetrical three-phase fault currents, only ________
sequence network needs to be considered.
	9.4	
In order of frequency of occurrence of short-circuit faults in three-phase 
power systems, list those: ________, ________, ________, ________.  
	9.5	
For a bolted three-phase-to-ground fault, sequence-fault currents 
________ are zero, sequence fault voltages are ______, and line-to-ground 
voltages are ________.
SECTION 9.2
	
9.6	
For a single-line-to-ground fault with a fault-impedance ZF, the sequence 
networks are to be connected ________ at the fault terminals through the 
impedance ________; the sequence components of the fault currents are 
________.
SECTION 9.3
	
9.7	
For a line-to-line fault with a fault impedance ZF, the positive-and nega-
tive-sequence networks are to be connected ________ at the fault termi-
nals through the impedance of 1/2/3 times ZF; the zero-sequence current 
is ________.
SECTION 9.4
	
9.8	
For a double line-to-ground fault through a fault impedance ZF, the 
sequence networks are to be connected ________, at the fault terminal; 
additionally, ________ is to be included in series with the zero-sequence 
network.
SECTION 9.5
	
9.9	
The sequence bus-impedance matrices can also be used to calculate fault 
currents and voltages for symmetrical as well as unsymmetrical faults by 
representing each sequence network as a bus-impedance rake-equivalent 
circuit.
(a) True                 (b) False

	
Problems	
577
PROBLEMS
SECTION 9.1
9.1	
The single-line diagram of a three-phase power system is shown in  
Figure 9.17. Equipment ratings are given as follows:
FIGURE 9.17
Problem 9.1
	
The inductor connected to Generator 3 neutral has a reactance of 0.05 
per unit using generator 3 ratings as a base. Draw the zero-, positive-, and 
negative-sequence reactance diagrams using a 1000-MVA, 765-kV base 
in the zone of line 1–2. Neglect the D–Y transformer phase shifts.
Synchronous generators:
G1  1000 MVA
15 kV
X0d 5 X2 5 0.18, X0 5 0.07 per unit
G2  1000 MVA
15 kV
X0d 5 X2 5 0.20, X0 5 0.10 per unit
G3  500 MVA
13.8 kV
X0d 5 X2 5 0.15, X0 5 0.05 per unit
G4  750 MVA
13.8 kV
X0d 5 0.30, X2 5 0.40, X0 5 0.10 per unit
Transformers:
T1  1000 MVA
15 kV D /765 kV Y X 5 0.10 per unit
T2  1000 MVA
15 kV D/765 kV Y
X 5 0.10 per unit
T3  500 MVA
15kV Y/765kV Y
X 5 0.12 per unit
T4  750 MVA
15 kV Y/765 kV Y
X 5 0.11 per unit
Transmission lines:
1–2  765 kV
X1 5 50 V, X0 5 150 V
1–3  765 kV
X1 5 40 V, X0 5 100 V
2–3  765 kV
X1 5 40 V, X0 5 100 V

578	
Chapter 9  |  Unsymmetrical Faults
9.2	
Faults at bus n in Problem 9.1 are of interest (the instructor selects n 5 1, 
2, or 3). Determine the Thévenin equivalent of each sequence network as 
viewed from the fault bus. Prefault voltage is 1.0 per unit. Prefault load 
currents and D–Y transformer phase shifts are neglected. (Hint: Use the 
Y–D conversion in Figure 2.33.)
9.3	
Determine the subtransient fault current in per-unit and in kA during a 
bolted three-phase fault at the fault bus selected in Problem 9.2.
9.4	
In Problem 9.1 and Figure 9.17, let 765 kV be replaced by 500 kV, keep-
ing the rest of the data to be the same. Repeat (a) Problems 9.1, (b) 9.2, 
and (c) 9.3.
9.5	
Equipment ratings for the four-bus power system shown in Figure 7.14 
are given as follows:
	
The inductor connected to generator G3 neutral has a reactance of  
0.028 V. Draw the zero-, positive-, and negative-sequence reactance 
diagrams using a 1000-MVA, 20-kV base in the zone of generator G3. 
Neglect D–Y transformer phase shifts.
9.6	
Faults at bus n in Problem 9.5 are of interest (the instructor selects n 5 1, 
2, 3, or 4). Determine the Thévenin equivalent of each sequence network 
as viewed from the fault bus. Prefault voltage is 1.0 per unit. Prefault load 
currents and D–Y phase shifts are neglected.
9.7	
Determine the subtransient fault current in per-unit and in kA during a 
bolted three-phase fault at the fault bus selected in Problem 9.6.
9.8	
Equipment ratings for the five-bus power system shown in Figure 7.15 are 
given as follows:
Generator G1:
50 MVA, 12 kV, X0d 5 X2 5 0.20, X0 5 0.10 per unit
Generator G2:
100 MVA, 15 kV, X0d 5 0.2, X2 5 0.23, X0 5 0.1 per unit
Transformer T1:
50 MVA, 10 kV Y/138 kV Y, X 5 0.10 per unit
Transformer T2:
100 MVA, 15 kV D/138 kV Y, X 5 0.10 per unit
Each 138-kV line: X1 5 40 ohms, X0 5 100 ohms
Generator G1:
500 MVA, 13.8 kV, X0d 5 X2 5 0.20, X0 5 0.10 per unit
Generator G2:
750 MVA, 18 kV, X0d 5 X2 5 0.18, X0 5 0.09 per unit
Generator G3:
1000 MVA, 20 kV, X0d 5 0.17, X2 5 0.20, X0 5 0.09 per unit
Transformer T1: 500 MVA, 13.8 kV D /500 kV Y, X 5 0.12 per unit
Transformer T2: 750 MVA, 18 kV D/500 kV Y, X 5 0.10 per unit
Transformer T3: 1000 MVA, 20 kV D/500 kV Y, X 5 0.10 per unit
Each line:
X1 5 50 ohms, X0 5 150 ohms
	
Draw the zero-, positive-, and negative-sequence reactance diagrams using 
a 100-MVA, 15-kV base in the zone of generator G2. Neglect D–Y trans-
former phase shifts.

9.9	
Faults at bus n in Problem 9.8 are of interest (the instructor selects n 5 
1, 2, 3, 4, or 5). Determine the Thévenin equivalent of each sequence 
network as viewed from the fault bus. Prefault voltage is 1.0 per unit. 
Prefault load currents and D–Y phase shifts are neglected.
9.10	 Determine the subtransient fault current in per-unit and in kA during a 
bolted three-phase fault at the fault bus selected in Problem 9.9.
9.11	 Consider the system shown in Figure 9.18. (a) As viewed from the fault at 
F, determine the Thévenin equivalent of each sequence network. Neglect 
D–Y phase shifts. (b) Compute the fault currents for a balanced three-
phase fault at fault point F through three fault impedances ZFA 5 ZFB 5 
ZFC 5 j0.5 per unit. Equipment data in per-unit on the same base are 
given as follows:
FIGURE 9.18
Problem 9.11
	
Problems	
579
Synchronous generators:
G1 
X1 5 0.2
X2 5 0.12
X0 5 0.06
G2 
X1 5 0.33
X2 5 0.22
X0 5 0.066
Transformers:
T1
X1 5 X2 5 X0 5 0.2
T2
X1 5 X2 5 X0 5 0.225
T3
X1 5 X2 5 X0 5 0.27
T4
X1 5 X2 5 X0 5 0.16
Transmission lines:
L1
X1 5 X2 5 0.14
X0 5 0.3
L1
X1 5 X2 5 0.35
X0 5 0.6

580	
Chapter 9  |  Unsymmetrical Faults
	
Using a 100-MVA, 230-kV base for the transmission lines, draw the per-
unit sequence networks and reduce them to their Thévenin equivalents, 
“looking in” at bus 3. Neglect D–Y phase shifts. Compute the fault 
currents for a bolted three-phase fault at bus 3.
9.13	 Consider the oneline diagram of a simple power system shown in  
Figure 9.20. System data in per-unit on a 100-MVA base are given as follows:
FIGURE 9.19
Problem 9.12
Synchronous generators: 
G1
100 MVA
20 kV
X1 5 X2 5 0.15
X0 5 0.05
G2
100 MVA
20 kV
X1 5 X2 5 0.15
X0 5 0.05
Transformers:
T1
100 MVA
20/220 kV
X1 5 X2 5 X0 5 0.1
T2
100 MVA
20/220 kV
X1 5 X2 5 X0 5 0.1
Transmission lines: 
L12
100 MVA
220 kV
X1 5 X2 5 0.125
X0 5 0.3
L13
100 MVA
220 kV
X1 5 X2 5 0.15
X0 5 0.35
L23
100 MVA
220 kV
X1 5 X2 5 0.25
X0 5 0.7125
Synchronous generators:
G1
100 MVA
25 kV
X1 5 X2 5 0.2
X0 5 0.05
G2
100 MVA
13.8 kV
X1 5 X2 5 0.2
X0 5 0.05
Transmission lines:
TL12
100 MVA
230 kV
X1 5 X2 5 0.1
X0 5 0.3
TL13
100 MVA
230 kV
X1 5 X2 5 0.1
X0 5 0.3
TL23
100 MVA
230 kV
X1 5 X2 5 0.1
X0 5 0.3
Transformers:
T1
100 MVA
25/230 kV
X1 5 X2 5 X0 5 0.05
T2
100 MVA
13.8/230 kV
X1 5 X2 5 X0 5 0.05
9.12	 Equipment ratings and per-unit reactances for the system shown in  
Figure 9.19 are given as follows:

	
The neutral of each generator is grounded through a current-limiting 
reactor of 0.08333 per unit on a 100-MVA base. All transformer neutrals 
are solidly grounded. The generators are operating no-load at their rated 
voltages and rated frequency with their EMFs in phase. Determine the 
fault current for a balanced three-phase fault at bus 3 through a fault 
impedance ZF 5 0.1 per unit on a 100-MVA base. Neglect D–Y phase 
shifts.
SECTIONS 9.2–9.4
9.14	 Determine the subtransient fault current in per-unit and in kA, as well 
as the per-unit line-to-ground voltages at the fault bus for a bolted single 
line-to-ground fault at the fault bus selected in Problem 9.2.
9.15	 Repeat Problem 9.14 for a single line-to-ground arcing fault with arc 
impedance ZF 5 15 1 j0 V.
9.16	 Repeat Problem 9.14 for a bolted line-to-line fault.
9.17	 Repeat Problem 9.14 for a bolted double line-to-ground fault.
9.18	 Repeat Problems 9.1 and 9.14 including D–Y transformer phase shifts. 
Assume American standard phase shift. Also calculate the sequence com-
ponents and phase components of the contribution to the fault current from 
generator n (n 5 1, 2, or 3 as specified by the instructor in Problem 9.2).
9.19	 (a)  Repeat Problem 9.14 for the case of Problem 9.4 (b).
	
(b)  Repeat Problem 9.19(a) for a single line-to-ground arcing fault with 
arc impedance ZF 5 (15 1 j0) V.
	
(c)  Repeat Problem 9.19(a) for a bolted line-to-line fault.
	
(d)  Repeat Problem 9.19(a) for a bolted double line-to-ground fault.
	
(e)  Repeat Problems 9.4(a) and 9.19(a) including D–Y transformer 
phase shifts. Assume American standard phase shift. Also calculate the 
sequence components and phase components of the contribution to the 
fault current from generator n (n 5 1, 2, or 3) as specified by the instruc-
tor in Problem 9.4(b).
FIGURE 9.20
Problem 9.13
	
Problems	
581

582	
Chapter 9  |  Unsymmetrical Faults
9.20	 A 500-MVA, 13.8-kV synchronous generator with X0d 5 X2 5 0.20 
and X0 5 0.05 per unit is connected to a 500-MVA, 13.8-kV D/500-kV 
Y transformer with 0.10 per-unit leakage reactance. The generator and 
transformer neutrals are solidly grounded. The generator is operated at 
no-load and rated voltage, and the high-voltage side of the transformer 
is disconnected from the power system. Compare the subtransient fault 
currents for the following bolted faults at the transformer high-voltage 
terminals: three-phase fault, single line-to-ground fault, line-to-line fault, 
and double line-to-ground fault.
9.21	 Determine the subtransient fault current in per-unit and in kA, as well 
as contributions to the fault current from each line and transformer con-
nected to the fault bus for a bolted single line-to-ground fault at the fault 
bus selected in Problem 9.6.
9.22	 Repeat Problem 9.21 for a bolted line-to-line fault.
9.23	 Repeat Problem 9.21 for a bolted double line-to-ground fault.
9.24	 Determine the subtransient fault current in per-unit and in kA, as well as 
contributions to the fault current from each line, transformer, and gener-
ator connected to the fault bus for a bolted single line-to-ground fault at 
the fault bus selected in Problem 9.9.
9.25	 Repeat Problem 9.24 for a single line-to-ground arcing fault with arc 
impedance ZF 5 0 1 j0.1 per unit.
9.26	 Repeat Problem 9.24 for a bolted line-to-line fault.
9.27	 Repeat Problem 9.24 for a bolted double line-to-ground fault.
9.28	 As shown in Figure 9.21 (a), two three-phase buses abc and a9b9c9 are 
interconnected by short circuits between phases b and b9 and between c 
and c9, with an open circuit between phases a and a9. The fault conditions 
in the phase domain are Ia 5 Ia9 5 0 and Vbb9 5 Vcc9 5 0. Determine the 
fault conditions in the sequence domain and verify the interconnection  
of the sequence networks as shown in Figure 9.15 for this one- 
conductor-open fault.
9.29	 Repeat Problem 9.28 for the two-conductors-open fault shown in  
Figure 9.21(b). The fault conditions in the phase domain are
Ib 5 Ib9 5 Ic 5 Ic9 5 0  and  Vaa9 5 0
FIGURE 9.21
Problems 9.28 and 
9.29: open conductor 
faults

9.30	 For the system of Problem 9.11, compute the fault current and voltages 
at the fault for the following faults at point F: (a) a bolted single  
line-to-ground fault; (b) a line-to-line fault through a fault impedance  
ZF 5 j0.05 per unit; (c) a double line-to-ground fault from phase B to C  
to ground, where phase B has a fault impedance ZF 5 j0.05 per unit, 
phase C also has a fault impedance ZF 5 j0.05 per unit, and the common 
line-to-ground fault impedance is ZG 5 j0.033 per unit.
9.31	 For the system of Problem 9.12, compute the fault current and voltages 
at the fault for the following faults at bus 3: (a) a bolted single line-to-
ground fault, (b) a bolted line-to-line fault, (c) a bolted double line-to-
ground fault. Also, for the single line-to-ground fault at bus 3, determine 
the currents and voltages at the terminals of generators Gl and G2.
9.32	 For the system of Problem 9.13, compute the fault current for the 
following faults at bus 3: (a) a single line-to-ground fault through a fault 
impedance ZF 5 j0.1 per unit, (b) a line-to-line fault through a fault 
impedance ZF 5 j0.1 per unit, (c) a double line-to-ground fault through a 
common fault impedance to ground ZF 5 j0.1 per unit.
9.33	 For the three-phase power system with single-line diagram shown in 
Figure 9.22, equipment ratings and per-unit reactances are given as 
follows:
	
Select a base of 100 MVA, 345 kV for the transmission line. On that base, 
the series reactances of the line are X1 5 X2 5 0.15 and X0 5 0.5 per unit. 
With a nominal system voltage of 345 kV at bus 3, machine 2 is operating 
as a motor drawing 50 MVA at 0.8 power factor lagging. Compute the 
change in voltage at bus 3 when the transmission line undergoes (a) a 
one-conductor-open fault, (b) a two-conductor-open fault along its span 
between buses 2 and 3.
9.34	 At the general three-phase bus shown in Figure 9.7(a) of the text, 
consider a simultaneous single line-to-ground fault on phase a and line-
to-line fault between phases b and c, with no fault impedances. Obtain 
the sequence-network interconnection satisfying the current and voltage 
constraints.
FIGURE 9.22
Problem 9.33
	
Problems	
583
Machines 1 and 2:
100 MVA
20 kV
X1 5 X2 5 0.2
X0 5 0.04
Xn 5 0.04
Transformers 1 and 2:
100 MVA
20D/345Y kV
X1 5 X2 5 X0 5 0.08

584	
Chapter 9  |  Unsymmetrical Faults
9.35	 Thévenin equivalent sequence networks looking into the faulted bus of 
a power system are given with Z1 5 j0.15, Z2 5 j0.15, Z0 5 j0.2, and  
E1 5 1/08 per unit. Compute the fault currents and voltages for the fol-
lowing faults occurring at the faulted bus:
	
(a)  Balanced three-phase fault
	
(b)  Single line-to-ground fault
	
(c)  Line-line fault
	
(d)  Double line-to-ground fault
	
Which is the worst fault from the viewpoint of the fault current?
9.36	 The single-line diagram of a simple power system is shown in Figure 9.23 
with per unit values. Determine the fault current at bus 2 for a three-phase  
fault. Ignore the effect of phase shift.
9.37	 Consider a simple circuit configuration shown in Figure 9.24 to calculate 
the fault currents I1, I2, and I with the switch closed.
	
(a)  Compute E1 and E2 prior to the fault based on the prefault voltage 
V 5 1/08 and then, with the switch closed, determine I1, I2, and I.
	
(b)  Start by ignoring prefault currents, with E1 5 E2 5 1/08. Then super-
impose the load currents, which are the prefault currents, I1 5 2I2 5 1/08. 
Compare the results with those of part (a).
SECTION 9.5
9.38	 The zero-, positive-, and negative-sequence bus impedance matrices for a 
three-bus three-phase power system are
FIGURE 9.24
Problem 9.37
FIGURE 9.23
Problem 9.36

Zbus 0 5 j 3
0.10
0
0
0
0.20
0
0
0
0.104
   per unit
Zbus 1 5 Zbus 2 5 j 3
0.12
0.08
0.04
0.08
0.12
0.06
0.04
0.06
0.084
  
	
Determine the per-unit fault current and per-unit voltage at bus 2 for a 
bolted three-phase fault at bus 1. The prefault voltage is 1.0 per unit.
9.39	 Repeat Problem 9.38 for a bolted single line-to-ground fault at bus 1.
9.40	 Repeat Problem 9.38 for a bolted line-to-line fault at bus 1.
9.41	 Repeat Problem 9.38 for a bolted double line-to-ground fault at bus 1.
9.42	 (a)  Compute the 3 3 3 per-unit zero-, positive-, and negative-sequence 
bus impedance matrices for the power system given in Problem 9.1. Use a 
base of 1000 MVA and 765 kV in the zone of line 1–2.
	
(b)  Using the bus impedance matrices determined in Problem 9.42, ver-
ify the fault currents for the faults given in Problems 9.3, 9.14, 9.15, 9.16, 
and 9.17.
9.43	 The zero-, positive-, and negative-sequence bus impedance matrices for a 
two-bus three-phase power system are
Zbus 0 5 j 3
0.10
0
0
0.104  per unit
Zbus 1 5 Zbus 2 5 j 3
0.20
0.10
0.10
0.304  per unit
	
Determine the per-unit fault current and per-unit voltage at bus 2 for a 
bolted three-phase fault at bus 1. The prefault voltage is 1.03 per unit.
9.44	 Repeat Problem 9.43 for a bolted single line-to-ground fault at bus 1.
9.45	 Repeat Problem 9.43 for a bolted line-to-line fault at bus 1.
9.46	 Repeat Problem 9.43 for a bolted double line-to-ground fault at bus 1.
9.47	 Compute the 3 3 3 per-unit zero-, positive-, and negative-sequence bus 
impedance matrices for the power system given in Problem 4(a). Use a 
base of 1000 MVA and 500 kV in the zone of line 1–2.
9.48	 Using the bus impedance matrices determined in Problem 9.47, verify  
the fault currents for the faults given in Problems 9.4(b), 9.4(c), and  
9.19 (a through d).
9.49	 Compute the 4 3 4 per-unit zero-, positive-, and negative-sequence bus 
impedance matrices for the power system given in Problem 9.5. Use a 
base of 1000 MVA and 20 kV in the zone of generator G3.
	
Problems	
585

586	
Chapter 9  |  Unsymmetrical Faults
9.50	 Using the bus impedance matrices determined in Problem 9.42, verify the 
fault currents for the faults given in Problems 9.7, 9.21, 9.22, and 9.23.
9.51	 Compute the 5 3 5 per-unit zero-, positive-, and negative-sequence bus 
impedance matrices for the power system given in Problem 9.8. Use a 
base of 100 MVA and 15 kV in the zone of generator G2.
9.52	 Using the bus impedance matrices determined in Problem 9.51, verify the 
fault currents for the faults given in Problems 9.10, 9.24, 9.25, 9.26, and 
9.27.
9.53	 The positive-sequence impedance diagram of a five-bus network with all 
values in per-unit on a 100-MVA base is shown in Figure 9.25. The gener-
ators at buses 1 and 3 are rated 270 and 225 MVA, respectively. Generator 
reactances include subtransient values plus reactances of the transformers 
connecting them to the buses. The turns ratios of the transformers are such 
that the voltage base in each generator circuit is equal to the voltage rating 
of the generator. (a) Develop the positive-sequence bus admittance matrix 
Ybus 1. (b) Using MATLAB or another computer program, invert Ybus 1 to 
obtain Zbus 1. (c) Determine the subtransient current for a three-phase fault 
at bus 4 and the contributions to the fault current from each line. Neglect 
prefault currents and assume a prefault voltage of 1.0 per unit.
9.54	 For the five-bus network shown in Figure 9.25, a bolted single-line-to-
ground fault occurs at the bus 2 end of the transmission line between 
buses 1 and 2. The fault causes the circuit breaker at the bus 2 end of 
the line to open, but all other breakers remain closed. The fault is shown 
in Figure 9.26. Compute the subtransient fault current with the circuit 
breaker at the bus-2 end of the faulted line open. Neglect prefault current 
and assume a prefault voltage of 1.0 per unit.
9.55	 A single-line diagram of a four-bus system is shown in Figure 9.27. 
Equipment ratings and per-unit reactances are given as follows.
FIGURE 9.25
Problems 9.53  
and 9.54
Machines 1 and 2:
100 MVA
20 kV
X1 5 X2 5 0.2
X0 5 0.04
Xn 5 0.05
Transformers T1 and T2: 100 MVA
20D/345Y kV
X1 5 X2 5 X0 5 0.08

	
On a base of 100 MVA and 345 kV in the zone of the transmission 
line, the series reactances of the transmission line are X1 5 X2 5 0.15 
and X0 50.5 per unit. (a) Draw each of the sequence networks and deter-
mine the bus impedance matrix for each of them. (b) Assume the system 
to be operating at nominal system voltage without prefault currents when 
a bolted line-to-line fault occurs at bus 3. Compute the fault current, the 
line-to-line voltages at the faulted bus, and the line-to-line voltages at the 
terminals of machine 2. (c) Assume the system to be operating at nominal 
system voltage without prefault currents, when a bolted double line-to-
ground fault occurs at the terminals of machine 2. Compute the fault 
current and the line-to-line voltages at the faulted bus.
9.56	 The system shown in Figure 9.28 is the same as in Problem 9.48 except 
that the transformers are now Y–Y connected and solidly grounded on 
both sides. (a) Determine the bus impedance matrix for each of the three 
sequence networks. (b) Assume the system to be operating at nominal 
system voltage without prefault currents when a bolted single-line-to-
ground fault occurs on phase A at bus 3. Compute the fault current, the 
current out of phase C of machine 2 during the fault, and the line-to-
ground voltages at the terminals of machine 2 during the fault.
FIGURE 9.26 
Problem 9.54
FIGURE 9.27
Problem 9.55
	
Problems	
587
FIGURE 9.28
Problem 9.56

588	
Chapter 9  |  Unsymmetrical Faults
9.57	 The results in Table 9.5 show that during a phase a single line-to-ground 
fault the phase angle on phase a voltages is always zero. Explain why we 
would expect this result.
9.58	 The results in Table 9.5 show that during the single line-to-ground fault at 
bus 2 the b and c phase voltage magnitudes at bus 2 actually rise above the 
prefault voltage of 1.05 per unit. Use PowerWorld Simulator with case 
Example 9_8 to determine the type of in-line fault midway between bus 2 
and 4 fault that gives the highest per-unit voltage magnitude.
9.59	 Using PowerWorld Simulator case Example 9_8, plot the variation in  
the bus 2 phase a, b, c voltage magnitudes during a single line-to-ground 
fault at bus 2 as the fault reactance is varied from 0 to 0.30 per unit in  
0.05 per-unit steps (the fault impedance is specified on the Fault Options 
page of the Fault Analysis dialog).
9.60	 Using the Example 9_8 case determine the fault current in amps, except 
with a line-to-line fault at each of the buses. Compare the fault currents 
with the values given in Table 9.4.
9.61	 Using the Example 9_8 case determine the fault current in amps, except 
with a bolted double line-to-ground fault at each of the buses. Compare 
the fault currents with the values given in Table 9.4.
9.62	 Re-determine the Example 9_8 fault currents, except with a new line 
installed between buses 2 and 5. The parameters for this new line should 
be identical to those of the existing line between buses 2 and 5. The new 
line is not mutually coupled to any other line. Are the fault currents larger 
or smaller than the Example 9_8 values?
9.63	 Re-determine the Example 9_8 fault currents, except with a second gen-
erator added at bus 3. The parameters for the new generator should be 
identical to those of the existing generator at bus 3. Are the fault currents 
larger or smaller than the Example 9_8 values?
9.64	 Using PowerWorld Simulator case Chapter 9_Design, calculate the per-
unit fault current and the current supplied by each of the generators for 
a single line-to-ground fault at the ORANGE69 bus. During the fault, 
what percentage of buses have voltage magnitude below 0.75 per unit?
9.65	 Repeat Problem 9.64, except place the fault at the POPLAR69 bus.
DESIGN PROJECT 3 (CONTINUED): POWER FLOW/
SHORT CIRCUITS
Additional time given: 3 weeks
Additional time required: 10 hours
This is a continuation of Design Project 3. Assignments 1 and 2 are given in Chapter 6.  
Assignment 3 is given in Chapter 7.
PW
PW
PW
PW
PW
PW
PW
PW

Assignment 4: Short Circuits—Breaker/Fuse Selection
For the single-line diagram that you have been assigned (Figure 6.22 or 6.23), convert 
the zero-, positive-, and negative-sequence reactance data to per-unit using the given 
system base quantities. Use subtransient machine reactances. Then using PowerWorld 
Simulator, create the generator, transmission line, and transformer input data files. 
Next run the Simulator to compute sub-transient fault currents for (1) single-line-to-
ground, (2) line-to-line, and (3) double line-to-ground bolted faults at each bus. Also 
compute the zero-, positive-, and negative-sequence bus impedance matrices. Assume 
1.0 per-unit prefault voltage. Also, neglect prefault load currents and all losses.
For students assigned to Figure 6.22: Select a suitable circuit breaker from  
Table 7.10 for each location shown on your single-line diagram. Each breaker that 
you select should: (1) have a rated voltage larger than the maximum system operat-
ing voltage, (2) have a rated continuous current at least 30% larger than normal load 
current (normal load currents are computed in Assignment 2), and (3) have a rated 
short-circuit current larger than the maximum fault current for any type of fault at the 
bus where the breaker is located (fault currents are computed in Assignments 3 and 4). 
This conservative practice of selecting a breaker to interrupt the entire fault current, 
not just the contribution to the fault through the breaker, allows for future increases in 
fault currents. Note: Assume that the (X/R) ratio at each bus is less than 15, such that 
the breakers are capable of interrupting the dc offset in addition to the subtransient 
fault current. Circuit breaker cost should also be a factor in your selection. Do not 
select a breaker that interrupts 63 kA if a 40-kA or a 31.5-kA breaker will do the job.
For students assigned to Figure 6.23: Enclosed [9, 10] are “melting time” and 
“total clearing time” curves for K rated fuses with continuous current ratings from 
15 to 200 A. Select suitable branch and tap fuses from these curves for each of the 
following three locations on your single-line diagram: bus 2, bus 4, and bus 7. Each 
fuse you select should have a continuous current rating that is at least 15% higher but 
not more than 50% higher than the normal load current at that bus (normal load cur-
rents are computed in Assignment 2). Assume that cables to the load can withstand 
50% continuous overload currents. Also, branch fuses should be coordinated with 
tap fuses; that is, for every fault current, the tap fuse should clear before the branch 
fuse melts. For each of the three buses, assume a reasonable X/R ratio and determine 
the asymmetrical fault current for a three-phase bolted fault (sub-transient current is 
computed in Assignment 3). Then for the fuses that you select from [9, 10], determine 
the clearing time CT of tap fuses and the melting time MT of branch fuses. The ratio 
MT/CT should be less than 0.75 for good coordination.
DESIGN PROJECT 4: CIRCUIT BREAKER SELECTION
Time given: 3 weeks
Approximate time required: 10 hours
As a protection engineer for Metropolis Light and Power (MLP) your job is to ensure 
that the transmission line and transformer circuit breaker ratings are sufficient to 
interrupt the fault current associated with any type of fault (balanced three phase, 
	
Design Project 4	
589

590	
Chapter 9  |  Unsymmetrical Faults
single line-to-ground, line-to-line, and double line-to-ground). The MLP power 
system is modeled in case Chapter9_DesignCase4. This case models the positive-, 
negative-, and zero-sequence values for each system device. Note that the 69/138 kV 
transformers are grounded Y on the low side and Δ on the high side; the 138 kV/345 kV  
transformers are grounded Y on both sides. In this design problem your job is to 
evaluate the circuit breaker ratings for the three 345 kV transmission lines and the six 
345/138 kV transformers. You need not consider the 138 or 69 kV transmission lines, 
or the 138/69 kV transformers.
Design Procedure
1.	 Load Chapter9_DesignCase4 into PowerWorld Simulator. Perform an 
initial power flow solution to get the base case system operating point.
2.	 Apply each of the four fault types to each of the 345 kV buses and to 
the 138 kV buses attached to 345/138 kV transformers to determine the 
maximum fault current that each of the 345 kV lines and 345/138 kV 
transformers will experience.
3.	 For each device select a suitable circuit breaker from Table 7.10. Each 
breaker that you select should (a) have a rated voltage larger than the 
maximum system operating voltage, (b) have a rated continuous current 
at least 30% larger than the normal rated current for the line, and (c) have  
a rated short circuit current larger than the maximum fault current for 
any type of fault at the bus where the breaker is located. This conserva-
tive practice of selecting a breaker to interrupt the entire fault current, 
not just the contribution to the fault current through the breaker allows 
for future increases in fault currents. Since higher rated circuit breakers 
cost more, you should select the circuit breaker with the lowest rating 
that satisfies the design constraints.
Simplifying Assumptions
1.	 You need only consider the base case conditions given in the  
Chapter9_DesignCase4 case.
2.	 You may assume that the X/R ratios at each bus is sufficiently small  
(less than 15) so that the dc offset has decayed to a sufficiently low  
value (see Section 7.7 for details).
3.	 As is common with commercial software, including PowerWorld  
Simulator, the D–Y transformer phase shifts are neglected.
CASE STUDY QUESTIONS
a.	
What is the “three-position” scheme for MV switchgear? Describe the 
interlocking of the three positions.
b.	
Describe the shielded solid insulation system in MV switchgear.

REFERENCES
  1.	
Westinghouse Electric Corporation, Electrical Transmission and Distri-
bution Reference Book, 4th ed. (East Pittsburgh, PA, 1964).
  2.	
Westinghouse Electric Corporation, Applied Protective Relaying (Newark,  
NJ, 1976).
  3.	
P. M. Anderson, Analysis of Faulted Power Systems (Ames: Iowa State 
University Press, 1973).
  4.	
J. R. Neuenswander, Modern Power Systems (New York: Intext Educa-
tional Publishers, 1971).
  5.	
H. E. Brown, Solution of Large Networks by Matrix Methods (New York: 
Wiley, 1975).
  6.	
W. D. Stevenson, Jr., Elements of Power System Analysis, 4th ed. (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1982).
  7.	
C. A. Gross, Power System Analysis (New York: Wiley, 1979).
  8.	
C. Ma et al., “Innovative MV Switchgear for Today’s Applications,” 
2012 China International Conference on Electricity Distribution (2012 
CICED), Shanghai, September 5–6, 2012, Paper No. FP0112.
  9.	
McGraw Edison Company, Fuse Catalog, R240-91-1 (Canonsburg, PA: 
McGraw Edison, April 1985).
10.	
Westinghouse Electric Corporation, Electric Utility Engineering Refer-
ence Book: Distribution Systems (Pittsburgh, PA: Westinghouse, 1959).
	
References	
591


593
System Protection
10
S
hort circuits occur in power systems when equipment insulation fails, due to 
system overvoltages caused by lightning or switching surges, to insulation con-
tamination, or to other mechanical and natural causes. Careful design, oper-
ation, and maintenance can minimize the occurrence of short circuits but cannot 
eliminate them. Methods for calculating short-circuit currents for balanced and un-
balanced faults were discussed in Chapters 7 and 9. Such currents can be several 
orders of magnitude larger than normal operating currents and, if allowed to per-
sist, may cause insulation damage, conductor melting, fire, and explosion. Windings 
Lightning slices 
through rainy 
skies above a 
city, in a time-
exposure view 
(Jhaz Photography/
Shutterstock.com)

594	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
and busbars may also suffer mechanical damage due to high magnetic forces during 
faults. Clearly, faults must be quickly removed from a power system. Standard EHV  
protective equipment is designed to clear faults within 3 cycles, whereas lower- 
voltage protective equipment typically operates within 5–20 cycles.
This chapter provides an introduction to power system protection. Blackburn de-
fines protection as “the science, skill, and art of applying and setting relays and/or fuses 
to provide maximum sensitivity to faults and undesirable conditions, but to avoid their 
operation on all permissible or tolerable conditions” [1]. The basic idea is to define the 
undesirable conditions and look for differences between the undesirable and permis-
sible conditions that relays or fuses can sense. It is also important to remove only the 
faulted equipment from the system while maintaining as much of the unfaulted system 
as possible in service, in order to continue to supply as much of the load as possible.
Although fuses and reclosers (circuit breakers with built-in instrument trans-
formers and relays) are widely used to protect primary distribution systems (with 
voltages in the 2.4–46 kV range), this chapter is primarily focused on circuit break-
ers and relays, which are used to protect HV (115–230 kV) and EHV (345–765 kV) 
power systems. The IEEE defines a relay as “a device whose function is to detect 
defective lines or apparatus or other power system conditions of an abnormal or 
dangerous nature and to initiate appropriate control action” [1]. In practice, a relay 
is a device that closes or opens a contact when energized. Relays are also used in 
low-voltage (600-V and below) power systems and almost anywhere that electricity is 
used. They are used in heating, air conditioning, stoves, clothes washers and dryers, 
refrigerators, dishwashers, telephone networks, traffic controls, airplane and other 
transportation systems, and robotics, as well as many other applications.
Problems with the protection equipment itself can occur. A second line of de-
fense, called backup relays, may be used to protect the first line of defense, called  
primary relays. In HV and EHV systems, separate current- or voltage-measuring de-
vices, separate trip coils on the circuit breakers, and separate batteries for the trip coils 
may be used. Also, the various protective devices must be properly coordinated such 
that primary relays assigned to protect equipment in a particular zone operate first. If 
the primary relays fail, then backup relays should operate after a specified time delay.
This chapter begins with a discussion of the basic system-protection  
components.
CASE STUDY
The following article traces the history of protective relays in power systems 
from electromechanical relays (since the early 1900s) to the introduction of 
solid-state relays (1960s and1970s), first-generation microprocessor-based 
digital (or numeric) relays (1980s), and now second-generation digital relays 
[14]. New-technology second-generation digital relays have more power-
ful microprocessors with faster analog-to-digital conversion, more reliable  

	
Case Study	
595
and robust surface-mount construction with longer-lasting components, 
improvements in the available number of protective components allow-
ing for new protection schemes, increased memory for event recording, 
improved internal relay diagnostics, and enhanced relay security against 
cyber attacks.
Upgrading Relay Protection  
Be Prepared for the Next Replacement or Upgrade Project
By Daniel L. Ransom
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/MIAS.2013.2288404  
Date of publication: 2 July 2014
There are many advantages to up-
grading old electromechanical (EM), 
solid-state, and first-generation nu-
meric relays with modern numeric 
relays. Reliability increases because 
there is less direct wiring and inter-
connection wiring, and the reliabil-
ity and security of multifunction 
logic and settings are improved 
with the next-generation user in-
terface 
software. 
Remote 
input– 
output 
modules, 
remote 
analog/ 
digital inputs, and thermal measure-
ment capabilities have expanded pro-
tection, control, and monitoring. New 
protection and monitoring features 
improve power system equipment life 
and increase personnel safety. Main-
tenance costs are reduced, while in-
ternal watchdogs alert the user if the 
relay has a problem. Settings groups 
can be changed instantaneously to 
adapt to varying power-system re-
quirements. Modern second-genera-
tion numeric relays offer a variety of  
secure communications capabilities  
for interfacing with smart-grid con-
trols, supervisory control, and data- 
acquisition systems, and business  
networks. Event memory is larger for 
more onboard, standardized oscillo­
graphs and event reporting. Relay secu-
rity is in accord with the latest North 
American Electric Reliability Corpora-
tion (NERC) standards.
Initially, every relay upgrade 
seems simple and straightforward, 
but then come the details. Operat-
ing personnel have expectations for 
reading targets, resetting trips, ease 
of interface for settings and events, 
motor restarting, sync closing, and so 
on. Regulator requirements [NERC  
critical 
infrastructure 
protection 
(CIP), for example] must be imple-
mented while maintaining smooth  
operations. Relay engineers must en-
sure that operational ease is retained 
with the new upgrade relay. Accurate 
oneline and connection drawings as 
well as good wiring documentation 
are essential. Escutcheon plates might 
be necessary, or perhaps switchgear 
will need modification (panel cut-
ting, new doors, relocation, etc.). In 
addition, this is an opportunity to 
© 2014 IEEE. Reprinted, with permission, 
from D. L. Ransom, Basler Electric,  
“Upgrading Relay Protection,” IEEE Industry 
Application Magazine, September/October 
2014, pp. 126–142. Reprinted with permission 
from Basler Electric.

596	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
re-evaluate arc-flash hazards and pos-
sibly reduce the risks. These and other  
considerations are taken from actual 
relay-replacement projects.
This article provides guidance 
for your next replacement or upgrade 
project, including ways to reduce 
costs, save time, and minimize unex-
pected or unplanned complications.
History of Relays
Protective relaying in industrial and 
utility power systems has changed 
greatly since the beginning of system 
protection over a hundred years ago. 
At first, finely made “Swiss watch” pre-
cision EM relays were developed and 
installed by the hundreds of thousands.
In the 1970s, solid-state (or 
static) relays became available and 
replaced the EM relays with a slight 
change in scheme protection or relay 
function. These relays had the advan-
tage of being cheaper and smaller, 
being less of a burden, being easier 
to maintain, and having less calibra-
tion drift and some programming.  
Typically, solid-state relays have no 
communication or event-recording 
functions. Some plug-and-play solid-
state relays remain very popular be-
cause there is minimal installation 
labor, low outage time for replace-
ments, and the scheme design remains 
simple. Some prefer to keep their sys-
tems in this configuration because no  
extensive computer software train-
ing is required to operate an effective 
power-system protective scheme.
Widespread growth of com-
puter technology in the 1970s resulted 
in the introduction of microprocessor- 
based numeric (or digital) relays. This  
first generation of numeric relays 
brought innovations in developing  
new algorithms and the beginning 
of 
combining 
several 
protection 
functions in one multifunction relay  
package. Desktop and laptop com-
puters configured the first-generation 
numeric relays via DE-9 and DB-25 
serial ports (with all the complications 
of configuring these connections). 
Initially, first-generation numeric re-
lays operated on ASCII protocol or 
proprietary serial commands; relay 
manufacturers later developed graph-
ical user interface (GUI) software to 
generate the background serial com-
mands to program the relay elements.
Now, 
these 
first-generation 
numeric relays are reaching an end- 
of-service-life state. A major reason 
for this situation is through-hole 
component-mounting 
design 
and 
poor solder joints. The heating and 
cooling of circuit boards also leads to 
problems, such as bad vias (electrical 
connections from one layer of the cir-
cuit board to another) and electrolytic 
capacitor failure, particularly in the  
power supplies. Because the first- 
generation numeric relays have built-
in test routines (a “watchdog”) that 
signal an alarm output, operators 
know when the numeric relay fails. EM  
designs and most solid-state designs 
did not have a watchdog alarm output.
The new-technology second- 
generation 
numeric 
relays 
are 
equipped with more powerful mi-
croprocessors, have a more reliable  
surface-mount 
construction, 
and 
have improved algorithms and ele-
ments. These developments have pro-
vided relay protection engineers with 

new protection schemes and have 
advanced the quest for more reliable, 
more secure, and more dependable 
operation. However, some manu-
facturers have provided so much 
programming capability in these  
second-generation products that ex-
tensive training is required to set and 
operate these relays. In some cases, 
the customer contracts with the man-
ufacturer to develop setting files. In 
other cases, the manufacturer has 
simplified the setting process by using  
computing power to make setting a 
relay more straightforward and by 
providing setting intelligence in relay-
setting software.
Operations personnel now have 
input into the second-generation nu-
meric relay settings because the newer 
relay front panels have operating in-
dicators and push buttons directly re-
lated to system operation.
The total costs of upgrading 
relays must be considered, includ-
ing engineering, labor, testing, and 
commissioning costs. Also, you must 
consider the future values of longer- 
lasting relays and newer setting- 
checking features that help relay  
engineers to improve settings, avoid 
expensive outages, reduce paperwork, 
and avoid possible fines.
Replacing/Upgrading Relays
Knowing when to upgrade your re-
lay protection should be a proactive 
function, and you should not operate 
protective relays to failure. Operating 
to failure might seem to be a cost- 
saving method, but this philosophy 
reduces the reliability, security, and 
dependability of the power system. 
Relevant standards for determin-
ing relay life are found in American 
National Standards Institute C37.90  
[1] for the United States and in Inter-
national Electrotechnical Commis-
sion (IEC) 60255 [2].
Replacement/Upgrade Timing
You must monitor the rise in relay 
failures so you can track and schedule 
the replacement/upgrade before an 
existing relay fails [3]. Monitoring is 
necessary, especially for older EM re-
lays, solid-state relays, and first-gen-
eration numeric relays. Figure 1  
shows the study results on relay  
longevity [3].
The longer a relay is in service, 
the more likely it is to fail, which is 
why primary/backup relaying is rec-
ommended. In general, the lifetime of 
a numeric relay is 15–20 years. This is 
based on the life of capacitors (loss 
of capacitance because of electrolyte 
drying and leakage) and by semicon-
ductors (mainly integrated circuits) 
that degrade because of thermal vi-
bration and humidity. Most of the 
first-generation numeric relays have 
already reached or passed normal 
lifetime. It is recommended that you 
schedule a replacement or upgrade to 
the second-generation relays (or re-
place the existing solid-state relays if 
you want to keep the solid-state relay 
scheme).
Protective Relay Stressors
Relays operated in severe condi-
tions will need more maintenance 
and more record keeping to docu-
ment the performance. Severe condi-
tions include extremely hot and cold  
	
Case Study	
597

598	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
environments, outdoor locations, 
humid areas, and environments that 
contain corrosive gases, like hydro-
gen sulfide.
Costs of Upgrading Relays
The costs associated with relay up-
grades and replacements have many 
variables. Depending upon the im-
portance you and your organization 
place on reliability, security, and 
dependability, optimizing relay up-
grades and replacements might seem 
like a puzzle because of the many 
variables of relay operation. However, 
there are some interesting methods 
of quantifying upgrades and replace-
ments with statistics and probability 
mathematics. 
These 
mathematical 
models use terms, such as mean time 
between failure (MTBF), mean time 
to failure (MTTF), mean time to  
repair (MTTR), reliability, security, 
and dependability.
Reliability is in the MTBF or 
MTTF parameters. Assuming that 
the modern second-generation nu-
meric relays have surface-mounted 
components, which cannot be re-
paired to the component level, the 
model for MTTF is used. MTBF 
does not make sense in this case; relay 
users generally do not repair modern 
relays because the relay price is low, 
and replacing a failed unit brings 
more peace of mind.
One study on relay replace-
ment is by Wang et al. [4], based on 
the least unit life-cycle cost with 
minimum maintenance model. Mini-
mum maintenance is repairing a relay 
board subsystem only or replacing 
the relay, with no hardware refurbish-
ment. These researchers found that 
relay longevity follows a lognormal 
distribution, with the following pa-
rameters for cost over the life cycle of 
the relay [C(t)]:
Figure 1  A study of relay longevity 
Electromechanical
Static
First
Generation
First Generation
Analog Static
Elapsed Time (Years)
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
Number of Abolished Relays
300
350
400
450
500
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Mechanical

C(t) 5 CL(t)
t
,
(1)
where CL(t) is the unit life cycle cost, 
and
CL(t) 5 Cd 1 Cx#
t
0
r(t)dt
	
1 Ct MTTR
MTTF #
t
0
r(t)dt,
(2)
where Cd is the price of a protection 
device (including installation), Cx is 
the average cost of maintenance, Ct is 
the cost effect when the power system 
is out of service because of a protec-
tive relay failure, and the function r(t) 
is the probability distribution.
This equation shows the ef-
fects of outages, maintenance, and 
initial relay installation. The cost of 
downtime (the third term with Ct) 
can be greater than the cost of main-
tenance (the second term with Cx) if 
the MTTR is large and the MTTF is 
relatively small. Ct is the loss when 
the power system is out of service 
because of a protective relay failure. 
Ct /MTBF represents the probability 
that another device is also out of ser-
vice. Note that the initial cost of the 
relay and installation (the first term 
with Cd) is not significant for a sin-
gle relay when that relay is in service 
for a long period (large t). However, 
replacement/upgrade projects sel-
dom have only one relay. By batching 
many relay replacements at one time, 
this term becomes significant. Shop-
ping for a low relay price with a quick 
setup time (to reduce labor cost)  
is advised.
The 
lognormal 
probability 
distribution r(t) indicates that once 
the relay has one failure, subsequent 
failures will occur with fewer and 
fewer time intervals. It is a good 
idea to replace/upgrade a relay af-
ter the first failure. High-reliability 
situations require that you make 
the decision to replace and/or up-
grade before relay failure. Wang et 
al. found the optimal replacement 
period was every 18.4 years. In fact, 
power industry standards [5] spec-
ify that relay protection device life 
is generally not fewer than 12 years, 
and for devices operating in harsh 
conditions, the useful life should be 
shortened.
Another analysis of relay life 
by Montignies et al. [6] shows similar 
results. They describe reliability as 
the summation of the probability of 
relay failure over time t (the failure 
rate). They use the familiar “bathtub 
curve” to confirm the large infant 
mortality of brand-new relays, the 
useful life of in-service relays, and  
finally, the end-of-life obsolescence 
period, where relay failures accu-
mulate rapidly (Figure 2). The IEC 
describes the useful life as “the time 
interval beginning at a given moment 
in time, and ending when the fail-
ure intensity becomes unacceptable 
or when the time is considered to be  
unrepairable as a result of a fault”  
(International Electrotechnical Vocabu­
lary 191-19-06) [7].
During the middle useful-life, 
constant-aging period, the failure 
rate, l(t), remains steady. The average 
operating time is
MTTF 5#
`
0
R(t)dt 5#
`
0
e2l(t) 5 1
l, (3)
	
Case Study	
599

600	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
where R(t) is the reliability at time t. 
The natural exponential function of 
the probability of failure l(t) also de-
scribes reliability R(t).
Thus, 
the 
relationship 
of 
MTTF and the failure rate l(t) is  
inverse. When the failure rate goes 
up, the MTTF goes down, and vice 
versa. An MTTF of 300 years means 
that one relay out of 300 relays 
will fail during an operational year 
(0.33%/year).
Availability is the probability 
that a system operates properly at a 
given time. During the useful life and 
over a long period of use, availability 
(A) is
A 5
MTTF
MTTF 1 MTTR (MTTF @ MTTR). (4)
To increase the availability, 
the MTTR must be as brief as pos-
sible. Having on-the-shelf spares 
speeds repair and increases avail-
ability. In addition, be sure to apply 
power to spare relays for 30 minutes 
every year. Doing so keeps the in-
ternal electrolytic capacitors fresh, 
improving the usable life of shelf 
spares.
Primary/Backup Relay Systems
Protective relays should have a  
primary/backup arrangement with 
different manufacturers, especially 
when applied to critical protection 
areas, and in the severe conditions 
mentioned above. In this manner,  
mutual failure modes from hardware 
and from software algorithms used 
by one manufacturer are avoided. 
Relay manufacturers often use differ-
ent algorithms, which have different 
accuracy and precision and different 
hardware. Using different manufac-
turers makes the primary/backup dif-
ferent-vendor solution more robust. 
Using two different relays can save 
valuable equipment if one relay does 
not detect a fault but the other relay 
does detect a fault. The added cost of 
training on another relay and added 
Failures 
Time 
Infant 
Mortality 
Useful 
Life 
Wear-Out,
Replacement 
Figure 2  Relay failures over time

spares is offset by the savings realized 
in avoiding a fault.
Upgrading to the Second- 
Generation Numeric Relays
Upgrading to the latest or “second gen-
eration” of numeric protective relays 
gives a distinct advantage. There have 
been advances in hardware, software, 
element mix, and communication.
Hardware Advances
The second-generation protective re-
lays have the following advantages 
over previous offerings.
Faster and Better Processors
Faster analog-to-digital (A/D) con-
version benefits protection because 
more samples of the power system 
voltages and currents are available 
to the relay internal microprocessor. 
Thus, the relay has a more accurate 
representation of the actual condi-
tions in the power system. The newer 
A/D converters also offer a wider 
range so small signals and large fault 
signals can be more accurately mea-
sured (if current transformers and 
voltage transformers are of good 
quality).
The processing power of the 
new microprocessors in protective  
relays mirrors the computing power 
improvements in ordinary office 
computing platforms. While the first 
generations could be compared with 
an old Intel 286 or 386, the latest  
protective 
relays 
have 
PowerPC 
(performance 
optimization 
with 
enhanced reduced instruction set  
computing—performance 
comput-
ing) or multicore-type processing 
chips. These new microprocessors  
are faster, smaller, and less expen-
sive and have had an effect on the 
relay-design trend toward improved 
algorithms and simplicity.
Surface-Mount Reliability
Older relays employed “wire-lead” 
components that experienced vibra-
tion and heating issues, making the 
protective-relay circuit board unreli-
able over time. Power supplies were 
of the brute-force design, requiring 
large electrolytic capacitors, which 
are known to dry or leak, and fail. 
This drying effect is significant, espe-
cially with shelf spares that are not 
powered on a yearly basis.
Surface-mount technology has 
made protective-relay circuit boards 
more robust because the surface- 
mount components lay on the circuit 
board. The components have better 
thermal conduction to the circuit 
board so the components are less 
subject to heating and to vibration 
problems.
Power-supply design reliability 
has improved using switching de-
signs, where dc and low-frequency  
ac are converted to a higher fre-
quency and then smoothed to in-
ternal working power using smaller 
electrolytic capacitors with a longer 
lifetime. In addition, manufacturers 
have learned to optimize compo-
nent selection for a more reliable 
working life.
Plug-Out Design More Reliable  
Than Drawout
There is a move to eliminate draw­
out protective relays in second- 
generation products. Many drawout 
	
Case Study	
601

602	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
designs damage the internal relay 
plug/jack interfaces with repeated use.
One popular solution to this 
problem is to use a “plug-out” design 
where, if the protective relay needs to 
be replaced, technicians detach the 
already-wired terminal blocks from 
the back of the relay. After the entire 
relay is removed from the panel, the 
technician replaces the already-wired 
terminal blocks (plugs) onto the 
back of the relay. This method has a 
lower force distributed over a number  
of connections, providing a more 
gentle connection scenario. Current- 
input 
circuits 
have 
shorting-type 
mechanisms for protecting personnel 
from open-current-transformer arc-
ing. The reliability is increased with 
comparable downtimes to a drawout-
case relay.
Ethernet-Based Connections
The second-generation hardware sup-
ports Ethernet-based communication. 
Usually, copper 100BASE-T and fiber- 
optic 100BASE-FX are provided. 
Properly managed for cybersecurity 
using the NERC CIP requirements 
[8], these interfaces achieve connec-
tions to a substation LAN and remote 
locations. New control and reporting 
protocols like IEC 61850 are available 
on the Ethernet interface.
Firmware and Software  
Advances
The second-generation numeric relay 
firmware offers improvements in the 
available number and type of pro-
tective elements, which allows new 
protection schemes, increases relay 
recording and reporting, provides im-
proved relay internal diagnoses, and 
complies with the latest NERC se-
curity requirements. External setting 
software is GUI based and includes 
settings analysis and checking, along 
with template import and export, to 
improve and simplify the setting and 
testing processes. Some new relay 
software have innovations such as off-
line logic simulation, seen previously 
only in programmable logic controller 
software.
Number and Type of Elements
More processing power has allowed 
protective relay manufacturers to 
increase the number of traditional 
elements in a relay (for example, 
providing six or more 50 and six or 
more 51 overcurrent elements with 
any phase, sequence, or specialty 
input(s) for a feeder relay). In addi-
tion, newer elements are packaged 
in the relay for use in newer protec-
tion schemes; an example is 21 dis-
tance element(s) and 78 vector-jump  
element(s) in a generator relay. Hybrid- 
grounding generator schemes, fast- 
synchronization, and main-tie-main 
schemes are examples of newer pro-
tection schemes supported by the 
many elements in the secondgenera-
tion protective relays.
Increased Relay Recording  
and Reporting
The second-generation numeric relays 
have more nonvolatile memory, allow-
ing them to record longer and more 
event records and oscillography. Espe-
cially when synchronized by satellite 
Inter-Range Instrumentation Group 
or Ethernet time, a fault is much 
easier to analyze using time-aligned 
data across multiple relays. Ethernet 

	
Case Study	
603
connections allow faster download-
ing speeds from these large-data- 
volume relays.
Second-generation relays pro-
vide more elements that can be used 
for the early warning of impending 
failure and for through-fault and  
remaining-life estimates. Thus, you 
can realize long-term savings because 
of the ability to extend equipment 
maintenance intervals.
Improved Relay Internal Diagnoses
EM relays had no diagnostic features. 
You could test the EM relay, then put it 
back into service only for it to fail im-
mediately. You would not discover this 
failure until the next testing interval, 
when it was time to test again. Some 
solid-state relays have power-supply 
alarms but no diagnostic testing. The 
first-generation of numeric relays 
have a microprocessor watchdog with 
a “deadman” alarm that would close 
alarm contacts upon suspension of al-
gorithm execution and of power loss.
The 
second-generation 
pro-
tective relays employ more intricate 
self-tests that analyze not only when 
the microprocessor(s) is operating, 
but these relays also check memory 
status, measure accuracy of the A/D 
converter, and monitor power supply 
tolerances. If the relay exceeds any of 
these parameters, it sends an alarm via 
contacts or communications protocols 
to operators to check the relay. Again, 
long-term costs are lower and power-
system protection is improved because 
of the relays alarm for failure.
Enhanced Relay Security
Worldwide, data security has become 
an important part of the protective 
relay arena. As shown in the Aurora 
effect [9], utilities and commercial/in-
dustrial power users must ensure that 
their processes are secure from ill- 
intentioned hackers. For example, in 
North America, the NERC security 
requirements, CIP-002 [8], require 
that protection relays connected to 
the bulk power system must log all 
entry attempts. The first-generation 
protective relays were designed before  
these requirements and do not pro-
vide adequate data security pro-
tection (without layering external 
security). 
The 
second-generation 
relays have extensive security provi-
sions, including logging who accesses 
the relay and for what purpose.
Smart Software Increases 
Programming Simplicity and 
Provides Checking
Recent studies [10] have shown that 
a large amount of relay misopera-
tions are caused by poor relay pro-
gramming. Although it is good to 
have nearly endless computer-like 
programming in protective relays, 
it can be a pitfall to unknowing or 
inadequately trained protection en-
gineers. The latest setting and moni-
toring software checks programmed 
logic and has templates for many 
protection schemes. These templates 
can be used “as is” or modified as a 
special settings or monitoring tem-
plate for protection department 
use. The new smart software for the  
second-generation relays features 
step-by-step guided settings and 
summary pages when complete to 
check that all elements are pro-
grammed and set. Simplicity is 

604	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
improved, and misoperations are 
minimized.
In addition, the latest relay 
software provides monitoring capa-
bilities for the power system, such 
as basic current and voltage mea-
surements, 
sequence 
components, 
phasors, power quality, and harmon-
ics. For motors and generators, there 
are start reports and calculated and 
actual temperature measurements. 
Trends are reported for crucial op-
erating parameters, such as starting, 
transformer through-fault monitor-
ing, and predicted end of life.
Automated testing is essential, 
and the newer relays coordinate with 
several available products to make 
testing and commissioning far easier 
than the first-generation numeric and 
previous relays.
Installation Data and Example
Experience from numerous relay in-
stallations over the years lends evi-
dence to the need for relay upgrades 
and replacements. Historic data and 
installation examples make the bene-
fits of upgrading apparent.
Historic Installation Data
Modern relays with active compo-
nents (not EM construction) do not 
have the service life of EM relays. 
Figure 3 shows the expected, max-
imum and minimum service life of 
the four main relay types. The aver-
age of each type is also shown. The 
first-generation numeric relays, sec-
ond-generation numeric relays, and 
solid-state relays offer more reliabil-
ity, better calibration retention, and 
more repeatable protection than the 
older EM relays.
Note that advances in compo-
nent technology and circuit board 
reliability have made a useful contri-
bution to relay life. Components such 
as electrolytic capacitors continue to 
be a limiting factor. Improvements in 
component technology and proper 
manufacturer selection have made the 
0
10
20
30
40
50
EM
Max
Expected
Ave
Min
Solid State
Relay Type
First-
Generation
Numeric
Second-
Generation
Numeric
(Estimate)
Lifetime (Years)
Figure 3 The relay longevity by type (years)

second-generation numeric relays last 
longer (estimate based upon data to 
date in Figure 3).
EM Transformer Differential 
Scheme
Some practical examples of relay 
replacement show efficiency gains 
in having multiple functions in one  
relay, communications ease, and 
space savings. Figure 4 shows the 
“before” picture for a transformer 
differential scheme when EM re-
lays were installed in the switchgear 
[11]. Not shown are the single-
function overcurrent relays that 
backed up this differential scheme. 
The old installation had minimal 
protection without a modern dual- 
slope algorithm. There was no 
transformer life monitoring and 
no 
circuit-breaker 
and 
station- 
battery monitoring. In addition, the 
old scheme offered no communica-
tion, and therefore, operators and 
engineers could not monitor the 
transformer working in the power 
system. In addition, many EM dif-
ferential relays consumed valuable 
front-panel space.
Upgrading the EM relays to nu-
meric relays resulted in better protec-
tion, better relay communication, and 
a less-cluttered use of panel space 
(along with built-in metering, the com-
pany enjoyed increased ease of oper-
ation and less downtime). Figure 5  
shows that this installation features 
new panels with a multifunction nu-
meric relay replacement as well as test 
switches not available in the original 
installation. Backup protection could 
be added in the remaining panel 
blank at a later date.
Cost of Upgrading
Performing the actual relay up-
grade and replacement begins with 
estimating the cost. A value must 
be placed on the operation of the 
power system with no changes and 
compared with the value of power 
system operation with protection 
upgrades.
	
Case Study	
605
Figure 4 The old EM transformer differential relays  
(Photo courtesy of Basler Electric Company.)

606	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
Making No Change
Continuing operation with older re-
lays can make economic sense if the 
costs are acceptable for downtime and 
equipment repairs caused by non-
working protection. As was observed 
in the section “History of Relays,” 
all of the EM, solid-state, and first- 
generation numeric relays are coming 
to the end of usable life. The loss of 
one power transformer for which the 
utility or commercial customer has 
no backup, or must reduce service/
production to provide remediation, 
can be prohibitive. Management and 
the protection division must work 
together to identify the high-risk 
protection areas and get these relays 
upgraded as a high priority.
Upgrading Costs to Consider
Upgrading relay protection can save 
money in the long run. The future val-
ues of a relay upgrade far outweigh  
the initial cost of implementation 
(see the “History of Relays” section). 
Costs to consider include 
●
●
drawing changes
●
●
physical mounting consider-
ations (including building sub-
panels and rewiring to reach 
the new relays, if needed)
●
●
upgrading communication 
infra­structure
●
●
resizing battery requirements
●
●
labor, including engineering,  
installation, settings, and 
commissioning
●
●
system downtime and damaged 
equipment
●
●
end-of-life maintenance.
Implementing a Relay Upgrade
When you have made the decision to 
upgrade protective relaying, these are 
the steps to follow.
Figure 5  Smaller size and better protection are benefits 
of numeric relay upgrade replacement (Photo 
courtesy of Basler Electric Company.)

●
●
Obtain management approval 
and team acceptance.
●
●
Update drawings for the new 
relays or panels.
●
●
Order all required materials, 
tools, and labor.
●
●
Develop an outage plan.
●
●
Install, test, and commission.
●
●
Complete drawings with as-is 
data.
●
●
Responsibly dispose of old 
equipment.
●
●
Report outcome to management.
Performing these steps helps to keep 
your project on time and within budget.
Obtain Management Approval 
and Team Acceptance
Organization management should 
be aware of your plans and grant ap-
proval for the upgrade project. Com-
municate the plans to the upgrade 
team of workers. Do not forget to 
account for the unexpected (incor-
rect relay or panel fit, door-swing 
problems with long-depth relays). 
A good value for unexpected costs 
is 10% (with thorough planning)  
to 25%.
Update Drawings for the New 
Relays or Panels
Planning begins with examining the 
existing drawings for the switchgear, 
substation, or line section. Be aware 
that the condition of existing system 
prints might not be up to date. Send 
a crew to examine the site, compar-
ing the latest drawings to the present 
installed configuration; make any 
changes required.
Next, make demolition draw-
ings. These drawings provide detail 
on the relays or panels to be removed.
Follow installation drawings, 
with detailed notes on relay or panel 
placement. These documents help to 
focus on the materials (metal stock, 
escutcheon plates, terminal blocks, 
panels, and relays, current transformer 
and voltage transformer replacements/ 
connections, etc.) tools, and labor 
that will be required for a successful 
transition.
Consult the relay manufactur-
ers’ websites and contact the man-
ufacturers’ application engineers in 
your area for a final overview of your 
plans. This action helps to reveal any 
assumptions about the relay oper-
ation that might have been missed. 
In addition, you can find tools for 
settings, application notes, and white 
papers that pertain to your upgrade 
work. Developing a relationship with 
the manufacturer and manufactur-
ers’ field organizations now can save  
you money in the future by reducing 
rework.
Prepare a detailed list of step-by- 
step procedures for the work. This 
planning reduces cost, increases effi-
ciency, reduces upgrade overall time, 
and makes the probability of exces-
sive commissioning troubleshooting 
time much less.
Develop an Outage Plan
An important safety measure is per-
forming the work when the associated 
areas of the power system are de- 
energized to avoid possible hazards to 
both your technical crew and power-
system equipment. It is best to up-
grade an out-of-service portion of the 
	
Case Study	
607

608	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
system. Doing “hot” upgrades and 
replacements is not recommended. 
Effective outage planning achieves 
the following goals:
●
●
avoids outage cost increases 
and project delays
●
●
avoids unforeseen circumstances 
during the outage because you 
have “walked through” the 
upcoming work
●
●
simplifies coordinating your 
technical staff during inspec-
tions and commissioning
●
●
increases personnel productivity.
Review work order historical data 
for the area of the power system get-
ting the upgrade to determine whether 
there were existing problems and 
emerging trends. If you are using data-
base software to schedule work orders, 
investigate whether it has an outage- 
planning module (many of these pro-
grams and options exist). Consult 
with electricians, the machine shop, 
and other trades on the nuances of the 
existing system. Document, order, and 
store these data so that all concerned 
parties have access (perhaps through 
a Web/Internet interface). Produce 
a draft of the work flow, estimate re-
quired hours, and identify resources. 
Add or subtract items in the plan 
addressed during the outage (time of 
year, provision for continuing cus-
tomer or plant loads, backup protec-
tion during the outage, etc.).
Order All Required Materials, 
Tools, and Labor
Early ordering of all the required 
materials, tools, and arranging  
predicted labor needs make the up-
grade go more smoothly. In general, 
protective relays have a three-to 
four-week lead time because of the 
many ordering options; manufac-
turers do not stock relays but build 
these to an exact option (or style) 
number. Although manufacturers 
can produce the relays faster, it might 
cost more.
Some upgrade solutions match 
the old terminal numbers to the new 
relay. In this manner, there are sig-
nificantly fewer drawing changes and 
technicians simply wire from the old 
relay to the upgrade relay using the 
same terminal number. This method 
has been known not only to reduce 
cost, but it also reduces mistakes 
during the upgrade. Laser-cut plastic 
overlays on the back of the new relay 
or prewired terminal blocks marked 
with the old relay terminal numbers 
are a few examples. End-to-end wire 
testing would be reduced. If replac-
ing an entire relay panel, be sure that 
some method of support is available 
for these heavy panels.
Getting key labor supervisors 
involved is important at this point. 
These men and women can make the 
job go well because of their special 
insights about the system hardware 
on which they and their subordi-
nates work. Listen and learn. Not 
only is it important for a protection 
engineer to determine the protection 
settings, but also it is important to 
apply the right amount of effort on 
the user interface, screens, labels, 
and so on [12]. If you do not get 
labor buy-in, consulting labor later 
could cause additional work and 

an unsuitable working relationship 
that makes for late, over-budget  
upgrades.
Install, Test, and Commission
Refer to the installation drawings and 
procedures prepared earlier. Make 
sure that everyone on the installation 
team knows the order and scope of 
the work.
Labor can be your best help or 
a painful experience. As noted previ-
ously, the earlier that the labor pool 
is on board, the better the project 
implementation will be. These days, 
technicians are not as familiar with 
older relays, especially EM types. If 
installing these type of relays, make 
sure that the staff knows where to get 
the test-fixture extenders, where to at-
tach the serial port, whether the port 
is “straight-through” or “crossed,” 
the data rate, and all pertinent pass-
words. Many newer technicians are 
comfortable with USB ports, IP  
addresses, and Ethernet ports in the 
modern second-generation numeric 
relays but not so comfortable with 
older serial connections.
Put a dedicated landline tele-
phone connection at the site. Not 
only is this telephone line a safety 
improvement, it is easier to use for 
contacting manufacturers’ applica-
tion engineers because there is no  
signal fading from nearby power- 
system noise as can be found with 
wireless or cellular telephones. Also, 
consider using a headset because noise 
levels at the site can make it difficult to 
hear someone on the telephone line.
Computer-aided testing is be-
coming standard throughout the  
industry to help existing technicians 
save time, providing more work at less 
cost (obviating the need to hire more 
personnel who are not available in the 
present workforce). Make sure that 
staff are trained for the relays in the 
upgrade [13].
Commissioning testing is es-
sential to verify that all wiring is con-
nected properly to all relay inputs 
and outputs (hardwired and virtual) 
and that the upgraded relays com-
municate as expected. Computer- 
aided testing can help save time at 
this point. Make sure to analyze the  
expected results against the scheme 
design to ensure trouble-free op-
eration. When changes come (and 
changes are a certainty), be ready 
with a revision-tracking method. 
These days, there are many software 
library management programs that 
can assist in enforcing one copy of 
the changes as the working set.
Complete Drawings with As-Left 
Data
Documentation is essential for sav-
ing time and money. From good 
planning to smooth installation and 
final testing, complete, accurate doc-
umentation furthers efficiency. Up-
dating project drawings should be 
an ongoing effort. Make final notes 
on protection design. File logic and 
software reports in a place where 
you can find these in the future. Cap-
turing the as-left data now keeps 
those who follow you from guessing 
and wasting time on understanding  
the work.
Besides 
updating 
drawings, 
now is a good time to write a project  
	
Case Study	
609

610	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
summary and update project design 
documents. Those who come after 
you will thank you.
Dispose of Old Equipment  
Responsibly
Be responsible about disposing of 
older electronic equipment. Consult  
and follow the restriction of haz-
ardous substances guidelines [14]. 
Currently, there is a large amount of 
lead, cadmium, mercury, and other  
dangerous chemicals in refuse land-
fills. The European Union spear-
headed efforts in these areas, reducing 
contamination and making ground 
water safe.
Think about donating older 
equipment to a local vocational 
school or college. It is important 
that the new crop of protection 
engineers and technicians are fa-
miliar with older products so these 
students can learn valuable lessons 
about algorithms and test proce-
dures. Mark the replaced old relays 
with painted or labeled warnings 
about reuse in the power system. 
Besides the enhanced goodwill that 
donations provide, perhaps your  
organization can earn a government 
tax deduction as well.
Report Outcome to Management
At the end of the relay upgrade, take 
the project summary report and ask 
to make a formal presentation to 
company management. Not only 
does this let management know what 
was accomplished, this effort pays 
back in increased favorable manage-
ment buy-in when proposing the next 
project.
Reporting the project outcome 
also helps to complete upgrade doc-
umentation, provides an opportunity 
to point out helpful colleagues and 
staff, and gives you one last look at 
what was done. It is good to write a 
“lesson learned” document to pass 
along to the next project leader on the 
next upgrade.
Conclusions
Upgrading power-system protection 
relays allows you to see long-term cost 
reduction and increased operational 
efficiency. In these days of cost cut-
ting and striving for doing more with 
less, relay upgrades, although initially 
requiring some cost and effort, make 
better use of funds. Whether it is a 
public utility district, an industry ap-
plication, or a large utility, upgrading 
can alleviate many system problems 
and expensive relay failures.
Second-generation numeric re-
lays (new multifunction microproces-
sor relays with multicore processing) 
are often less expensive per function 
than earlier relays. The new relays 
are rugged, with surface-mount tech-
nology that endures harsh operating 
environments better than older con-
struction. The unreliable connections 
from older drawout designs are not a 
factor in newer relays, enhancing the 
already increased reliability.
More functions in one relay 
means lower cost and fewer replace-
ments to improve protection schemes; 
the relay elements are already in the 
newer second-generation numeric re-
lays. Even if these elements are not 
in use now, they will be available for 
later use if required by management,  

government, and protection man-
dates. Less panel wiring, longer  
maintenance intervals (from sta-
ble calibration and active watchdog 
reporting), and automated testing 
interfaces reduce overall costs. An 
unplanned outage can be more ex-
pensive than the cost of a relay- 
replacement project, not to mention 
the possible monetary fines (espe-
cially when connected to the bulk 
power system), loss of capital, loss of 
production, and loss of reputation.
Software for modern relays 
actually assists the protection engi-
neer to make more consistent and 
better settings. In addition, second- 
generation numeric relay software 
provides summaries and internal 
logic checking to make certain that 
the protection elements are on, con-
nected, and working.
Plan the upgrade project well. 
Keep management and labor informed 
on progress. Consult relay manufactur-
ers for assistance. Make a final project  
summary, and report to management 
and all stakeholders (especially to 
all who worked on the project). This 
will promote future upgrade projects, 
which will improve power-system per-
formance as well as the reputation of 
the relay protection engineer.
References
1.	 Standard for Relays and Relay 
Systems Associated with Elec-
tric Power Apparatus, ANSI/
IEEE Standard C37.90, 2005.
2.	 Measuring Relays and Pro-
tection Equipment—Part 1: 
Common Requirements, IEC 
Standard 60255–1, 2009.
3.	 H. Kameda, S. Yoshiyama, G. 
Ushio, M. Usui, K. Sekiguchi, 
and C. Komatsu, “Estimation 
of replacement of numerical 
relay systems from reliability 
analysis,” in Proc. Int. Conf. 
Advanced Power System Auto-
mation Protection, Oct. 16–20, 
2011, vol. 1, pp. 114–119.
4.	 W. RuiChen, X. AnCheng,  
B. TianShu, and H. ShaoFeng, 
“Relay replacement strategy 
based on the least unit life 
cycle cost with minimum  
maintenance model,” in Proc. 
Int. Conf. Advanced Power  
System Automation Protection,  
Oct. 16–20, 2011, vol. 1,  
pp. 609–614.
5.	 Protection Devices Operation 
and Management Procedures, 
People’s Republic of Electric 
Power Industry Standard [S], 
Standard DL/T587–2007.
6.	 P. Montignies, P. P. Basu, and 
F. Gruffaz, “Digital protective 
relays are designed for long 
life,” in Proc. 4th European 
Conf. Electrical Instrumenta-
tion Applications Petroleum 
Chemical Industry, June 13–15, 
2007, pp. 1–8.
7.	 International Electrotechni-
cal Vocabulary Chapter 191: 
Dependability and Quality of 
Service, International Electro-
technical Committee Standard 
60050–191, 2012.
8.	 National Electric Reliability 
Council. (2009). Critical Infra-
structure Protection Standard 
CIP-002-3. [Online]. Available: 
	
Case Study	
611

612	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
http://www.nerc.com/page 
.php?cid=2|20
9.	 M. Zeller, “Myth or reality—
Does the Aurora vulnerability 
pose a risk to my generator?” 
in Proc. 2011 64th Annu. Conf. 
Protective Relay Engineers, 
Apr. 11–14, 2011, pp. 130–136.
10.	 National Electric Reliability 
Council. (2011). Protection 
system misoperation identifica-
tion and correction. [Online]. 
Available: www.nerc.com/files 
/misoperations_webinar_master 
_deck_final.pdf
11.	 Basler Electric, “Multifunc-
tion relays fit in cutouts for 
transformer differential and 
overcurrent relays,” Technical 
Resource Library, 2012.
12.	 J. Sperl, B. Carper, and W. Coe, 
“Upgrading your protective 
relays—When theory meets 
reality,” in Proc. 63rd Annu. 
Conf. Relay Engineers, Pro-
tective Relay Engineers, Mar. 
29–Apr. 1 2010, pp. 1–8.
13.	 A. Jezak and R. Garcia, 
“Aggressive electromechanical 
relay panel replacement project 
at TXU electric delivery,” in 
Proc. 58th Annu. Conf. Relay 
Engineers, Apr. 5–7, 2005,  
pp. 189–193.
14.	 European Union, Directive 
on the restriction of the use of 
certain hazardous substances 
in electrical and electronic 
equipment 2002/95/EC (RoHS), 
2003.  ■
10.1  System Protection Components
Protection systems have three basic components:
1.	 Instrument transformers
2.	 Relays
3.	 Circuit breakers
Figure 10.1 shows a simple overcurrent protection schematic with: (1) one type 
of instrument transformer—the current transformer (CT), (2) an overcurrent relay 
(OC), and (3) a circuit breaker (CB) for a single-phase line. The function of the CT is to 
reproduce in its secondary winding a current I9 that is proportional to the primary cur-
rent I. The CT converts primary currents in the kiloamp range to secondary currents in 
the 0–5 ampere range for convenience of measurement, with the following advantages.
Safety: Instrument transformers provide electrical isolation from the power 
system so that personnel working with relays will work in a safer environment.
Economy: Lower-level relay inputs enable relays to be smaller, simpler, and less 
expensive.

	
Section 10.1 System Protection Components	
613
Accuracy: Instrument transformers accurately reproduce power system cur-
rents and voltages over wide operating ranges.
The function of the relay is to discriminate between normal operation and fault 
conditions. The OC relay in Figure 10.1 has an operating coil, which is connected to 
the CT secondary winding, and a set of contacts.
When |I9| exceeds a specified “pickup” value, the operating coil causes the nor-
mally open contacts to close. When the relay contacts close, the trip coil of the circuit 
breaker is energized, which then causes the circuit breaker to open.
Note that the circuit breaker does not open until its operating coil is ener-
gized, either manually or by relay operation. Based on information from instrument 
transformers, a decision is made and “relayed” to the trip coil of the breaker, which 
actually opens the power circuit—hence the name relay.
System-protection components have the following design criteria [2]:
Reliability: Operate dependably when fault conditions occur, even after re-
maining idle for months or years. Failure to do so may result in costly damages.
Selectivity: Avoid unnecessary, false trips.
Speed: Operate rapidly to minimize fault duration and equipment damage. Any 
intentional time delays should be precise.
Economy: Provide maximum protection at minimum cost.
Simplicity: Minimize protection equipment and circuitry.
Since it is impossible to satisfy all these criteria simultaneously, compromises 
must be made in system protection.
FIGURE 10.1
Overcurrent protection 
schematic

614	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
10.2  Instrument Transformers
There are two basic types of instrument transformers: voltage transformers  
(VTs), formerly called potential transformers (PTs), and current transformers (CTs). 
Figure 10.2 shows a schematic representation for the VT and CT.
The transformer primary is connected to or into the power system and is insu-
lated for the power system voltage. The VT reduces the primary voltage, and the CT 
reduces the primary current to much lower, standardized levels suitable for operation 
of relays. Photos of VTs and CTs are shown in Figures 10.3–10.6.
FIGURE 10.2
VT and CT schematic
FIGURE 10.3
Three 34.5-kV voltage 
transformers with 
34.5 kV: 115/67 volt 
VT ratios, at Lisle 
substation, Lisle, 
Illinois (Courtesy 
of Commonwealth 
Edison, an Exelon 
Company.)

	
Section 10.2 Instrument Transformers	
615
For system-protection purposes, VTs are generally considered to be sufficiently 
accurate. Therefore, the VT is usually modeled as an ideal transformer, where
V9 5 s1yndV
(10.2.1)
V9 is a scaled-down representation of V and is in phase with V. A standard VT 
secondary voltage rating is 115 V (line-to-line). Standard VT ratios are given in  
Table 10.1.
Ideally, the VT secondary is connected to a voltage-sensing device with in-
finite impedance, such that the entire VT secondary voltage is across the sensing 
device. In practice, the secondary voltage divides across the high-impedance sens-
ing device and the VT series leakage impedances. VT leakage impedances are kept  
low in order to minimize voltage drops and phase-angle differences from primary to 
secondary.
The primary winding of a current transformer usually consists of a single turn, 
obtained by running the power system’s primary conductor through the CT core. The 
normal current rating of CT secondaries is standardized at 5 A in the United States,  
FIGURE 10.4
Three 500-kV 
coupling capacitor 
voltage transformers  
with 303.1 kV: 
115/67 volt VT ratios, 
Westwing 500-kV 
Switching Substation 
(Courtesy of Arizona 
Public Service.)

616	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
whereas 1 A is standard in Europe and some other regions. Currents of 10 to 20 times 
(or greater) normal rating often occur in CT windings for a few cycles during short 
circuits. Standard CT ratios are given in Table 10.2.
Ideally, the CT secondary is connected to a current-sensing device with zero 
impedance, such that the entire CT secondary current flows through the sensing 
device. In practice, the secondary current divides, with most flowing through the 
low-impedance sensing device and some flowing through the CT shunt excitation 
impedance. CT excitation impedance is kept high in order to minimize excitation 
current.
An approximate equivalent circuit of a CT is shown in Figure 10.7, where
Z9 5 CT secondary leakage impedance
Xe 5 (Saturable) CT excitation reactance
ZB 5 Impedance of terminating device (relay, including leads)
The total impedance ZB of the terminating device is called the burden and is typically 
expressed in values of less than an ohm. The burden on a CT may also be expressed 
as volt-amperes at a specified current.
Associated with the CT equivalent circuit is an excitation curve that determines 
the relationship between the CT secondary voltage E9 and excitation current Ie. Exci-
tation curves for a multiratio bushing CT with ANSI classification C100 are shown in  
Figure 10.8.
FIGURE 10.5
Three 25 kV class 
current transformers-
window design 
(Courtesy of Arizona 
Public Service.)

	
Section 10.2 Instrument Transformers	
617
Current transformer performance is based on the ability to deliver a second-
ary output current I9 that accurately reproduces the primary current I. Performance 
is determined by the highest current that can be reproduced without saturation to 
cause large errors. Using the CT equivalent circuit and excitation curves, the follow-
ing procedure can be used to determine CT performance.
FIGURE 10.6
500-kV class current 
transformers with 
2000:5 CT ratios in 
front of 500-kV SF6 
circuit breakers. 
Westwing 500-kV 
Switching Substation 
(Courtesy of Arizona 
Public Service.)
Voltage Ratios
1:1
2:1
2.5:1
4:1
5:1
20:1
40:1
60:1
100:1
200:1
300:1
400:1
600:1
800:1
1000:1
2000:1
3000:1
4500:1
TABLE 10.1
Standard VT ratios
Current Ratios
50:5
100:5
150:5
200:5
250:5
300:5
400:5
450:5
500:5
600:5
800:5
900:5
1000:5
1200:5
1500:5
1600:5
2000:5
2400:5
2500:5
3000:5
3200:5
4000:5
5000:5
6000:5
TABLE 10.2
Standard CT ratios

618	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
STEP 1	 Assume a CT secondary output current I9.
STEP 2	 Compute E9 5 (Z9 1 ZB)I9.
STEP 3	 Using E9, find Ie from the excitation curve.
STEP 4	 Compute I 5 n(I91 Ie).
STEP 5	 Repeat Steps 1–4 for different values of I9, then plot I9 versus I.
For simplicity, approximate computations are made with magnitudes rather than 
with phasors. Also, the CT error is the percentage difference between (I9 1 Ie) and 
I9, given by:
CT
   error 5
Ie
I9 1 Ie
3 100%
(10.2.2)
The following examples illustrate the procedure.
FIGURE 10.7
CT equivalent circuit
FIGURE 10.8
Excitation curves for a bushing CT with a C100 ANSI accuracy classification [3] (Westinghouse Relay Manual, A New Silent 
Sentinels Publication (Newark, NJ: Westinghouse Electric Corporation, 1972).)

	
Section 10.2 Instrument Transformers	
619
Current transformer (CT) performance
Evaluate the performance of the multiratio CT in Figure 10.8 with a 100:5 CT 
ratio, for the following secondary output currents and burdens: (a) I9 5 5 A and 
ZB 5 0.5 V; (b) I9 5 8 A and ZB 5 0.8 V; and (c) I9 5 15 A and Zb 5 1.5 V. Also, 
compute the CT error for each output current.
SOLUTION
From Figure 10.8, the CT with a 100:5 CT ratio has a secondary resistance Z9 5 
0.082 V. Completing the above steps:
a.	 STEP 1	 I9 5 5 A
STEP 2	 From Figure 10.7,
	
E9 5 (Z9 1 ZB)I9 5 (0.082 1 0.5)(5) 5 2.91 V
STEP 3	 From Figure 10.8, Ie 5 0.25 A
STEP 4	 From Figure 10.7, I 5 (100/5)(5 1 0.25) 5 105 A
	
CT error 5  0.25
5.25 3 100 5 4.8%
b.	 STEP1	
I9 5 8 A
STEP 2	
From Figure 10.7,
	
E9 5 (Z9 1 ZB)I9 5 (0.082 1 0.8)(8) 5 7.06 V
STEP 3	
From Figure 10.8, Ie 5 0.4 A
STEP 4	
From Figure 10.7, I 5 (100/5)(8 1 0.4) 5 168 A
	
CT error 5 0.4
8.4 3 100 5 4.8%
c.	 STEP 1	
I9 5 15 A
STEP 2	
From Figure 10.7,
	
E9 5 (Z9 1 ZB)I9 5 (0.082 1 1.5)(15) 5 23.73 V
STEP 3 	 From Figure 10.8, Ie 5 20 A
STEP 4 	 From Figure 10.7, I 5 (100/5)(15 1 20) 5 700 A
	
CT error 5 20
35 3 100 5 57.1%
Note that for the 15-A secondary current in (c), high CT saturation causes a 
large CT error of 57.1%. Standard practice is to select a CT ratio to give a little less than  
5-A secondary output current at maximum normal load. From (a), the 100:5 CT  
ratio and 0.5 V burden are suitable for a maximum primary load current of about 
100 A. This example is extended in Problem 10.2 to obtain a plot of I9 versus I.
EXAMPLE 10.1

620	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
10.3  Overcurrent Relays
As shown in Figure 10.1, the CT secondary current I9 is the input to the overcurrent 
relay operating coil. Instantaneous overcurrent relays respond to the magnitude of 
their input current, as shown by the trip and block regions in Figure 10.9. If the cur-
rent magnitude I9 5 |I9| exceeds a specified adjustable current magnitude Ip, called the 
pickup current, then the relay contacts close “instantaneously” to energize the circuit 
breaker trip coil. If I9 is less than the pickup current Ip, then the relay contacts remain 
open, blocking the trip coil.
Time-delay overcurrent relays also respond to the magnitude of their input 
current, but with an intentional time delay. As shown in Figure 10.10, the time de-
lay depends on the magnitude of the relay input current. If I9 is a large multiple of 
the pickup current Ip, then the relay operates (or trips) after a small time delay. For 
smaller multiples of pickup, the relay trips after a longer time delay. And if I9 , Ip, 
the relay remains in the blocking position.
Figure 10.11 shows two examples of a time-delay overcurrent relay: (a) Westing-
house electromechanical CO relay; and (b) Basler Electric digital relay. Characteristic 
Relay operation versus fault current and CT burden
An overcurrent relay set to operate at 8 A is connected to the multiratio CT in 
Figure 10.8 with a 100:5 CT ratio. Will the relay detect a 200-A primary fault 
current if the burden ZB is (a) 0.8 V, (b) 3.0 V?
SOLUTION
Note that if an ideal CT is assumed, (100/5) 3 8 5 160-A primary current would 
cause the relay to operate.
a.  From Example 10.1(b), a 168-A primary current with ZB 5 0.8 V produces a 
secondary output current of 8 A, which would cause the relay to operate. There-
fore, the higher 200-A fault current also causes the relay to operate.
b.  STEP 1	 I9 5 8 A
STEP 2	 From Figure 10.7,
	
E9 5 (Z9 1 ZB)I9 5 (0.082 1 3.0)(8) 5 24.7 V
STEP 3	 From Figure 10.8, Ie 5 30 A
STEP 4	 From Figure 10.7, I 5 (100/5)(8 1 30) 5 760 A
With a 3.0- V burden, 760 A is the lowest primary current that causes the relay to 
operate. Therefore, the relay will not operate for the 200-A fault current.
EXAMPLE 10.2

	
Section 10.3 Overcurrent Relays	
621
curves of the Westinghouse CO-8 relay are shown in Figure 10.12. These relays have 
two settings:
Current tap setting: The pickup current in amperes.
Time-dial setting: The adjustable amount of time delay.
FIGURE 10.9
Instantaneous 
overcurrent relay 
block and trip regions
FIGURE 10.10
Time-delay 
overcurrent relay 
block and trip regions

622	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
FIGURE 10.11
Time-delay 
overcurrent relays: 
(a) Westinghouse 
Electromechanical 
(Courtesy of  
ABB-Westinghouse.)
(b) Basler Electric 
Digital (Courtesy 
Danvers Electric.) 
FIGURE 10.12
CO-8 time-delay 
overcurrent relay 
characteristics  
(Courtesy of  
Westinghouse  
Electric Corporation.) 

	
Section 10.3 Overcurrent Relays	
623
The characteristic curves are usually shown with operating time in seconds 
versus relay input current as a multiple of the pickup current. The curves are asymp-
totic to the vertical axis and decrease with some inverse power of current magni-
tude for values exceeding the pickup current. This inverse time characteristic can 
be shifted up or down by adjustment of the time-dial setting. Although discrete 
time-dial settings are shown in Figure 10.12, intermediate values can be obtained by 
interpolating between the discrete curves.
Figure 10.13 shows the time-current characteristics of five CO time-delay over-
current relays used in transmission and distribution lines. The time-dial settings are 
Operating time for a CO-8 time-delay overcurrent relay
The CO-8 relay with a current tap setting of 6 amperes and a time-dial setting of 
1 is used with the 100:5 CT in Example 10.1. Determine the relay operating time 
for each case.
SOLUTION
a.  From Example 10.1(a)
I9 5 5 A      I9
Ip
5 5
6 5 0.83
The relay does not operate. It remains in the blocking position.
EXAMPLE 10.3
FIGURE 10.13
Comparison of CO 
relay characteristics 
(Courtesy of 
Westinghouse 
Electric Corporation.)
(Continued)

624	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
selected in the figure so that all relays operate in 0.2 seconds at 20 times the pickup 
current. The choice of relay time-current characteristic depends on the sources, lines, 
and loads. The definite (CO-6) and moderately inverse (CO-7) relays maintain a rel-
atively constant operating time above 10 times pickup. The inverse (CO-8), very in-
verse (CO-9), and extremely inverse (CO-11) relays operate respectively faster on 
higher fault currents.
Figure 10.14 illustrates the operating principle of an electromechanical 
time-delay overcurrent relay. The ac input current to the relay operating coil sets 
up a magnetic field that is perpendicular to a conducting aluminum disc. The disc 
can rotate and is restrained by a spiral spring. Current is induced in the disc, inter-
acts with the magnetic field, and produces a torque. If the input current exceeds the 
pickup current, the disc rotates through an angle u to close the relay contacts. The 
larger the input current, the larger is the torque and the faster the contact closing. 
After the current is removed or reduced below the pickup, the spring provides reset 
of the contacts.
A solid state relay panel between older-style electromechanical relays is shown 
in Figure 10.15.
b.  I9 5 8 A      I9
Ip
5 8
6 5 1.33
Using curve 1 in Figure 10.12, toperating 5 6 seconds.
c.  I9 5 15 A      I9
Ip
5 15
6 5 2.5
From curve 1, toperating 51.2 seconds. 
FIGURE 10.14
Electromechanical 
time-delay 
overcurrent relay—
induction disc type

	
Section 10.4 Radial System Protection	
625
10.4  Radial System Protection
Many radial systems are protected by time-delay overcurrent relays. Adjustable time 
delays can be selected such that the breaker closest to the fault opens, while other 
upstream breakers with larger time delays remain closed. That is, the relays can be 
coordinated to operate in sequence so as to interrupt minimum load during faults. 
Successful relay coordination is obtained when fault currents are much larger than 
normal load currents. Also, coordination of overcurrent relays usually limits the 
maximum number of breakers in a radial system to five or less; otherwise the relay 
closest to the source may have an excessive time delay.
Consider a fault at P1 to the right of breaker B3 for the radial system of  
Figure 10.16. For this fault breaker B3 should open while B2 (and B1) remains closed. 
Under these conditions, only load L3 is interrupted. Select a longer time delay for 
the relay at B2, so that B3 operates first. Thus, for any fault to the right of B3, B3 
provides primary protection. Only if B3 fails to open will B2 open, after a time delay, 
thus providing backup protection.
Similarly, consider a fault at P2 between B2 and B3. B2 should open while B1 
remains closed. Under these conditions, loads L2 and L3 are interrupted. Since the 
fault is closer to the source, the fault current is larger than for the previous fault 
considered. B2, set to open for the previous, smaller fault current after a time delay, 
will open more rapidly for this fault. Also selected is the B1 relay with a longer time 
delay than B2, so that B2 opens first. Thus, B2 provides primary protection for faults 
FIGURE 10.15
Solid-state relay 
panel (center) for a 
345-kV transmission 
line, with 
electromechanical 
relays on each 
side, at Electric 
Junction Substation, 
Naperville, Illinois 
(Courtesy of 
Commonwealth 
Edison, an Exelon 
Company.)

626	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
between B2 and B3, as well as backup protection for faults to the right of B3. Simi-
larly, B1 provides primary protection for faults between B1 and B2, as well as backup 
protection for further downstream faults.
The coordination time interval is the time interval between the primary and re-
mote backup protective devices. It is the difference between the time that the backup 
relaying operates and the time that circuit breakers clear the fault under primary re-
laying. Precise determination of relay operating times is complicated by several fac-
tors, including CT error, dc offset component of fault current, and relay overtravel. 
Therefore, typical coordination time intervals from 0.2 to 0.5 seconds are selected to 
account for these factors in most practical applications.
FIGURE 10.16
Single-line diagram 
of a 34.5-kV radial 
system
Coordinating time-delay overcurrent relays in a radial system
Data for the 60-Hz radial system of Figure 10.16 are given in Tables 10.3, 10.4, 
and 10.5. Select current tap settings (TSs) and time-dial settings (TDSs)
S
Bus
MVA
Lagging p.f.
1
11.0
0.95
2
  4.0
0.95
3
  6.0
0.95
TABLE 10.3
Maximum loads—Example 10.4
EXAMPLE 10.4
Bus
Maximum Fault Current  
(Bolted Three-Phase) A
Minimum Fault Current  
(L–G or L–L) A
1
3000
2200
2
2000
1500
3
1000
  700
TABLE 10.4
Symmetrical fault currents—Example 10.4

	
Section 10.4 Radial System Protection	
627
to protect the system from faults. Assume three CO-8 relays for each breaker, one 
for each phase, with a 0.3-second coordination time interval. The relays for each 
breaker are connected as shown in Figure 10.17, so that all three phases of the 
breaker open when a fault is detected on any one phase. Assume a 34.5-kV (line-
to-line) voltage at all buses during normal operation. Also, future load growth is 
included in Table 10.3, such that maximum loads over the operating life of the 
radial system are given in this table.
SOLUTION
First, select TSs such that the relays do not operate for maximum load currents. 
Starting at B3, the primary and secondary CT currents for maximum load L3 are
Breaker
Breaker Operating Time
CT Ratio
Relay
B1
5 cycles
400:5
CO-8
B2
5 cycles
200:5
CO-8
B3
5 cycles
200:5
CO-8
TABLE 10.5
Breaker, CT, and relay data—Example 10.4
FIGURE 10.17
Relay connections 
to trip all three 
phases
(Continued)

628	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
IL3 5
SL3
V3Ï3 5
6 3 106
s34.5 3 103dÏ3 5 100.4 A
I9L3 5 100.4
s200/5d 5 2.51A
From Figure 10.12, relay a 3-A TS is selected for the B3, which is the lowest TS 
above 2.51 A.
Note that |SL2 1 SL3| 5 |SL2| 1 |SL3| because the load power factors are iden-
tical. Thus, at B2, the primary and secondary CT currents for maximum load are
IL2 5 SL2 1 SL3
V2Ï3
5 s4 1 6d 3 106
s34.5 3 103dÏ3 5 167.3 A
I9L2 5 167.3
s200/5d 5 4.18 A
From Figure 10.12, select for the B2 relay a 5-A TS, the lowest TS above 
4.18 A. At B1,
IL1 5 SL1 1 SL2 1 SL3
V1Ï3
5 s11 1 4 1 6d 3 106
s34.5 3 103dÏ3
5 351.4 A
I9L1 5 351.4
s400/5d 5 4.39 A
Select a 5-A TS for the B1 relay.
Next select the TDSs. First, coordinate for the maximum fault currents in 
Table 10.4, checking coordination for minimum fault currents later. Starting at 
B3, the largest fault current through B3 is 2000 A, which occurs for the three-
phase fault at bus 2 (just to the right of B3). Neglecting CT saturation, the fault-
to-pickup current ratio at B3 for this fault is
I93Fault
TS3 5 2000ys200y5d
3
5 16.7
To clear faults as rapidly as possible, select a 1/2 TDS for the B3 relay. Then, from 
the 1/2 TDS curve in Figure 10.12, the relay operating time is T3 5 0.05 seconds. 
Adding the breaker operating time (5 cycles 5 0.083 s), primary protection clears 
this fault in T3 1 Tbreaker 5 0.05 1 0.083 5 0.133 seconds.
For this same fault, the fault-to-pickup current ratio at B2 is
I92Fault
TS2 5 2000ys200y5d
5
5 10.0
Adding the B3 relay operating time (T3 5 0.05 s), breaker operating  
time (0.083 s), and 0.3 s coordination time interval, a B2 relay operating time is 
desirable:
T2 5 T3 1 Tbreaker 1 Tcoordination 5 0.05 1 0.083 1 0.3 ø 0.43 s

	
Section 10.5 Reclosers and Fuses	
629
Note that separate relays are used for each phase in Example 10.4, and therefore 
these relays will operate for three-phase as well as line-to-line, single line-to-ground, 
and double line-to-ground faults. However, in many cases single line-to-ground fault 
currents are much lower than three-phase fault currents, especially for distribution 
feeders with high zero-sequence impedances. In these cases a separate ground relay 
with a lower current tap setting than the phase relays is used. The ground relay is con-
nected to operate on zero-sequence current from three of the phase CTs connected in 
parallel or from a CT in the grounded neutral.
10.5  Reclosers and Fuses
Automatic circuit reclosers are commonly used for distribution circuit protection. 
A recloser is a self-controlled device for automatically interrupting and reclosing an 
ac circuit with a preset sequence of openings and reclosures. Unlike circuit break-
ers, which have separate relays to control breaker opening and reclosing, reclosers 
have built-in controls. More than 80% of faults on overhead distribution circuits are  
From Figure 10.12, select TDS2 5 2.
Next select the TDS at Bl. The largest fault current through B2 is 3000 A, 
for a three-phase fault at bus 1 (just to the right of B2). The fault-to-pickup cur-
rent ratio at B2 for this fault is
I92Fault
TS2 5 3000ys200y5d
5
5 15.0
From the 2 TDS curve in Figure 10.12, T2 5 0.38 s. For this same fault,
I91Fault
TS1 5 3000ys400y5d
5
5 7.5
T1 5 T2 1 Tbreaker 1 Tcoordination 5 0.38 1 0.083 1 0.3 ø 0.76 s
From Figure 10.12, select TDS1 5 3. The relay settings are shown in Table 10.6. 
Note that for reliable relay operation the fault-to-pickup current ratios with min-
imum fault currents should be greater than 2. Coordination for minimum fault 
currents listed in Table 10.4 is evaluated in Problem 10.11.
Breaker
Relay
TS
TDS
B1
CO-8
5
3
B2
CO-8
5
2
B3
CO-8
3
1/2
TABLE 10.6
Solution—Example 10.4

630	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
temporary, caused by tree limb contact, by animal interference, by wind bring-
ing bare conductors in contact, or by lightning. The automatic tripping-reclosing  
sequence of reclosers clears these temporary faults and restores service with only 
momentary outages, thereby significantly improving customer service. A disadvan-
tage of reclosers is the increased hazard when a circuit is physically contacted by  
people—for example, in the case of a broken conductor at ground level that remains 
energized. Also, reclosing should be locked out during live-line maintenance by  
utility personnel.
Figure 10.18 shows a common protection scheme for radial distribution 
circuits utilizing fuses, reclosers, and time-delay overcurrent relays. Data for the 
13.8-kV feeder in this figure is given in Table 10.7. There are three load taps 
protected by fuses. The recloser ahead of the fuses is set to open and reclose for 
faults up to and beyond the fuses. For temporary faults the recloser can be set 
for one or more instantaneous or time-delayed trips and reclosures in order to 
clear the faults and restore service. If faults persist, the fuses operate for faults 
to their right (downstream), or the recloser opens after a time delay and locks 
out for faults between the recloser and fuses. Separate time-delay overcurrent 
phase and ground relays open the substation breaker after multiple reclosures of  
the recloser.
Coordination of the fuses, recloser, and time-delay overcurrent relays is shown 
via the time-current curves in Figure 10.19. Type T (slow) fuses are selected because 
their time-current characteristics coordinate well with reclosers. The fuses are se-
lected on the basis of maximum loads served from the taps. A 65 T fuse is selected 
for the bus 1 tap, which has a 60-A maximum load current, and 100 T is selected for 
the bus 2 and 3 taps, which have 95-A maximum load currents. The fuses should also 
have a rated voltage larger than the maximum bus voltage and an interrupting cur-
rent rating larger than the maximum asymmetrical fault current at the fuse location. 
Type T fuses with voltage ratings of 15 kV and interrupting current ratings of 10 kA 
and higher are standard.
FIGURE 10.18
Single-line diagram 
of a 13.8-kV radial 
distribution feeder 
with fuse/recloser/
relay protection

	
Section 10.5 Reclosers and Fuses	
631
Maximum Load
3 f Fault
IL-G Fault
Bus
Current A
Current A
Current A
1
  60
1000
  850
2
  95
1500
1300
3
  95
2000
1700
4
250
3000
2600
5
250
4000
4050
TABLE 10.7
Data for Figure 10.18
FIGURE 10.19
Time-current curves 
for the radial 
distribution circuit  
of Figure 10.18

632	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
Standard reclosers have minimum trip ratings of 50, 70, 100, 140, 200, 280, 
400, 560, 800, 1120, and 1600 A, with voltage ratings up to 38 kV and maximum 
interrupting currents up to 16 kA. A minimum trip rating of 200–250% of maximum 
load current is typically selected for the phases, in order to override cold load pickup 
with a safety factor. The minimum trip rating of the ground unit is typically set at 
maximum load and should be higher than the maximum allowable load unbalance. 
For the recloser in Figure 10.18 that carries a 250-A maximum load, minimum trip 
ratings of 560 A for each phase and 280 A for the ground unit are selected.
A popular operation sequence for reclosers is two fast operations: without in-
tentional time delay, followed by two delayed operations. The fast operations allow 
temporary faults to self-clear, whereas the delayed operations allow downstream 
fuses to clear permanent faults. Note that the time-current curves of the fast recloser 
lie below the fuse curves in Figure 10.19, such that the recloser opens before the fuses 
melt. The fuse curves lie below the delayed recloser curves, such that the fuses clear 
before the recloser opens. The recloser is typically programmed to reclose 1
2 s after the 
first fast trip, 2 s after the second fast trip, and 5–10 s after a delayed trip.
Time-delay overcurrent relays with an extremely inverse characteristic coor-
dinate with both reclosers and type T fuses. A 300:5 CT ratio is selected to give a 
secondary current of 250 3 (5/300) 5 4.17 A at maximum load. Relay settings are 
selected to allow the recloser to operate effectively to clear faults before relay opera-
tion. A current tap setting of 9 A is selected for the CO-11 phase relays so that mini-
mum pickup exceeds twice the maximum load. A time-dial setting of 2 is selected so 
that the delayed recloser trips at least 0.2 s before the relay. The ground relay is set 
with a current tap setting of 4 A and a time-dial setting of 1.
Fuse/recloser coordination
For the system of Figure 10.18, describe the operating sequence of the protective 
devices for the following faults: (a) a self-clearing, temporary, three-phase fault 
on the load side of tap 2; and (b) a permanent three-phase fault on the load side 
of tap 2.
SOLUTION
a.  From Table 10.7, the three-phase fault current at bus 2 is 1500 A. From Fig­
ure 10.19, the 560-A fast recloser opens 0.05 s after the 1500-A fault current  
occurs, and then recloses 1
2 s later. Assuming the fault has self-cleared, normal 
service is restored. During the 0.05-s fault duration, the 100 T fuse does not melt.
b.  For a permanent fault the fast recloser opens after 0.05 s, recloses 1
2 s later 
into the permanent fault, opens again after 1
2 s, and recloses into the fault a second 
time after a 2-s delay. Then the 560-A delayed recloser opens 3 seconds later. Dur-
ing this interval the 100 T fuse clears the fault. The delayed recloser then recloses 
5 to 10 s later, restoring service to loads 1 and 3.
EXAMPLE 10.5

	
Section 10.6 Directional Relays	
633
10.6  Directional Relays
Directional relays are designed to operate for fault currents in only one direction. 
Consider the directional relay D in Figure 10.20, which is required to operate only 
for faults to the right of the CT. Since the line impedance is mostly reactive, a fault 
at P1 to the right of the CT will have a fault current I from bus 1 to bus 2 that lags 
the bus voltage V by an angle of almost 908. This fault current is said to be in the 
forward direction. On the other hand, a fault at P2, to the left of the CT, will have a 
fault current I that leads V by almost 908. This fault current is said to be in the reverse 
direction.
The directional relay has two inputs: the reference voltage V 5 V/08, and  
current I 5 I/f. The relay trip and block regions, shown in Figure 10.21, can be 
described by
21808 , sf 2 f1d , 08 sTripd
	
Otherwise	
(Block)
(10.6.1)
where f is the angle of the current with respect to the voltage and f1, typically 28 to 
88, defines the boundary between the trip and block regions.
The contacts of the overcurrent relay OC and the directional relay D are con-
nected in series in Figure 10.20, so that the breaker trip coil is energized only when 
the CT secondary current (1) exceeds the OC relay pickup value, and (2) is in the 
forward tripping direction.
FIGURE 10.20
Directional relay 
in series with 
overcurrent relay 
(only phase A is 
shown)

634	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
Although construction details differ, the operating principle of an electro­
mechanical directional relay is similar to that of a watt-hour meter. There are two 
input coils, a voltage coil and a current coil, both located on a stator, and there is a 
rotating disc element. Suppose that the reference voltage is passed through a phase-
shifting element to obtain V1 5 V/f1 2 908. If V1 and I 5 I/f are applied to a watt-
hour meter, the torque on the rotating element is
T 5 kVI cossf1 2 f 2 908d 5 kVI sinsf1 2 fd
(10.6.2)
Note that for faults in the forward direction, the current lags the voltage, and the 
angle (f1 2 f) in (10.6.2) is close to 908. This results in maximum positive torque 
on the rotating disc, which would cause the relay contacts to close. On the other 
hand, for faults in the reverse direction the current leads the voltage, and (f1 2 f) 
is close to 2908. This results in maximum negative torque tending to rotate the 
disc element in the backward direction. Backward motion can be restrained by 
mechanical stops.
10.7  Protection of a Two-Source System 
with Directional Relays
It becomes difficult and in some cases impossible to coordinate overcurrent relays 
when there are two or more sources at different locations. Consider the system with 
two sources shown in Figure 10.22. Suppose there is a fault at P1. B23 and B32 should 
clear the fault so that service to the three loads continues without interruption. Using 
time-delay overcurrent relays, set B23 faster than B21. Now consider a fault at P2 
instead. Breaker B23 will open faster than B21, and load L2 is disconnected. When 
a fault can be fed from both the left and right, overcurrent relays cannot be coordi-
nated. However, directional relays can be used to overcome this problem.
FIGURE 10.21
Directional relay 
block and trip regions 
in the complex plane

	
Section 10.8 Zones of Protection	
635
10.8  Zones of Protection
Protection of simple systems has been discussed so far. For more general power sys-
tem configurations, a fundamental concept is the division of a system into protective 
zones [1]. If a fault occurs anywhere within a zone, action is taken to isolate that zone 
from the rest of the system. Zones are defined for:
generators,
transformers,
FIGURE 10.22
System with two 
sources
Two-source system protection with directional  
and time-delay overcurrent relays
Explain how directional and time-delay overcurrent relays can be used to protect 
the system in Figure 10.22. Which relays should be coordinated for a fault (a) at 
P1, (b) at P2? (c) Is the system also protected against bus faults?
SOLUTION
Breakers B12, B21, B23, and B32 should respond only to faults on their “for-
ward” or “line” sides. Directional overcurrent relays connected as shown in  
Figure 10.20 can be used for these breakers. Overcurrent relays alone can be used 
for breakers B1 and B3, which do not need to be directional.
a.  For a fault at P1, the B21 relay would not operate; B12 should coordinate 
with B23 so that B23 trips before B12 (and B1). Also, B3 should coordinate 
with B32.
b.  For a fault at P2, B23 would not operate; B32 should coordinate with B21 so 
that B21 trips before B32 (and B3). Also, B1 should coordinate with B12.
c.  Yes, the directional overcurrent relays also protect the system against bus 
faults. If the fault is at bus 2, relays at B21 and B23 will not operate, but B12 and 
B32 will operate to clear the fault. B1 and B21 will operate to clear a fault at bus 1.  
B3 and B23 will clear a fault at bus 3.
EXAMPLE 10.6

636	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
buses,
transmission and distribution lines, and
motors.
Figure 10.23 illustrates the protective zone concept. Each zone is defined by a 
closed, dashed line. Zone 1, for example, contains a generator and connecting leads 
to a transformer. In some cases a zone may contain more than one component. For 
example, zone 3 contains a generator-transformer unit and connecting leads to a bus, 
and zone 10 contains a transformer and a line. Protective zones have the following 
characteristics:
Zones are overlapped.
Circuit breakers are located in the overlap regions.
For a fault anywhere in a zone, all circuit breakers in that zone open to isolate 
the fault.
Neighboring zones are overlapped to avoid the possibility of unprotected  
areas. Without overlap the small area between two neighboring zones would not be 
located in any zone and thus would not be protected.
Since isolation during faults is done by circuit breakers, they should be in-
serted between equipment in a zone and each connection to the system. That is, 
breakers should be inserted in each overlap region. As such, they identify the 
boundaries of protective zones. For example, zone 5 in Figure 10.23 is connected to 
FIGURE 10.23
Power system protective zones

	
Section 10.8 Zones of Protection	
637
zones 4 and 7. Therefore, a circuit breaker is located in the overlap region between 
zones 5 and 4, as well as between zones 5 and 7.
If a fault occurs anywhere within a zone, action is taken to open all breakers 
in that zone. For example, if a fault occurs at P1 on the line in zone 5, then the two 
breakers in zone 5 should open. If a fault occurs at P2 within the overlap region of 
zones 4 and 5, then all five breakers in zones 4 and 5 should open. Clearly, if a fault 
occurs within an overlap region, two zones are isolated and a larger part of the sys-
tem is lost from service. To minimize this possibility, overlap regions are kept as small  
as possible.
Overlap is accomplished by having two sets of instrument transformers and 
relays for each circuit breaker. For example, the breaker in Figure 10.24 shows two 
CTs, one for zone 1 and one for zone 2. Overlap is achieved by the order of the ar-
rangement: first the equipment in the zone, second the breaker, and then the CT for 
that zone.
FIGURE 10.24
Overlapping 
protection around a 
circuit breaker
Zones of protection
Draw the protective zones for the power system shown in Figure 10.25. Which 
circuit breakers should open for a fault at P1? at P2?
SOLUTION
Noting that circuit breakers identify zone boundaries, protective zones 
are drawn with dashed lines as shown in Figure 10.26. For a fault at P1, 
located in zone 5, breakers B24 and B42 should open. For a fault at P2, 
located in the overlap region of zones 4 and 5, breakers B24, B42, B21, and 
B23 should open.
EXAMPLE 10.7
(Continued)

638	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
FIGURE 10.25
Power system for 
Example 10.7
FIGURE 10.26
Protective zones for Example 10.7

	
Section 10.9 Line Protection with Impedance (Distance) Relays	
639
10.9  Line Protection with Impedance 
(Distance) Relays
Coordinating time-delay overcurrent relays can also be difficult for some radial sys-
tems. If there are too many radial lines and buses, the time delay for the breaker 
closest to the source becomes excessive.
Also, directional overcurrent relays are difficult to coordinate in transmission 
loops with multiple sources. Consider the use of these relays for the transmission loop 
shown in Figure 10.27. For a fault at P1, set the B21 relay to operate faster than the 
B32 relay. For a fault at P2, B32 should be faster than B13. And for a fault at P3, set 
B13 faster than B21. Proper coordination, which depends on the magnitudes of the 
fault currents, becomes a tedious process. Furthermore, when consideration is given 
to various lines or sources out of service, coordination becomes extremely difficult.
To overcome these problems, relays that respond to a voltage-to-current 
ratio can be used. Note that during a three-phase fault, current increases while bus 
voltages close to the fault decrease. If, for example, current increases by a factor of  
5 while voltage decreases by a factor of 2, then the voltage-to-current ratio decreases 
by a factor of 10. That is, the voltage-to-current ratio is more sensitive to faults than 
current alone. A relay that operates on the basis of voltage-to-current ratio is called 
an impedance relay. It is also called a distance relay or a ratio relay.
FIGURE 10.27
345-kV transmission 
loop

640	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
Impedance relay block and trip regions are shown in Figure 10.28, where the 
impedance Z is defined as the voltage-to-current ratio at the relay location. The relay 
trips for |Z| , |Zr|, where Zr is an adjustable relay setting. The impedance circle that 
defines the border between the block and trip regions passes through Zr.
A straight line called the line impedance locus is shown for the impedance relay 
in Figure 10.28. This locus is a plot of positive sequence line impedances, predom-
inantly reactive, as viewed between the relay location and various points along the 
line. The relay setting Zr is a point in the R-X plane through which the impedance 
circle that defines the trip-block boundary must pass.
Consider an impedance relay for breaker B12 in Figure 10.27, for which  
Z 5 V1/I12. During normal operation, load currents are usually much smaller than 
fault currents, and the ratio Z has a large magnitude (and some arbitrary phase an-
gle). Therefore, Z will lie outside the circle of Figure 10.28, and the relay will not trip 
during normal operation.
During a three-phase fault at P1, however, Z appears to relay B12 to be the line 
impedance from the B12 relay to the fault. If |Zr| in Figure 10.28 is set to be larger 
than the magnitude of this impedance, then the B12 relay will trip. Also, during a 
three-phase fault at P3, Z appears to relay B12 to be the negative of the line imped-
ance from the relay to the fault. If |Zr| is larger than the magnitude of this impedance, 
the B12 relay will trip. Thus, the impedance relay of Figure 10.28 is not directional; 
a fault to the left or right of the relay can cause a trip.
Two ways to include directional capability with an impedance relay are shown 
in Figure 10.29. In Figure 10.29(a), an impedance relay with directional restraint is 
obtained by including a directional relay in series with an impedance relay, just as 
was done previously with an overcurrent relay. In Figure 10.29(b), a modified imped-
ance relay is obtained by offsetting the center of the impedance circle from the origin. 
FIGURE 10.28
Impedance relay 
block and trip regions

	
Section 10.9 Line Protection with Impedance (Distance) Relays	
641
This modified impedance relay is sometimes called an mho relay. If either of these 
relays is used at B12 in Figure 10.27, a fault at P1 will result in a trip decision, but a 
fault at P3 will result in a block decision.
Note that the radius of the impedance circle for the modified impedance relay 
is half of the corresponding radius for the impedance relay with directional restraint. 
The modified impedance relay has the advantage of better selectivity for high power 
factor loads. For example, the high power factor load ZL lies outside the trip region 
of Figure 10.29(b) but inside the trip region of Figure 10.29(a).
The reach of an impedance relay denotes how far down the line the relay  
detects faults. For example, an 80% reach means that the relay will detect any (solid 
three-phase) fault between the relay and 80% of the line length. This explains the 
term distance relay.
It is common practice to use three directional impedance relays per phase, with 
increasing reaches and longer time delays. For example, Figure 10.27 shows three 
protection zones for B12. The zone 1 relay is typically set for an 80% reach and 
instantaneous operation, in order to provide primary protection for line 1–2. The 
zone 2 relay is set for about 120% reach, extending beyond bus 2, with a typical time 
delay of 0.2 to 0.3 seconds. The zone 2 relay provides backup protection for faults on  
line 1–2 as well as remote backup for faults on line 2–3 or 2–4 in zone 2.
Note that in the case of a fault on line 2–3 it is desirable to set the B23 relay 
to trip, not the B12 relay. Since the impedance seen by B12 for faults near bus 2, 
either on line 1–2 or line 2–3, is essentially the same, do not set the B12 zone 1 re-
lay for 100% reach. Instead, select an 80% reach to avoid instantaneous operation 
FIGURE 10.29
Impedance relays with directional capability

642	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
of B12 for a fault on line 2–3 near bus 2. For example, if there is a fault at P2 on 
line 2–3, B23 should trip instantaneously; if it fails, B12 will trip after a time delay. 
Other faults at or near bus 2 also cause tripping of the B12 zone 2 relay after a 
time delay.
Reach for the zone 3 B12 relay is typically set to extend beyond buses 3 and 4 in 
Figure 10.27, in order to provide remote backup for neighboring lines. As such, the 
zone 3 reach is set for 100% of line 1–2 plus 120% of either line 2–3 or 2–4, whichever 
is longer, with an even larger time delay, typically one second.
Typical block and trip regions are shown in Figure 10.30 for both types of 
three-zone, directional impedance relays. Relay connections for a three-zone imped-
ance relay with directional restraint are shown in Figure 10.31.
FIGURE 10.30
Three-zone, 
directional  
impedance relay

	
Section 10.9 Line Protection with Impedance (Distance) Relays	
643
FIGURE 10.31
Relay connections 
for a three-zone 
directional impedance 
relay (only phase A  
is shown) 
Three-zone impedance relay settings
Table 10.8 gives positive-sequence line impedances as well as CT and VT ratios 
at B12 for the 345-kV system shown in Figure 10.27. (a) Determine the settings 
Zrl, Zr2, and Zr3 for the B12 three-zone, directional impedance relays connected as 
shown in Figure 10.31. Consider only solid, three-phase faults.
(b) Maximum current for line 1–2 during emergency loading conditions is 1500 A  
at a power factor of 0.95 lagging. Verify that B12 does not trip during normal and 
emergency loadings.
EXAMPLE 10.8
(Continued)

644	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
SOLUTION
a.  Denoting VLN as the line-to-neutral voltage at bus 1 and IL as the line current 
through B12, the primary impedance Z viewed at B12 is
Z 5 VLN
IL
 V
Using the CT and VT ratios given in Table 10.8, the secondary impedance viewed 
by the B12 impedance relays is
Z9 5
VLN    1
3000
1 2
I
L    1
1500
5 2
5 Z
10
Setting the B12 zone 1 relay for 80% reach, that is, 80% of the line 1–2 (secondary) 
impedance:
Zr1 5 0.80(8 1 j50)/10 5 0.64 1j4 5 4.05/80.98 V secondary
Setting the B12 zone 2 relay for 120% reach:
Zr2 5 1.2(8 1j50)/10 5 0.96 1j6 5 6.08/80.98 V secondary
From Table 10.8, line 2–4 has a larger impedance than line 2–3. Therefore, set the 
B12 zone 3 relay for 100% reach of line 1–2 plus 120% reach of line 2–4.
Zr3 5 1.0(8 1j50)/10 1 1.2(5.3 1j33)/10
	
 5 1.44 1 j8.96 5 9.07/80.98 V secondary
b.  The secondary impedance viewed by B12 during emergency loading, using  
VLN 5 345yÏ3/08 5 199.2/08 kV and IL 5 1500/2cos21s0.95d 5 1500/218.198 
A, is
Line
Positive-Sequence Impedance V
1–2
  8 1J50
2–3
  8 1J50
2–4
5.31J33
1–3
4.31J27
Breaker
CT Ratio
VT Ratio
B12
1500:5
3000:1
TABLE 10.8
Data for Example 10.8

	
Section 10.10 Differential Relays	
645
Remote backup protection of adjacent lines using zone 3 of an impedance 
relay may be ineffective. In practice, buses have multiple lines of different lengths 
with sources at their remote ends. Contributions to fault currents from the multiple 
lines may cause the zone 3 relay to underreach. This “infeed effect” is illustrated in 
Problem 10.21.
The impedance relays considered so far use line-to-neutral voltages and line 
currents and are called ground fault relays. They respond to three-phase, single 
line-to-ground, and double line-to-ground faults very effectively. The impedance 
seen by the relay during unbalanced faults will generally not be the same as seen 
during three-phase faults and will not be truly proportional to the distance to 
the fault location. However, the relay can be accurately set for any fault location  
after computing impedance to the fault using fault currents and voltages. For other 
fault locations farther away (or closer), the impedance to the fault will increase (or 
decrease).
Ground fault relays are relatively insensitive to line-to-line faults. Impedance 
relays that use line-to-line voltages Vab, Vbc, Vca and line-current differences Ia 2 Ib, 
Ib 2 Ic, Ic 2 Ia are called phase relays. Phase relays respond effectively to line-to-line 
faults and double line-to-ground faults but are relatively insensitive to single line-to-
ground faults. Therefore, both phase and ground fault relays need to be used.
10.10  Differential Relays
Differential relays are commonly used to protect generators, buses, and transform-
ers. Figure 10.32 illustrates the basic method of differential relaying for generator 
protection. The protection of only one phase is shown. The method is repeated for 
the other two phases. When the relay in any one phase operates, all three phases of 
the main circuit breaker will open, as well as the generator neutral and field breakers 
(not shown).
For the case of no internal fault within the generator windings, I1 5 I2, and, 
assuming identical CTs, I19 5 I29. For this case the current in the relay operating coil 
is zero, and the relay does not operate. On the other hand, for an internal fault such 
as a phase-to-ground or phase-to-phase short within the generator winding, I1 Þ I2, 
Z9 5 Zy10 51
199.2 3 103
1500/218.1982    10 5 13.28/18.198 V secondary
Since this impedance exceeds the zone 3 setting of 9.07/80.98 V, the impedance 
during emergency loading lies outside the trip regions of the three-zone, direc-
tional impedance relay. Also, lower line loadings during normal operation will 
result in even larger impedances farther away from the trip regions. B12 will trip 
during faults but not during normal and emergency loadings.

646	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
and I19 Þ I29. Therefore, a difference current I19 2 I29 flows in the relay operating coil, 
which may cause the relay to operate. Since this relay operation depends on a differ-
ence current, it is called a differential relay.
An electromechanical differential relay called a balance beam relay is shown in  
Figure 10.33. The relay contacts close if the downward force on the right side exceeds 
the downward force on the left side. The electromagnetic force on the right, operating 
coil is proportional to the square of the operating coil mmf—that is, to [N0(I19 2 I29)]2. 
Similarly, the electromagnetic force on the left, restraining coil is proportional to 
[Nr(I19 1 I29)/2]2. The condition for relay operation is then
fN0sI91 2 I92dg2 . fNrsI91 1 I92dy2g2
(10.10.1)
Taking the square root:
uI91 2 I92u . kusI91 1 I92dy2u
(10.10.2) 
FIGURE 10.32
Differential relaying 
for generator  
protection (protection 
for one phase shown)
FIGURE 10.33
Balance beam 
differential relay

	
Section 10.11 Bus Protection with Differential Relays	
647
where
k 5 Nr/N0
(10.10.3)
Assuming I91 and I92 are in phase, (10.10.2) is solved to obtain
I92 . 2 1 k
2 2 k I91   for I92 . I91
I92 , 2 2 k
2 1 kI91   for I92 , I91

(10.10.4)
Equation (10.10.4) is plotted in Figure 10.34 to obtain the block and trip re-
gions of the differential relay for k 5 0.1. Note that as k increases, the block region 
becomes larger; that is, the relay becomes less sensitive. In practice, no two CTs are 
identical, and the differential relay current I91 2 I92 can become appreciable during  
external faults, even though I1 5 I2. The balanced beam relay solves this problem 
without sacrificing sensitivity during normal currents, since the block region in-
creases as the currents increase, as shown in Figure 10.34. Also, the relay can be 
easily modified to enlarge the block region for very small currents near the origin, in 
order to avoid false trips at low currents.
Note that differential relaying provides primary zone protection without 
backup. Coordination with protection in adjacent zones is eliminated, which permits 
high-speed tripping. Precise relay settings are unnecessary. Also, the need to calculate 
system fault currents and voltages is avoided.
10.11  Bus Protection with Differential Relays
Differential bus protection is illustrated by the single-line diagram of Figure 10.35. 
In practice, three differential relays are required, one for each phase. Operation of 
any one relay would cause all of the three-phase circuit breakers connected to the bus 
to open, thereby isolating the three-phase bus from service.
FIGURE 10.34
Differential relay 
block and trip regions

648	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
For the case of no internal fault between the CTs—that is, no bus fault— 
I1 1 I2 5 I3. Assuming identical CTs, the differential relay current I19 1 I29 2 I39 equals 
zero, and the relay does not operate. However, if there is a bus fault, the differential 
current I19 1 I29 2 I39, which is not zero, flows in the operating coil to operate the relay. 
Use of the restraining coils overcomes the problem of nonidentical CTs.
A problem with differential bus protection can result from different levels of 
fault currents and varying amounts of CT saturation. For example, consider an exter-
nal fault at point P in Figure 10.35. Each of the CT1 and CT2 primaries carries part of 
the fault current, but the CT3 primary carries the sum I3 5 I1 1 I2. CT3, energized at a 
higher level, will have more saturation, such that I39 Þ I19 1 I29. If the saturation is too 
high, the differential current in the relay operating coil could result in a false trip. This 
problem becomes more difficult when there are large numbers of circuits connected to 
the bus. Various schemes have been developed to overcome this problem [1].
10.12  Transformer Protection with 
Differential Relays
The protection method used for power transformers depends on the transformer 
MVA rating. Fuses are often used to protect transformers with small MVA ratings, 
whereas differential relays are commonly used to protect transformers with ratings 
larger than 10 MVA.
The differential protection method is illustrated in Figure 10.36 for a single- 
phase, two-winding transformer. Denoting the turns ratio of the primary and sec-
ondary CTs by 1/n1 and 1/n2, respectively (a CT with 1 primary turn and n secondary 
turns has a turns ratio a 5 1/n), the CT secondary currents are
FIGURE 10.35
Single-line diagram 
of differential bus 
protection

	
Section 10.12 Transformer Protection with Differential Relays	
649
I91 5 I1
n1       I92 5 I2
n2

(10.12.1)
and the current in the relay operating coil is
I9 5 I91 2 I92 5 I1
n1
2 I2
n2

(10.12.2)
For the case of no fault between the CTs—that is, no internal transformer fault—the 
primary and secondary currents for an ideal transformer are related by
I2 5 N1I1
N2

(10.12.3)
Using (10.12.3) in (10.12.2),
I9 5 I1
n111 2 N1yN2
n2yn12
(10.12.4)
To prevent the relay from tripping for the case of no internal transformer fault, 
where (10.12.3) and (10.12.4) are satisfied, the differential relay current I9 must be 
zero. Therefore, from (10.12.4), select
n2
n1
5 N1
N2

(10.12.5)
If an internal transformer fault between the CTs does occur, (10.12.3) is 
not satisfied and the differential relay current I9 5 I19 2 I29 is not zero. The relay 
will trip if the operating condition given by (10.10.4) is satisfied. Also, the value 
of k in (10.10.4) can be selected to control the size of the block region shown in  
Figure 10.34, thereby controlling relay sensitivity.
FIGURE 10.36
Differential 
protection of a 
single-phase, two-
winding transformer

650	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
Differential relay protection for a single-phase transformer
A single-phase two-winding, 10-MVA, 80 kV/20 kV transformer has differential 
relay protection. Select suitable CT ratios. Also, select k such that the relay blocks 
for up to 25% mismatch between I 91 and I92.
SOLUTION
The transformer-rated primary current is 
I1rated 5 10 3 106
80 3 103 5 125  A
From Table 10.2, select a 150:5 primary CT ratio to give I19 5 125(5/150) 5 4.17 A  
at rated conditions. Similarly, I2rated 5 500 A. Select a 600:5 secondary CT ratio to 
give I92 5 500(5/600) 5 4.17 A and a differential current I 5 I91 2 I92 5 0 (neglect-
ing magnetizing current) at rated conditions. Also, for a 25% mismatch between 
I91 and I92, select a 1.25 upper slope in Figure 10.34. That is,
2 1 k
2 2 k 5 1.25     k 5 0.2222
EXAMPLE 10.9
A common problem in differential transformer protection is the mismatch of 
relay currents that occurs when standard CT ratios are used. If the primary winding 
in Example 10.9 has a 138-kV instead of 80-kV rating, then I1rated 5 10 3 106/138 3 
103 5 72.46 A, and a 100:5 primary CT would give I91 5 72.46(5/100) 5 3.62 A at 
rated conditions. This current does not balance I92 5 4.17 A using a 5:600 secondary 
CT, nor I92 5 3.13 A using a 5:800 secondary CT. The mismatch is about 15%.
One solution to this problem is to use auxiliary CTs, which provide a wide 
range of turns ratios. A 5:5.76 auxiliary CT connected to the 5:600 secondary CT 
in the above example would reduce I92 to 4.17(5/5.76) 5 3.62 A, which does balance 
I91. Unfortunately, auxiliary CTs add their own burden to the main CTs and also 
increase transformation errors. A better solution is to use tap settings on the relays 
themselves, which have the same effect as auxiliary CTs. Most transformer differen-
tial relays have taps that provide for differences in restraining windings in the order 
of 2 or 3 to 1.
When a transformer is initially energized, it can draw a large “inrush” current, a 
transient current that flows in the shunt magnetizing branch and decays after a few cy-
cles to a small steady-state value. Inrush current appears as a differential current since 
it flows only in the primary winding. If a large inrush current does occur upon trans-
former energization, a differential relay will see a large differential current and trip 
out the transformer unless the protection method is modified to detect inrush current.

	
Section 10.12 Transformer Protection with Differential Relays	
651
One method to prevent tripping during transformer inrush is based on the fact 
that inrush current is nonsinusoidal with a large second-harmonic component. A 
filter can be used to pass fundamental and block harmonic components of the differ-
ential current I9 to the relay operating coil. Another method is based on the fact that 
inrush current has a large dc component, which can be used to desensitize the relay. 
Time-delay relays may also be used to temporarily desensitize the differential relay 
until the inrush current has decayed to a low value.
Figure 10.37 illustrates differential protection of a three-phase Y–D two- 
winding transformer. Note that a Y–D transformer produces 308 phase shifts in the 
line currents. The CTs must be connected to compensate for the 308 phase shifts, 
FIGURE 10.37
Differential protection 
of a three-phase, 
Y–D, two-winding 
transformer

652	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
such that the CT secondary currents as seen by the relays are in phase. The correct 
phase-angle relationship is obtained by connecting CTs on the Y side of the trans-
former in D, and CTs on the D side in Y.
Differential relay protection for a three-phase transformer
A 30-MVA, 34.5 kV Y/138 kV D transformer is protected by differential relays 
with taps. Select CT ratios, CT connections, and relay tap settings. Also determine 
currents in the transformer and in the CTs at rated conditions. Assume that the 
available relay tap settings are 5:5, 5:5.5, 5:6.6, 5:7.3, 5:8, 5:9, and 5:10, giving 
relay tap ratios of 1.00, 1.10, 1.32, 1.46, 1.60, 1.80, and 2.00.
SOLUTION
As shown in Figure 10.37, CTs are connected in D on the (34.5-kV) Y side of 
the transformer, and CTs are connected in Y on the (138-kV) D side, in order to 
obtain the correct phasing of the relay currents.
Rated current on the 138-kV side of the transformer is
IA rated 5
30 3 106
Ï3s138 3 103d 5 125.51  A
Select a 150:5 CT on the 138-kV side to give I9A 5 125.51(5/150) 5 4.184 A in the 
138-kV CT secondaries and in the righthand restraining windings of Figure 10.37.
Next, rated current on the 34.5-kV side of the transformer is
Ia rated 5
30 3 106
Ï3s34.5 3 103d 5 502.04  A
Select a 500:5 CT on the 34.5-kV side to give I9a 5 502.0(5/500) 5 5.02 A in the 
34.5-kV CT secondaries and I9ab 5 5.02Ï3 5 8.696 A in the lefthand restraining 
windings of Figure 10.37.
Finally, select relay taps to balance the currents in the restraining windings. 
The ratio of the currents in the left- to righthand restraining windings is
I9ab
I9A
5 8.696
4.184 5 2.078
The closest relay tap ratio is T9AB/T9A 5 2.0, corresponding to a relay tap setting of 
T9A: T9ab 5 5 : 10. The percentage mismatch for this tap setting is
*
(I9AyT9
A) 2 (I9abyT9ab)
(I9abyT9ab)
* 3 100 5*
(4.184y5) 2 (8.696y10)
(8.696y10)
* 3 100 5 3.77%
EXAMPLE 10.10

	
Section 10.13 Pilot Relaying	
653
For three-phase transformers (Y–Y, Y–D, D–Y, D–D), the general rule is to 
connect CTs on the Y side in D and CTs on the D side in Y. This arrangement 
compensates for the 308 phase shifts in Y–D or D–Y banks. Note also that zero- 
sequence current cannot enter a D side of a transformer or the CTs on that side, 
and zero-sequence current on a grounded Y side cannot enter the D-connected 
CTs on that side. Therefore, this arrangement also blocks zero-sequence currents 
in the differential relays during external ground faults. For internal ground faults, 
however, the relays can operate from the positive- and negative-sequence currents  
involved in these faults.
Differential protection methods have been modified to handle multi-winding 
transformers, voltage-regulating transformers, phase-angle regulating transformers, 
power-rectifier transformers, transformers with special connections (such as zig-zag), 
and other, special-purpose transformers. Also, other types of relays such as gas- 
pressure detectors for liquid-filled transformers are used.
10.13  Pilot Relaying
Pilot relaying refers to a type of differential protection that compares the quantities 
at the terminals via a communication channel rather than by a direct wire intercon-
nection of the relays. Differential protection of generators, buses, and transformers 
considered in previous sections does not require pilot relaying because each of these 
devices is at one geographical location where CTs and relays can be directly intercon-
nected. However, differential relaying of transmission lines requires pilot relaying 
because the terminals are widely separated (often by many kilometers). In actual 
practice, pilot relaying is typically applied to short transmission lines (up to 80 km) 
with 69 to 115 kV ratings.
Four types of communication channels are used for pilot relaying:
1.	 Pilot wires: Separate electrical circuits operating at dc, 50 to 60 Hz, or 
audio frequencies. These could be owned by the power company or 
leased from the telephone company.
2.	 Power-line carrier: The transmission line itself is used as the communica-
tion circuit, with frequencies between 30 and 300 kHz being transmitted. 
The communication signals are applied to all three phases using an L–C 
voltage divider and are confined to the line under protection by blocking 
filters called line traps at each end.
This is a good mismatch; since transformer differential relays typically have their 
block regions adjusted between 20% and 60% (by adjusting k in Figure 10.34), 
a 3.77% mismatch gives an ample safety margin in the event of CT and relay 
differences.

654	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
3.	 Microwave: A 2 to 12 GHz signal transmitted by line-of-sight paths 
between terminals using dish antennas.
4.	 Fiber optic cable: Signals transmitted by light modulation through 
electrically nonconducting cable. This cable eliminates problems due 
to electrical insulation, inductive coupling from other circuits, and 
atmospheric disturbances.
Two common fault detection methods are directional comparison, where the power 
flows at the line terminals are compared, and phase comparison, where the relative phase 
angles of the currents at the terminals are compared. Also, the communication channel 
can either be required for trip operations, which is known as a transfer trip system, or not 
be required for trip operations, known as a blocking system. A particular pilot-relaying 
method is usually identified by specifying the fault-detection method and the channel 
use. The four basic combinations are directional comparison blocking, directional com-
parison transfer trip, phase comparison blocking, and phase comparison transfer trip.
Like differential relays, pilot relays provide primary zone protection without 
backup. Thus, coordination with protection in adjacent zones is eliminated, resulting 
in high-speed tripping. Precise relay settings are unnecessary. Also, the need to calcu-
late system fault currents and voltages is eliminated.
10.14  Numeric Relaying
Previous sections covered the operating principle of relays built with electromechanical 
components, including the induction disc time-delay over-current relay, as in Figure 10.14; 
the directional relay, similar in operation to a watt-hour meter; and the balance-beam dif-
ferential relay, as in Figure 10.33. These electromechanical relays, introduced in the early 
1900s, have performed well over the years and continue in relatively maintenance-free 
operation today. Solid-state relays using analog circuits and logic gates, with block-trip 
regions similar to those of electromechanical relays and with newer types of block/trip 
regions, have been available since the late 1950s. Such relays, widely used in HV and EHV 
systems, offer the reliability and ruggedness of their electromechanical counterparts at a 
competitive price. Beyond solid-state analog relays, a new generation of numeric relays 
based on digital computer technology has been under development since the 1980s.
The numeric relay (or digital relay) is a protective relay that uses a microproces-
sor with software for purposes of fault detection. Benefits of numeric relays include 
the following [14, 16]:
●
●
Compact size
●
●
Programmable
●
●
Low burden
●
●
Multi-function capability
●
●
Flexibility and Reliability
●
●
Sensitivity and Speed
●
●
Permits storage of fault data and disturbance records

	
Section 10.14 Numeric Relaying	
655
●
●
Self-checking diagnostics
●
●
Adaptive relaying schemes
●
●
Digital communications capabilities
●
●
Costs
Numeric relays can be physically smaller and normally require less panel wiring 
than electromechanical or solid-state relays. Numeric relays also have the advantage 
that modifications to tripping characteristics, either changes in conventional settings or 
shaping of entirely new block/trip regions, can be made by updating the software from 
a remote computer terminal. For example, the relay engineer can reprogram tripping 
characteristics of field-installed, in-service relays without leaving the engineering office. 
Numeric relays have minimum burdens on instrument transformers. Numeric relays of-
fer multiple functions and multiple characteristics with a wide range of operation, com-
pared to electromechanical and solid-state relays with single functions and narrower 
ranges of operation. For numeric relays, software can be modified with the same hard-
ware to achieve a flexible variety of protection functions, and significant improvement 
in reliability is obtained through use of fewer components and fewer interconnections. 
Numeric relays offer greater sensitivity with high pickup ratio, and tripping 
times (not including circuit breaker opening times) of 1
2 cycle or less. Numeric relays 
can assist in post-fault analysis by recording fault data including the type of fault, 
duration and magnitude of fault, circuit breaker problem, and CT saturation. Nu-
meric relays have the capability to check whether return to a normal condition has 
been attained and then automatically reset. Numeric relay settings can be changed 
instantaneously to adapt to varying power-system requirements. Numeric relays  
offer secure communications capabilities for interface with smart-grid controls, su-
pervisory control and data acquisition systems. By combining several functions that 
share hardware in one numeric relay, capital and maintenance costs are reduced com-
pared to electromechanical and solid-state relays.
Numeric relays do have limitations. With digital communications, numeric relays 
are exposed to the potential risk of hacking, and therefore should be properly man-
aged for cybersecurity. In North America, numeric relays should comply with NERC 
security requirements. Relay engineers should be aware of common failure modes 
that can affect multiple elements of protection. For example, the failure of a power 
supply or an input signal processor could disable a numeric relay that provides many 
different protection functions. Numeric relays may be exposed to external power- 
system transients that would not normally affect electromechanical or solid-state re-
lays. And while numeric relays offer multiple functions as well as greater flexibility, 
sensitivity, and speed, that does not necessarily translate into better protection [16].
An important feature of power system protection is the decentralized, local na-
ture of relays. Except for pilot relaying, each relay receives information from nearby 
local CTs and VTs and trips only local breakers. Interest in numeric relaying is not di-
rected at replacing local relays by a central computer. Instead, local electromechanical 
or solid-state relays would be replaced by dedicated, local numeric relays with similar 
operating principles, such as time-delay overcurrent, impedance, or differential relay-
ing. The central computer would interact with local digital relays in a supervisory role.

656	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
Problems
SECTION 10.2
10.1	
The primary conductor in Figure 10.2 is one phase of a three-phase trans-
mission line operating at 345 kV, 700 MVA, 0.95 power factor lagging. The 
CT ratio is 1200:5, and the VT ratio is 3000:1. Determine the CT second-
ary current I9 and the VT secondary voltage V9. Assume zero CT error.
10.2	
A CO-8 relay with a current tap setting of 5 amperes is used with the 
100:5 CT in Example 10.1. The CT secondary current I9 is the input to 
the relay operating coil. The CO-8 relay burden is shown in the following 
table for various relay input currents.
	
CO-8 relay input current I9, A	
5	
8	
10	
13	
15
	
CO-8 relay burden ZB, V	
0.5	
0.8	
  1.0	
  1.3	
  1.5
	
Primary current and CT error are computed in Example 10.1 for the 5-, 8-,  
and 15-A relay input currents. Compute the primary current and CT error 
for (a) I9 5 10 A and ZB 5 1.0 V, and for (b) I9 5 13 A and ZB 5 1.3 V.  
(c) Plot I9 versus I for the above five values of I9. (d) For reliable relay 
operation, the fault-to-pickup current ratio with minimum fault current 
should be greater than two. Determine the minimum fault current for 
application of this CT and relay with 5-A tap setting.
10.3	
An overcurrent relay set to operate at 10 A is connected to the CT in 
Figure 10.8 with a 500:5 CT ratio. Determine the minimum primary fault 
current that the relay will detect if the burden ZB is (a) 1.0 V, (b) 4.0 V, 
and (c) 5.0 V.
10.4	
Given the open-delta VT connection shown in Figure 10.38, both VTs 
having a voltage rating of 240 kV : 120 V, the voltages are specified as 
Vab 5 230/08, VBc 5 230/21208, and VCA 5 230/1208 kV. Determine 
Vab, Vbc, and Vca for the following cases: (a) The dots are shown in  
Figure 10.38. (b) The dot near c is moved to b in Figure 10.38.
FIGURE 10.38
Problem 10.4

	
Problems	
657
10.5	
A CT with an excitation curve given in Figure 10.39 has a rated current 
ratio of 500:5 A and a secondary leakage impedance of 0.1 1 j0.5 V. 
Calculate the CT secondary output current and the CT error for the fol-
lowing cases: (a) The impedance of the terminating device is 4.9 1 j0.5 V 
and the primary CT load current is 400 A. (b) The impedance of the ter-
minating device is 4.9 1 j0.5 V and the primary CT fault current is 1200 A.  
(c) The impedance of the terminating device is 14.9 1 j1.5 V and the 
primary CT load current is 400 A. (d) The impedance of the terminating 
device is 14.9 1 j1.5 V and the primary CT fault current is 1200 A.
FIGURE 10.39
Problem 10.5
10.6	
The CT of Problem 10.5 is utilized in conjunction with a current- 
sensitive device that will operate at current levels of 8 A or above. Check 
whether the device will detect the 1300-A fault current for cases (b) and 
(d) in Problem 10.5.
SECTION 10.3
10.7	
The input current to a CO-8 relay is 10 A. Determine the relay operating 
time for the following current tap settings (TS) and time dial settings 
(TDS): (a) TS 5 1.0, TDS 5 1/2; (b) TS 5 2.0, TDS 5 1.5; (c) TS 5 2.0, 
TDS 5 7; (d) TS 5 3.0, TDS 5 7; and (e) TS 5 12.0, TDS 5 1.
10.8	
The relay in Problem 10.2 has a time-dial setting of 4. Determine the 
relay operating time if the primary fault current is 400 A.
10.9	
An RC circuit used to produce time delay is shown in Figure 10.40. For 
a step input voltage vi(t) 5 2u(t) and C 5 10 mF, determine Tdelay for the 
following cases: (a) R 5 100 kV; and (b) R 5 1 MV. Sketch the output 
vo(t) versus time for cases (a) and (b).
FIGURE 10.40
Problem 10.9

658	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
 SECTION 10.4
10.11	
Evaluate relay coordination for the minimum fault currents in Exam­
ple  10.4. For the selected current tap settings and time dial settings,  
(a) determine the operating time of relays at B2 and B3 for the 700-A 
fault current. (b) Determine the operating time of relays at Bl and B2 
for the 1500-A fault current. Are the fault-to-pickup current ratios ù 2.0  
(a requirement for reliable relay operation) in all cases? Are the coordina-
tion time intervals ù 0.3 seconds in all cases?
10.10	
Reconsider case (b) of Problem 10.5. Let the load impedance 4.9 1 j0.5 V 
be the input impedance to a CO-7 induction disc time-delay overcur-
rent relay. The CO-7 relay characteristic is shown in Figure 10.41. For  
a tap setting of 4 A and a time dial setting of 2, determine the relay  
operating time.
FIGURE 10.41
Problems 10.10  
and 10.14

Maximum Load
Symmetrical Fault Current
Bus
MVA
Lagging p.f.
Maximum A
Minimum A
1
9.0
0.95
5000
3750
2
9.0
0.95
3000
2250
3
9.0
0.95
2000
1500
Breaker
Breaker Operating Time
CT Ratio
Relay
B1
5 cycles
600:5
CO-8
B2
5 cycles
400:5
CO-8
B3
5 cycles
200:5
CO-8
10.12	
Repeat Example 10.4 for the following system data. Coordi-
nate the relays for the maximum fault currents.
10.13	
Using the current tap settings and time dial settings that you 
have selected in Problem 10.12, evaluate relay coordination 
for the minimum fault currents. Are the fault-to-pickup cur-
rent ratios ù 2.0, and are the coordination time delays ù 0.3 
seconds in all cases?
10.14	
An 11-kV radial system is shown in Figure 10.42. Assuming 
a CO-7 relay with relay characteristic given in Figure 10.41 
and the same power factor for all loads, select relay settings 
to protect the system.
FIGURE 10.42
Problem 10.14
SECTION 10.5
10.15	
Rework Example 10.5 for the following faults: (a) a three-
phase, permanent fault on the load side of tap 3; (b) a single 
line-to-ground, permanent fault at bus 4 on the load side of 
the recloser; and (c) a three-phase, permanent fault at bus 4 
on the source side of the recloser.
	
Problems	
659

660	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
10.16	
A three-phase 34.5-kV feeder supplying a 3.5-MVA load is protected by 
80E power fuses in each phase, in series with a recloser. The time-current 
characteristic of the 80E fuse is shown in Figure 10.43. Analysis yields 
maximum and minimum fault currents of 1000 and 500 A, respectively, 
(a) To have the recloser clear the fault, find the maximum clearing time 
necessary for recloser operation. (b) To have the fuses clear the fault, find 
the minimum recloser clearing time. Assume that the recloser operating 
time is independent of fault current magnitude.
SECTION 10.7
10.17	
For the system shown in Figure 10.44, directional overcurrent relays are 
used at breakers B12, B21, B23, B32, B34, and B43. Overcurrent relays 
alone are used at B1 and B4. (a) For a fault at P1, which breakers do not 
FIGURE 10.43
Problem 10.16

operate? Which breakers should be coordinated? Repeat (a) for a fault at 
(b) P2, (c) P3. (d) Explain how the system is protected against bus faults.
FIGURE 10.44
Problem 10.17
SECTION 10.8
10.18	
(a) Draw the protective zones for the power system shown in  
Figure 10.45. Which circuit breakers should open for a fault at (a) P1, 
(b) P2, and (c) P3?
FIGURE 10.45
Problem 10.18
	
Problems	
661

662	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
10.19	
Figure 10.46 shows three typical bus arrangements. Although the num-
ber of lines connected to each arrangement varies widely in practice, 
four lines are shown for convenience and comparison. Note that the 
required number of circuit breakers per line is 1 for the ring bus, 11
2 for the  
breaker-and-a-half double-bus, and 2 for the double-breaker double-bus 
arrangement. For each arrangement: (a) Draw the protective zones.  
(b) Identify the breakers that open under primary protection for a fault 
on line 1. (c) Identify the lines that are removed from service under pri-
mary protection during a bus fault at P1. (d) Identify the breakers that 
open under backup protection in the event a breaker fails to clear a fault 
on line 1 (that is, a stuck breaker during a fault on line 1).
FIGURE 10.46
Problem 10.19—typical 
bus arrangements

SECTION 10.9
10.20	
Three-zone mho relays are used for transmission line protection of the 
power system shown in Figure 10.25. Positive-sequence line impedances 
are given as follows.
Line
Positive-Sequence Impedance, V
1–2
6 1 j 60
2–3
4 1 j 40
2–4
5 1 j 50
	
Rated voltage for the high-voltage buses is 500 kV. Assume a 2500:5 
CT ratio and a 4500:1 VT ratio at B12. (a) Determine the settings Zt1, 
Zt2, and Zt3 for the mho relay at B12. (b) Maximum current for line 
1–2 under emergency loading conditions is 1400 A at 0.90 power fac-
tor lagging. Verify that B12 does not trip during emergency loading 
conditions.
10.21	
Line impedances for the power system shown in Figure 10.47 are  
Z12 5 Z23 5 3.0 1 j40.0 V, and Z24 5 6.0 1 j80.0 V. Reach for the zone 3  
B12 impedance relays is set for 100% of line 1–2 plus 120% of line 2–4.  
(a) For a bolted three-phase fault at bus 4, show that the apparent pri-
mary impedance “seen” by the B12 relays is
Zapparent 5 Z12 1 Z24 1 (I32/I12)Z24
	
where(I32/I12) is the line 2–3 to line 1–2 fault current ratio. (b) If |I32|I12| . 
0.20, does the B12 relay see the fault at bus 4?
	
  Note: This problem illustrates the “infeed effect.” Fault currents from 
line 2–3 can cause the zone 3 B12 relay to underreach. As such, remote 
backup of line 2–4 at B12 is ineffective.
FIGURE 10.47
Problem 10.21
	
Problems	
663

664	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
10.23	
A simple system with circuit breaker-relay locations is shown in  
Figure 10.49. The six transmission-line circuit breakers are controlled 
by zone distance and directional relays, as shown in Figure 10.50. The 
three transmission lines have the same positive-sequence impedance of 
j0.1 per unit. The reaches for zones 1, 2, and 3 are 80, 120, and 250%, 
respectively. Consider only three-phase faults. (a) Find the settings  
Zr in per unit for all distance relays. (b) Convert the settings in V if the 
VTs are rated 133 kV: 115 V and the CTs are rated 400:5 A. (c) For a 
fault at location X, which is 10% down line TL31 from bus 3, discuss 
relay operations.
FIGURE 10.48
Problem 10.22
FIGURE 10.49
Problem 10.23
10.22	
Consider the transmission line shown in Figure 10.48 with series imped-
ance ZL, negligible shunt admittance, and a load impedance ZR at the 
receiving end. (a) Determine ZR for the given conditions of VR 5 1.0 per 
unit and SR 5 2 1 j0.8 per unit. (b) Construct the impedance diagram in 
the R-X plane for ZL 5 0.1 1 j0.3 per unit. (c) Find ZS for this condition 
and the angle d between ZS and ZR.

	
Problems	
665
SECTION 10.10
10.24	
Select k such that the differential relay characteristic shown in 
Figure 10.34 blocks for up to 20% mismatch between I91 and I92.
SECTION 10.11
10.25	
Consider a protected bus that terminates four lines, as shown in  
Figure 10.51. Assume that the linear couplers have the standard Xm 5 5 mV 
and a three-phase fault externally located on line 3 causes the fault cur-
rents shown in Figure 10.51. Note that the infeed current on line 3 to 
the fault is –j10 kA. (a) Determine V0. (b) Let the fault be moved to an 
internal location on the protected bus between lines 3 and 4. Find V0 and 
discuss what happens. (c) By moving the external fault from line 3 to a 
corresponding point on (i) line 2 and (ii) line 4, determine V0 in each case.
FIGURE 10.50
Three-zone distance-relay scheme (shown for one phase only) for Problem 10.23

666	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
SECTION 10.12
10.26	
A single-phase, 5-MVA, 20/8.66-kV transformer is protected by a dif-
ferential relay with taps. Available relay tap settings are 5:5, 5:5.5, 5:6.6, 
5:7.3, 5:8, 5:9, and 5:10, giving tap ratios of 1.00, 1.10, 1.32, 1.46, 1.60, 
1.80, and 2.00. Select CT ratios and relay tap settings. Also, determine 
the percentage mismatch for the selected tap setting.
10.27	
A three-phase, 500-MVA, 345 kV D /500 kV Y transformer is protected by 
differential relays with taps. Select CT ratios, CT connections, and relay 
tap settings. Determine the currents in the transformer and in the CTs at 
rated conditions. Also determine the percentage mismatch for the selected 
relay tap settings. Available relay tap settings are given in Problem 10.26.
10.28	
For a D-Y connected, 15-MVA, 33 :11 kV transformer with differential 
relay protection and CT ratios shown in Figure 10.52, determine the relay 
currents at full load and calculate the minimum relay current setting to 
allow 125% overload.
j16
j7
j36
j13
j10
VR
V
FIGURE 10.51
Problem 10.25—Bus 
differential protection 
using linear couplers
FIGURE 10.52
Problem 10.28

	
References	
667
10.29	
Consider a three-phase D–Y connected, 30-MVA, 33:11 kV transformer 
with differential relay protection. If the CT ratios are 500:5 A on the pri-
mary side and 2000:5 A on the secondary side, compute the relay current 
setting for faults drawing up to 200% of rated transformer current.
10.30	
Determine the CT ratios for differential protection of a three-phase, D–Y 
connected, 10-MVA, 33:11 kV transformer, such that the circulating cur-
rent in the transformer D does not exceed 5 A.
Case Study Questions
a.	
What is the normal lifetime of a numeric relay?  What is the basis of 
numeric relay lifetime?
b.	
What are the major reasons for failures of first-generation numeric relays?
c.	
In addition to the costs of the relays, what other costs should be consid-
ered when upgrading relays?
References
1.	
J. L. Blackburn, Protective Relaying (New York: Dekker, 1997).
2.	
J. L. Blackburn et al., Applied Protective Relaying (Newark, NJ: Westing-
house Electric Corporation, 1976).
3.	
Westinghouse Relay Manual, A New Silent Sentinels Publication  
(Newark, NJ: Westinghouse Electric Corporation, 1972).
4.	
J. W. Ingleson et al., “Bibliography of Relay Literature. 1986–1987. 
IEEE Committee Report,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, 4, 3, 
pp. 1649–1658 (July 1989).
5.	
IEEE Recommended Practice for Protection and Coordination of Indus-
trial and Commercial Power Systems—IEEE Buff Book, IEEE Standard 
242-2001 (www.ieee.org, January 2001).
6.	
Distribution Manual (New York: Ebasco/Electrical World, 1990).
7.	
C. Russel Mason, The Art and Science of Protective Relaying (New York: 
Wiley, 1956).
8.	
C. A. Gross, Power System Analysis (New York: Wiley, 1979).
9.	
W. D. Stevenson, Jr., Elements of Power System Analysis, 4th ed.  
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1982).
10.	
A. R. Bergen, Power System Analysis (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice- 
Hall, 1986).
11.	
S. H. Horowitz and A. G. Phadke, Power System Relaying (New York: 
Research Studies Press, 1992).

668	
Chapter 10  |  System Protection
12.	
A. G. Phadke and J. S. Thorpe, Computer Relaying for Power Systems 
(New York: Wiley, 1988).
13.	
C. F. Henville, “Digital Relay Reports Verify Power System Models,” 
IEEE Computer Applications in Power, 13, 1 (January 2000), pp. 26–32.
14.	
D. Ransom, “Upgrading Relay Protection,” IEEE Industry Applications 
Magazine, 20, 5, ISSN 1077-2618, (September/October 2014), pp. 71–79.
15.	
D. Reimert, Protective Relaying for Power Generation Systems (Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2005).
16.	
J. Parmar, “Types and Revolution of Electrical Relay,” Electrical Notes 
and Articles, www.electricalnotes.com, December 1, 2012.

669
P
ower system stability refers to the ability of a power system to move from one 
steady-state operating point following a disturbance to another steady-state 
operating point, without generators losing synchronism or having unaccept-
able voltage magnitude and frequency deviations [1]. There are three types of power 
system stability: steady-state, transient, and dynamic.
Steady-state stability, discussed in Chapter 5, involves slow or gradual changes 
in operating points. Steady-state stability studies, which are usually performed 
with a power-flow computer program (Chapter 6), ensure that phase angles across 
11Transient Stability
1300-MW generating 
unit consisting of a 
cross-compound  
steam turbine and 
two 722-MVA  
synchronous 
generators (Courtesy 
of American Electric 
Power.)

670	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
transmission lines are not too large, that bus voltages are close to nominal values,  
and that generators, transmission lines, transformers, and other equipment are not 
overloaded.
Transient stability, the main focus of this chapter, involves major disturbances 
such as loss of generation, line-switching operations, faults, and sudden load changes. 
Following a disturbance, synchronous machine frequencies undergo transient deviations 
from synchronous frequency (60 Hz in North America, 50 Hz in many other locations), 
and machine power angles change. The objective of a transient stability study is to de-
termine whether or not the machines will return to synchronous frequency with new 
steady-state power angles. Changes in power flows and bus voltages are also of concern.
Elgerd [2] gives an interesting mechanical analogy to the power system tran-
sient stability program. As shown in Figure 11.1, a number of masses representing 
synchronous machines are interconnected by a network of elastic strings representing 
transmission lines. Assume that this network is initially at rest in steady-state, with the 
net force on each string below its break point, when one of the strings is cut, repre-
senting the loss of a transmission line. As a result, the masses undergo transient oscil-
lations and the forces on the strings fluctuate. The system will then either settle down 
to a new steady-state operating point with a new set of string forces, or additional 
strings will break, resulting in an even weaker network and eventual system collapse. 
That is, for a given disturbance, the system is either transiently stable or unstable.
Transient stability studies are solved using a time-domain simulation for a spe-
cific disturbance that at each time point involves a solution of algebraic equations rep-
resenting (primarily) the network power balance constraints, and differential equations 
representing the generator and sometimes the load dynamics. There are two main ap-
proaches for solving the system at each time point—either simultaneous in which the 
algebraic and differential equations are solved simultaneously, or partitioned in the 
program, alternately solves the algebraic and differential equations [15]. Both predis-
turbance, disturbance, and postdisturbance computations are performed. The program 
output includes power angles and frequencies of synchronous machines, bus voltages, 
and power flows versus time. Large-scale system studies can often involve many thou-
sand algebraic equations and sometimes more than 100,000 differential equations.
Sometimes the transient stability is determined during the first swing of ma-
chine power angles following a disturbance. During the first swing, which typically 
lasts about 1 second, the mechanical output power and the internal voltage of a 
generating unit are often assumed constant. However, where multiswings lasting 
several seconds are of concern, models of turbine-governors and excitation systems 
(for example, see Figures 12.3 and 12.5) as well as more detailed machine models 
FIGURE 11.1
Mechanical analog 
of power system 
transient stability 
[2] (Based on Elgerd, 
Electric Energy 
Systems Theory: An 
Introduction, 1982. 
McGraw-Hill.)

	
Case Study	
671
and sometimes dynamic load models can be employed to obtain accurate transient 
stability results over the longer time period.
Dynamic stability involves an even longer time period, typically several min-
utes. It is possible for controls to affect dynamic stability even though transient stabil-
ity is maintained. The action of turbine-governors, excitation systems, tap-changing 
transformers, and controls from a power system dispatch center can interact to sta-
bilize or destabilize a power system several minutes after a disturbance has occurred.
To simplify transient stability studies, the following assumptions are commonly 
made:
1.	 Only balanced three-phase systems and balanced disturbances are  
considered. Therefore, only positive-sequence networks are employed.
2.	 Deviations of machine frequencies from synchronous frequency (60 Hz) 
are small, and dc offset currents and harmonics are neglected. Therefore, 
the network of transmission lines, transformers, and impedance loads 
is essentially in steady-state; and voltages, currents, and powers can be 
computed from algebraic power-flow equations.
In Section 11.1 introduces the swing equation, which determines synchro-
nous machine rotor dynamics. In Section 11.2, a simplified model of a synchronous 
machine and a Thévenin equivalent of a system consisting of lines, transformers, 
loads, and other machines are given. Then, the equal-area criterion; that gives a 
direct method for determining the transient stability of one machine connected to 
a system equivalent is presented in Section 11.3. Numerical integration techniques 
for solving swing equations step by step are covered in Section 11.4, and they are 
used in Section 11.5 to determine multimachine stability. Section 11.6 introduces a 
more detailed synchronous generator model, while Section 11.7 discusses how wind 
turbines are modeled in transient stability studies. Finally, Section 11.8 discusses 
design methods for improving power system transient stability.
CASE STUDY
The following case study provides an overview of the various issues involved 
in power system restoration following a blackout [11]. Restoration involves 
regulatory, economic, and technical issues. The case study focuses mainly 
on the technical issues. Most outages involve only a portion of a power 
system that can be restored with assistance from neighboring grids. In this 
case, top-down restoration is typically applied, where tie-lines to neighbor-
ing grids can be used to first energize the high-voltage grid, followed by 
energizing the subtransmission system, which can begin to restore some 
system load and supply auxiliary power at power plants to bring generation 
back on line in the blacked-out portion. In the case of a widespread blackout, 
there may be no help from neighboring grids, and bottom-up restoration 

672	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
must be applied, where restoration begins at preselected generating units 
(called “black-start units”) that do not require any external power sources to 
start up. In order to ensure that facilities and personnel are prepared, res-
toration plans and procedures must be developed and coordinated among 
the various parties that own and operate the generators, the transmis-
sion system, and the distribution systems. Restoration studies and analy-
ses, including steady-state and dynamic analyses, are required. Technical 
issues include load-frequency control, voltage control, motor starting, self- 
excitation of black-start units, system stability, cold load pickup, and tran-
sient overvoltages. Development of thorough restoration plans and testing 
of those plans via simulation and drills will help to minimize disruption of 
service to loads and equipment damage following a blackout.
Down, but Not Out
By James Feltes and Carlos Grande-Moran
Modern power systems are highly re-
liable. They are operated to withstand 
the variability in system conditions 
that occur in the course of normal op-
erations, including the daily changes in 
load levels, generation dispatch, and 
equipment availability. Modern power 
systems must also provide reliable ser-
vice to load during unusual events, 
such as faults and the tripping of 
transmission lines or generating units. 
Extreme events can occur, however, 
that may lead to partial or total system 
blackouts. To recover from such cata-
strophic events, utilities thus have a re-
sponsibility to develop detailed plans 
and procedures for restoring the power 
system safely, efficiently, and as expe-
ditiously as possible. This case study 
gives a brief overview of many issues 
involved in power system restoration.
Restoration challenges can be 
subdivided into three areas: regulatory, 
economic, and technical. Only a very 
brief overview of the first two will be 
given here, as our emphasis will be on 
the technical issues associated with 
the restoration of a power system fol-
lowing a partial or total blackout.
Regulatory issues are associated 
with directives from the authorities in 
charge of determining the required 
level of service reliability to be sup-
plied by the utilities to end users. As 
part of this process, the regulatory 
authorities generally establish criteria 
and requirements for power system 
restoration. In the United States, stan-
dards and criteria are established by 
the North American Electric Reliabil-
ity Corporation (NERC), the Nuclear 
Regulatory Commission, the NERC 
regional authorities, and the local 
independent system operator (ISO) 
or regional transmission operator 
(RTO). While the exact process is dif-
ferent in other parts of the world, the 
concepts are generally quite similar.
The NERC requirements are de-
lineated in its emergency preparedness  
(© 2014 IEEE. Reprinted, with permission, 
from J. Feltes and C. Grande-Moran, “Down 
but Not Out,” IEEE Power Engineering 
Magazine, January/February 2014, pp. 34–43.)

	
Case Study	
673
and operations (EOP) standards. 
The standards that cover the areas 
being discussed here are EOP-001 
(Emergency Operations Planning) and 
EOP-005 (System Restoration from 
Blackstart Resources). EOP-001 cov-
ers the requirements to develop, main-
tain, and implement a set of plans to 
mitigate operating emergencies. The 
purpose of EOP-005 is to ensure plans,  
facilities, and personnel are prepared 
to enable system restoration from 
black-start resources so as to assure 
that reliability is maintained during 
restoration and a high priority is placed 
on restoring the interconnection.
Economic issues are handled 
differently in different regions of the 
United States and also throughout 
other parts of the world. In the tra-
ditional, vertically integrated utility 
structure, the utility was responsible 
for generation, transmission, and dis-
tribution and hence for all the system 
components required for restoration. 
In a market-based system, however, 
coordination among many parties is 
required, as different owners and opera-
tors for the generators, the transmission 
system, and the distribution systems are 
involved. Common to both structures is 
the need to set clear requirements and 
reimburse the various parties for fulfill-
ing these requirements. This is often a 
difficult process. As with expenditures 
for life and medical insurance, we must 
spend money on something we hope 
never to have to actually use. It is also 
quite difficult to measure the quality of 
restoration services until it is too late 
and they are already being mobilized. 
We will not delve into these issues here 
other than to state that system restora-
tion is a critical service, and the induce-
ments for generation and transmission 
owners must be sufficient for them to 
not only offer these services but to dil-
igently participate in the testing and 
training needed to implement them suc-
cessfully. Below we discuss the main em-
phasis of this article: the technical issues 
that affect power system restoration.
General Philosophy
Most outages involve only a por-
tion of the power system that can 
be restored with assistance from 
neighboring 
power 
grids. 
While 
such restoration can be a complex 
process, the restoration generally 
occurs in a relatively straightforward 
manner. First, the tie lines from the 
outside power system to the blacked- 
­out area are energized. These ties 
are the starting points used to ener-
gize the transmission high-voltage 
grid. With significant circuits in the 
transmission network energized, it is 
relatively straightforward to pick up 
the subtransmission system, start to 
restore some system load, and sup-
ply auxiliary power to selected power 
plants to bring generation back on-
line. This is an example of a top-down 
restoration, where the highvoltage 
grid is energized first and then used to 
energize the lower-voltage networks.
In the case of a widespread 
blackout, however, there may be no 
help from neighboring systems. In this 
case, system restoration must begin 
from preselected generating units that 
have the ability to start themselves, 
that is, that do not require any exter-
nal power sources. These units, called 
black-start units (BSUs) or black-start 
resources (BSRs), are then used as the 
kernels with which to start the restora-
tion process. This can be considered a 
bottom-up restoration, starting from 

674	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
an individual generating unit and em-
anating outward toward the critical 
system load. Of course, to speed the 
restoration process, this black-start se-
quence will probably occur using sev-
eral generating units simultaneously 
and independently; these independent 
islands of generation and load will 
later be synchronized so as to restore 
the original power system.
Restoration can, of course, be 
accomplished by combining the ap-
proaches described above. In the case 
of a total blackout, it is important to 
decide how quickly to energize the 
high-voltage system. As will be dis-
cussed in more detail below, energiz-
ing the high-voltage system is more 
difficult and usually requires that large 
generating units be online. If a high-
voltage overlay can be successfully 
established, however, it will generally 
lead to faster restoration of the loads.
Restoration Plans  
and Procedures
Restoration plans and procedures 
must be developed, clearly delineat-
ing the actions to be undertaken and 
the responsibilities of each of the 
parties. These procedures must meet 
established reliability criteria and be 
able to be implemented by system op-
erators at a central control center, a 
local control center, or both.
Restoration plans define the se-
quence of steps and cranking paths 
needed to restore power to critical 
loads and generation facilities from 
BSRs. Ideally, the BSRs are able to 
start quickly and energize secure 
transmission paths. A backbone 
network is formed so that critical 
load can be restored—in particular, 
stabilizing loads for the BSRs and 
auxiliary loads at power plants with-
out black-start capability.
The restoration plan focuses 
on restoring the key system elements 
(generating stations, transmission 
lines, substations, and loads) that fa-
cilitate restoration of additional facil-
ities. In particular, flexibility is impor-
tant because major equipment may 
be out of service and not be available 
to assist in the restoration process. 
For example, restoration of a genera-
tion plant or substation with multiple 
transmission outlets is preferable to 
restoration of a location with a single 
path. This also illustrates the need for 
simplicity: the more complex a plan 
is, the more chances there are that a 
key component or action cannot be 
performed when or in the manner re-
quired.
In order to be able to fully restore 
the system, the restoration plan must 
be able to reenergize the transmission 
system to major generating facilities 
in a timely manner and also reach in-
terconnection points with neighboring 
systems to form a larger and usually 
more stable grid. The supply of off-site 
power to nuclear power plant auxiliary 
systems is also a priority for those sys-
tems with nuclear generation.
The restoration plans and pro-
cedures must also address a myriad 
of other topics, including:
●
●
Staffing and communication 
requirements;
●
●
The training of control center 
staff and field staff needed to 
perform switching actions;

	
Case Study	
675
●
●
Communication 
protocols 
among control centers and 
transmission and generation 
facility operators;
●
●
The requirements of the BSRs, 
including technical issues such 
as voltage and frequency control 
capabilities and managerial issues 
such as maintenance and ade-
quate fuel supply capability; and
●
●
The testing of the plans, includ-
ing the starting of BSRs and 
drills testing the communication 
and coordination of the various 
power system operators.
Restoration Studies  
and Analysis
Each transmission operator is re-
quired to have plans, procedures, 
and resources available to restore the 
electric system following a partial or 
total shutdown of the system. The 
standards also require each trans-
mission operator and balancing au-
thority to verify their restoration 
procedure by actual testing or through  
simulation.
Restoration testing is a complex 
process. The testing of BSUs requires 
starting and running the units for a 
limited period of time, processes that 
involve straightforward procedures. 
The coordination of the test period, 
however, is complicated by consid-
erations of staffing requirements, 
environmental emission restrictions, 
and the requirements of the overall 
system. The testing of line energiza-
tions is more complex, as it involves 
the deenergization of parts of the 
transmission system so they can  
be connected to the BSU. This must 
be accomplished without any adverse 
impact on loads, which may not al-
ways be possible. Restoration plans 
that require the energization of load 
at a particular step in the plan cannot 
be tested beyond that step because it 
is never acceptable to submit loads 
to outage and pickup as part of a 
test. In addition to any field testing 
performed, simulation is usually re-
quired to verify and validate the plan. 
A study including both steady-state 
and transient analysis is therefore 
performed.
The restoration plans must doc-
ument the various cranking paths. 
For example, the plans show the num-
ber and switching sequence of trans-
mission elements involved, including 
the initial switching requirements 
between each BSU and the unit to be 
started (i.e., its next-start unit).
In the case of a total system 
outage, system restoration must be-
gin from the BSUs, with restoration 
of the power system proceeding out-
ward toward critical system loads. As 
the BSUs themselves can only supply 
a small fraction of the system load, 
these units must be used to help start 
larger units that need their station 
service loads to be supplied by out-
side power sources. Full restoration 
of system load can only occur when 
these larger units can come online. 
The restoration plan following a 
system blackout should therefore 
include self-starting units that can 
be used to black-start large, steam 
turbine-driven plants located elec-
trically close to these units. As men-
tioned above, another objective for 

676	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
many systems is the supply of auxil-
iary power to nuclear power stations 
in need of off-site power to supply 
critical station service loads. Other 
priority loads may include military 
facilities, law enforcement facilities, 
hospitals and other public health fa-
cilities, and communication facilities.
The typical black-start scenario 
includes the self-starting unit or units, 
the transmission lines that will trans-
port the power supplied to the large 
motor loads in the power plant to be 
black-started, and at least three trans-
former units. These would include  
the generator step-up transformers 
of the black-start generating unit, 
the generator step-up transformers 
of the next-start unit involved (e.g., a 
large steam turbine unit), and one or 
more auxiliary transformers serving 
motor control centers at the next- 
start plant. The transmission lines 
used for the black start may be either 
overhead lines or high-voltage under-
ground cables. The load to be black-
started includes very large induction 
motors, ranging from a few hundred 
horsepower to several thousands of 
horsepower as well as plant lighting 
and small-motor loads.
The key concerns are the con-
trol of voltage and frequency. Both 
voltage and frequency must be kept 
within a tight band around nominal 
values to guard against damage to 
equipment and to ensure restoration 
progress. Any equipment failure will 
severely hinder restoration and may 
require starting over with a revised 
plan. System protection operations 
can also occur if voltage or frequency 
strays outside acceptable ranges, 
again with the potential to set back 
or stop the restoration process. The 
following sections give an overview 
of several of the technical concerns 
that must be addressed.
Steady-State Concerns
The black-start plan describes the 
steps that the transmission opera-
tors need to take to restore the iso-
lated power system from the BSU. 
This includes sequentially energizing 
transformers, transmission lines, and, 
potentially, shunt compensation and 
load pickup to supply power to the 
next-start unit auxiliary loads, allow-
ing their associated units to begin op-
eration. Once larger generating units 
are available, higher-voltage lines can 
be energized, again in a step-by-step 
sequence, to supply power to major 
substations where load can be picked 
up and further interconnections made  
until the grid is fully restored.
The steady-state analysis of this 
isolated power system includes:
●
●
Voltage control and steady-state  
overvoltage (Ferranti effect) 
analysis;
●
●
Capability of the BSUs to 
absorb reactive power (vars) 
produced 
by 
the 
charging 
capacitance of the transmission 
system;
●
●
Step-by-step simulation of the 
black-start plan being tested to 
ensure its feasibility and compli-
ance with required operational  
limits;
●
●
Verification of the robustness 
of the tested black-start plan to 
ensure its ability to compensate 

for the unavailability of key 
components to be used in the 
plan; and
●
●
Demonstration of generation 
and load-matching capability.
Voltage control analysis deter-
mines the voltage reference set point 
of the black-starting generating unit 
and the off-nominal tap setting for all 
transformers that are part of the plan. 
This ensures proper control of volt-
age and provides the needed terminal 
voltage to start up the large induction 
motor loads at the black-started plant. 
Transformer tap settings that are ap-
propriate for normal conditions that 
generally include significant current 
flows may result in high system volt-
ages under the lightly loaded black-
start condition. Since most taps on 
generator step-up transformers and 
station auxiliary transformers cannot 
be changed under load, the selection 
of transformer taps must be a balance 
between the needs of the black-start 
period and normal operation, when 
the power system is supplying a sig-
nificant amount of load.
Load flow simulations can be 
used to calculate the receiving end 
bus voltage of the transmission lines 
when the black-starting unit ener-
gizes the unloaded generator, step-up 
transformer, and transmission lines. 
The charging current generated by 
an unloaded transmission line will 
result in a rise in voltage along the 
line. This is particularly true when 
underground cables are used as they 
have significantly more charging ca-
pacitance. The charging requirements 
can be large enough to result in the 
BSUs absorbing reactive power. 
There could be, under extreme condi-
tions, the potential for self-excitation, 
which is discussed later.
The steady-state analysis of 
a black-start plan should include a 
step-by-step simulation of the plan 
to verify its compliance with required 
operational limits for voltage con-
trol and power flows. The robustness 
of the plan for the loss of a system 
component is also valuable knowl-
edge because the events leading to the 
blackout could result in some equip-
ment unavailability during the res-
toration period. Generally, thermal 
overloads are not a restoration issue 
because the system is lightly loaded. 
This may become a concern, however, 
as restoration progresses and load is 
picked up.
Dynamic Studies
Once the steady-state analysis has 
been completed, a dynamic analysis of 
the restoration plan is conducted. The 
dynamic analysis starts from an initial 
steady-state operating point repre-
senting a step in the plan. This initial 
system operating condition is usually 
obtained from the system steady-state 
analysis. One key simulation initially 
represents the isolated power system 
and then simulates the start-up of the 
largest induction motor load at the 
next-start generating unit. This veri-
fies that the voltage supply is strong 
enough to start the motor and also 
that the voltage dip will not stall or 
cause the motor contactors of run-
ning motors to drop out.
The importance of accuracy in 
equipment modeling must be empha-
sized. The effect of the controls of an 
individual unit is generally not very 
	
Case Study	
677

678	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
significant under normal operation 
because a large number of units are 
sharing the control of system voltage 
and frequency. Both of these quanti-
ties are controlled solely by the BSU 
during the initial restoration period, 
however. The modeling of the gen-
erator, excitation system, and speed 
governor is therefore very important. 
The modeling of equipment that does 
not generally operate under normal 
conditions, such as over- and under-
excitation limiters, can also be impor-
tant. Governor modeling must take 
into account whether the machine is 
operated in an isochronous or droop 
control mode, as will be discussed 
later. The accuracy of the dynamic 
modeling parameters of any large 
motors to be started are also impor-
tant to motor-starting simulations.
The dynamic analysis of a 
black-start plan includes some or all 
of the following functions:
●
●
Load frequency control;
●
●
Voltage control;
●
●
Large induction motor starting;
●
●
Motor-starting sequence 
assessment;
●
●
Self-excitation assessment;
●
●
System stability; and
●
●
Transient overvoltages.
Because frequency may deviate 
significantly from its nominal value, 
the effect of frequency variation on 
system impedances must be modeled.
BSUs
As we have already explained, BSUs 
are units that do not require off-site 
power to start. Generally, these fall 
into four categories:
●
●
Hydroelectric units. These units 
can be designed for black-
start capability and have fast 
primary frequency response 
characteristics.
●
●
Diesel generator sets. Diesel 
sets usually require only battery 
power and can be started very 
quickly. They are small in size 
and useful only for supplying 
the power needed to start larger 
units. They generally cannot be 
used to pick up any significant 
transmission system elements.
●
●
Aeroderivative gas turbine gener-
ator sets. This type of gas tur-
bine typically requires only local 
battery power to start. These 
units can usually be started 
using remote commands and 
can pick up load quickly.
●
●
Larger gas turbines operating 
in a simple cycle mode or steam 
turbine units. These units are not 
in themselves black-start capa-
ble but are coupled with on-site 
diesel generator sets to make the 
plant a black-start source. The 
diesels are started and used to 
energize plant auxiliary buses 
and start either a gas turbine or 
a steam turbine. A gas turbine 
is generally quicker to bring 
online. The time to restart and 
available ramping capability are 
generally functions of how long 
the unit was off-line.
Load Frequency Control
When only a portion of the system is 
lost and is being restored using tie lines 
to a larger power system, load frequency 

control is not generally a large concern. 
The outside system generally has the ca-
pacity to absorb changes in load with-
out significant frequency deviations.
When restoration without ex-
ternal resources is required, however, 
load frequency control is of critical 
importance. During the restoration 
process, the black-start generating 
unit will typically be used to pick up 
large induction motors associated 
with a larger power plant such as 
boiler feed pumps and forced-draft 
and induced-draft fan motors. The 
frequency of the black-start system 
will be controlled by the speed gover-
nor of the turbine driving the black-
start synchronous generator.
Standard practice for units  
operating in parallel in multi-machine 
power systems under normal condi-
tions is to operate all turbine speed 
governors in a droop-governing mode. 
This provides a stable sharing of the 
electric system load among all units. 
The proportional characteristic of the 
droop speed governor control, how-
ever, results in a steady-state frequency 
error remaining in the system. Auto-
matic generation control (AGC) has 
the form of a pure integral controller 
and will follow the primary frequency 
control action of the speed governors 
to remove this undesirable steady-state 
frequency error. Typical steady-state 
regulating droop (R) for speed gover-
nors is 5% using a system frequency 
base of 50 Hz or 60 Hz and a power 
base equal to the turbine MW rating.
During a black-start event, 
AGC will not be operating, however, 
it is imperative that system frequency 
regain its scheduled value following 
the start-up of motors or pickup of 
other loads. This frequency control 
should be automatic, since the crew in 
charge of the BSU will be operating 
under extreme emergency conditions, 
which can lead to undesirable oper-
ating errors. The automation of the  
frequency control process can there-
fore be carried out by the prime-
mover speed governor of the BSU, 
operated in a constant frequency 
or isochronous control mode. In 
this pure integral control mode, the 
steady-state frequency error is zero 
because of the resetting characteris-
tic of the pure integral control. Most 
if not all modern diesel engines, gas 
turbines, and hydraulic turbines are 
furnished with digital speed gover-
nors with which a selection of either 
a droop or isochronous operating 
mode can be carried out by means of 
a simple change in command.
Once the system has more than 
one generating unit online, all speed 
governors should be operated in a 
droop control mode, unless it is de-
cided in the restoration plan that one 
of the largest units should operate in 
isochronous control to maintain the 
control of the system frequency. As 
noted above, AGC would be disabled 
under this extreme condition.
In summary, the preferred 
control mode for speed governors 
associated with BSUs is isochronous 
or constant frequency control. When 
additional units are added, the pre-
ferred control mode for speed gover-
nors is droop control mode. In some 
cases, it may be preferable to keep 
one large unit in isochronous control 
mode. Units should not be operated 
	
Case Study	
679

680	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
in parallel with more than one unit in 
isochronous control mode.
Voltage Control
Control of voltage is obtained 
through the generator’s excitation 
system. The excitation system must 
be operated in automatic control 
with the automatic voltage regula-
tor (AVR) in service. The system 
voltage will be a function of the 
generator terminal voltage. The gen-
erator scheduled voltage may there-
fore need to be adjusted throughout 
the restoration process as load is 
picked up, and also coordinated 
with any changes in transformer tap 
positions. Such adjustments should 
be an integral part of the restora-
tion plan. The changes in voltage 
that will occur with the starting of 
large motors or the pickup of large 
blocks of load require that the ex-
citation system respond in a rapid, 
well-tuned manner.
Motor Starting
Motor starting is a concern during 
black-start restoration. A BSU’s pri-
mary function is generally to start 
up the auxiliary load of a larger 
next-start unit. This auxiliary load 
is made up of lighting and motor 
load used, for the most part, in the 
start-up of steam generators and 
fuel systems. The motor load is made 
up of a large number of small- and 
medium-size motors and a few large 
motors ranging anywhere from sev-
eral hundred horsepower to several 
thousand horsepower. Fuel and feed- 
water pump motors and forced- and 
induced-draft fan motors belong to 
this large-horsepower group. It is this 
latter group that presents the greatest 
challenge to the reactive power re-
sources available in any well-designed 
black-start plan.
The method used for starting 
up these large motors is often a hard 
start, which applies full line-to-line 
voltage across the motor terminals. 
Occasionally, motors may also be 
soft-started by applying a reduced 
voltage during the starting period. It 
is therefore extremely important to 
properly identify the motor-starting 
method since this will greatly affect 
the depth of the dip in voltage result-
ing from the black-start process.
Accurate motor data are vital 
for conducting dynamic studies to 
verify the viability of a given black-
start process. The information needed 
to establish the dynamic model for 
the large induction motors participat-
ing in the black-start process includes 
the inertia of the motor plus its me-
chanical load, the starting or locked 
rotor torque, the starting or locked 
rotor current and associated power 
factor, the pull-out torque, the full-
load torque, and the full-load cur-
rent and its associated power factor. 
All of these data should be at rated 
voltage and frequency. From these 
motor performance data, parameters 
for the stator and rotor circuits are 
estimated. The dynamic model for 
these large induction motors should 
include both inertial and rotor circuit 
flux dynamics. This dynamic model 
must closely match the speed-torque 
characteristic of the motors, partic-
ularly at starting, pull-out, and full-
load operating points. In addition, it 

is important to include the mechani-
cal load damping effect in the inertial 
model of the mechanical load, which 
for most centrifugal pumps and fans 
follows a quadratic speed-torque 
characteristic.
The motor-starting sequence is 
another variable that must be verified 
in any black-start process. The feasi-
bility of plant start-up can be tested 
by dynamically simulating the var-
ious motor-starting sequences. The 
sequence must also accommodate the 
start-up requirements of the plant, 
which may require certain motors to 
be started before others.
The voltage dip caused by 
starting these large induction motors 
must be accurately quantified. This 
is because the motors already online 
have magnetic contactors that open 
at approximately 80% of the nominal 
bus voltage. IEEE Standard 399-1997 
recommends a minimum terminal 
voltage of 80% of rated voltage.  
Occasionally there may be magnetic 
contactors that can hold their con-
tacts with voltages as low as 70% of 
the rated value; the number of cycles 
for which this operating condition can 
be sustained is low, however. In addi-
tion, the life expectancy of the insula-
tion of the stator and rotor windings 
is reduced as a result of the large cur-
rents circulating through these wind-
ings. In such situations, the motor 
manufacturer must be consulted to 
avoid motor damage, such as shorted 
turns or even catastrophic motor fail-
ure. Undervoltage protection settings 
should also be verified to avoid the 
opening of circuit protection caused 
by undervoltage relay action.
The accelerating time period 
required by an induction motor de-
pends in great measure on the com-
bined inertia of the motor and its 
mechanical load. The longer the 
accelerating period, the higher the 
heating experienced by the stator and 
rotor windings. When accelerating 
periods last a few tens of seconds, 
motor manufacturer data on allowed 
motor heating should be consulted to 
avoid a significant loss of useful op-
erating life of the winding insulating 
material.
Self-Excitation
As noted above, energization of a 
transmission line or cable will result 
in a rise in voltage along the line or 
cable due to charging currents. The 
charging requirements can be large 
enough to result in the BSUs ab-
sorbing reactive power. There is the 
potential for self-excitation if the 
charging current is large relative to 
the size of the generating unit. The 
result can be an uncontrolled rise in 
voltage that could result in equip-
ment failure. Such an undesirable 
operating condition may occur when 
the effective charging capacitive reac-
tance of the transmission system used 
in the black-start operation, as seen 
by the BSU, is less than the q-axis 
generator reactance Xq. In generat-
ing units with no negative field cur-
rent capability, self-excitation cannot 
be controlled by the excitation sys-
tem, and thus the machine terminal 
voltage rises almost instantaneously 
for cases where the effective capaci-
tive reactance is less than the d-axis 
reactance Xd. Generator excitation 
	
Case Study	
681

682	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
systems with negative field current ca-
pability delay but do not prevent the 
onset of self-excitation. It is worth 
noting that most generating units 
installed in the last 40 years do not 
have negative field current capability. 
It is therefore extremely important to 
verify the reactive power capability of 
the BSU when operated at a leading 
power factor.
Self-excitation can also occur 
from the load end for the inadver-
tent loss of supply resulting from 
the opening of a transmission line or  
cable at the sending end that leaves 
the line connected to a large motor or 
a group of motors.
System Stability
Power system stability was defined 
in 2004 by the IEEE/CIGRÉ Joint 
Task Force on Stability Terms and 
Definitions as “the ability of an elec-
tric power system, for a given initial 
operating condition, to regain a state 
of operating equilibrium after being 
subjected to a physical disturbance, 
with most system variables bounded 
so that practically the entire system 
remains intact.” This simply means 
that the power system must be able to 
survive a disturbance and return to a 
sustainable operating point without a 
significant loss of equipment.
Power system stability can be 
further subdivided into:
●
●
Rotor angle stability: the ability 
of synchronous machines of an 
interconnected power system 
to remain in synchronism after 
being subjected to a disturbance
●
●
Voltage stability: the ability of 
a power system to maintain 
steady voltages at all buses in 
the system after being subjected 
to a disturbance
●
●
Frequency stability: the ability 
of a power system to maintain 
steady frequency following a 
severe system disturbance result-
ing in a significant imbalance 
between generation and load
As discussed above, voltage 
and frequency control present the 
greatest concerns during restoration. 
Angular stability is generally not a 
major concern in the early stages of 
the restoration process. When the 
system is being restored from a total 
blackout, angular stability is assessed 
only when more than one generat-
ing unit is used in the black-start 
plan. Even when there are multiple 
units connected in the early stages 
of a restoration plan, the system is 
operating in a weakened state and 
stable performance is not expected 
for all system contingencies. Under 
normal conditions, there are gen-
erally multiple transmission paths  
between groups of generators such 
that a fault and trip of one of these 
paths does not result in instability. 
During restoration, however, there 
may only be one strong path, and 
hence a fault and outage of that path 
would cause instability. This period 
of exposure to possible but unlikely 
events cannot limit the restoration, 
however. It is simply a stage the sys-
tem must pass through to reach a 
more robust operating condition. 
The exposure to events that could re-
sult in instability can be used as one 
of the criteria with which to rank res-
toration alternatives.

Cold Load Pickup
The purpose of the restoration pro-
cess is, of course, to restore power 
supply to the loads and allow them to 
operate as they did prior to the outage. 
But the characteristics of the load im-
mediately after reenergization may be 
quite different than the characteristics 
exhibited prior to the outage.
If the load has been deenergized 
for several hours or more, the inrush 
current upon reenergizing the load can 
be eight to ten times the normal load 
current. The magnitude and duration 
of the inrush current that flows when a 
feeder is reenergized after a prolonged 
outage is a function of the type of 
load served by the feeder. This could 
include: lighting; motors; and ther-
mostatically controlled loads such as 
air conditioners, refrigerators, freezers, 
furnaces, and electric hot water heaters.
There are various components 
of the load that contribute to the to-
tal inrush current. One example is the 
component due to the filaments of 
incandescent lights. The resistance of 
the filament is very low until it warms 
to its operating temperature. This low 
resistance results in a very high inrush 
current—up to ten times the normal 
current. This high current flows for 
a short period, approximately one-
tenth of a second.
Another component of the in-
rush current is the starting of motors 
when the load is picked up. When a 
motor starts, the current drawn will 
typically be five to six times normal, 
until the motor reaches its operating 
speed. This may take as long as sev-
eral seconds for large, industrial-type 
motors.
A third component of inrush 
current is thermostatically controlled 
loads, which turn on and off auto-
matically to hold temperature to a 
desired preset value. Under normal 
operating conditions, approximately 
one-third of these loads will likely 
be connected at any instant in time. 
But after a lengthy interruption of 
service, they will all have their ther-
mostat contacts closed, waiting to 
run as soon as power is restored. As 
a result, these thermostatically con-
trolled loads will be perhaps three 
times greater than they normally 
would be for the first half hour or 
so after being energized. Most ther-
mostatically controlled loads also 
contain small, single-phase motors, 
which will draw five or six times run-
ning current until they are acceler-
ated up to running speed in perhaps 
one-half of a second. This results 
in the initial current drawn by some 
thermostatically controlled loads be-
ing as high as 15 times normal cur-
rent for the first one-half of a second 
following energization.
A summary of the magnitude 
and duration of the inrush for some 
of the various types of loads is shown 
in Figure 1.
Transient Overvoltages
Restoration of the power system is 
performed through a series of switch-
ing actions to sequentially reener-
gize system components. Energizing 
equipment during restoration condi-
tions can result in higher overvoltages 
than during times of normal opera-
tion. These overvoltages can lead to 
equipment failure or damage that 
	
Case Study	
683

684	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
may hinder the successful implemen-
tation of the restoration plan.
Transient overvoltages include 
temporary overvoltages, switching 
surges, and lightning surges. Light-
ning surges, while an important de-
sign consideration, are usually not a 
concern that affects the restoration of 
a power system.
Switching surges are the tran-
sient overvoltages that immediately fol-
low the opening or closing of a circuit  
breaker or other switching device. 
Switching surges have high-frequency 
components (from 100 Hz to 10 kHz) 
that decay quickly, typically within 
two to three cycles of the power fre-
quency, and are followed by a normal 
steady-state voltage. Switching surges 
typically contain only one, or just a 
few, voltage peaks that are of inter-
est, as shown in Figure 2. This sample 
waveform is from a simulation of the 
energizing of a typical overhead line.
950 MVA
Load
330 MVA
180 MVA
100 MVA
0 0.5 s
3 s
30 min
Time After Pickup
Initial Inrush
Incandescent Lamp Filaments
Reach Operating Temperature
Small Motors up to Speed
Large Motors
up to Speed
Diversity in Load
Cycling Begins
Figure 1  Load variation following cold load pickup
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
(ms)
–2.0
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
(V)
Figure 2  Switching surge from an electromechanical  
transients program simulation of the energizing 
of a typical overhead line. The voltage is shown 
per unit of the line’s nominal voltage rating.

The magnitude and wave shape 
of the switching surge depends on the 
angle of the power frequency source 
voltage wave at the instant of circuit 
breaker closure. This requires that many 
simulations be performed with various 
closing times to obtain a statistical 
distribution of the overvoltage results. 
Surge arresters are effective in limiting 
the peak of the switching surges.
Temporary overvoltages (TOVs)  
include many types of events for 
which the voltage transient lasts 
longer than the surges discussed 
above, exceeding the rated value 
for three cycles or, potentially, sig-
nificantly longer. TOVs encompass 
power frequency phenomena such as 
the Ferranti rise on an open-ended 
line or cable and the overvoltage on 
an unfaulted phase during a single 
line-to-ground fault.
TOVs can also follow switching 
surges. For example, a TOV can result 
from switching circuits that saturate 
the core of a power transformer, for 
example, when cables and trans-
formers are energized together. The 
harmonic-rich transformer inrush cur-
rents can interact with the harmonic 
resonances of the power system. The 
resonant frequencies are a function  
of the series inductance associated 
with the system’s short-circuit strength 
and the shunt capacitances of cables 
and lines. Higher inductances (a prop-
erty of relatively weak systems, such as 
those often occurring during restora-
tion) and higher capacitances (such as 
those due to long cables) yield lower 
resonant frequencies and a higher 
chance of TOVs.
Figure 3 shows an example of a 
TOV taken from a simulation of the 
energization of a large transformer. 
Like switching surges, this type of 
TOV can be dependent on the circuit 
breaker closing times. In contrast to 
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
(s)
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
(V)
Figure 3  An example of a TOV; voltage is expressed 
per unit of nominal peak phase voltage
	
Case Study	
685

686	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
switching surges with one predomi-
nant peak, TOVs can have hundreds 
of peaks, all of about the same mag-
nitude, if the TOV lasts for several 
seconds.
The expected TOV magnitude 
and duration is often a major concern 
for 
surge 
arresters. 
Metal-oxide  
varistor-type surge arresters have 
little effect on TOVs that are below 
about 1.6 per unit. Silicon carbide-
type surge arresters are not affected 
by TOV levels below the 60-Hz spark-
over level. If the TOV repeatedly ex-
ceeds the spark-over level, however, 
then the multiple discharges may 
result in excessive energy absorption 
and consequent arrester failure.
A Black-Start Example
In this section, we present a simu-
lated black start. The scenario is one 
where a fast-starting, gas turbine-
driven generating unit is used as a 
BSR to start up a combined-cycle 
power plant. The black-start system 
consists of the BSU’s step-up trans-
former, underground high-voltage 
(HV) cables that connect the HV 
substation at the BSU to the HV 
substation at the combined-cycle 
plant, and the generator step-up 
and auxiliary transformers at the 
combined-cycle plant. Both the taps 
of transformers with tap-adjustment 
capability and the voltage reference 
set point of the BSU were chosen to 
ensure that terminal voltages at the 
large induction motor units used in 
the black start were close to their 
nominal values.
The black-start plan begins 
with the across-the-line starting of a  
2500-hp motor. The motor perfor-
mance during the starting period is 
shown in Figure 4. Terminal volt-
age, motor reactive power, electrical 
torque, and motor slip are shown. 
Note the dip in motor terminal  
voltage and that the demand for re-
active power rises during the period 
following the lowest voltage at the 
motor terminals. The motor’s air 
gap torque increases significantly 
during the acceleration period, as 
expected, to overcome the mechan-
ical load torque that opposes devel-
oped electromagnetic torque.
The dynamic response of the 
BSU during the starting of this 
large induction motor is shown in 
Figure 5. The performance of the 
excitation system is shown as it 
works to control the BSU’s termi-
nal voltage. Note the fast response 
and large field forcing applied to 
pull up the machine terminal volt-
age from the dip caused by the large 
reactive power demand imposed by 
the starting motor. The unit also 
sees a significant voltage rise caused 
by the rapid reduction in reactive 
power as the motor locks in to its 
operating speed. Electric power 
demand also increases during this 
period as the motor accelerates and 
moves toward its steady-state oper-
ating point.
Summary
Restoration actions involve very un-
usual conditions, especially for local 
generation used as a BSR. Important 
considerations for assuring that res-
toration plans are realizable include 
the ability to operate in islanded 

conditions with stable frequency 
and voltage control, the availability 
of synchronizing equipment at key 
substations to permit paralleling of 
separate sections, and the validity of 
assumptions used to assess the ability 
of synchronous generators to operate 
at the unusual points of their capa-
bility required during the restoration 
period.
Restoration actions performed 
to recover from a blackout may vary 
from those determined in the res-
toration studies. Restoration plans 
are based on a given set of assump-
tions, such as the available transmis-
sion, the amount of cold load to be 
picked up, and the many other con-
ditions discussed in this case study. 
Although actual conditions could 
differ from these assumptions, res-
toration studies provide value by 
demonstrating the logic behind par-
ticular steps being taken, such as the 
reasoning behind the choice and se-
quence of operator actions and the 
Slip
Electric Torque
Terminal Voltage
Absorbed Reactive Power
0.0
3.000
6.000
9.000
12.000
15.000
18.000
21.000
24.000
27.000
30.000
Time (s)
Figure 4  Motor performance during the starting period: motor 
terminal voltage, reactive power, electric torque,  
and slip
	
Case Study	
687

688	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
expected results of those actions. 
With this understanding, the oper-
ating staff will be able to adapt to 
differences in the actual versus the 
assumed conditions.
This case study has described 
restoration operations and the studies 
that should be part of a restoration 
planning process. In particular, it  
attempted to describe technical issues 
such as system dynamics and control 
aspects of the black-start process. This 
overview should be helpful to utility 
staff involved in the development of 
restoration plans. Development of 
thorough restoration plans and the 
testing of those plans through simu-
lation and drills will help to minimize 
disruption of service to loads and 
the risk of damage to equipment 
following partial or total power  
system blackouts.
For Further Reading
M. M. Adibi, “Power system restora-
tion, methodologies, and implemen-
tation strategies,” IEEE Series on 
Power Engineering, P. M. Anderson, 
Ed., 2000.
IEEE Committee Report, “Sys-
tem restoration-deploying the plan: 
current operational problems working 
group,” IEEE Trans., pp. 4623–4671, 
Nov. 1982.
J. W. Feltes and C. Grande- 
Moran, “Black start studies for 
Terminal Voltage
Field Voltage
Speed Deviation
0.0
3.000
6.000
9.000
12.000
15.000
18.000
21.000
24.000
27.000
30.000
Time (s)
Figure 5  Dynamic response of the BSU as the large 
induction motor is started: field voltage,  
terminal voltage, and speed

	
Section 11.1 The Swing Equation	
689
11.1  The Swing Equation
Consider a generating unit consisting of a three-phase synchronous generator and 
its prime mover. The rotor motion is determined by Newton’s second law, given by
Jamstd 5 Tmstd 2 Testd 5 Tastd
(11.1.1) 
where J 5 total moment of inertia of the rotating masses, kg-m2
am 5 rotor angular acceleration, rad/s2
Tm 5 mechanical torque supplied by the prime mover minus the retarding 
torque due to mechanical losses, N-m
Te 5 electrical torque that accounts for the total three-phase electrical power 
output of the generator, plus electrical losses, N-m
Ta 5 net accelerating torque, N-m
Also, the rotor angular acceleration is given by
amstd 5 dvmstd
dt
5 d 2umstd
dt2

(11.1.2) 
vmstd 5 dumstd
dt

(11.1.3)
where vm 5 rotor angular velocity, rad/s
um 5 rotor angular position with respect to a stationary axis, rad
system restoration,” presented at the 
2008 IEEE Power and Energy So-
ciety General Meeting, Pittsburgh, 
PA, 20–24 July 2008.
J. W. Feltes, C. Grande-Moran,  
P. Duggan, S. Kalinowsky, M. Zam-
zam, V. C. Kotecha, and F. P. de 
Mello, “Some considerations in the 
development of restoration plans for 
electric utilities serving large metro-
politan areas,” IEEE Trans. on Power 
Systems, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 909–915, 
May 2006.
IEEE 
Committee 
Report, 
“New approaches in power system 
restoration,” IEEE Trans. on Power 
Systems, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 1428–1434, 
Nov. 1992.
M. Henderson, E. Rappold, 
J. W. Feltes, C. Grande-Moran, D. 
Durbak, and O. Bileya, “Addressing 
restoration issues for the ISO New 
England system,” 2012 IEEE Power 
and Energy Society General Meet-
ing, San Diego, CA, July 2012.
Biographies
James Feltes is with Siemens Power 
Technologies International (Sie-
mens 
PTI), 
Schenectady, 
New 
York.
Carlos Grande-Moran is with 
Siemens Power Technologies Inter-
national (Siemens PTI), Schenectady, 
New York.  ■

690	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
Tm and Te are positive for generator operation. In steady-state Tm equals Te, the 
accelerating torque Ta is zero, and, from (11.1.1), the rotor acceleration am is zero, 
resulting in a constant rotor velocity called synchronous speed. When Tm is greater 
than Te, Ta is positive and am is therefore positive, resulting in increasing rotor speed. 
Similarly, when Tm is less than Te, the rotor speed is decreasing.
It is convenient to measure the rotor angular position with respect to a syn-
chronously rotating reference axis instead of a stationary axis. Accordingly, 
umstd 5 vmsynt 1 dmstd
(11.1.4) 
where vmsyn 5 synchronous angular velocity of the rotor, rad/s
dm 5 rotor angular position with respect to a synchronously rotating  
reference, rad
Using (11.1.2) and (11.1.4), (11.1.1) becomes
J d 2umstd
dt2
5 J d 2dmstd
dt2
5 Tmstd 2 Testd 5 Tastd
(11.1.5) 
It is also convenient to work with power rather than torque, and to work in per-
unit rather than in actual units. Accordingly, multiply (11.1.5) by vm(t) and divide by 
Srated, the three-phase voltampere rating of the generator:
Jvmstd
Srated
 d 2dmstd
dt2
5 vmstdTmstd 2 vmstdTestd
Srated
5 pmstd 2 pestd
Srated
5 pmp.u.std 2 pep.u.std 5 pap.u.std
(11.1.6) 
where pmp.u. 5 mechanical power supplied by the prime mover minus mechanical 
losses, per unit
pep.u. 5 electrical power output of the generator plus electrical losses, per unit
Finally, it is convenient to work with a normalized inertia constant, called the 
H constant, which is defined as
H 5 stored kinetic energy at synchronous speed
generator voltampere rating
5
1
2Jv2
msyn
Srated
   joulesyVA or per unit{seconds
(11.1.7) 
The H constant has the advantage that it falls within a fairly narrow range, normally 
between 1 and 10 p.u.-s, whereas J varies widely, depending on generating unit size 
and type. Solving (11.1.7) for J and using in (11.1.6),
2H vmstd
v2
msyn
 d 2dmstd
dt2
5 pmp.u.std 2 pep.u.std 5 pap.u.std
(11.1.8) 

	
Section 11.1 The Swing Equation	
691
Defining per-unit rotor angular velocity.
vp.u.std 5 vmstd
vmsyn

(11.1.9) 
Equation (11.1.8) becomes
2H
vmsyn
 vp.u.std d 2dmstd
dt2
5 pmp.u.std 2 pep.u.std 5 pap.u.std
(11.1.10) 
For a synchronous generator with P poles, the electrical angular acceleration a, 
electrical radian frequency v, and power angle d are
astd 5 P
2
 amstd
(11.1.11) 
vstd 5 P
2
 vmstd
(11.1.12) 
dstd 5 P
2
 dmstd
(11.1.13) 
Similarly, the synchronous electrical radian frequency is
vsyn 5 P
2
 vmsyn
(11.1.14) 
The per-unit electrical frequency is
vp.u.std 5 vstd
vsyn
5
2
P
 vstd
2
P
 vsyn
5 vmstd
vmsyn

(11.1.15) 
Therefore, using (11.1.13–11.1.15), (11.1.10) can be written as
2H
vsyn
 vp.u.std d 2dstd
dt2
5 pmp.u.std 2 pep.u.std 5 pap.u.std
(11.1.16) 
Frequently (11.1.16) is modified to also include a term that represents a damping 
torque anytime the generator deviates from its synchronous speed, with its value 
proportional to the speed deviation
2Hyvsynvp.u.stdsd 2dstdysdt2dd
5 pmp.u.std 2 pep.u.std 2 Dyvsynsddstdysdtdd
5 pap.u.std
(11.1.17) 
where D is either zero or a relatively small positive number with typical values be-
tween 0 and 2. The units of D are per-unit power divided by per-unit speed deviation.
Equation (11.1.17), called the per-unit swing equation, is the fundamental  
equation that determines rotor dynamics in transient stability studies. Note that it is 
nonlinear due to pep.u.(t) which is shown in Section 11.2 to be a nonlinear function 

692	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
of d. Equation (11.1.17) is also nonlinear due to the vp.u.(t) term. However, in practice 
the rotor speed does not vary significantly from synchronous speed during transients. 
That is, vp.u.(t) ≃ 1.0, which is often assumed in (11.1.17) for hand calculations.
Equation (11.1.17) is a second-order differential equation that can be rewrit-
ten as two first-order differential equations. Differentiating (11.1.4), and then using 
(11.1.3) and (11.1.12) through (11.1.14), result in
ddstd
dt
5 vstd 2 vsyn
(11.1.18) 
Using (11.1.18) in (11.1.17),
2H
vsyn
 vp.u.std dvstd
dt
5 pmp.u.std 2 pep.u.std 2 Dyvsyn ddstd
dt
5 pap.u.std
(11.1.19) 
Equations (11.1.18) and (11.1.19) are two first-order differential equations.
Generator per-unit swing equation and power angle during 
a short circuit
A three-phase, 60-Hz, 500-MVA, 15-kV, 32-pole hydroelectric generating unit has 
an H constant of 2.0 p.u.-s and D 5 0. (a) Determine vsyn and vmsyn. (b) Give the 
per-unit swing equation for this unit. (c) The unit is initially operating at pmp.u. 5 
pep.u. 5 1.0, v 5 vsyn, and d 5 108 when a three-phase-to-ground bolted short 
circuit at the generator terminals causes pep.u. to drop to zero for t ù 0. Determine 
the power angle 3 cycles after the short circuit commences. Assume pmp.u. remains 
constant at 1.0 per unit. Also assume vp.u.(t) 5 1.0 in the swing equation.
SOLUTION
a.  For a 60-Hz generator,
vsyn 5 2p60 5 377 rad/s
and, from (11.1.14), with P 5 32 poles,
vmsyn 5 2
P
 vsyn 51
2
322377 5 23.56   rad/s
b.  From (11.1.16), with H 5 2.0 p.u.-s,
4
2p60
 vp.u.std d 2dstd
dt2
5 pmp.u.std 2 pep.u.std
c.  The initial power angle is
ds0d 5 108 5 0.1745   radian
EXAMPLE 11.1

	
Section 11.1 The Swing Equation	
693
Also, from (11.1.17), at t 5 0,
dds0d
dt
5 0
Using pmp.u.(t) 5 1.0, pep.u. 5 0, and vp.u.(t) 5 1.0, the swing equation from (b) is
1
4
2p602
d 2dstd
dt2
5 1.0   t ù 0
Integrating twice and using the above initial conditions,
d dstd
dt
51
2p60
4 2t 1 0
dstd 51
2p60
8 2t2 1 0.1745
At t 5 3 cycles 5
3 cycles
60 cyclesysecond 5 0.05 second,
ds0.05d 51
2p60
8 2 s0.05d2 1 0.1745
5 0.2923 radian 5 16.758
Equivalent swing equation: two generating units
A power plant has two three-phase, 60-Hz generating units with the following 
ratings:
Unit 1: 500 MVA, 15 kV, 0.85 power factor, 32 poles, H1 5 2.0 p.u.-s, D 5 0
Unit 2: 300 MVA, 15 kV, 0.90 power factor, 16 poles, H2 5 2.5 p.u.-s, D 5 0
a.	 Give the per-unit swing equation of each unit on a 100-MVA system base.
b.	 If the units are assumed to “swing together,” that is, d1(t) 5 d2(t), combine 
the two swing equations into one equivalent swing equation.
SOLUTION
a.  If the per-unit powers on the right-hand side of the swing equation are con-
verted to the system base, then the H constant on the left-hand side must also be 
converted. That is,
EXAMPLE 11.2
(Continued )

694	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
Hnew 5 Hold Sold
Snew
   per unit
Converting H1 from its 500-MVA rating to the 100-MVA system base,
H1new 5 H1old Sold
Snew
5 s2.0d1
500
1002 5 10   p.u.{s
Similarly, converting H2,
H2new 5 s2.5d1
300
1002 5 7.5   p.u.{s
The per-unit swing equations on the system base are then
2H1new
vsyn
 v1p.u.std d 2d1std
dt2
5 20.0
2p60
 v1p.u.stdd 2d1std
dt2
5 pm1p.u.std 2 pe1p.u.std
2H2new
vsyn
 v2p.u.std d 2d2std
dt2
5 15.0
2p60
 v2p.u.stdd 2d2std
dt2
5 pm2p.u.std 2 pe2p.u.
b.  Letting: 
dstd 5 d1std 5 d2std
vp.u.std 5 v1p.u.std 5 v2p.u.std
pmp.u.std 5 pm1p.u.std 1 pm2p.u.std
pep.u.std 5 pe1p.u.std 1 pe2p.u.std
and adding the above swing equations
2sH1new 1 H2newd
vsyn
 vp.u.std d 2dstd
dt2
5 35.0
2p60
  vp.u.std d 2dstd
dt2
5 pmp.u.std 2 pep.u.std
When transient stability studies involving large-scale power systems with 
many generating units are performed, computation time can be reduced by 
combining the swing equations of those units that swing together. Such units, 
which are called coherent machines, usually are connected to the same bus or are 
electrically close, and they are usually remote from the network disturbances 
under study.

	
Section 11.2 Simplified Synchronous Machine Model and System Equivalents	
695
11.2  Simplified Synchronous Machine Model 
and System Equivalents
Figure 11.2 shows a simplified model of a synchronous machine, called the classical 
model, that can be used in transient stability studies. As shown, the synchronous ma-
chine is represented by a constant internal voltage E9 behind its direct axis transient 
reactance X9d. This model is based on the following assumptions:
1.	 The machine is operating under balanced three-phase positive-sequence 
conditions.
2.	 Machine excitation is constant.
3.	 Machine losses, saturation, and saliency are neglected.
In transient stability programs, more detailed models can be used to represent ex-
citers, losses, saturation, and saliency. However, the simplified model reduces model 
complexity while maintaining reasonable accuracy for some stability calculations.
Each generator in the model is connected to a system consisting of transmis-
sion lines, transformers, loads, and other machines. To a first approximation the sys-
tem can be represented by an “infinite bus” behind a system reactance. An infinite 
bus is an ideal voltage source that maintains constant voltage magnitude, constant 
phase, and constant frequency.
Figure 11.3 shows a synchronous generator connected to a system equivalent. 
The voltage magnitude Vbus and 08 phase of the infinite bus are constant. The phase 
angle d of the internal machine voltage is the machine power angle with respect to 
the infinite bus.
FIGURE 11.2
Simplified synchronous 
machine model for 
transient stability 
studies
FIGURE 11.3
Synchronous generator 
connected to a system 
equivalent

696	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
The equivalent reactance between the machine internal voltage and the infinite 
bus is Xeq 5 (X9d 1 X). From (6.7.3), the real power delivered by the synchronous 
generator to the infinite bus is
pe 5 E9Vbus
Xeq
 sin d
(11.2.1) 
During transient disturbances both E9 and Vbus are considered constant in (11.2.1). 
Thus pe is a sinusoidal function of the machine power angle d.
Generator internal voltage and real power output versus 
power angle
Figure 11.4 shows a single-line diagram of a three-phase, 60-Hz synchronous 
generator, connected through a transformer and parallel transmission lines to an 
infinite bus. All reactances are given in per-unit on a common system base. If the 
infinite bus receives 1.0 per unit real power at 0.95 p.f. lagging, determine (a) the 
internal voltage of the generator and (b) the equation for the electrical power 
delivered by the generator versus its power angle d.
SOLUTION
a.  The equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 11.5, from which the equivalent 
reactance between the machine internal voltage and infinite bus is
Xeq 5 X9d 1 XTR 1 X12isX13 1 X23d
5 0.30 1 0.10 1 0.20is0.10 1 0.20d
5 0.520   per unit
The current into the infinite bus is
I 5
P
Vbussp.f.d/2cos21sp.f.d 5
s1.0d
s1.0ds0.95d/2cos21 0.95
5 1.05263/218.1958   per unit
EXAMPLE 11.3
FIGURE 11.4
Single-line diagram 
for Example 11.3

	
Section 11.3 The Equal-Area Criterion	
697
11.3  The Equal-Area Criterion
Consider a synchronous generating unit connected through a reactance to an infinite 
bus. Plots of electrical power pe and mechanical power pm versus power angle d are 
shown in Figure 11.6. pe is a sinusoidal function of d, as given by (11.2.1).
and the machine internal voltage is
E9 5 E9/d 5 Vbus 1 jXeqI
5 1.0/08 1 s j0.520ds1.05263/218.1958)
5 1.0/08 1 0.54737/71.8058
5 1.1709 1 j0.5200
5 1.2812/23.9468   per unit
b.  From (11.2.1),
pe 5 s1.2812ds1.0d
0.520
 sin d 5 2.4628 sin d   per unit
FIGURE 11.5
Equivalent circuit 
for Example 11.3
FIGURE 11.6
pe and pm versus d

698	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
Suppose the unit is initially operating in steady-state at pe 5 pm 5 pm0 and d 5 d0, 
when a step change in pm from pm0 to pm1 occurs at t 5 0. Due to rotor inertia, the  
rotor position cannot change instantaneously. That is, dm(01) 5 dm(02); therefore, 
d(01) 5 d(02) 5 d0 and pe(01) 5pe(02). Since pm(01) 5pm1 is greater than pe(01), the  
acceleration power pa(01) is positive and, from (11.1.16), (d 2d)∙(dt2)(01) is positive. 
The rotor accelerates and d increases. When d reaches d1, pe 5 pm1 and (d 2d)∙(dt2) be-
comes zero. However, dd∙dt is still positive and d continues to increase, overshooting 
its final steady-state operating point. When d is greater than d1, pm is less than pe, pa 
is negative, and the rotor decelerates. Eventually, d reaches a maximum value d2 and 
then swings back toward d1. Using (11.1.16), which has no damping, d would contin-
ually oscillate around d1. However, damping due to mechanical and electrical losses 
causes d to stabilize at its final steady-state operating point d1. Note that if the power 
angle exceeded d3, then pm would exceed pe and the rotor would accelerate again, 
causing a further increase in d and loss of stability.
One method for determining stability and maximum power angle is to solve 
the nonlinear swing equation via numerical integration techniques using a digital 
computer. This method, which is applicable to multimachine systems, is described 
in Section 11.4. However, there is also a direct method for determining stability 
that does not involve solving the swing equation; this method is applicable for one  
machine connected to an infinite bus or for two machines. The method, called the 
equal-area criterion, is described in this section.
In Figure 11.6, pm is greater than pe during the interval d0 , d , d1, and the rotor 
is accelerating. The shaded area A1 between the pm and pe curves is called the acceler-
ating area. During the interval d1 , d , d2, pm is less than pe, the rotor is decelerating, 
and the shaded area A2 is the decelerating area. At both the initial value d 5 d0 and 
the maximum value d 5 d2, dd∙dt 5 0. The equal-area criterion states that A1 5 A2.
To derive the equal-area criterion for one machine connected to an infinite bus, 
assume vp.u.(t) 5 1 in (11.1.16), giving
2H
vsyn
 d 2d
dt2 5 pmp.u. 2 pep.u.
(11.3.1) 
Multiplying by dd∙dt and using
d
dt 3
dd
dt4
2
5 2S
dd
dtDS
d 2d
dt2D
(11.3.1) becomes
2H
vsyn
 1
d 2d
dt22 1
dd
dt2 5 H
vsyn
 d
dt 3
dd
dt4
2
5 spmp.u. 2 pep.u.d dd
dt
(11.3.2) 
Multiplying (11.3.2) by dt and integrating from d0 to d,
H
vsyn#
d
d0
d 3
dd
dt4
2
5#
d
d0
s pmp.u. 2 pep.u.ddd

	
Section 11.3 The Equal-Area Criterion	
699
or
H
vsyn
 3
dd
dt4
2*
d
d0
5#
d
d0
s pmp.u. 2 pep.u.d dd
(11.3.3) 
The above integration begins at d0 where dd∙dt 5 0, and continues to an ar-
bitrary d. When d reaches its maximum value, denoted d2, dd∙dt again equals zero. 
Therefore, the left-hand side of (11.3.3) equals zero for d 5 d2 and
#
d2
d0
s pmp.u. 2 pep.u.ddd 5 0
(11.3.4) 
Separating this integral into positive (accelerating) and negative (decelerating) 
areas, results in the equal-area criterion
#
d1
d0
s pmp.u. 2 pep.u.ddd 1#
d2
d1
s pmp.u. 2 pep.u.ddd 5 0
or
#
d1
d0
s pmp.u. 2 pep.u.ddd 5#
d2
d1
s pep.u. 2 pmp.u.ddd
(11.3.5)
In practice, sudden changes in mechanical power usually do not occur, since 
the time constants associated with prime mover dynamics are on the order of sec-
onds. However, stability phenomena similar to that described above can also occur 
from sudden changes in electrical power, due to system faults and line switching. The 
following three examples are illustrative.
Equal-area criterion: transient stability during  
a three-phase fault
The synchronous generator shown in Figure 11.4 is initially operating in the steady-
state condition given in Example 11.3, when a temporary three-phase-to-ground 
bolted short circuit occurs on line 1–3 at bus 1, shown as point F in Figure 11.4. 
Three cycles later the fault extinguishes by itself. Due to a relay misoperation, all 
circuit breakers remain closed. Determine whether stability is or is not maintained 
and determine the maximum power angle. The inertia constant of the generat-
ing unit is 3.0 per unit-seconds on the system base. Assume pm remains constant 
throughout the disturbance. Also assume vp.u. 5 (t) 5 1.0 in the swing equation.
SOLUTION 
Plots of pe and pm versus d are shown in Figure 11.7. From Example 11.3 the initial 
operating point is pe(02) 5 pm 5 1.0 per unit and ds01d 5 ds02d 5 d0 5 23.958 5  
EXAMPLE 11.4
(Continued )
A1
A2

700	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
0.4179 radian. At t 5 0, when the short circuit occurs, pe instantaneously drops to 
zero and remains at zero during the fault since power cannot be transferred past 
faulted bus 1. From (11.1.16), with vp.u.(t) 5 1.0,
2H
vsyn
 d 2dstd
dt2
5 pmp.u.    0 < t ø 0.05   s
Integrating twice with initial condition d(0) 5 d0 and dds0d
dt
5 0,
ddstd
dt
5
vsyn  pmp.u.
2H
 t 1 0
  dstd 5
vsyn  pmp.u.
4H
 t2 1 d0
At t 5 3 cycles 5 0.05 second,
d1 5 ds0.05 sd 5 2p60
12  s0.05d2 1 0.4179
  5 0.4964 
  radian 5 28.448
The accelerating area A1, shaded in Figure 11.7, is
A1 5#
d1
d0
pmdd 5#
d1
d0
1.0dd 5 sd1 2 d0d 5 0.4964 2 0.4179 5 0.0785
At t 5 0.05 s the fault extinguishes and pe instantaneously increases from zero to 
the sinusoidal curve in Figure 11.7. d continues to increase until the decelerating 
area A2 equals A1. That is,
A2 5#
d2
d1
s p max  sin d 2 pmddd
5#
d2
0.4964
s2.4638 sin d 2 1.0ddd 5 A1 5 0.0785
Integrating,
2.4638fcoss0.4964d 2 cos d2g 2 sd2 2 0.4964d 5 0.0785
2.4638 cos d2 1 d2 5 2.5843
FIGURE 11.7
p–d plot for 
Example 11.4

	
Section 11.3 The Equal-Area Criterion	
701
The above nonlinear algebraic equation can be solved iteratively to obtain d2 5 
0.7003 radian 5 40.128
Since the maximum angle d2 does not exceed d3 5 (1808 2 d0) 5 156.058, 
stability is maintained. In steady-state, the generator returns to its initial operating 
point pess 5 pm 5 1.0 per unit and dss 5d0 5 23.958.
Note that as the fault duration increases, the risk of instability also increases. The 
critical clearing time, denoted tcr, is the longest fault duration allowable for stability.
To see this case modeled in PowerWorld Simulator, open case Example 11_4 
(see Figure 11.8). Then select Add-Ons, Transient Stability, which displays the 
Transient Stability Analysis Form. Notice that in the Transient Stability Contin-
gency Elements list, a fault is applied to bus 1 at t 5 0 s and cleared at t 5 0.05 s 
(three cycles later). To see the time variation in the generator angle (modeled at 
bus 4 in PowerWorld Simulator), click the Run Transient Stability button. When 
the simulation is finished, a graph showing this angle automatically appears, as 
FIGURE 11.8
Variation in d(t ) without Damping
(Continued )

702	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
shown in the figure. More detailed results are also available by clicking on Results 
in the list on the left side of the form. To rerun the example with a different fault 
duration, modify the Time (second) field in the Transient Contingency Elements 
list, and then again click the Run Transient Stability button.
Notice that because this system is modeled without damping (i.e., D 5 0), the 
angle oscillations do not damp out with time. To extend the example, right-click on  
the Bus 4 generator on the one-line diagram and select Generator Information Dialog. 
Then click on the Stability, Machine Models tab to see the parameters associated 
with the GENCLS model (i.e., a classical model—a more detailed machine model is 
introduced in Section 11.6). Change the D field to 1.0, select OK to close the dialog, 
and then rerun the transient stability case. The results are as shown in Figure 11.9. 
While the inclusion of damping did not significantly alter the maximum for d(t), the 
magnitude of the angle oscillations is now decreasing with time. For convenience this 
modified example is contained in PowerWorld Simulator case Example 11_4b.
FIGURE 11.9
Variation in d(t ) with Damping

	
Section 11.3 The Equal-Area Criterion	
703
Equal-area criterion: critical clearing time for a temporary 
three-phase fault
Assuming the temporary short circuit in Example 11.4 lasts longer than 3 cycles, 
calculate the critical clearing time.
SOLUTION 
The p–d plot is shown in Figure 11.10. At the critical clearing angle, denoted dcr, 
the fault is extinguished. The power angle then increases to a maximum value  
d3 5 1808 2 d0 5 156.058 5 2.7236 radians, which gives the maximum decelerating 
area. Equating the accelerating and decelerating areas,
A1 5#
dcr
d0
pm dd 5 A2 5#
d3
dcr
sPmax  sind 2 pmddd
#
dcr
0.4179
 1.0 dd 5#
2.7236
dcr
 s2.4638 sin d 2 1.0d dd
Solving for dcr,
sdcr 2 0.4179d 5 2.4638fcos dcr 2 cos s2.7236dg 2 s2.7236 2 dcrd
 2.4638 cos dcr 5 10.05402
                  dcr 5 1.5489 radians 5 88.748
From the solution to the swing equation given in Example 11.4,
dstd 5
vsyn pmp.u.
4H
 t2 1 d0
EXAMPLE 11.5
FIGURE 11.10
p–d plot for 
Example 11.5
(Continued )

704	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
Solving
t 5Î
4H
vsyn pmp.u.
 sdstd 2 d0d
Using d(tcr) 5 dcr 5 1.5489 and d0 5 0.4179 radian,
tcr 5Î
12
s2p60ds1.0d s1.5489 2 0.4179d
  5 0.1897 s 5 11.38 cycles
If the fault is cleared before t 5 tcr 5 11.38 cycles, stability is maintained. Otherwise, 
the generator goes out of synchronism with the infinite bus; that is, stability is lost.
To see a time-domain simulation of this case, open Example 11_5 in 
PowerWorld Simulator (see Figure 11.11). Again select Add-Ons, Transient Stability  
FIGURE 11.11
Variation in d(t ) for Example 11.5

	
Section 11.3 The Equal-Area Criterion	
705
to view the Transient Stability Analysis Form. In order to better visualize the 
results on a PowerWorld one-line diagram, there is an option to transfer the 
transient stability results to the one-line every n timesteps. To access this option, 
select the Options page from the list on the left side of the display, then the General 
tab, then check the Transfer Results to Power Flow after Interval Check field. With 
this option checked, click on the Run Transient Stability, which will run the case 
with a critical clearing time of 0.1895 seconds. The plot is set to dynamically  
update as well. The final results are shown in Figure 11.11. Because the oneline is 
reanimated every n time-steps (4 in this case), a potential downside to this option 
is it takes longer to run. Uncheck the option to restore full solution speed.
Equal-area criterion: critical clearing angle for a cleared 
three-phase fault
The synchronous generator in Figure 11.4 is initially operating in the steady-state 
condition given in Example 11.3 when a permanent three-phase-to-ground bolted 
short circuit occurs on line 1–3 at bus 3. The fault is cleared by opening the cir-
cuit breakers at the ends of line 1–3 and line 2–3. These circuit breakers then 
remain open. Calculate the critical clearing angle. As in previous examples, H 5 
3.0 p.u.-s, pm 5 1.0 per unit and vp.u. 5 1.0 in the swing equation.
SOLUTION
From Example 11.3, the equation for the prefault electrical power, denoted pe1 here, 
is pe1 5 2.4638 sin d per unit. The faulted network is shown in Figure 11.12 (a), 
and the Thévenin equivalent of the faulted network, as viewed from the generator 
internal voltage source, is shown in Figure 11.12(b). The Thévenin reactance is
XTh 5 0.40 1 0.20i0.10 5 0.46666   per unit
and the Thévenin voltage source is
VTh 5 1.0/08 3
X13
X13 1 X124 5 1.0/08 0.10
0.30
5 0.33333/08   per unit
From Figure 11.12(b), the equation for the electrical power delivered by the gen-
erator to the infinite bus during the fault, denoted pe2, is
pe2 5 E9VTh
XTh
 sin d 5 s1.2812ds0.3333d
0.46666
 sin d 5 0.9152 sin d   per unit
EXAMPLE 11.6
(Continued )

706	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
The postfault network is shown in Figure 11.12(c), where circuit breakers have 
opened and removed lines 1–3 and 2–3. From this figure, the postfault electrical 
power delivered, denoted pe3, is
pe3 5 s1.2812ds1.0d
0.60
 sin d 5 2.1353 sin d   per unit
The p–d curves as well as the accelerating area A1 and decelerating area A2 corre-
sponding to critical clearing are shown in Figure 11.12(d). Equating A1 and A2,
A1 5#
dcr
d0
s pm 2 P2max  sin dddd 5 A2 5#
d3
dcr
sP3max sin d 2 pmddd
#
dcr
0.4179
s1.0 2 0.9152 sin dddd 5#
2.6542
dcr
s2.1353 sin d 2 1.0ddd
FIGURE 11.12
Example 11.6

	
Section 11.4 Numerical Integration of the Swing Equation	
707
11.4  Numerical Integration 
of the Swing Equation
The equal-area criterion is applicable to one machine and an infinite bus or to two 
machines. For multimachine stability problems, however, numerical integration tech-
niques can be employed to solve the swing equation for each machine.
Given a first-order differential equation
dx
dt 5 f sxd
(11.4.1) 
one relatively simple integration technique is Euler’s method [1], illustrated in  
Figure 11.13. The integration step size is denoted Dt. Calculating the slope at the 
beginning of the integration interval, from (11.4.1),
dxt
dt 5 f sxtd
(11.4.2) 
The new value xt1Dt is calculated from the old value xt by adding the increment Dx,
xt1Dt 5 xt 1 Dx 5 xt 11
dxt
dt2Dt
(11.4.3) 
Solving for dcr,
sdcr 2 0.4179d 1 0.9152scos dcr 2 cos 0.4179d
5 2.1353scos dcr 2 cos 2.6542d 2 s2.6542 2 dcrd
21.2201 cos dcr 5 0.4868
dcr 5 1.9812 radians 5 111.58
If the fault is cleared before d 5 dcr 5 111.58, stability is maintained. Otherwise, 
stability is lost. To see this case in PowerWorld Simulator open case Example 11_6.
FIGURE 11.13
Euler’s method

708	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
As shown in the figure, Euler’s method assumes that the slope is constant over 
the entire interval Dt. An improvement can be obtained by calculating the slope at both 
the beginning and end of the interval, and then averaging these slopes. The modified 
Euler’s method is illustrated in Figure 11.14. First, the slope at the beginning of the 
interval is calculated from (11.4.1) and used to calculate a preliminary value x
, given by
x
, 5 xt 11
dxt
dt2Dt
(11.4.4) 
Next, the slope at x
, is calculated:
dx
,
dt 5 f sx
,d
(11.4.5)
Then, the new value is calculated using the average slope:
xt1Dt 5 xt 11
dxt
dt 1 dx
,
dt2
2
 Dt
(11.4.6) 
Now apply the modified Euler’s method to calculate machine frequency v and 
power angle d. Letting x be either d or v, the old values at the beginning of the inter-
val are denoted dt and vt. From (11.1.17) and (11.1.18), the slopes at the beginning 
of the interval are
ddt
dt 5 vt 2 vsyn
(11.4.7) 
dv t
dt 5
pa p.u. tvsyn
2Hvp.u.t

(11.4.8) 
where pap.u.t is the per-unit accelerating power calculated at d 5 dt and vp.u.t 5 vt∙vsyn. 
Applying (11.4.4), preliminary values are
d
, 5 dt 11
ddt
dt2Dt
(11.4.9) 
v
, 5 vt 11
dvt
dt2 Dt
(11.4.10) 
FIGURE 11.14 
Modified Euler’s 
method

	
Section 11.4 Numerical Integration of the Swing Equation	
709
Next, the slopes at d
, and v
, are calculated, again using (11.1.17) and (11.1.18):
d d
,
dt 5 v
, 2 vsyn
(11.4.11) 
d v
,
dt 5
p
,
ap.u.vsyn
2Hv
,
p.u.

(11.4.12) 
where p
,
a p.u. is the per-unit accelerating power calculated at d 5 d
,, and v
,
p.u. 5 v
,yvsyn. 
Applying (11.4.6), the new values at the end of the interval are
dt1Dt 5 dt 11
ddt
dt 1 dd
,
dt2
2
 Dt
(11.4.13) 
vt1Dt 5 vt 11
dvt
dt 1 dv
,
dt2
2
 Dt
(11.4.14) 
This procedure, given by (11.4.7) through (11.4.13), begins at t 5 0 with specified 
initial values d0 and v0, and continues iteratively until t 5 T, a specified final time. 
In addition to Euler’s method, there are many other numerical integration 
techniques, such as Runge-Kutta, Picard’s method, and Milne’s predictor-corrector 
method [1]. Comparison of the methods shows a trade-off of accuracy versus com-
putation complexity. The Euler method is a relatively simple method to compute, but 
requires a small step size Dt for accuracy. Some of the other methods can use a larger 
step size for comparable accuracy, but the computations are more complex.
To see this case in PowerWorld Simulator, open case Example 11_7, which plots 
both the generator angle and speed. However, rather than showing the speed in radi-
ans per second, Hertz is used. Also, in addition to plotting the angle and speed versus 
time, the case includes a “phase portrait” in which the speed is plotted as a function 
of the angle. Numeric results are available by clicking on the Results page. The results 
shown in PowerWorld differ slightly from those in the table because PowerWorld uses 
a more exact second order integration method.
Euler’s method: computer solution to swing equation  
and critical clearing time
Verify the critical clearing angle determined in Example 11.6, and calculate the 
critical clearing time by applying the modified Euler’s method to solve the swing 
equation for the following two cases:
Case 1  The fault is cleared at d 5 1.95 radians 51128 (which is less than dcr)
Case 2  The fault is cleared at d 5 2.09 radians 5 1208 (which is greater than dcr)
EXAMPLE 11.7
(Continued )

710	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
Case 1 Stable
Case 2 Unstable
Time s
Delta rad
Omega rad/s
Time s
Delta rad Omega rad/s
Program Listing
0.000
0.418
376.991
0.000
0.418
376.991
0.020
0.426
377.778
0.020
0.426
377.778
10 REM EXAMPLE 13.7
0.040
0.449
378.547
0.040
0.449
378.547
20 REM SOLUTION TO SWING EQUATION
0.060
0.488
379.283
0.060
0.488
379.283
30 REM THE STEP SIZE IS DELTA
0.080
0.541
379.970
0.080
0.541
379.970
40 REM THE CLEARING ANGLE IS DLTCLR
0.100
0.607
380.599
0.100
0.607
380.599
50 DELTA1.01
0.120
0.685
381.159
0.120
0.685
381.159
60 DLTCLR 5 1.95
0.140
0.773
381.646
0.140
0.773
381.646
70 J 5 1
0.160
0.870
382.056
0.160
0.870
382.056
80 PMAX 5 .9I52
0.180
0.975
382.392
0.180
0.975
382.392
90 PI 5 3.1415927 #
0.200
1.086
382.660
0.200
1.086
382.660
I00 T 5 0
0.220
1.202
382.868
0.220
1.202
382.868
110 X1 5.4179
0.240
1.321
383.027
0.240
1.321
383.027
I20 X2 5 2*PI*60
0.260
1.443
383.153
0.260
1.443
383.153
130 LPRINT “TIME DELTA OMEGA”
0.280
1.567
383.262
0.280
1.567
383.262
140LPRINT”srad rad/s”
0.300
1.694
383.370
0.300
1.694
383.370
150 LPRINT USING “#####.###”; T;XI;X2
0.320
1.823
383.495
0.320
1.823
383.495
160 FORK 5 1 TO 86
0.340
1.954
383.658
0.340
1.954
383.658
170 REM LINE 180 IS EQ (13.4.7)
Fault Cleared
0.360
2.090
383.876
I80 X3 5 X2 2 (2*PI*60)
0.360
2.076
382.516
Fault Cleared
190 IF J 5 2 THEN GOTO 240
0.380
2.176
381.510
0.380
2.217
382.915
200 IF X1 . DLTCLR OR XI 5 DLTCLR THEN
0.400
2.257
380.638
0.400
2.327
382.138
    PMAX 5 2.I353
0.420
2.322
379.886
0.420
2.424
381.546
210 IF X1 . DLTCLR OR XI 5 DLTCLR THEN
0.440
2.373
379.237
0.440
2.511
381.135
    LPRINT “FAULT CLEARED”
0.460
2.413
378.674
0.460
2.591
380.902
220 IF XI . DLTCLR OR XI 5 DLTCLR THEN
0.480
2.441
378.176
0.480
2.668
380.844
    J 5 2
For calculations, use a step size Dt 5 0.01 s, and solve the swing equation from  
t 5 0 to t 5 T 5 0.85 s.
SOLUTION 
Equations (11.4.7) through (11.4.14) are solved by a computer program written in  
BASIC. From Example 11.6, the initial conditions at t 5 0 are
d0 5 0.4179 rad
v0 5 vsyn 5 2p60 rad/s
Also, the H constant is 3.0 p.u.-s, and the faulted accelerating power is
pap.u. 5 1.0 2 0.9152  sin  d
The postfault accelerating power is
pap.u. 5 1.0 2 2.1353  sin  d   per unit
The computer program and results at 0.02 s printout intervals are listed in  
Table 11.1. As shown, these results agree with Example 11.6, since the system is 
stable for Case 1 and unstable for Case 2. Also from Table 11.1, the critical clearing 
time is between 0.34 and 0.36 s.

	
Section 11.5 Multimachine Stability	
711
11.5  Multimachine Stability
The numerical integration methods discussed in Section 11.4 can be used to solve the 
swing equations for a multimachine stability problem. However, a method is required 
for computing machine output powers for a general network. Figure 11.15 shows a 
general N-bus power system with M synchronous machines. Each machine is the 
same as that represented by the simplified model of Figure 11.2, and the internal  
machine voltages are denoted E91, E92,…,E9M. The M machine terminals are connected 
FIGURE 11.15
N-bus power-system 
representation for 
transient stability 
studies
0.500
2.460
377.726
0.500
2.746
380.969
230 REM LINES 240 AND 250 ARE EQ (13.4.8)
0.520
2.471
377.307
0.520
2.828
381.288
240 X45I-PMAX*SIN(XI)
0.540
2.473
376.900
0.540
2.919
381.824
250 X5 5 X4 * (2 * PI * 60) * (2 * PI * 60)/(6 * X2) 
0.560
2.467
376.488
0.560
3.022
382.609
260 REM LINE 270 IS EQ (13.4.9)
0.580
2.453
376.056
0.580
3.145
383.686
270 X6 5 X1 1X3* DELTA
0.600
2.429
375.583
0.600
3.292
385.111
280 REM LINE 290 IS EQ (I3.4.10)
0.620
2.396
375.053
0.620
3.472
386.949
290 X7 5 X2 1 X5* DELTA
0.640
2.351
374.446
0.640
3.693
389.265
300 REM LINE 3 10 IS EQ (13.4.1 1)
0.660
2.294
373.740
0.660
3.965
392.099
3I0 X8 5 X7-2*PI*60
0.680
2.221
372.917
0.680
4.300
395.426
320 REM LINES 330 AND 340 ARE EQ (13.4.12)
0.700
2.130
371.960
0.700
4.704
399.079
330X9 5 I-PMAX*SIN (X6)
0.720
2.019
370.855
0.720
5.183
402.689
340 X10 5 X9 * (2 * PI * 60) * (2 * PI * 60)/(6 * X7)
0.740
1.884
369.604
0.740
5.729
405.683
350 REM LINE 360 IS EQ (13.4.13)
0.760
1.723
368.226
0.760
6.325
407.477
360 X1 5 X1 1 (X3 1 X8) * (DELTA/2)
0.780
1.533
366.773
0.780
6.941
407.812
370 REM LINE 380 IS EQ (I3.4.14)
0.800
1.314
365.341
0.800
7.551
406.981
380 X2 5 X2 1 (X5 1 X10) * (DELTA/2) 
0.820
1.068
364.070
0.820
8.139
405.711
390 T 5 K* DELTA
0.840
0.799
363.143
0.840
8.702
404.819
400Z 5 K/2
0.860
0.516
362.750
0.860
9.257
404.934
4I0M 5 INT (Z)
420 IF M 5 Z THEN LPRINT USING
    “#####.###”; T;XI;X2
430 NEXT K
 
440 END
TABLE  11.1
Computer calculation of swing curves for Example 11.7

712	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
to system buses denoted Gl, G2,…, GM in Figure 11.15. All loads are modeled here 
as constant admittances. Writing nodal equations for this network,
3
Y11
Y12
YT
12
Y224 3
V
E4 53
0
I4
(11.5.1) 
where
V 53
V1
V2
o
VN4
 is the N vector of bus voltages
(11.5.2) 
E 53
E91
E92
o
E9M4
 is the M vector of machine voltages
(11.5.3) 
I 53
I1
I2
o
IM4
 is the M vector of machine currents  
(these are current sources) 
(11.5.4) 
3
Y11
Y12
YT
12
Y224   is an sN 1 Md 3 sN 1 Md admitance matrix
(11.5.5) 
The admittance matrix in (11.5.5) is partitioned in accordance with the N system 
buses and M internal machine buses, as follows:
Y11
is
N 3 N
Y12
is
N 3 M
Y22
is
M 3 M
Y11 is similar to the bus admittance matrix used for power flows in Chapter 6, except 
that load admittances and inverted generator impedances are included. That is, if a 
load is connected to bus n, then that load admittance is added to the diagonal ele-
ment Y11nn. Also, s1yjX9dnd is added to the diagonal element Y11GnGn.
Y22 is a diagonal matrix of inverted generator impedances; that is,
Y22 5     
1
j X9d1
0
1
j X9d 2
∞
0
1
j X9dM

(11.5.6)
3
4

	
Section 11.5 Multimachine Stability	
713
Also, the kmth element of Y12 is
Y12km 55
21
j X9dn
      if k 5 Gn and m 5 n
0          otherwise                
(11.5.7) 
Writing (11.5.1) as two separate equations,
Y11V 1 Y12E 5 0
(11.5.8) 
YT
12V 1 Y22E 5 I
(11.5.9) 
Assuming E is known, (11.5.8) is a linear equation in V that can be solved 
either iteratively or by Gauss elimination. Using the Gauss-Seidel iterative method 
given by (7.2.9), the kth component of V is
Vksi 1 1d 5
1
Y11kk
 32o
M
n51
Y12knEn 2 o
k21
n51
Y11knVnsi 1 1d 2 o
N
n5k11
Y11knVnsid4 (11.5.10) 
After V is computed, the machine currents can be obtained from (11.5.9).  
That is,
I 53
I1
I2
o
IM4
5 YT
12V 1 Y22E
(11.5.11) 
The (real) electrical power output of machine n is then
pen 5 RefEnI *
n g      n 5 1,2, Á ,M
(11.5.12) 
The computation procedure for solving a transient stability problem alter-
nately solves the swing equations representing the machines and the above al-
gebraic power-flow equations representing the network. Use the modified Euler 
method of Section 11.4 to solve the swing equations and the Gauss-Seidel iterative 
method to solve the power-flow equations. The procedure is outlined in the follow-
ing 11 steps.
TRANSIENT STABILITY COMPUTATION PROCEDURE
STEP 1  Run a prefault power-flow program to compute initial bus voltages 
Vk, k 5 1, 2,…,N, initial machine currents In, and initial machine 
electrical power outputs pen, n 5 1, 2,…,M. Set machine mechanical 

714	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
power outputs, pmn 5 pen. Set initial machine frequencies, vn 5 vsyn. 
Compute the load admittances.
STEP 2  Compute the internal machine voltages:
En 5 En/dn 5 VGn 1 s jX9dn dIn     n 5 1, 2, Á ,M
	
where VGn and In are computed in Step 1. The magnitudes En will 
remain constant throughout the study. The angles dn are the initial 
power angles.
STEP 3  Compute Y11. Modify the (N 3 N) power-flow bus admittance 
matrix by including the load admittances and inverted generator 
impedances.
STEP 4  Compute Y22 from (11.5.6) and Y12 from (11.5.7).
STEP 5  Set time t 5 0.
STEP 6  Is there a switching operation, change in load, short circuit, or 
change in data? For a switching operation or change in load, modify 
the bus admittance matrix. For a short circuit, set the faulted bus 
voltage [in (11.5.10)] to zero.
STEP 7  Using the internal machine voltages En 5 En/dn, n 5 1, 2, Á ,M, 
with the values of dn at time t, compute the machine electrical powers 
pen at time t from (11.5.10) to (11.5.12).
STEP 8  Using pen computed in Step 7 and the values of dn and vn at time t, 
compute the preliminary estimates of power angles dn and machine 
speeds v
,
n at time (t 1 Dt) from (11.4.7) to (11.4.10).
STEP 9  Using En 5 En/d
,
n, n 5 1, 2, Á ,M, compute the preliminary esti-
mates of the machine electrical powers pen at time (t 1 Dt) from 
(11.5.10) to (11.5.12).
STEP 10  Using p
,
en computed in Step 9, as well as d
,
n and v
,
n computed in Step 8,  
compute the final estimates of power angles dn and machine speeds 
vn at time (t 1 Dt) from (11.4.11) to (11.4.14).
STEP 11  Set time t 5 t 1 Dt. Stop if t . T. Otherwise, return to Step 6.
An important transient stability parameter is the step size (time step), Dt, used 
in the numerical integration. Because the time required to solve a transient stabil-
ity problem varies inversely with the time step, a larger value would be preferred. 
However, if too large a value is chosen, then the solution accuracy may suffer, and 
for some integration methods, such as Euler’s, the solution can experience numeric 
instability. To see an example of numeric instability, re-do the PowerWorld Simu-
lator Example 11_7, except change the time step to 0.02 seconds. A typical time 
step for commercial transient stability simulations is 1/2 cycle (0.00833 seconds  
for a 60 Hz system).

	
Section 11.5 Multimachine Stability	
715
Modifying power-flow Ybus for application  
to multimachine stability
Consider a transient stability study for the power system given in Example 6.9, 
with the 184-Mvar shunt capacitor of Example 6.14 installed at bus 2. Machine 
transient reactances are X9d1 5 0.05 and X9d2 5 0.025 per unit on the system base. 
Determine the admittance matrices Y11, Y22, and Y12.
SOLUTION 
From Example 6.9, the power system has N 5 5 buses and M 5 2 machines. The 
second row of the 5 3 5 bus admittance matrix used for power flows is calculated 
in Example 6.9. Calculating the other rows in the same manner, results in
Ybus 53
s3.728 2 j49.72d
0
0
0
s23.728 1 j49.72d
0
s2.68 2 j26.46d
0
s20.892 1 j9.92d
s21.784 1 j19.84d
0
0
s7.46 2 j99.44d
s27.46 1 j99.44d
0
0
s20.892 1 j9.92d
s27.46 1 j99.44d
s11.92 2 j148.d
s23.572 1 j39.68d
s23.728 1 j49.72d
s21.784 1 j19.84d
0
s23.572 1 j39.68d
s9.084 2 j108.6d4
 per unit
To obtain Y11, Ybus is modified by including load admittances and inverted 
generator impedances. From Table 6.1, the load at bus 3 is PL3 2 jQL3 5 0.8 1 j0.4 
per unit and the voltage at bus 3 is V3 5 1.05 per unit. Representing this load as a 
constant admittance,
Yload 3 5 PL3 2 jQL3
V2
3
5 0.8 2 j0.4
s1.05d2
5 0.7256 2 j0.3628   per unit
Similarly, the load admittance at bus 2 is
Yload 2 5 PL2 2 jQL2
V2
2
5 8 2 j2.8 1 j1.84
s0.959d2
5 8.699 2 j1.044
where V2 is obtained from Example 6.14 and the 184-Mvar (1.84 per unit) shunt 
capacitor bank is included in the bus 2 load.
The inverted generator impedances are: for machine 1 connected to bus 1,
1
jX9d1
5
1
j0.05 5 2j 20.0   per unit
and for machine 2 connected to bus 3,
1
jX9d2
5
1
j0.025 5 2j40.0   per unit
EXAMPLE 11.8
(Continued )

716	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
To obtain Y11, add (1yjX9d1) to the first diagonal element of Ybus, add Yload2 
to the second diagonal element, and add Yload 3 1 s1yjX9d2d to the third diagonal 
element. The 5 3 5 matrix Y11 is then
Y11 53
s3.728 2 j69.72d
0
0
0
s23.728 2 j49.72d
0
s11.38 2 j29.50d
 0
s20.892 1 j9.92d
s21.784 1 j19.84d
0
0
s8.186 2 j139.80d
s27.46 1 j99.44d
0
0
s20.892 1 j9.92d
s27.46 1 j99.44d
s11.92 2 j148.d
s23.572 2 j39.68d
s23.728 1 j49.72d
s21.784 1 j19.84d
0
s23.572 1 j39.68d
s9.084 2 j108.6d4
 per unit
From (11.5.6), the 2 3 2 matrix Y22 is
Y22 53
1
jX9d1
0
0
1
jX9d24
53
2j20.0
0
0
2j40.04   per unit
From Figure 6.2, generator 1 is connected to bus 1 (therefore, bus G1 5 1 and 
generator 2 is connected to bus 3 (therefore G2 5 3). From (11.5.7), the 5 3 2 
matrix Y12 is
Y12 53
j20.0
0
0
0
0
j40.0
0
0
0
0 4
   per unit
To see this case in PowerWorld Simulator, open case Example 11_8. To see 
the Y11 matrix entries, first display the Transient Stability Analysis Form, and then 
select States/Manual Control, Transient Stability Ybus. By default, this case is set 
to solve a self-clearing fault at bus 4 that extinguishes itself after three cycles (0.05 
s). Both generators are modeled with H 5 5.0 p.u.-s and D 5 1.0 p.u.
For the bus 4 fault, Figure 11.16 shows the variation in the rotor angles 
for the two generators with respect to a 60 Hz synchronous reference frame. The 
angles are increasing with time because neither of the generators is modeled with 
a governor, and there is no infinite bus. While it is clear that the generator angles 
remain together, it is very difficult to tell from Figure 11.16 the exact variation in 
the angle differences. Therefore transient stability programs usually report angle 
differences, either with respect to the angle at a specified bus or with respect to 
the average of all the generator angles. The latter is shown in Figure 11.17 which 
displays the results from the PowerWorld Simulator Example 11_8A case.

	
Section 11.5 Multimachine Stability	
717
FIGURE 11.16
Variation in the rotor 
angles with respect 
to a synchronous 
speed reference 
frame
FIGURE 11.17
Relative variation of 
the rotor angles

718	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
Stability results for 37 bus, 9 generator system
PowerWorld Simulator case Example 11_9 demonstrates a transient stability  
solution using the 37 bus system introduced in Chapter 6 with the system 
augmented to include classical models for each of the generators. By default, 
the case models a transmission line fault on the 69 kV line between bus 44 
(PEACH69) and bus 14 (REDBUD69) with the fault at the bus 44 end of the 
line. The fault is cleared after 0.1 seconds by opening this transmission line. 
The results from this simulation are shown in Figure 11.18, with the largest 
generator angle variation occurring (not surprisingly) at the bus 44 generator. 
Notice that during and initially after the fault, the bus 44 generator’s angle  
increases relative to all the other angles in the system. The critical clearing time 
for this fault is about 0.262 seconds.
EXAMPLE 11.9
FIGURE 11.18
Rotor Angles for Example 11.9 case

	
Section 11.6 A Two-Axis Synchronous Machine Model	
719
11.6  A Two-Axis Synchronous 
Machine Model
While the classical model for a synchronous machine provides a useful mechanism 
for introducing transient stability concepts, it is only appropriate for the most basic 
of system studies. Also, it is usually not coupled with the exciter and governor mod-
els that are introduced in the next chapter. In this section a more realistic synchro-
nous machine model is introduced.
The analysis of more detailed synchronous machine models requires that each 
machine model be expressed in a frame of reference that rotates at the same speed as 
its rotor. The standard approach is to use a d-q reference frame in which the major 
“direct” (d) axis is aligned with the rotor poles, and the quadrature (q) axis leads the 
direct axis by 908. The rotor angle d is then defined as the angle by which the q-axis 
leads the network reference frame (see Figure 11.19). The equation for transforming 
the network quantities to the d-q reference frame is given by (11.6.1) and from the d-q 
reference frame by (11.6.2),
3
Vr
Vi4 53
sin d
cos d
2cos d
sin d4 3
Vd
Vq4
(11.6.1)
3
Vd
Vq4 53
sin d
2cos d
cos d
sin d4 3
Vr
Vi4
(11.6.2)
where the terminal voltage in the network reference frame is VT 5 Vr 1 jVi. A similar 
conversion is done for the currents.
Numerous different transient stability models exist for synchronous ma-
chines, most of which are beyond the scope of this text. The two-axis model, which 
real
q-axis
imag
d-axis

FIGURE 11.19
Reference frame 
transformations

720	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
models the dynamics associated with the synchronous generator field winding 
and one damper winding, while neglecting the faster subtransient damper dynam-
ics and stator transients, provides a nice compromise. For accessibility, machine 
saturation is not considered. With the two-axis model, the electrical behavior 
of the generator is represented by two algebraic equations and two differential 
equations
E9q 5 Vq 1 RaIq 1 X9d Id
(11.6.3) 
E9d 5 Vd 1 RdId 2 X9q Iq
(11.6.4)
dE9q
dt 5 1
T9do
 _2E9q 2 sXd 2 X9d dId 1 Efd+
(11.6.5)
dE9d
dt 5 1
T9qo
 _2E9d 1 sXq 2 X9q dIq+
(11.6.6)
where Vd 1 jVq and Id 1 jIq are the generator’s terminal voltage and current shifted 
into the generator’s reference frame, and Efd is proportional to the field voltage. The 
per unit electrical torque, Telec is then
Te 5 VdId 1 VqIq 1 RasI 2
d 1 I 2
qd
(11.6.7)
While pe 5 Te vp.u., it is often assumed that vp.u. 5 1.0 f10g with the result being an 
assumption that pe 5 Te. When (11.6.5) and (11.6.6) are combined with generator 
mechanical equations presented in (11.1.18) and (11.1.19), substituting (11.6.7) for 
pep.u., the result is a synchronous generator model containing four first-order differ-
ential equations.
The initial value for d can be determined by noting that in steady-state, d is the 
same as the angle of the internal voltage [10],
E 5 VT 1 jXqI
(11.6.8)
Hence the initial value of d is the angle on E. Once d has been determined, (11.6.2) 
is used to transfer the generator terminal voltage and current into the generator’s 
reference frame, and then (11.6.3), (11.6.4), and (11.6.5) (assuming the left-hand side 
is zero) are used to determine the initial values of E9q, E9d, and Efd. In this chapter the 
field voltage, Efd, will be assumed constant (the use of the generator exciters to con-
trol the field voltage is a topic covered in the next chapter).

	
Section 11.6 A Two-Axis Synchronous Machine Model	
721
Two-Axis Model Example
For the system from Example 11.3, with the synchronous generator modeled 
using a two-axis model, determine (a) the initial conditions, and then (b) use  
 PowerWorld Simulator to determine the critical clearing time for the Example 11.6 
fault (three phase fault at bus 3, cleared by opening lines 1–3 and 2–3). Assume  
H 5 3.0 per unit-seconds, Ra 5 0, Xd 5 2.1, Xq 5 2.0, Xd 5 0.3, Xq 5 0.5, all per unit  
using the 100 MVA system base.
SOLUTION
a.  From Example 11.3, the current out of the generator is
I 5 1.0526/218.208 5 12j0.3288
which gives a generator terminal voltage of
VT 5 1.0/08 1 s  j0.22ds1.0526/218.208d 5 1.0946/11.598 5 1.0723 1 j0.220
From (11.6.8),
E 5 1.0946/11.598 1 s  j2.0ds1.052/218.28d 5 2.814/52.18
S d 5 52.18
Using (11.6.2) gives
3
Vd
Vq4 53
0.7889
20.6146
0.6146
0.7889 4 3
1.0723
0.2204 53
0.7107
0.83264
and
3
Id
Iq4 53
0.7889
20.6146
0.6146
0.7889 4 3
1.000
20.32874 53
0.9909
0.35534
Then, solving (11.6.3), (11.6.4), and (11.6.5) gives
E9q 5 0.8326 1 s0.3ds0.9909d 5 1.1299          
E9d 5 0.7107 2 s0.5ds0.3553d 5 0.5330          
Efd 5 1.1299 1 s2.1 2 0.3ds0.9909d 5 2.9135
b.  Open PowerWorld Simulator case Example 11_10 (see Figure 11.20). 
Select Add-Ons, Transient Stability to view the Transient Stability Analysis  
Form. Initially the bus 3 fault is set to clear at 0.05 seconds. Select Run 
Transient Stability to create the results shown in Figure 11.20. In comparing 
EXAMPLE 11.10
(Continued )

722	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
these results with those from Example 11.4, notice that while the initial value 
of d is different, the initial angle increase of about 138 is similar to the increase 
of 168 in Example 11.4. A key difference between the two is the substantial 
amount of damping in the two-axis model case. This damping arises because 
of the explicit modeling of the field and damper windings with the two-axis 
model. The critical clearing time can be determined by gradually increasing 
the clearing time until the generator loses synchronism. This occurs at about 
0.30 seconds, with the almost critically cleared angle shown in Figure 11.21. 
Since there are now two additional state variables for generator 4, E9q, and E9d, 
their values can also be shown. This is done in Figure 11.22, again for the 
0.30 second clearing time.
FIGURE 11.20
Variation in generator 4 rotor angle with a fault clearing time of 0.05 seconds

	
Section 11.6 A Two-Axis Synchronous Machine Model	
723
FIGURE 11.21
Variation in 
generator 4 rotor 
angle with a fault 
clearing time of 
0.30 seconds
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Rotor Angle_Gen '4' '1'
1.1
1.05
1
0.95
0.9
0.85
0.8
0.75
0.7
0.65
0.6
0.55
0.5
0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
States of Machine/Eqp_Gen '4' '1'
States of Machine/Edp_Gen '4' '1'
FIGURE 11.22
Variation in 
generator 4 E9q
and E9d with a fault 
clearing time of 
0.30 seconds

724	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
11.7  Wind Turbine Machine Models
As wind energy continues its rapid growth, wind turbine models need to be included in 
transient stability analysis. As was introduced in Chapter 6, there are four main types of 
wind turbines that must be considered. Model types 1 and 2 are based on an induction 
machine models. As is the case with a synchronous machine, the stator windings of the 
induction machine are connected to the rest of the electric network. However, rather than 
having a dc field winding on the rotor, the ac rotor currents are induced by the relative 
motion between the rotating magnetic field setup by the stator currents, and the rotor. 
Usually the difference between the per unit synchronous speed, ns, and the per unit rotor 
speed, nr, is quantified by the slip (S), defined (using the standard motor convention), as
S 5 ns 2 nr
ns

(11.7.1)
From (11.7.1), it is clear that if the machine were operating at synchronous speed, 
its slip would be 0, with positive values when it is operating as a motor and negative 
values when it is operating as a generator. Expressing all values in per unit, the me-
chanical equation for an induction machine is
dS
dt 5 1
2H
 sTm 2 Ted
(11.7.2)
where H is the inertia constant, Tm is the mechanical torque, and Te the electrical 
torque, defined in (11.7.10).
The simplified electric circuit for a single-cage induction machine is shown in  
Figure 11.23, using the generator convention in which current out of the machine is 
assumed to be positive. Similar to what is done for synchronous machines, an induction 
machine can be modeled as an equivalent voltage behind the stator resistance and a tran-
sient reactance X9. Referring to Figure 11.23, the values used in this representation are
X9 5 Xa 1
X1Xm
X1 1 Xm

(11.7.3)
where X9 is the apparent reactance seen when the rotor is locked (i.e., slip is 1),
X 5 Xa 1 Xm
(11.7.4)
X is the synchronous reactance, and
T90 5 sX1 1 Xmd
v0R1

(11.7.5)
is the open-circuit time constant for the rotor. Also, Xa is commonly called the leak-
age reactance.
I = Ir + jIi
Ra
jXa
jXm
jX1
VT = Vr + jVi
+
–
R1
S
FIGURE 11.23
Equivalent circuit  
for a single cage  
induction machine

	
Section 11.7 Wind Turbine Machine Models	
725
Electrically the induction machine is modeled using two algebraic and two  
differential equations. However, in contrast to synchronous machines, because the 
reactances of induction machines do not depend upon the rotor position values, they 
are specified in the network reference frame. The equations are
Vr 5 E9r 2 RaIr 1 X9Ii
(11.7.6)
Vi 5 E9i 2 RaIi 2 X9Ir
(11.7.7)
dE9r
dt 5 voSE9i 2 1
T9o
 _sE9r 2 sX 2 X9dIi+
(11.7.8)
dE9i
dt 5 2voSE9r 2 1
T9o
 _sE9i 1 sX 2 X9dIr+
(11.7.9)
The induction machine electric torque is then given by
Te 5 sE9r Ii 1 E9i Ii)yvo
(11.7.10)
and the terminal real power injection by
Pe 5 sVrIr 1 ViIid
(11.7.11)
The transient stability initial conditions are determined by setting (11.7.8) and 
(11.7.9) to zero, and then using the power flow real power injection and terminal volt-
age as inputs to solve (11.7.6), (11.7.7), (11.7.8), (11.7.9), and (11.7.11) for the other 
variables. The Newton-Raphson approach (Section 6.3) is commonly used. Since the 
induction machine reactive power injection will not normally match the power flow 
value, the difference is modeled by including a shunt capacitor whose susceptance is 
determined to match the initial power flow conditions. The reactive power produced 
by the machine is given by
Qe 5 s2VrIi 1 ViIrd
(11.7.12)
with the value negative since induction machines consume reactive power.
Induction Generator Example
For the system from Example 11.3, assume the synchronous generator is replaced 
with an induction generator and shunt capacitor in order to represent a wind 
farm with the same initial real and reactive power output as in Example 11.3. The 
induction generator parameters are H 5 0.9 per unit-seconds, Ra 5 0.013, Xa 5 
0.067, Xm 5 3.8, R1 5 0.0124, X1 5 0.17 (all per unit using the 100 MVA system 
base). This system is modeled in PowerWorld Simulator case Example 11_11.  
(a) Use the previous equations to verify the initial conditions of S 5 20.0111, E9r 5 
0.9314, E9i  5 0.4117, Ir 5 0.7974, Ii 5 0.6586. (b) Plot the terminal voltage for the 
fault sequence from Example 11.6.
EXAMPLE 11.11
(Continued )

726	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
SOLUTION
a.  Using (11.7.3) to (11.7.5) the values of X9, X, and T90  are determined to be 
0.2297, 3.867, per unit and 0.85 seconds respectively. With VT 5 1.0723 1 j0.220 
and Pe5 1.0 per unit, (11.7.6) and (11.7.7) are verified as
Vr 5 0.9314 2 s0.013d s0.7974d 1 (0.2297s0.6586d 5 1.0723
Vi 5 0.4117 2 s0.013d s0.6586d 2 (0.2297s0.7974d 5 0.2200
And (11.7.8), (11.7.9) as
dE9r
dt 5 2p60s20.0111ds0.4117d 2
1
0.85 s0.9314 2 s3.637ds0.6586dd 5 0.0   
dE9i
dt 5 22p60s20.0111ds0.9314d 2
1
0.85 s0.4117 1 s3.637ds0.7974dd 5 0.0
    Pe 5 s1.0723ds0.7974d 1 s0.220ds0.6586d 5 1.000                                       
    Qe 5 2s1.0723ds0.6586d 1 s0.220ds0.7974d 5 20.531                                
You can see the initial values in PowerWorld Simulator by first displaying the 
States/Manual Control page of the Transient Stability Analysis form, which ini-
tializes the transient stability. Then from the one-line diagram view the Generator  
Information Dialog for the generator at bus 4, and select Stability, Terminal and 
State, Terminal Values. Because the generator in the power flow is producing  
57.2 Mvar, and the induction machine is consuming 53.1 Mvar, a shunt capacitor 
that produces 110.3 Mvar with a 1.0946 terminal voltage must be modeled.
b.  Figure 11.24 plots the terminal voltage for the three cycle fault.
1.1
1.05
1
0.95
0.9
0.85
0.8
0.7
0.75
0.65
0.6
0.55
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Term. PU_Gen '4' '1'
FIGURE 11.24
Example 11.11 
Generator 4 voltage 
magnitude for a 
fault clearing time 
of 0.05 seconds

	
Section 11.7 Wind Turbine Machine Models	
727
Both the Type 1 and 2 wind turbine models utilize induction generators, but 
whereas the Type 1 models have a conventional squirrel cage rotor with fixed ro-
tor resistance, the Type 2 models are wound rotor induction machines that utilize a 
control system to vary the rotor resistance. The reason for this is to provide a more 
steady power output from the wind turbine during wind variation. From (11.7.5) it 
is clear that increasing this external resistance has the effect of decreasing the open 
circuit time constant. The inputs to the rotor resistance control system are turbine 
speed and electrical power output, while the output is the external resistance that is 
in series with R1 from Figure 11.22. Figure 11.25 plots the variation in the real power 
output for the Example 11.11 generator as a function of speed for the original rotor 
resistance of 0.0124 and for a total rotor resistance of 0.05 per unit. With a total re-
sistance of 0.05, the operating point slip changes to about –0.045, which corresponds 
to a per-unit speed of 1.045.
Most new wind turbines are either Type 3 or Type 4. Type 3 wind turbines 
are used to represent doubly-fed asynchronous generators (DFAGs), also sometimes 
referred to as doubly-fed induction generators (DFIGs). A DFAG consists of a 
traditional wound rotor induction machine, but with the rotor windings connected 
to the ac network through an ac-dc-ac converter—the machine is “doubly-fed” 
through both the stator and rotor windings (see Figure 11.26). The advantages of 
this arrangement are that it allows for separate control of both the real and reactive 
power (like a synchronous machine), and the ability to transfer power both ways 
through the rotor converter allows for a much wider speed range. Because the stator 
is directly connected to the ac grid, the rotor circuit converter need only be sized to 
about 30% of the machine’s rated capacity. Another consequence of this design is 
the absence of an electrical coupling with the mechanical equation such as was seen 
with (11.1.10) for the synchronous machines and in (11.7.2) for the Type 1 and 2 
induction machine models.
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
–0.5
–1
–1.5
–2
–2.5
0.7
0.8
Speed (Per Unit)
Real Power Generation (Per Unit)
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
Power (PU) with R = 0.0124
Power (PU) with R = 0.05
FIGURE 11.25
Effect of varying 
external resistance on 
an induction machine 
torque-speed curve

728	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
From a transient stability perspective, the DFAG dynamics are driven by the 
converter, with the result that the machine can be well approximated as a voltage-
source converter (VSC). A VSC can be approximated as a synthesized current injec-
tion in parallel with an effective reactance, Xeq, (Figure 11.27) in which the current 
in phase with the terminal voltage, Ip, and the reactive power current, Iq, can be 
controlled independently. Low and high voltage current management is used to limit 
these values during system disturbances. With a terminal voltage angle of 0, the cur-
rent injection on the network reference is
Isorc 5 sIp 1 jIqd s1/ud
(11.7.13) 
And the reactive voltage is
Eq 5 2IqXeq
(11.7.14) 
Type 4 wind turbines utilize a completely asynchronous design in which the full out-
put of the machine is connected to the ac network through an ac-dc-ac converter 
(see Figure 11.28). Because the converter completely decouples the electric generator 
from the rest of the network, there is considerable freedom in selecting the electric 
3  AC Windings
fnet
frotor
Pstator
Protor
Protor
P net
Q net
Converter
Collector
system
(e.g., 34.5kV bus)
Wound-rotor
induction generator
Wind turbine
Pconv
Fnetwork
Frotor
FIGURE 11.26
Doubly-fed 
asynchronous  
generator  
components
Eq
jXeq
V L
Iq
Isorc
I
Ip
High/
low voltage
management
–1
Xeq
FIGURE 11.27
Type 3 DFAG model 
circuit diagram

	
Section 11.7 Wind Turbine Machine Models	
729
machine type: for example, a conventional synchronous generator, a permanent mag-
net synchronous generator, or even a squirrel cage induction machine.
From a transient stability perspective, electrically, the Type 4 model is similar 
to the Type 3 in that it can also be represented as a VSC. The key difference is lack of 
the effective reactance, with Ip and Iq being the direct control variables for the Type 4  
model. As is the case with a DFAG, there is no electrical coupling with the turbine 
dynamics.
3 f AC Windings
fnet
Pnet = Pstator
Qnet
fstator
Pstator
Qstator
fstator
Converter
Permanent
magnet
rotor
Collector
system
(e.g., 34.5 kV bus)
Wind
turbine
FIGURE 11.28
Type 4 full converter 
components
Doubly-Fed Asynchronous Generator Example
For the system from Example 11.3, assume the synchronous generator is replaced 
with a Type 3 DFAG generator in order to represent a wind farm with the initial 
current into the infinite bus set to 1.0 (unity power factor). The DFAG reactance 
Xeq 5 0.8 per unit using a 100 MVA system base. Determine the initial values for 
Ip, Iq, and Eq.
SOLUTION 
With I 5 1.0 and an impedance of j0.12 between the machine’s terminal and the 
infinite bus, the terminal voltage is
VT 5 1.0 1 s1.0ds  j0.22d 5 1.0 1 j0.22 5 1.0239/12.418
The amount supplied by Isorc is I plus the amount modeled as going into Xeq
Isorc 5 I 2 VT
jXeq
5 1.00 1 1.0 1 j0.220
j0.8
Isorc 5 1.275 2 j1.25
EXAMPLE 11.12
(Continued )

730	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
11.8  Design Methods for Improving 
Transient Stability
Design methods for improving power system transient stability include the following:
1.	 Improved steady-state stability
a.	 Higher system voltage levels
b.	 Additional transmission lines
c.	 Smaller transmission-line series reactances
d.	 Smaller transformer leakage reactances
e.	 Series capacitive transmission-line compensation
f.	 Static var compensators and flexible ac transmission systems (FACTS)
2.	 High-speed fault clearing
3.	 High-speed reclosure of circuit breakers
4.	 Single-pole switching
5.	 Larger machine inertia, lower transient reactance
6.	 Fast responding, high-gain exciters
7.	 Fast valving
8.	 Braking resistors
These design methods are discussed in the following paragraphs.
1.	 Increasing the maximum power transfer in steady-state can also im-
prove transient stability, allowing for increased power transfer through 
the unfaulted portion of a network during disturbances. Upgrading 
voltage on existing transmission or opting for higher voltages on new 
The values of Ip and Iq are then calculated by shifting these values backward 
by the angle of the terminal voltage
Ip 1 jIq 5 s1.275 2 j1.25d * s1/12.418d 5 0.977 2 j1.495
And then
Eq 5 2s21.495ds0.8d 5 1.196
You can see the initial values in PowerWorld Simulator by opening case Exam-
ple 11_12 and then displaying the States/Manual Control page of the Transient Sta-
bility Analysis form and selecting Reset to Start Time which initializes the transient 
stability. Then from the one-line diagram view the Generator Information Dialog 
for the generator at bus 4, and select Stability, Terminal and State, Terminal Values.

	
Section 11.8 Design Methods for Improving Transient Stability	
731
transmission increases line loadability (5.5.6). Additional parallel lines 
increase power-transfer capability. Reducing system reactances also in-
creases power-transfer capability. Lines with bundled phase conductors 
have lower series reactances than lines that are not bundled. Oversized 
transformers with lower leakage reactances also help. Series capacitors 
reduce the total series reactances of a line by compensating for the series 
line inductance. 
2.	 High-speed fault clearing is fundamental to transient stability. Standard prac-
tice for EHV systems is 1-cycle relaying and 2-cycle circuit breakers, allowing 
for fault clearing within 3 cycles (0.05 s). Ongoing research is presently aimed 
at reducing these to one-half cycle relaying and 1-cycle circuit breakers.
3.	 The majority of transmission-line short circuits are temporary, with 
the fault arc self-extinguishing within 5–40 cycles (depending on system 
voltage) after the line is deenergized. High-speed reclosure of circuit 
breakers can increase postfault transfer power, thereby improving 
transient stability. Conservative practice for EHV systems is to employ 
high-speed reclosure only if stability is maintained when reclosing into a 
permanent fault with subsequent reopening and lockout of breakers.
4.	 Since the majority of short circuits are single line-to-ground, relaying 
schemes and independent-pole circuit breakers can be used to clear a 
faulted phase while keeping the unfaulted phases of a line operating, 
thereby maintaining some power transfer across the faulted line. Studies 
have shown that single line-to-ground faults are self-clearing even when 
only the faulted phase is deenergized. Capacitive coupling between the 
energized unfaulted phases and the deenergized faulted phase is, in most 
cases, not strong enough to maintain an arcing short circuit [5].
5.	 Inspection of the swing equation, (11.1.16), shows that increasing the 
per-unit inertia constant H of a synchronous machine reduces angular 
acceleration, thereby slowing down angular swings and increasing criti-
cal clearing times. Stability is also improved by reducing machine tran-
sient reactances, which increases power-transfer capability during fault 
or postfault periods [see (11.2.1)]. Unfortunately, present-day generator 
manufacturing trends are toward lower H constants and higher machine 
reactances, which are a detriment to stability.
6.	 Modern machine excitation systems with fast thyristor controls and high 
amplifier gains (to overcome generator saturation) can rapidly increase 
generator field excitation after sensing low terminal voltage during 
faults. The effect is to rapidly increase internal machine voltages during 
faults, thereby increasing generator output power during fault and post-
fault periods. Critical clearing times are also increased [6].
7.	 Some steam turbines are equipped with fast valving to divert steam flows 
and rapidly reduce turbine mechanical power outputs. During faults 
near the generator, when electrical power output is reduced, fast valving 
action acts to balance mechanical and electrical power, providing  

732	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
reduced acceleration and longer critical clearing times. The turbines are 
designed to withstand thermal stresses due to fast valving [7].
8.	 In power systems with generation areas that can be temporarily sep-
arated from load areas, braking resistors can improve stability. When 
separation occurs, the braking resistor is inserted into the generation 
area for a second or two, preventing or slowing acceleration in the  
generation area. Shelton et al. [8] describe a 3-GW-s braking resistor.
PROBLEMS
SECTION 11.1
11.1	 A three-phase, 60-Hz, 500-MVA, 11.8-kV, 4-pole steam turbine-generating 
unit has an H constant of 5 p.u.-s. Determine: (a) vsyn and vmsyn; (b) the 
kinetic energy in joules stored in the rotating masses at synchronous 
speed; (c) the mechanical angular acceleration am and electrical angular 
acceleration a if the unit is operating at synchronous speed with an accel-
erating power of 500 MW.
11.2	 Calculate J in kg-m2 for the generating unit given in Problem 11.1.
11.3	 Generator manufacturers often use the term WR2, which is the weight in 
pounds of all the rotating parts of a generating unit (including the prime 
mover) multiplied by the square of the radius of gyration in feet. WR2/32.2 
is then the total moment of inertia of the rotating parts in slug-fl2. 
(a) Determine a formula for the stored kinetic energy in ft-lb of a gener-
ating unit in terms of WR2 and rotor angular velocity vm. (b) Show that
	
H 5 2.31 3 1024WR2srpmd2
Srated
   per unit­seconds
	
where Srated is the voltampere rating of the generator, and rpm is the syn-
chronous speed in r/min. Note that 1 ft-lb 5 746/550 5 1.356 joules,  
(c) Evaluate H for a three-phase generating unit rated 750 MVA,  
3600 r/min, with WR2 5 4,000,000 lb-ft2.
11.4	 The generating unit in Problem 11.1 is initially operating at pmp.u. 5 pep.u. 5 
0.7 per unit, v 5 vsyn, and d 5 128 when a fault reduces the generator elec-
trical power output by 60%. Determine the power angle 3 five cycles after 
the fault commences. Assume that the accelerating power remains con-
stant during the fault. Also assume that vp.u.(t) 5 1.0 in the swing equation.
11.5	 How would the value of H change if a generator’s assumed operating 
frequency is changed from 60 Hz to 55 Hz?
11.6	 Repeat Example 11.1 except assume the number of poles is changed from 
32 to 16, H is changed from 2.0 p.u.-s to 1.5 p.u.-s, and the unit is initially 
operating with an electrical and mechanical power of 0.5 p.u.

SECTION 11.2
11.7	 Given that for a moving mass Wkinetic 5 1/2 Mv2, how fast would a 80,000 kg  
diesel locomotive need to go to equal the energy stored in a 60-Hz,  
100-MVA, 60-Hz, 2-pole generator spinning at synchronous speed with 
an H of 3.0 p.u.-s?
11.8	 The synchronous generator in Figure 11.4 delivers 0.8 per-unit real power 
at 1.05 per-unit terminal voltage. Determine: (a) the reactive power output 
of the generator; (b) the generator internal voltage; and (c) an equation 
for the electrical power delivered by the generator versus power angle d.
11.9	 The generator in Figure 11.4 is initially operating in the steady-state con-
dition given in Problem 11.8 when a three-phase-to-ground bolted short 
circuit occurs at bus 3. Determine an equation for the electrical power 
delivered by the generator versus power angle d during the fault.
11.10	 For the five bus system from Example 6.9, assume the transmission lines 
and transformers are modeled with just their per unit reactance (e.g., 
neglect their resistance and B shunt values). If bus one is assumed to be 
an infinite bus, what is the equivalent (Thévenin) reactance looking into 
the system from the bus three terminal? Neglect any impedances associ-
ated with the loads.
11.11	 Repeat Problem 11.10, except assume there is a three-phase-to-ground 
bolted short circuit at bus five.
SECTION 11.3
11.12	 The generator in Figure 11.4 is initially operating in the steady-state 
condition given in Example 11.3 when circuit breaker B12 inadvertently 
opens. Use the equal-area criterion to calculate the maximum value of 
the generator power angle d. Assume vp.u.(t) 5 1.0 in the swing equation.
11.13	 The generator in Figure 11.4 is initially operating in the steady-state con-
dition given in Example 11.3 when a temporary three-phase-to-ground 
short circuit occurs at point F. Three cycles later, circuit breakers B13 and 
B22 permanently open to clear the fault. Use the equal-area criterion to 
determine the maximum value of the power angle d.
11.14	 If breakers B13 and B22 in Problem 11.13 open later than 3 cycles after 
the fault commences, determine the critical clearing time.
11.15	 Building upon Problem 11.11, assume a 60 Hz nominal system frequency, 
that the bus fault actually occurs on the line between buses five and two 
but at the bus two end, and that the fault is cleared by opening breakers 
B21 and B52. Again, neglecting the loads, assume that the generator at 
bus three is modeled with the classical generator model having a per unit 
value (on its 800 MVA base) of X9d 5 0.24, and H 5 3 p.u.-s. Before the 
fault occurs the generator is delivering 300 MW into the infinite bus at 
unity power factor (hence its terminal voltage is not 1.05 as was assumed 
in Example 6.9). Further, assume the fault is cleared after 3 cycles. 
	
Problems	
733

734	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
Determine: (a) the initial generator one power angle, (b) the power angle 
when the fault is cleared, and (c) the maximum value of the power angle 
using the equal area criteria.
11.16	 Analytically determine whether there is a critical clearing time for Prob-
lem 11.15.
SECTION 11.4
11.17	 Consider the first order differential equation, dx1
dt 5 2x2, with an initial 
value x(0) 5 10. With an integration step size of 0.1 seconds, determine 
the value of x(0.5) using (a) Euler’s method, (b) the modified Euler’s 
method.
11.18	 The following set of differential equations can be used to represent that 
behavior of a simple spring-mass system, with x1(t) the mass’s position 
and x2(t) its velocity:
	
dx1
dt 5 x2
dx2
dt 5 2x1
	
For the initial condition of x1(0) 5 1.0, x2(0) 5 0, and a step size 0.1 sec-
onds, determine the values x1(0.3) and x2(0.3) using (a) Euler’s method, 
(b) the modified Euler’s method.
11.19	 A 60 Hz generator is supplying 400 MW (and 0 Mvar) to an infinite bus 
(with 1.0 per unit voltage) through two parallel transmission lines. Each 
transmission line has a per unit impedance (100 MVA base) of 0.09j. The 
per unit transient reactance for the generator is 0.0375j, the per unit iner-
tia constant for the generator (H) is 20 seconds, and damping is 0.1 per 
unit (all with a 100 MVA base). At time 5 0, one of the transmission lines 
experiences a balanced three-phase short to ground one third (1/3) of the 
way down the line from the generator to the infinite bus. (a) Using the 
classical generator model, determine the prefault internal voltage magni-
tude and angle of the generator. (b) Express the system dynamics during 
the fault as a set of first order differential equations. (c) Using Euler’s 
method, determine the generator internal angle at the end of the second 
timestep. Use an integration step size of one cycle.
11.20	 Open PowerWorld Simulator case Problem 11_20. This case models the 
Example 11.4 system with damping at the bus 1 generator, and with a  
line fault midway between buses 1 and 2. The fault is cleared by opening 
the line. Determine the critical clearing time for this fault.
11.21	 Open PowerWorld Simulator case Problem 11_21. This case models the 
Example 11.4 system with damping at the bus 1 generator, and with a line 
fault midway between buses 2 and 3. The fault is cleared by opening the line. 
Determine the critical clearing time (to the nearest 0.01 second) for this fault.
PW
PW

SECTION 11.5
11.22	 Consider the six-bus power system shown in Figure 11.29, where all data 
are given in per-unit on a common system base. All resistances as well 
as transmission-line capacitances are neglected. (a) Determine the 6 3 6 
per-unit bus admittance matrix Ybus suitable for a power-flow computer 
program. (b) Determine the per-unit admittance matrices Y11, Y12, and 
Y22 given in (11.5.5), which are suitable for a transient stability study.
11.23	 Modify the matrices Y11, Y12, and Y22 determined in Problem 11.22 for  
(a) the case when circuit breakers B32 and B51 open to remove line 3–5; 
and (b) the case when the load PL3 1 jQL3 is removed.
11.24	 Open PowerWorld Simulator case Problem 11_24, which models the 
Example 6.9 with transient stability data added for the generators. Deter-
mine the critical clearing time (to the nearest 0.01 second) for a fault on 
the line between buses 4 and 5 at the bus 4 end which is cleared by open-
ing the line.
PW
FIGURE 11.29
Single-line diagram  
of a six-bus power 
system (per-unit 
values are shown)
	
Problems	
735

736	
Chapter 11  |  Transient Stability
11.25	 With PowerWorld Simulator using the Example 11_9 case determine the 
critical clearing time (to the closest 0.01 second) for a transmission line 
fault on the transmission line between bus 44 (PEACH69) and bus 14 
(REDBUD69), with the fault occurring near bus 44.
SECTION 11.6
11.26	 PowerWorld Simulator case Problem 11_26 duplicates Example 11.10, 
except with the synchronous generator initially supplying 75 MW  
at unity power factor to the infinite bus. (a) Derive the initial values  
for d, E9q, E9d and Efd. (b) Determine the critical clearing time for the 
Example 11.10 fault.
11.27	 PowerWorld Simulator case Problem 11_27 duplicates the system from 
Problem 11.24, except the generators are modeled using a two-axis model, 
with the same X9d and H parameters as are in Problem 11.24. Compare 
the critical clearing time between this case and the Problem 11.24 case.
SECTION 11.7
11.28	 PowerWorld Simulator case Problem 11_28 duplicates Example 11.11 
except the wind turbine generator is set so it is initially supplying 100 MW 
to the infinite bus at unity power factor. (a) Use the induction machine 
equations to verify the initial conditions of S 5 –0.0129, E9r 5 0.8475, 
E9i  5 0.4230, Ir 5 0.8433, and Ii 5 0.7119. (b) Plot the terminal voltage for 
the fault sequence from Example 11.6.
11.29	 Redo Example 11.12 with the assumption the generator is supplying  
100 1 j10 MVA to the infinite bus.
CASE STUDY QUESTIONS
a.	
What is a black-start generating unit? Name three types of black-start 
units. Are black-start units subject to self-excitation? If so, how?
b.	
In the case study, system stability is subdivided into what three catego-
ries? What is rotor angle stability?
c.	
Define cold-load pickup. What are the components of cold-load pickup?
REFERENCES
1.	
G. W. Stagg and A. H. El-Abiad, Computer Methods in Power Systems 
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1968).
2.	
O. I. Elgerd, Electric Energy Systems Theory, 2d ed. (New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1982).
3.	
C. A. Gross, Power System Analysis (New York: Wiley, 1979).
PW
PW
PW
PW

4.	
W. D. Stevenson, Jr., Elements of Power System Analysis, 4th ed. (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1982).
5.	
E. W. Kimbark, “Suppression of Ground-Fault Arcs on Single-Pole 
Switched EHV Lines by Shunt Reactors,” IEEE Trans PAS, 83 (March 
1964), pp. 285–290.
6.	
K. R. McClymont et al., “Experience with High-Speed Rectifier Excitation 
Systems,” IEEE Trans PAS, vol. PAS-87 (June 1986), pp. 1464–1470.
7.	
E. W. Cushing et al., “Fast Valving as an Aid to Power System Transient 
Stability and Prompt Resynchronization and Rapid Reload after Full 
Load Rejection,” IEEE Trans PAS, vol. PAS-90 (November/December 
1971), pp. 2517–2527.
8.	
M. L. Shelton et al., “Bonneville Power Administration 1400 MW 
Braking Resistor,” IEEE Trans PAS, vol. PAS-94 (March/April 1975), 
pp. 602–611.
9.	
P. W. Sauer and M. A. Pai, Power System Dynamics and Stability (Prentice 
Hall, 1997).
10.	
P. Kundar, Power System Stability and Control (McGraw-Hill, 1994).
11.	
J. Feltes and C. Grande-Moran, “Down but Not Out,” IEEE Power & 
Energy Magazine, 12,1, (January/February 2014), pp. 34–43.
12.	
J. Arrillaga, C.P. Arnold, Computer Analysis of Power Systems, John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd., 1990.
13.	
K. Clark, N. W. Miller, J. J. Sanchez-Gasca, “Modeling of GE Wind 
Turbine-Generators for Grid Studies,” Version 4.4, GE Energy, Schenectady, 
NY, September 2009.
14.	
E.H. Camm et al., “Characteristics of Wind Turbine Generators for 
Wind Power Plants,” Proc. IEEE 2009 General Meeting, Calgary, AB, 
July 2009.
15.	
B. Stott, “Power System Dynamic Response Calculations,” Proc. IEEE, 
vol. 67, No. 2 (February 1979), pp. 219–241.
	
References	
737


739
A
utomatic control systems are used extensively in power systems. Local controls  
are employed at turbine-generator units and at selected voltage-controlled 
buses. Central controls are employed at area control centers.
Figure 12.1 shows two basic controls of a steam turbine-generator: the voltage 
regulator and turbine-governor. The voltage regulator adjusts the power output of  
the generator exciter in order to control the magnitude of generator terminal voltage Vt. 
When a reference voltage Vref is raised (or lowered), the output voltage Vr of the 
ISO New 
England’s  
state-of-the-art 
control center 
helps to ensure 
the reliable 
operation of New 
England’s bulk 
power generation 
and transmission 
system 
(Photograph  
© Adam Laipson)
12 Power System Controls

740	
Chapter 12  |  Power System Controls
regulator increases (or decreases) the exciter voltage Efd applied to the generator field 
winding, which in turn acts to increase (or decrease) Vt. Also a voltage transformer 
and rectifier monitor Vt, which is used as a feedback signal in the voltage regulator. 
If Vt, decreases, the voltage regulator increases Vr to increase Efd, which in turn acts 
to increase Vt.
The turbine-governor shown in Figure 12.1 adjusts the steam valve position 
to control the mechanical power output pm of the turbine. When a reference power 
level pref is raised (or lowered), the governor moves the steam valve in the open (or 
close) direction to increase (or decrease) pm. The governor also monitors rotor speed 
vm, which is used as a feedback signal to control the balance between pm and the 
electrical power output pe of the generator. Neglecting losses, if pm is greater than pe, 
vm increases, the governor moves the steam valve in the close direction to reduce pm. 
Similarly, if pm is less than pe, vm decreases, the governor moves the valve in the open 
direction.
In addition to voltage regulators at generator buses, equipment is used to con-
trol voltage magnitudes at other selected buses. Tap-changing transformers, switched 
capacitor banks, and static var systems can be automatically regulated for rapid volt-
age control.
Central controls also play an important role in modern power systems. Today’s 
systems are composed of interconnected areas, where each area has its own control 
FIGURE 12.1
Voltage regulator and turbine-governor controls for a steam-turbine generator

	
Power System Controls	
741
center. There are many advantages to interconnections. For example, interconnected 
areas can share their reserve power to handle anticipated load peaks and unantici-
pated generator outages. Interconnected areas can also tolerate larger load changes 
with smaller frequency deviations than an isolated area.
Figure 12.2 shows how a typical area meets its daily load cycle. The base 
load is carried by base-loaded generators running at 100% of their rating for  
24 hours. Nuclear units and large fossil-fuel units are typically base-loaded. The 
variable part of the load is carried by units that are controlled from the central 
control center. Medium-sized fossil-fuel units and hydro units are used for con-
trol. During peak load hours, smaller, less efficient units such as gas-turbine or 
diesel-generating units are employed. Renewable generators, such as wind and 
solar, are usually operated to maximize their outputs for the given wind or solar 
conditions since their “fuel” is essentially free. In addition, generators operat-
ing at partial output (with spinning reserve) and standby generators provide a  
reserve margin.
The central control center monitors information including area frequency, gen-
erating unit outputs, and tie-line power flows to interconnected areas. This informa-
tion is used by automatic load-frequency control (LFC) in order to maintain area 
frequency at its scheduled value (60 Hz) and net tie-line power flow out of the area 
at its scheduled value. Raise and lower reference power signals are dispatched to the 
turbine-governors of controlled units.
This chapter covers automatic controls employed in power systems under nor-
mal operation. Sections 12.1 and 12.2 describe the operation of the two generator 
controls: voltage regulator and turbine-governor, and load-frequency control is dis-
cussed in Section 12.3.
FIGURE 12.2
Daily load cycle

742	
Chapter 12  |  Power System Controls
CASE STUDY
Beginning at 4:10 p.m Eastern Daylight Time on August 14, 2003, an enor-
mous power disruption resulted in the loss of power to approximately 50 mil-
lion people across the eastern Great Lakes region, the northeastern United 
States, and parts of eastern Canada. It took more than 24 hours to restore 
substantial load. The following article provides a restoration summary and 
reviews the challenges that had to be overcome to restore power [15]. A 
general pattern for sound restoration is inferred from the restoration process.
No Light in August: Power System  
Restoration Following the 2003  
North American Blackout
E.H. Allen, R.B. Stuart, and T.E. Wiedman
On 14 August 2003, three 345-kV 
transmission circuits in northeastern 
Ohio contacted overgrown trees dur-
ing a 40-minute time span, starting 
a chain of events that culminated 
in the collapse of the electrical grid 
across the eastern Great Lakes 
region, the northeastern United 
States, and parts of eastern Canada. 
In the aftermath of the disturbance, 
large portions of the Eastern Inter-
connection were blacked out, and 
several electrical islands were pres-
ent. System operators faced a for-
midable task: to reassemble the grid 
and restore power to tens of millions 
of customers. The challenges that 
had to be overcome varied signifi-
cantly from one state or province to 
another. New York, New England, 
Ontario, Michigan, and Ohio each 
had unique problems that operators 
had to address.
New York
Faced with a system restoration task, 
the priorities of the New York Inde-
pendent System Operator (NYISO) 
restoration plan were to: (1) stabilize  
the remaining system, (2) extend the 
stabilized system into blacked-out 
areas for generation and load restora-
tion, (3) connect energized islands to 
the stabilized system for restoration 
of frequency and voltage control, and 
(4) restore normal transmission oper-
ations. In keeping with the restoration  
plan, the highest priority operations 
were to: (1) energize the New York 
state power system, (2) synchronize 
the New York state power system 
with the Eastern Interconnection, 
and (3) restore off-site power to nu-
clear plants in New York. The opera-
tors first had to assess the state of the  
system and determine what was still 
© 2014 IEEE. Reprinted, with permission, 
from E. H. Allen, R.B. Stuart and T.E. 
Wiedman, “No Light in August: Power 
System Restoration Following the 2003 North 
American Blackout,” IEEE Power Engineering 
Magazine, January/February 2014, pp. 24–33.

	
Case Study	
743
energized. They found that New 
York had split electrically into two 
pieces, with the southeast part of the 
state blacked out and upstate New 
York remaining as an electrical is-
land but with greatly reduced load 
and generation. Of the 28,700 MW 
of load in the New York control 
area just prior to the disturbance, 
only 5700 MW remained. Figure 1  
is a representation of the New York 
power system in the following se-
quence of events.
An early step taken was the 
initiation of black-start procedures 
at the Gilboa pumped-storage plant 
in east-central New York (Figure 1).  
Two Gilboa units (250 MW each) were 
started at 4:27 p.m., but they could 
not be synchronized to the remain-
ing power system until after 7:05 p.m.  
(when the Marcy–New Scotland  
345-kV line was reclosed) due to ex-
cessive voltage disparity between the 
Gilboa and Fraser substations. Long 
Island Power Authority (LIPA) be-
gan restoring the Long Island system 
independently of NYISO, using gas 
turbines to energize the local system 
and pick up load.
After finding that the remain-
ing system was an island, operators  
Niagara
Dunkirk
South Ripley
NEW YORK
Marcy
New Scotland
Gilboa
Leeds
Buchanan
East View
Sprain Brook
Branchburg
Linden
PENNSYLVANIA
Ramapo
Figure 1  A representation of the New York Power System (green lines indicate 765 kV, 
orange lines indicate 500 kV, and red lines indicate 345 kV)

744	
Chapter 12  |  Power System Controls
concluded that in order to restore 
transmission circuits, they would 
need to restore load at the same time 
so as to prevent excessively high 
voltage. In order to restore load, 
however, they would need additional 
generation to serve the additional 
load and keep frequency under 
control. In order to bring generation 
online, the voltage and frequency in 
the New York island would need to 
be stable. Resynchronization of the 
island to the Eastern Interconnection 
therefore became the top priority for 
NYISO operators in order to achieve 
the restoration goals.
An initial attempt to synchro-
nize the upstate New York island to the 
Eastern Interconnection at 6:02 p.m. 
by closing the Branchburg-Ramapo  
500-kV circuit failed because the fre-
quency difference between the two 
systems was too large. Interestingly, 
the synchronization was actually 
achieved without operators’ knowl-
edge at 6:52 p.m., as an automatic re-
closing scheme on the South Ripley– 
Dunkirk 230-kV line at the far west-
ern end of the island detected that 
the two systems had come close 
enough in phase angle and voltage 
to permit a reclosing attempt, and 
the reclosing attempt was successful.  
When operators again attempted to re-
close the Branchburg-Ramapo 500-kV  
circuit at 7:06 p.m., it was thus dis-
covered that the two systems were  
already synchronized. The Branchburg- 
Ramapo 500-kV circuit was then suc-
cessfully reclosed, providing a second,  
stronger transmission path for syn-
chronizing the upstate New York 
island and stabilizing the frequency 
of the energized portion of the New 
York transmission system.
After resynchronization with 
the Eastern Interconnection was 
achieved, the energized system was 
extended into the New York City 
metropolitan area by a progressive 
reenergization of the 345-kV network 
from north to south. The Sprain 
Brook substation in Westchester 
County was energized at 7:56 p.m. 
from Ramapo via the Buchanan and 
Eastview stations. By 9:50 p.m., a 
second 345-kV transmission path 
from New Scotland down the east 
side of the Hudson River through 
Leeds to Sprain Brook had been 
restored, although the two trans-
mission paths were not connected 
at Sprain Brook until 12:08 a.m. on 
August 15. A transmission path from 
New Jersey into Brooklyn and Staten 
Island was energized at 11:00 p.m.; 
this path also provided a connec-
tion for East Coast Power’s Linden 
plant. A 345-kV path from Sprain 
Brook into the West 13th Street sta-
tion in Manhattan was energized at 
4:08 a.m. The LIPA system, which 
had been restored independently of  
NYISO, was synchronized with the 
rest of New York and the Eastern  
Interconnection at 5:12 a.m.
New England was resynchro-
nized with New York and the East-
ern Interconnection at 1:53 a.m. 
This resynchronization could not be 
accomplished until after the paral-
leling operation at Sprain Brook was 
completed to stabilize the voltage 
in eastern New York. New England 
provided 
substantial 
emergency 
power (up to 600 MW) throughout 

	
Case Study	
745
the remainder of the restoration. 
Restoration of generation, load, and 
additional transmission continued 
throughout the evening of August 15.  
By order of the U.S. Department 
of Energy, the Cross-Sound Cable 
was energized at 12:26 p.m., carry-
ing 100 MW of emergency flow. This  
dc link between Connecticut and 
Long Island had been constructed 
but had not yet been authorized to 
begin operation.
By 12 a.m. on August 15, 40% 
of New York load had been restored, 
and 60% of the New York load was 
restored by 4 a.m. on that day. Because 
the morning load pickup exceeded  
the capability of the partially restored 
system, the Emergency Demand 
Response Program, which calls for 
voluntary load reduction, was invoked 
at 8:59 a.m. When this action proved 
insufficient, 300 MW of load west 
of Utica was shed at 9:33 a.m. Area 
control error at the time was –630 MW.  
Half of this load was restored at 
10:02 a.m., and the rest was restored 
at 10:24 a.m. By 10:30 p.m. on August 
15, 100% of New York load had been 
restored.
NYISO found that several les-
sons were learned from the experience:
●
●
Staff duties in the event of such 
a calamity needed to be clearly 
defined.
●
●
Communications needed to be 
improved.
●
●
A recommendation was made to 
investigate a formal process for 
distributing information to trans-
mission and generator owners.
●
●
It was concluded that restoration 
training should be expanded.
New England
New England and the Maritimes 
remained intact, as a single island. 
The aggregate flow across the ac ties 
(i.e., excluding dc imports) was very 
small before the event, and the total 
generation loss and load loss during 
the event in these areas were nearly 
identical (around 3100 MW). The 
island was therefore able to remain 
in relatively stable operation. South-
western Connecticut had separated 
along with southeast New York 
and was blacked out, while about  
140 MW in northern Vermont was  
also deenergized, apparently in reac-
tion to oscillations over a 4.5-s interval 
that drove voltage as low as 0.21 p.u.  
A small amount of load had been shed 
by underfrequency load-shedding  
(UFLS) relays that had acted above 
the standard threshold of 59.3 Hz 
for the first stage of UFLS in New 
England. 
Significant 
oscillations 
were reported, possibly due to a mis-
alignment of frequency bias with ac-
tual generation frequency response. 
The status of the New England 
system after the event is shown in  
Figure 2.
Voltage was initially high after 
the separation but fell rapidly owing 
to the tripping of capacitors (both 
transmission and distribution) by 
overvoltage protection and a load 
increase over the next 7–10 minutes. 
At 4:16 p.m., all fast-start generation 
was ordered online. Due to flows on 
transmission lines over long-term 

746	
Chapter 12  |  Power System Controls
emergency ratings and low voltages 
that prevented generation synchroni-
zation, CONVEX (a local transmis-
sion operator) ordered 500 MW of 
manual load shedding (400 MW in 
Connecticut and 100 MW in western 
Massachusetts), which was completed 
by 4:40 p.m. Over the next hour and 
10 minutes, 400 MW of generation 
was synchronized to the system. 
The load that had been manually 
shed was restored between 5:42 p.m.  
and 7:28 p.m.
Restoration of power to south-
western Connecticut was an ongoing 
task. Stations were manually staffed in 
southwestern Connecticut. At 9:50 p.m.,  
Danbury, Norwalk, and Stamford 
were reconnected. At 11:23 p.m., the  
Connecticut transmission system was  
restored except for the ties to New 
York and the connections to the 
Middle River substation, which were 
high-pressure, fluid-filled cables. By 
1:35 a.m. on August 15, all distribu-
tion buses at bulk substations were 
energized except for Middle River. 
Restoration efforts in the area were 
complicated by a conductor splice 
failure on the Southington–Frost 
Bridge 345-kV line, which tripped at 
5:44 a.m. Restoration of load was 
halted from 7 a.m. to noon, though no 
additional load shedding was needed. 
Load restoration was completed 
by the evening of August 15. The  
Norwalk-Northport 138-kV cable 
under Long Island Sound was not re-
stored until August 24, however, due 
to the loss of cable insulation pressure.
Several lessons were learned 
from the New England experience:
●
●
Some generators were not oper-
ating with automatic voltage 
regulators (AVRs) in voltage 
control mode, which hampered 
efforts to maintain stability 
of the islanded system and 
Blacked-Out Areas
50 MW
0 MW
Citizens
High Gate
PV-30
K37
K6
E205W
393
690
398
1,400 MW
150 MW
396
1,385 Cable
Cross-Sound Cable DOS
Phase II HVDC
0 MW
Total New England Load
Lost: 2,500 MW
Figure 2 The New England power system island

maintain voltages within emer-
gency limits.
●
●
It was concluded that opera-
tors should switch from tie line 
bias to flat-frequency automatic  
generation control (AGC ) when 
the system becomes islanded.
●
●
Generator governor response 
needed to be reviewed.
●
●
Frequency and voltage match 
criteria for the resynchroni-
zation of islands needed to be 
reviewed.
●
●
It was found that personnel are 
needed to transcribe critical 
decisions and actions.
●
●
Communications improvements, 
such as the ability to keep a 
teleconference line between con-
trol centers open continuously, 
were also recommended.
Ontario
In restoring the system in Ontario, the 
first steps taken were to confirm the ex-
tent of the disturbance and to activate 
the Ontario Power System Restoration 
Plan, which includes establishing com-
munications with other control areas, 
transmission owners, and market par-
ticipants. Loads that have top priority 
in the restoration plan include class IV 
ac power to all nuclear sites, critical 
transmission and generation station 
service loads, and critical utility tele-
communication facilities. The next pri-
ority is restoration of customer loads 
as necessary to control voltages and 
secure generators, and the priority that 
follows that one is synchronization of 
islands to each other and to neighbor-
ing power systems.
The Ontario system was com-
pletely blacked out, except for the 
portion of northern Ontario west 
of Wawa, two islands in the vicin-
ity of Niagara and Cornwall (both 
of which were connected to upstate 
New York), and two other small is-
lands (one north of Timmins and the 
other on the Ottawa River near Deep 
River). Transmission was restored 
from Niagara to the Bruce nuclear 
generating station starting at 4:42 p.m.  
The Ontario restoration paths are 
depicted in Figure 3. This path also 
provided potential for restarting the 
Nanticoke units. The three avail-
able Bruce units were restored from  
7:13 p.m. to 9:13 p.m. Restoration con-
tinued toward the Toronto area, Pick-
ering, and Lambton (on the border 
with Michigan). Controlled customer 
(load) restoration took place between 
London and Toronto to balance the 
transmission system. The Ontario 
restoration paths are depicted in  
Figure 3.
Meanwhile, an assessment of 
the Cornwall area was conducted 
between 4:11 p.m. and 5:15 p.m. 
Starting at 5:15 p.m., restoration  
began westward toward Pickering and 
Darlington. At 6:40 p.m., restoration 
of a path from Cornwall to Ottawa 
was begun in order to energize critical 
communication facilities. A Darling-
ton unit was restored at 9:18 p.m. At 
10:37 p.m., a transmission loop was 
completed around Lake Ontario.
Starting from a small remaining 
island, at 7:41 p.m. a path was ener-
gized south to Timmins. Load was 
restored, and the restoration contin-
ued south to Sudbury. This restoration  
	
Case Study	
747

748	
Chapter 12  |  Power System Controls
path reached southern Ontario at 
3:43 a.m. on August 15. Northern  
Ontario was resynchronized to the rest 
of the province at Wawa at 5:20 a.m.
Immediately following the dis-
turbance, 11 nuclear units were off-line.  
These units posed a number of spe-
cial challenges. Fully powering down 
these reactors would have left them 
all off-line for several days, owing 
to the complications of restarting 
them. It was difficult, however, to 
maintain them at minimum power 
generation levels for the amount of 
time required to restore the trans-
mission system and provide suitable  
outlets for their power. At Pickering B,  
the pumps in the emergency cooling 
system were unavailable for five and 
a half hours. In the end, three of 
four units at Bruce and one of four 
units at Darlington were able to come 
back online and support the system 
after several hours, but the remain-
ing units were not available for sev-
eral days. One unit at Bruce required  
Existing Major Hydraulic GS
Existing 500-kV and/or 230-kV
Transformer Station
Existing 230-kV Line Route
F Fossil
N Nuclear
Thermal GS (Existing or Under Construction)
Existing 500-kV Line Route
500-kV Authorized
Authorized 500-kV and/or
230-kv Transformer Station
LEGEND
Figure 3  Ontario power system restoration paths

repairs and was out for nine days, 
while one unit at Pickering did not re-
turn until two weeks after the initial 
disturbance. Ontario remained in a 
state of emergency operation for nine 
days because of capacity issues. Some 
parts of Ontario experienced rolling 
blackouts during this time. 
The experience in Ontario pro-
vided a number of lessons learned:
●
●
The devices in place to protect 
equipment operated as planned.
●
●
The development and main-
tenance of a documented res-
toration plan, with training and 
rehearsals, were essential invest-
ments of time and money.
●
●
Close 
cooperation 
among 
multiple entities, transmission 
owners and operators, genera-
tion owners and operators, the 
Independent Market Operator 
(now known as the Indepen-
dent Electricity System Oper-
ator), market participants, and 
government, is needed.
●
●
Communication 
protocols 
between different control areas 
and reliability coordinators are 
important.
●
●
Emergency power at key facili-
ties is crucial. A backup diesel 
generator at a Hydro One con-
trol center failed to start. The 
emergency operations center at 
the Canadian Nuclear Safety 
Commission in Ottawa had no 
backup power supply.
Detroit
The restoration effort in metropoli-
tan Detroit was hampered by several  
instances of physical damage to 
equipment as well as a complete 
blackout of much of the area. Essen-
tially, all of metropolitan Detroit and 
southeastern Michigan was blacked 
out, with only the northern part of 
the area known as the Thumb and a 
single connection from the west and 
south still energized.
The basic restoration plan 
started with the energization of the 
120-kV network around Detroit from 
the still-energized grid to the west 
and north, which was synchronized 
with the Eastern Interconnection. 
Meeting this objective was followed 
by energization of the parallel 345-kV  
network. Starting from the north, 
energization was extended to the 
Harbor Beach unit from two 120-kV 
ties to Consumers Energy in central 
Michigan. Energization reached the 
120-kV St. Clair station at 8:15 p.m. 
A stronger tie to Consumers Energy 
was established when the 345-kV 
Hampton-Pontiac line was closed in 
after midnight. The Remer station 
and the Dean power plant were re-
connected at 3:18 a.m. on August 15.  
A 345-kV path from Belle River  
to St. Clair and Jewel was closed at 
4:43 a.m. (see Figure 4).
On the south side, energiza-
tion was extended from the Mon-
roe 345-kV station to Brownstown  
and Fermi between 10:00 p.m. and 
10:30 p.m. At 3 a.m. on August 15, 
a 120-kV connection to the Airport 
substation was energized, enabling 
restoration of critical load. But ac-
cess to River Rouge and other south-
ern generating plants was hampered 
by a fire at an oil refinery at the 
time of the blackout that forced an  
	
Case Study	
749

750	
Chapter 12  |  Power System Controls
evacuation of the area. Extension 
of energization to the Waterman 
station near downtown Detroit was 
therefore delayed until 8:00 a.m. 
With the closure of the Blackfoot- 
Madrid 345-kV line at 8:55 a.m. and 
the closure of the ring bus at Pontiac 
at 9:30 a.m., the 345-kV loop around 
the Detroit metro area was finally 
reestablished. A second 345-kV tie 
to Consumers Energy, the Thetford-
Jewel circuit, was reclosed at 1:38 p.m.  
on August 15.
As restoration continued, De-
troit Edison followed a practice of 
energizing whole distribution centers 
without isolating individual circuits. 
Up to this point, most of the restora-
tion actions were preparatory to re-
storing load. Distribution crews were 
needed as transmission was restored 
in order to balance load against avail-
able generation. Substantial restora-
tion of distribution started at about 
2:30 p.m. on August 15. The res-
toration of the Essex 24-kV station 
Brownstown
MICHIGAN
Hampton
Thetford
Greenwood
Blackfoot
Jewel
Madrid
Majestic
Wayne
Waterman
Fermi
Stephens
Pontiac
Belle River
St. Clair
DETROIT
Monroe
Figure 4  Eastern Michigan power system restoration (orange lines indicate 500 kV, 
red lines indicate 345 kV, and blue lines indicate 230 kV)

at 5:30 p.m. picked up a significant 
portion of the load in the city of De-
troit. The last of four critical pumps 
for the city’s water and sanitation de-
partment was restored in the evening. 
Detroit Edison conducted in-
spections of transmission lines and 
switchyards over the next several days 
to maintain system reliability. The in-
spections were conducted both by air 
and on the ground, and they were both 
visual and thermal. Storms delayed 
the start of the inspections. Approxi-
mately 1500 mi. of transmission were 
inspected between August 17 and 21.
Several instances of damage 
to generators were reported. Five 
units had failed rupture discs, which 
kept these units unavailable for more 
than 24 hours. Rupture discs are a 
pressure relief location for the steam 
condenser. They are prone to failure 
when the entire electrical network 
goes down, as a consequent loss of 
circulating water pumps and vacuum 
pumps results in a buildup of pres-
sure in the condenser. The rupture 
discs, however, are designed to fail un-
der stressed conditions and probably 
prevented serious physical damage 
to the units. The availability of spare 
discs so that units could be returned 
to service was an issue; the need 
for so many simultaneous rupture  
disc replacements had not been expe-
rienced previously. One unit suffered 
a loss of control air on the generator 
seal oil system valves, resulting in oil 
in the generator. The output of an-
other unit was limited due to a ground 
in the no load/low load trip switch. 
Another unit had an overheated 
boiler circulating water pumps, which 
needed to be replaced. Finally, one 
unit (River Rouge 3) suffered bear-
ing damage during the event, which 
left the unit out of service for weeks. 
Lessons learned from the restoration 
experience in and around Detroit  
include:
●
●
The restoration effort was vul-
nerable to Detroit Edison’s 
computerized “in-service appli-
cation” function, used to prior-
itize and dispatch repair crews. 
This function was not operable 
due to the loss of power, forcing 
repair crews to make a number 
of extra trips back to service cen-
ters to pick up new work orders.
●
●
Practices in maintaining spare 
rupture discs for generators 
were deficient for coping with 
system-wide disturbances and 
hence were changed.
Southern Michigan
The southeastern corner of the Con-
sumers Energy system in southern 
Michigan had also blacked out. After 
the initial disturbance, operators 
received conflicting information about 
the amount of generation. Operators 
believed the Consumers Energy sys-
tem was undergenerating, but the 
high frequency (60.2 Hz) suggested 
the opposite. Operators maintained 
generation levels until the status of 
the system could be ascertained. Res-
toration efforts commenced with an 
emergency page of transmission and 
distribution personnel and a confer-
ence call at 5:15 p.m. on August 14 
to determine initial actions. After  
assessing the state of the transmission 
	
Case Study	
751

752	
Chapter 12  |  Power System Controls
system and identifying the affected 
area, all of the breakers within that 
area were opened as preparation for 
restoration. The 138-kV network was 
restored by 7:25 p.m. Subsequently, 
the remaining 46-kV lines and cus-
tomer load were restored; this work 
was completed by 10:05 p.m.
The area that was restored was  
fed by three 138-kV lines. One of  
the lines (Leoni-Beecher) tripped at 
10:30 p.m. and did not reclose. The 
power increase on the other two lines 
caused them to trip as well, black-
ing out the area that had just been 
restored. A second restoration com-
menced quickly, bringing the 138-kV 
network back up by 12:55 a.m. on  
August 15 and the 46-kV network, 
with all customer load, by 1:35 a.m. 
A fault location was identified from 
relay data, but a cause for the fault 
was not found at the indicated lo-
cation. The line was given a derated 
capability when it was reclosed at 
11:00 p.m. Because of the limitations 
of the system caused by the derating, 
40 MW of load, served by four 46-kV  
lines, was manually shed between  
7 a.m. and 9:30 a.m. on August 15; 
the lines were restored when a Whit-
ing generator came back online.
The initial attempt to return the 
Campbell 3 unit to service failed due 
to water hammer that developed after 
steam was turned back on. The water 
hammer damaged a number of pip-
ing hangers, delaying the unit’s return 
to service.
Cleveland
The authors could not find any 
publicly 
available, 
comprehensive  
reports on the restoration process 
in the Cleveland area. A summary 
of the restoration in the region of 
the East Central Area Reliability 
Coordination Agreement (ECAR), 
which includes northern Ohio and 
southern Michigan, is provided 
from the ECAR final report dated  
July 7, 2004. In the region, 18,047 MW  
of load, 18,811 MW of genera-
tion, and 238 transmission circuits 
were lost. All load was restored by 
9:00 a.m. on August 16. Restora-
tion of 100% of the load took one 
day and 17 hours. The restoration 
strategy consisted of restoration 
of load from energized transmis-
sion lines and the use of black-start 
units not in black-start mode. These 
gas turbines were capable of black 
starting but were not used in this 
mode. These units can be started up 
very quickly to help restore load. 
Throughout the restoration, opera-
tors needed to be sure that transfers 
from 
American 
Electric 
Power  
(AEP) to Michigan did not overload 
the FirstEnergy transmission sys-
tem in northern Ohio. Restoration 
of power to off-site nuclear power 
plant supply and to other generation 
resources off-line as a result of the 
blackout was a priority. Communi-
cations and fuel supply to critical 
infrastructure were major issues dur-
ing the blackout restoration effort. 
The need to more effectively share 
restoration plans among reliability 
coordinators, transmission opera-
tors, and generation operators was 
identified. ECAR also identified the 
need for additional training and reg-
ular drills for blackout restoration.

Restoration Summary
The times to restore substantial and 
100% load for the various regions 
affected by the blackout are given in 
Table 1.
Lessons Learned
A general pattern for sound res-
toration can be inferred from these 
examples. Restoration commences by 
first assessing the current state of the 
system. Then a skeletal high-voltage 
network is reassembled, providing a 
cranking path for generation, followed 
by the gradual connection of lower-
voltage facilities and customer load. 
Of course, the process is not quite 
this simple. Some load is needed on 
the system throughout the restoration 
process in order to maintain volt-
age stability; otherwise, voltages be-
come excessively high, to the point of  
potentially damaging equipment. Re-
active devices alone are insufficient 
to regulate voltage on an unloaded 
transmission system. The system is 
vulnerable throughout the process: 
at least one instance was observed 
of a fully restored area collapsing,  
forcing utility personnel to start all 
over again.
The ability to tie to a large in-
terconnection makes the restoration 
process easier and smoother. A large 
interconnection provides very stable 
frequency control and, to a lesser 
extent, voltage control. Maintaining 
voltage and frequency in a smaller 
island is considerably more difficult. 
In several such instances, operators 
found it necessary to manually shed 
load to prevent a complete collapse 
of the remaining system.
Operators must prioritize crit-
ical loads during restoration. Such 
loads, at the bulk power system level, 
include water and sanitation system 
pumps, off-site power for nuclear 
generating stations, and airports.
The old cliché “expect the 
unexpected” is certainly applica-
ble to a system restoration effort. 
Despite the thoughtful development 
of restoration plans, a number of 
unforeseen difficulties arose through-
out the process, including damaged 
generators, the inability to synchronize 
due to excessive voltage disparities, 
State or Province
Time to Restore Substantial Load Time to Restore 100% Load
Michigan
8/15/2003 at 5:30 p.m.
8/15/2003, evening
New England
8/15/2003 at 1:35 a.m.
8/15/2003, end of day
New York
8/15/2003 at 4:00 a.m.
8/15/2003 at 10:30 p.m.
Ohio
8/15/2003 at 7:00 a.m. (Cleveland 
water pumps)
8/16/2003 at 7:00 a.m.  
(as reported by ECAR)
Ontario
Data not publicly available
8/15/2003, end of day
TABLE  1
Time to restore substantial and 100% load for the various regions affected, as reported in 
publicly available documentation
	
Case Study	
753

754	
Chapter 12  |  Power System Controls
and an inability to physically reach 
substations due to industrial hazards 
spawned by the power outage. Com-
munications was cited as an issue in  
nearly all areas; communication sys-
tems need to be able to function in 
the absence of the power grid. Sim-
ilar flaws in emergency plans were 
seen following Hurricane Katrina: 
officials anticipated being able to 
use cellular phones following the 
storm, but many cellular towers were  
inoperable.
To summarize, the lessons 
learned included the following priori-
ties and steps:
●
●
Improve communications among 
responsible parties and commu-
nication systems.
●
●
Develop and maintain a restora-
tion plan, and always be prepared 
to “expect the unexpected.”
●
●
Restoration begins by first 
assessing the current state of 
the system.
●
●
The next step is to reassemble a 
skeletal high-voltage network.
●
●
Then a “cranking” path for 
generation must be provided so 
as to assure the system is stable 
and will be restored without 
sustaining excessive voltages.
●
●
Gradually connect lower volt-
age facilities and customer 
load to maintain voltage stabil-
ity. Reactive devices alone are 
insufficient to regulate voltage 
on an unloaded transmission 
system.
●
●
The availability of connec-
tion to a large interconnection 
makes frequency control and 
voltage control more stable.
●
●
Shed load if need be to main-
tain stability within an island 
being restored.
●
●
Prioritize critical loads during 
restoration.
Regulatory Recommendations 
and Standards
Most of the recommendations that 
followed the postmortem analysis of 
the blackout focused on preventing 
a cascading outage as opposed to 
recovering from one. Recommenda-
tion 29 from the U.S.-Canada Power 
System Outage Task Force, how-
ever, was as follows: “Evaluate and 
disseminate lessons learned during 
system restoration.” In the after-
math of the blackout, the North 
American Electric Reliability Coun-
cil (NERC) developed a number of 
reliability standards to minimize the 
likelihood of major blackouts and 
mitigate their impact should they  
occur. Two particular standards—
EOP-005-2 and EOP-006-2—address  
system restoration. EOP-005-2 pro-
vides standards regarding the use of 
black-start units to reliably restore 
the system after a blackout. Some 
of the lessons learned in the Aug­ust 14 
blackout, such as identifying key strat-
egies for establishing cranking paths 
and adding load incrementally to 
stabilize voltage and frequency, 
were incorporated into EOP-005-2.  
NERC Standard EOP-006-2 ad-
dresses the need for coordination of 
restoration plans among reliability 
coordinators, the need for plans to 
achieve synchronization between 

islands formed by the blackout and 
the need for training and simulation 
drills at prescribed periods to ensure 
that the main ties among reliability 
coordinators are restored in a reli-
able manner. While the emphasis 
remains on preventing blackouts in 
the first place, it is important to have 
thoughtful and coordinated plans 
to restore the power system reliably, 
particularly in view of the ever pre-
sent-threat of natural disasters such 
as fires, floods, and hurricanes.
Conclusion
On August 14, 2003, an enormous 
power disruption resulted in the loss 
of power to approximately 50 mil-
lion people. A total of 61,800 MW 
of load was disconnected, along 
with 265 generating plants (see  
Figure 5). Three major metropolitan 
areas (Cleveland, Detroit, and New 
York), along with much of the prov-
ince of Ontario, were blacked out. 
Two large areas (upstate New York 
and the combination of New England  
and the Maritime provinces) and 
several smaller areas became electri-
cally islanded systems, disconnected 
from the Eastern Interconnection. 
Overall, given the difficulties con-
fronted, the affected utilities and 
their dedicated personnel did an 
admirable job in overcoming those 
difficulties and restoring the power 
system following this historic power 
outage.
	
Case Study	
755
MI
IL
IN
OH
WV
PA
MA
CT
NH
VT
Quebec
NY
Ontario
Toronto
Ottawa
T
NJ
Detroit
oledo Cleveland 
New York 
Figure 5 The area affected by August 14, 2003 blackout

756	
Chapter 12  |  Power System Controls
For Further Reading
New York Independent System Oper-
ator. (2005, Feb.). Blackout August 14,  
2003 final report. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.nyiso.com/public/web 
docs/media_room/press_releases/2005 
/blackout_rpt_final.pdf
Independent System Operator 
New England. (2004, Feb.). Blackout  
2003: Performance of the New  
England and Maritimes Power Sys­
tems During the August 14, 2003  
Blackout. United States: ISO New 
England. [Online]. Available: http://
www.iso-ne.com/pubs/spcl_rpts/2004 
/iso_august_blackout_report.pdf
Canada  News  Wire.  (2003,  Sept.  2). 
IMO releases details of power res-
toration effort. T&D World Magazine  
[Online]. Available: http://tdworld.com 
/energizing/imo-releases-details-power 
-restoration-effort
Ontario Independent Electric-
ity Market Operator. (2003, Sept. 4).  
Testimony on August 14, 2003 
Blackout by David Goulding Presi-
dent and Chief Operating Officer of 
IESO before the United States House 
of Representatives Committee on 
Energy and Commerce. [Online].  
Available: http://www.ieso. ca/imoweb 
/pubs/corp/IM O-Testimony-Congress 
Hearings_ 2003Sep04.pdf
J. Spears (2013, Aug.). Black-
out 2003: How Ontario went dark. 
Toronto Star [Online]. Available:  
http://www.thestar.com/business 
/eco­nomy/2013/08/13/blackout_2003 
_how_ontario_went_dark.html
NPCC 
Inter-Control 
Area 
Restoration Coordination Working 
Group (CO-11). Restoration of the 
NPCC areas following the power 
system collapse of August 14, 2003. 
Presented at the Joint Meeting of the 
NERC Market Committee, Operat-
ing Committee and Planning Com-
mittee, Vancouver, Canada, July 21, 
2004. [Online]. Available: https://
www.npcc.org/library/blackout%20 
recommendations/Restoration_of 
_the_NPCC_Areas.pdf
Michigan Public Service Com-
mission, “Michigan public service 
commission report on August 14th 
blackout,” Nov. 2003.
DTE Energy. (2004, Apr.). 
Detroit Edison’s response to the 
August 14, 2003 blackout, Response 
to Michigan Public Service Com-
mission Case No. U-13859. [Online].  
Available: 
http://efile.mpsc.state.mi 
.us/efile/docs/13859/0006.pdf
U.S.-Canada 
Power 
System 
Outage Task Force. (2004, Apr.). 
Final report on the August 14, 2003 
blackout in the United States and 
Canada: Causes and recommenda-
tions. [Online]. Available: http://www 
.ferc.gov/industries/electric/ indus-act 
/reliability/blackout/ch1-3.pdf
Biographies
Eric H. Allen is with the North 
American Electric Reliability Corpo-
ration, Atlanta, Georgia.
Robert B. Stuart is with Stuart 
Consulting, Walnut Creek, California.
Thomas E. Wiedman is with 
Wiedman Power System Consulting, 
Elizabeth, Illinois.  ■

	
Section 12.1 Generator-Voltage Control	
757
12.1  Generator-Voltage Control
The exciter delivers dc power to the field winding on the rotor of a synchronous 
generator. For older generators, the exciter consists of a dc generator driven by the 
rotor. The dc power is transferred to the rotor via slip rings and brushes. For newer 
generators, static or brushless exciters are often employed.
For static exciters, ac power is obtained directly from the generator terminals or 
a nearby station service bus. The ac power is then rectified via thyristors and trans-
ferred to the rotor of the synchronous generator via slip rings and brushes.
For brushless exciters, ac power is obtained from an “inverted” synchronous 
generator whose three-phase armature windings are located on the main generator 
rotor and whose field winding is located on the stator.
The ac power from the armature windings is rectified via diodes mounted on 
the rotor and is transferred directly to the field winding. For this design, slip rings 
and brushes are eliminated.
Block diagrams of several standard types of generator-voltage control systems 
have been developed by the IEEE Power and Energy Society, beginning in 1968 with 
[1] and most recently in 2005 with IEEE Std 421.5-2005. A block diagram for what is 
commonly known as the IEEE Type 1 exciter, which uses a shaft-driven dc generator 
to create the field current, is shown in Figure 12.3 (neglecting saturation).
In Figure 12.3, the leftmost block, 1/(1 1 sTr), represents the delay associated 
with measuring the terminal voltage Vt where s is the Laplace operator and Tr is the 
measurement time constant. Note that if a unit step is applied to a 1/(1 1 sTr) block, 
the output rises exponentially to unity with time constant Tr. The measured generator 
terminal voltage Vt is compared with a voltage reference Vref to obtain a voltage error, 
ΔV, which in turn is applied to the voltage regulator. The voltage regulator is modeled 
as an amplifier with gain Ka and a time constant Ta, while the last forward block rep-
resents the dynamics of the exciter’s dc generator. The output is the field voltage Efd. 
which is applied to the generator field winding and acts to adjust the generator termi-
nal voltage, as in (11.6.5). The feedback block in Figure 12.3 is used to improve the 
dynamic response of the exciter by reducing excessive overshoot. This feedback is rep-
resented by (sKf)/(1 1 sTf), which provides a filtered first derivative negative feedback.
For any transient stability study, the initial values for the state variables need 
to be determined. This is done by assuming that the system is initially operating 
in steady-state, and recognizing that in steady-state all the derivatives will be zero. 
Then, by knowing the initial field voltage (found as in Example 11.10) and terminal 
voltage, all the other variables can be determined.
Vt
Vref
Vr min
Vr max
Ka
sKf
Vr
Vf
Efd
1
–
–
+
+
1 + sTr
1 + sTa
1+sTf
1
Ke + sTe
FIGURE 12.3
Block diagram for 
the IEEE Type 1 
Exciter (neglecting 
saturation)

758	
Chapter 12  |  Power System Controls
For wind turbines, how their voltage is controlled depends upon the type of the 
wind turbines. Type 1 wind turbines, squirrel cage induction machines, have no direct 
voltage control. Type 2 wind turbines are wound rotor induction machines with vari-
able external resistance. While they do not have direct voltage control, the external 
resistance control system is usually modeled as a type of exciter. The block diagram 
for such a model is shown in Figure 12.4. The purpose for this control is to allow for a 
more constant power output from the wind turbine. For example, if a wind gust were 
to cause the turbine blades to accelerate, this controller would quickly increase the 
external resistance, flatting the torque-speed curve as shown in Figure 11.25.
Similar to synchronous machines, the Type 3 and 4 wind turbines have the ability 
to perform voltage or reactive power control. Common control modes include constant 
power factor control, coordinated control across a wind farm to maintain a constant 
voltage at the interconnection point, and constant reactive power control. Figure 12.5  
shows a simplified version of a Type 3 wind turbine exciter, in which Qcmd is the com-
manded reactive power, Vt is the terminal voltage, and the output, Eq is the input to the 
DFAG model shown in Figure 11.27. For fixed reactive power Qcmd is a constant, while 
for power factor control, Qcmd varies linearly with the real power output.
From
generator
model
Speed
from
turbine
model
Pgen
Kw
Rmin
Rmax
Rext
To
generator
model
Kp
Kpp + Kip/s
s2
s1
s0
1 + sTw
1 + sTp
P vs. slip curve
+
–
FIGURE 12.4
Simplified block 
diagram for a Type 2  
wind turbine Rext 
control system
Qcmd
Qgen
Vmax
Eq
Kvi
KQi
s
s
Vref
Vt
Vmin
XlQmin
XlQmax
+
+
–
–
FIGURE 12.5
Simplified block 
diagram for a Type 3 
wind turbine reactive 
power control 
system
Synchronous Generator Exciter Response
Using the system from Example 11.10, assume the two-axis generator is aug-
mented with an IEEE Type 1 exciter with Tr 5 0, Ka 5 100, Ta 5 0.05, Vrmax 5 5, 
Vrmin 5 25, Ke 5 1, Te 5 0.26, Ka 5 0.01 and Tf 5 1.0. (a) Determine the initial 
values of Vr, Vf, and Vref . (b) Using the fault sequence from Example 11.10, deter-
mine the bus 4 terminal voltage after 1 second and then after 5 seconds.
EXAMPLE 12.1

	
Section 12.1 Generator-Voltage Control	
759
SOLUTION
a.  The initial field voltage and terminal voltage, Efd and Vt, do not depend on 
the exciter, so their values are equal to those found in Example 11.10, that is, 2.913 
and 1.095 respectively. Since the system is initially in steady-state,
Vr 5 (Ke)(Efd) 5 (1.0)(2.9135) 5 2.9135
Because Vf is the output of the filtered derivative feedback, its initial value is zero. 
Finally, writing the equation for the second summation block in Figure 12.3
sVref 2 Vt 2 VfdsKad 5 Vr
Vref 5 Vr
Ka
1 Vt 1 Vf 5 2.9135
100
1 1.0946 5 1.1237
b.  Open PowerWorld Simulator case Example 12_1 and display the Transient 
Stability Analysis Form (see Figure 12.6). To see the initial conditions, select the 
FIGURE 12.6
Example 12.1 results
(Continued )

760	
Chapter 12  |  Power System Controls
States/Manual Control page, and then select the Transfer Present State to Power 
Flow button to update the oneline display. From this page, it is also possible to 
just do a specified number of timesteps by selecting the Do Specified Number of 
Timesteps(s) button or to run to a specified simulation time using the Run Until 
Specified Time button. To determine the terminal voltage after one second, select 
the Run Until Specified Time button. The value is 1.10 p.u. To finish the simula-
tion, select the Continue button. The terminal voltage at five seconds is 1.095 p.u., 
which is close to the prefault voltage, indicating the exciter is restoring the voltage 
to its setpoint value. In contrast, the bus 4 terminal voltage after five seconds in 
the Example 11.10 case, which does not include an exciter, is 1.115 p.u.
Type 3 Wind Turbine Reactive Power Control
Assume the Type 3 wind turbine from Example 11.12 has a Figure 12.5 reactive 
power control system with KQi 5 0.4, KVi 5 40, XIQmax 5 1.45, XIQmin 5 0.5, 
Vmax 5 1.1, Vmin 5 0.9 (per unit using a 100 MVA base). For the Example 11.12 
system conditions, determine the initial values for Vref, Qcmd, and estimate the 
maximum amount of reactive power this system could supply during a fault that 
depresses the terminal voltage to 0.5 p.u.
SOLUTION
Since in steady-state the inputs to each of the two integrator blocks in Figure 12.5  
must be zero, Vref is just equal to the initial terminal voltage magnitude from 
Example 11.12, that is, 1.0239 p.u., and Qcmd is the initial reactive power output, 
which is 0.22 per unit (22 Mvar), found from the imaginary part of the product of 
the terminal voltage and the conjugate of the terminal current. During the fault 
with its low terminal voltage, the positive input into the KVi; integration block will 
cause Eq to rapidly rise to its limit XIQmax 5 1.45. The reactive component of Isorc 
will then be 21.45/ 0.8 5 21.8125 p.u. The total per unit reactive power injection 
with Vt 5 0.5 during the fault is then
Qnet 5 sVtds1.8125d 2 V 2
t
0.8 5 0.593 pu 5 59.3  Mvar
This result can be confirmed by opening PowerWorld Simulator case Exam­
ple 12_2 which models such a fault condition (see Figure 12.7). After the fault is 
cleared, the reactive power controller restores the machine’s reactive power out-
put to its prefault value.
EXAMPLE 12.2

	
Section 12.2 Turbine-Governor Control	
761
Block diagrams such as those shown in Figure 12.3 are used for computer rep-
resentation of generator-voltage control in transient stability computer programs 
(see Chapter 11). In practice, high-gain, fast-responding exciters provide large, 
rapid increases in field voltage Efd during short circuits at the generator terminals 
in order to improve transient stability after fault clearing. Equations represented 
in the block diagram can be used to compute the transient response of generator-
voltage control.
12.2  Turbine-Governor Control
Turbine-generator units operating in a power system contain stored kinetic energy 
due to their rotating masses. If the system load suddenly increases, stored kinetic en-
ergy is released to initially supply the load increase. Also, the electrical torque Te of 
each turbine-generating unit increases to supply the load increase, while the mechan-
ical torque Tm of the turbine initially remains constant. From Newton’s second law, 
Ja 5 Tm 2 Te, the acceleration a is therefore negative. That is, each turbine-generator 
decelerates and the rotor speed drops as kinetic energy is released to supply the load 
increase. The electrical frequency of each generator, which is proportional to rotor 
speed for synchronous machines, also drops.
FIGURE 12.7
Example 12.2 variation in generator reactive power output

762	
Chapter 12  |  Power System Controls
From this, we conclude that either rotor speed or generator frequency indicates 
a balance or imbalance of generator electrical torque Te and turbine mechanical 
torque Tm. If speed or frequency is decreasing, then Te is greater than Tm (neglecting 
generator losses). Similarly, if speed or frequency is increasing, Te is less than Tm. 
Accordingly, generator frequency is an appropriate control signal for governing the 
mechanical output power of the turbine.
The steady-state frequency-power relation for turbine-governor control is
Dpm 5 Dpref 2 1
RDf 
(12.2.1)
where Df is the change in frequency, Dpm is the change in turbine mechanical power 
output, and Dpref is the change in a reference power setting. R is called the regulation 
constant. The equation is plotted in Figure 12.8 as a family of curves, with Dpref as a 
parameter. Note that when Dpref is fixed, Dpm is directly proportional to the drop in 
frequency.
Figure 12.8 illustrates a steady-state frequency-power relation. When an elec-
trical load change occurs, the turbine-generator rotor accelerates or decelerates, and 
frequency undergoes a transient disturbance. Under normal operating conditions, 
the rotor acceleration eventually becomes zero, and the frequency reaches a new 
steady-state, shown in the figure.
The regulation constant R in (12.2.1) is the negative of the slope of the Df 
versus Dpm curves shown in Figure 12.8. The units of R are Hz/MW when Df is in 
Hz and Dpm is in MW. When Df and Dpm are given in per-unit, however, R is also in 
per-unit.
FIGURE 12.8
Steady-state 
frequency–power 
relation for a  
turbine-governor

	
Section 12.2 Turbine-Governor Control	
763
The steady-state frequency-power relation for one area of an interconnected 
power system can be determined by summing (12.2.1) for each turbine-generating 
unit in the area. Noting that Df is the same for each unit,
Dpm 5 Dpm1 1 Dpm2 1 Dpm3 1 Á
5 sDpref1 1 Dpref2 1 Á d 21
1
R1
1 1
R2
1 Á2Df
5 Dpref 21
1
R1
1 1
R2
1 Á2Df 
(12.2.2)
where Dpm is the total change in turbine mechanical powers and Dpref is the total 
change in reference power settings within the area. We define the area frequency 
response characteristic b as
b 51
1
R1
1 1
R2
Á2
(12.2.3)
Using (12.2.3) in (12.2.2),
Dpm 5 Dpref 2 bDf 
(12.2.4)
Turbine-governor response to a frequency change  
at a generating unit
A 500-MVA, 60-Hz turbine-generator has a regulation constant R 5 0.05 per 
unit based on its own rating. If the generator frequency increases by 0.01 Hz in 
steady-state, what is the decrease in turbine mechanical power output? Assume a 
fixed reference power setting.
SOLUTION
The per-unit change in frequency is
Dfp.u. 5 Df
fbase
5 0.01
60 5 1.6667 3 1024  per unit
Then, from (12.2.1), with Dpref 5 0,
Dpmp.u. 51
21
0.052s1.6667 3 1024d 5 23.3333 3 1024  per unit
Dpm 5 sDpmp.u.dSbase 5 s23.3333 3 1024ds500d 5 21.6667  MW
The turbine mechanical power output decreases by 1.67 MW.
EXAMPLE 12.3

764	
Chapter 12  |  Power System Controls
Equation (12.2.4) is the area steady-state frequency-power relation. The units of  
b are MW/Hz when Df is in Hz and Dpm is in MW. b can also be given in per-unit. In 
practice, b is somewhat higher than that given by (12.2.3) due to system losses and 
the frequency dependence of loads.
A standard value for the regulation constant is R 5 0.05 per unit. When all 
turbine-generating units have the same per-unit value of R based on their own ratings, 
then each unit shares total power changes in proportion to its own rating. Figure 12.9  
shows a block diagram for a simple steam turbine governor commonly known 
as the TGOV1 model. The 1/(1 1 sT1) models the time delays associated with  
the governor, where s is again the Laplace operator and T1 is the time constant. The  
limits on the output of this block account for the fact that turbines have minimum and 
maximum outputs. The second block diagram models the delays associated with the 
turbine; for non-reheat turbines T2 should be zero. Typical values are R 5 0.05 p.u.,  
T1 50.5 seconds, T3 5 0.5 for a non-reheat turbine or T2 5 2.5 and T3 5 7.5 seconds 
otherwise. Dt, is a turbine damping coefficient that is usually 0.02 or less (often zero). 
Additional turbine block diagrams are available in [3].
pref
pmech
Vmax
Vmin
Dt
1
1
1 + sT1
1 + sT2
1 + sT3
R
–
–
+
+
Speed
FIGURE 12.9
Turbine-governor 
block diagram
Response of turbine-governors to a load change  
in an interconnected power system
An interconnected 60-Hz power system consists of one area with three 
turbine-generator units rated 1000, 750, and 500 MVA, respectively. The regulation  
constant of each unit is R 5 0.05 per unit based on its own rating. Each unit is 
initially operating at one-half of its own rating, when the system load suddenly 
increases by 200 MW. Determine (a) the per-unit area frequency response charac-
teristic b on a 1000 MVA system base, (b) the steady-state drop in area frequency, 
and (c) the increase in turbine mechanical power output of each unit. Assume 
that the reference power setting of each turbine-generator remains constant. 
Neglect losses and the dependence of load on frequency.
EXAMPLE 12.4

	
Section 12.2 Turbine-Governor Control	
765
SOLUTION
a.  The regulation constants are converted to per-unit on the system base using
Rp.u.new 5 Rp.u.old 
Sbasesnewd
Sbasesoldd
We obtain
R1p.u.new 5 R1p.u.old 5 0.05
R2p.u.new 5 s0.05d1
1000
7502 5 0.06667
R3p.u.new 5 s0.05d1
1000
5502 5 0.10  per unit
Using (12.2.3),
b 5 1
R1
1 1
R2
1 1
R3
5
1
0.05 1
1
0.06667 1
1
0.10 5 45.0  per unit
b.  Neglecting losses and dependence of load on frequency, the steady-state increase 
in total turbine mechanical power equals the load increase, 200 MW or 0.20 per unit. 
Using (12.2.4) with Dpref 5 0,
Df 51
21
b 2Dpm 51
21
452s0.20d 5 24.444 3 1023  per unit
5 (24.444 3 1023) (60) 5 20.2667  Hz
The steady-state frequency drop is 0.2667 Hz.
c.  From (12.2.1), using Df 5 24.444 3 1023 per unit,
Dpm1 51
21
0.052s24.444 3 1023d 5 0.08888  per unit
5 88.88  MW
Dpm2 51
21
0.066672s24.444 3 1023d 5 0.06666  per unit
5 66.66  MW
Dpm3 51
21
0.102s24.444 3 1023d 5 0.04444  per unit
5 44.44  MW
Note that unit 1, whose MVA rating is 33% larger than that of unit 2 and 100% 
larger than that of unit 3, picks up 33% more load than unit 2 and 100% more 
(Continued )

766	
Chapter 12  |  Power System Controls
load than unit 3. That is, each unit shares the total load change in proportion to 
its own rating.
PowerWorld Simulator case Example 12_4 contains a lossless nine bus, three 
generator system that duplicates the conditions from this example (see Figure 12.10). 
The generators at buses 1, 2 and 3 have ratings of 500, 1000, and 750 MVA respec-
tively, with initial outputs of 300, 600, 500 MWs. Each is modeled with a two-axis 
synchronous machine model (see Section 11.6), an IEEET1 exciter and a TGOV1 
governor model with the parameters equal to the defaults given earlier. At time t 5 
0.5 seconds, the load at bus 8 is increased from 200 to 400 MW. Figure 12.10 shows 
the results of a 10-second transient stability simulation. The final generator outputs 
are 344.5, 589.0, and 466.7 MWs, while the final frequency decline is 0.272 Hz, 
closely matching the results predicted in the example (the frequency decline exactly 
matches the 0.266 Hz prediction if the simulation is extended to 20 seconds).
FIGURE 12.10
System oneline with generator mechanical power variation for Example 12.4

	
Section 12.3 Load-Frequency Control	
767
The power output from wind turbines can be controlled by changing the 
pitch angle of the blades. When the available power in the wind is above the 
rating for the turbine, its blades are pitched to limit the mechanical power deliv-
ered to the electric machine. When the available power is less than the machine’s 
rating, the pitch angle is set to its minimum. Figure 12.11 shows the generic 
pitch control model for Type 3 and 4 wind turbines, with the inputs being the per 
unit speed of the turbine, vr, the desired speed (normally 1.2 p.u.), the ordered 
per unit electrical output, and a setpoint power. These signals are combined as 
shown on the figure to produce a commanded angle for the blades, ucmd, expressed 
in degrees. The right side of the block diagram models the dynamics and limits 
associated with changing the pitch angle of the blades; Ru is the rate at which 
the blades change their angle in degrees per second. Typical values are Tp 5 0.3 
seconds, umin/max between 0° and 27°, rate limits of 610°/s, Kpp 5 150, Kip 5 25, 
Kpc 5 3, Kic 5 30.
In general, the larger the size of the interconnected system, the better the 
frequency response since there are more generators to share the task. However, 
“Owners/operators of generator units have strong economic reasons to operate 
generator units in many ways that prevent effective governing response.” [16] For 
example, operating the unit at its full capacity, which maximizes the income that 
can be derived from the unit but prevents the unit from increasing its output. This 
is certainly an issue with wind turbines since their “fuel” is essentially free. Also, the 
Type 3 and 4 units do not contribute inertial response.
12.3  Load-Frequency Control
As shown in Section 12.2, turbine-governor control eliminates rotor accelerations 
and decelerations following load changes during normal operation. However, there 
is a steady-state frequency error Df when the change in turbine-governor reference 
setting Dpref is zero. One of the objectives of load-frequency control (LFC), therefore, 
is to return Df to zero.
In a power system consisting of interconnected areas, each area agrees to export 
or import a scheduled amount of power through transmission-line interconnections, 
Kpp +
Kip
s
Kpc +
Kic
s
Pelec
Pset
+
+
+
+
+
Pitch
1
sTp
0
–
–
–
FIGURE 12.11
Pitch control for a 
Type 3 or 4 wind 
turbine model

768	
Chapter 12  |  Power System Controls
or tie-lines, to its neighboring areas. Thus, a second LFC objective is to have 
each area absorb its own load changes during normal operation. This objective is 
achieved by maintaining the net tie-line power flow out of each area at its scheduled  
value.
The following summarizes the two basic LFC objectives for an interconnected 
power system:
1.	 Following a load change, each area should assist in returning the steady-
state frequency error Df to zero.
2.	 Each area should maintain the net tie-line power flow out of the area 
at its scheduled value, in order for the area to absorb its own load 
changes.
The following control strategy developed by N. Cohn [4] meets these LFC objectives. 
We first define the area control error (ACE) as follows:
ACE 5 sptie 2 ptie,schedd 1 Bf s f 2 60d
5 Dptie 1 Bf Df
(12.3.1)
where Dptie is the deviation in net tie-line power flow out of the area from its sched-
uled value ptie, sched, and Df is the deviation of area frequency from its scheduled 
value (60 Hz). Thus, the ACE for each area consists of a linear combination of 
tie-line error Dptie and frequency error Df. The constant Bf is called a frequency bias 
constant.
The change in reference power setting Dprefi of each turbine-governor operating 
under LFC is proportional to the integral of the area control error. That is,
Dprefi 5 2Ki#ACE dt
(12.3.2)
Each area monitors its own tie-line power flows and frequency at the area control 
center. The ACE given by (12.3.1) is computed and a percentage of the ACE is allo-
cated to each controlled turbine-generator unit. Raise or lower commands are dis-
patched to the turbine-governors at discrete time intervals of two or more seconds 
in order to adjust the reference power settings. As the commands accumulate, the 
integral action in (12.3.2) is achieved.
The constant Ki in (12.3.2) is an integrator gain. The minus sign in (12.3.2) 
indicates that if either the net tie-line power flow out of the area or the area fre-
quency is low—that is, if the ACE is negative—then the area should increase its 
generation.
When a load change occurs in any area, a new steady-state operation can be 
obtained only after the power output of every turbine-generating unit in the in-
terconnected system reaches a constant value. This occurs only when all reference 
power settings are zero, which in turn occurs only when the ACE of every area is 
zero. Furthermore, the ACE is zero in every area only when both Dptie and Df are 
zero. Therefore, in steady-state, both LFC objectives are satisfied.

	
Section 12.3 Load-Frequency Control	
769
Response of LFC to a load change in an interconnected 
power system
As shown in Figure 12.12, a 60-Hz power system consists of two interconnected 
areas. Area 1 has 2000 MW of total generation and an area frequency response 
characteristic b1 5 700 MW/Hz. Area 2 has 4000 MW of total generation and 
b2 5 1400 MW/Hz. Each area is initially generating one-half of its total genera-
tion, at Dptiel 5 Dptie2 5 0 and at 60 Hz when the load in area 1 suddenly increases 
by 100 MW. Determine the steady-state frequency error Df and the steady-state  
tie-line error Dptie of each area for the following two cases: (a) without LFC, and  
(b) with LFC given by (12.3.1) and (12.3.2). Neglect losses and the dependence of  
load on frequency.
SOLUTION
a.  Since the two areas are interconnected, the steady-state frequency error Df is 
the same for both areas. Adding (12.2.4) for each area,
sDpm1 1 Dpm2d 5 sDpref1 1 Dpref2d 2 sb1 1 b2dDf
Neglecting losses and the dependence of load on frequency, the steady-state increase 
in total mechanical power of both areas equals the load increase, 100 MW. Also, 
without LFC, Dpref1 and Dpref2 are both zero. The above equation then becomes
100 5 2sb1 1 b2dDf 5 2s700 1 1400dDf
Df 5 2100/2100 5 20.0476  Hz
Next, using (12.2.4) for each area, with Dpref 5 0,
Dpm1 5 2b1Df 5 2s700ds20.0476d 5 33.33  MW
Dpm2 5 2b2Df 5 2s1400ds20.0476d 5 66.67  MW
In response to the 100-MW load increase in area 1, area 1 picks up 33.33 MW 
and area 2 picks up 66.67 MW of generation. The 66.67-MW increase in area 2 
EXAMPLE 12.5
FIGURE 12.12
Example 12.5
(Continued)

770	
Chapter 12  |  Power System Controls
generation is transferred to area 1 through the tie-lines. Therefore, the change in 
net tie-line power flow out of each area is
Dptie2 5 166.67  MW
Dptie1 5 266.67  MW
b.  From (12.3.1), the area control error for each area is
ACE1 5 Dptie1 1 B1Df1
ACE2 5 Dptie2 1 B2Df2
Neglecting losses, the sum of the net tie-line flows must be zero; that is, 
Dptie1 1 Dptie2 5 0 or Dptie2 5 2Dptie1. Also, in steady-state Df1 5 Df2 5 Df. 
Using these relations in the above equations,
ACE1 5 Dptie1 1 B1Df
ACE2 5 2Dptie1 1 B2Df
In steady-state, ACE1 5 ACE2 5 0; otherwise, the LFC given by (12.3.2) would 
be changing the reference power settings of turbine-governors on LFC. Adding 
the above two equations,
ACE1 1 ACE2 5 0 5 (B1 1 B2)Df
Therefore, Df 5 0 and Dptie1 5 Dptie2 5 0. That is, in steady-state the frequency 
error is returned to zero, area 1 picks up its own 100-MW load increase, and area 2  
returns to its original operating condition—that is, the condition before the load 
increase occurred.
Note that the turbine-governor controls act almost instantaneously, subject 
only to the time delays shown in Figure 12.9. However, LFC acts more slowly. 
LFC raise and lower signals are dispatched from the area control center to turbine- 
governors at discrete time intervals of 2 or more seconds. Also, it takes time for 
the raise or lower signals to accumulate. Thus, case (a) represents the first action. 
Turbine-governors in both areas rapidly respond to the load increase in area 1 in 
order to stabilize the frequency drop. Case (b) represents the second action. As LFC 
signals are dispatched to turbine-governors, Df and Dptie are slowly returned to zero.
The choice of the Bf and Ki constants in (12.3.1) and (12.3.2) affects the tran-
sient response to load changes—for example, the speed and stability of the response. 
The frequency bias Bf should be high enough such that each area adequately con-
tributes to frequency control. Cohn [4] has shown that choosing Bf equal to the area 
frequency response characteristic, Bf 5 b, gives satisfactory performance of the 
interconnected system. The integrator gain Ki, should not be too high; otherwise, 
instability may result. Also, the time interval at which LFC signals are dispatched, 

	
Section 12.3 Load-Frequency Control	
771
2 or more seconds, should be long enough so that LFC does not attempt to follow 
random or spurious load changes. A detailed investigation of the effect of Bf, Ki, and 
LFC time interval on the transient response of LFC and turbine-governor controls 
is beyond the scope of this text.
Two additional LFC objectives are to return the integral of frequency error and 
the integral of net tie-line error to zero in steady-state. By meeting these objectives, 
LFC controls both the time of clocks that are driven by 60-Hz motors and energy 
transfers out of each area. These two objectives are achieved by making temporary 
changes in the frequency schedule and tie-line schedule in (12.3.1).
Finally, note that LFC maintains control during normal changes in load and 
frequency—that is, changes that are not too large. During emergencies, when large 
imbalances between generation and load occur, LFC is bypassed and other, emer-
gency controls are applied.
COORDINATION OF ECONOMIC DISPATCH WITH LFC
Both the load-frequency control (LFC) and economic dispatch objectives are 
achieved by adjusting the reference power settings of turbine-governors on control.  
Figure 12.13 shows an automatic generation control strategy for achieving both 
objectives in a coordinated manner. In this figure, PiD is the desired output of each 
generator as computed from an economic dispatch program, which is discussed in 
Bf
Pi
PiD
K1i
K3i
K2i
K1i 5 Proportion of ACE shared by unit i
K2i 5 Proportion of total load deviation shared by unit i
K3i 5 Control gain for unit i
Frequency
schedule
fs
Bias
To other
controlled units
Total actual
generation
Total economic
dispatch power
Actual
unit
output
ACE
share
for unit i
Economic
dispatch
for unit i
Error
signal
Limits
Raise/lower signals to
reference power setting
of turbine-governor i
ACE
Area
frequency
f
Net tie-line flow
out of area
ptie,sched
ptie
1
1
1
1
S PiD
S Pi
1
1
2
1
1
2
2
1
2
2
FIGURE 12.13
Automatic generation control [11] (Based on A.J. Wood and B.F. Wollenberg, Power Generation, Operation, and Control, 1989,  
John Wiley & Sons)

772	
Chapter 12  |  Power System Controls
Section 6.12. As shown in Figure 12.13, the area control error (ACE) is first computed, 
and a share K1i of the ACE is allocated to each unit. Second, the deviation of total ac-
tual generation from total desired generation is computed, and a share K2iSsPiD 2 Pid 
is allocated to unit i. Third, the deviation of actual generation from desired generation 
of unit i is computed, and (PiD 2 Pi) is allocated to unit i. An error signal formed from 
these three components and multiplied by a control gain K3i determines the raise or 
lower signals that are sent to the turbine-governor of each unit i on control.
In practice, raise or lower signals are dispatched to the units at discrete time 
intervals of 2 to 10 seconds. The desired outputs PiD of units on control, determined 
from the economic dispatch program, are updated at slower intervals, typically every 
2 to 10 minutes.
PROBLEMS
SECTION 12.1
12.1	 The block-diagram representation of a closed-loop automatic regulat-
ing system, in which generator voltage control is accomplished by con-
trolling the exciter voltage, is shown in Figure 12.14. Ta, Te, and Tf are 
the time constants associated with the amplifier, exciter, and generator 
field circuit, respectively. (a) Find the open-loop transfer function G(s).  
(b) Evaluate the minimum open-loop gain such that the steady-state error 
Dess does not exceed 1%. (c) Discuss the nature of the dynamic response 
of the system to a step change in the reference input voltage.
Tf s
Te s
Ta s
KA
KE
KF
V
e
V
V
V
V
FIGURE 12.14
Problem 12.1
Gain
Time Constant 
(seconds)
Amplifier
KA
TA 5 0.1
Exciter
KE 5 1
TE 5 0.4
Generator
KG 5 1
TG 5 1.0
Sensor
KR 5 1
TR 5 0.05
12.2	 The Automatic Voltage Regulator (AVR) system of a generator is repre-
sented by the simplified block diagram shown in Figure 12.15, in which 
the sensor is modeled by a simple first-order transfer function. The volt-
age is sensed through a voltage transformer and then rectified through a 
bridge rectifier. Parameters of the AVR system are given as follows.

	
Problems	
773
	
(a)  Determine the open-loop transfer function of the block diagram and 
the closed-loop transfer function relating the generator terminal voltage  
Vt(s) to the reference voltage Vref (s). (b) For the range of KA from 0 
to 12.16, comment on the stability of the system. (c) For KA 5 10, evaluate  
the steady-state step response and steady-state error.
12.3	 Open PowerWorld Simulator case Problem 12_3. This case models the 
system from Example 12.1 except with the rate feedback gain constant, 
Kf, has been set to zero and the simulation end time was increased to 30 
seconds. Without rate feedback the system voltage response will become 
unstable if the amplifier gain, Ka, becomes too large. In the simulation 
this instability will be indicated by undamped oscillations in the termi-
nal voltage (because of the limits on Vr the response does not grow to 
infinity but rather bounces between the limits). Using transient stability 
simulations, iteratively determine the approximate value of Ka at which 
the system becomes unstable. The value of Ka can be on the Generator 
Information Dialog, Stability, Exciters page.
12.4	 One of the disadvantages of the IEEET1 exciter is following a fault the 
terminal voltage does not necessarily return to its prefault value. Using 
PowerWorld Simulator case Problem 12_3 determine the prefault bus 4 
terminal voltage and field voltage. Then use the simulation to determine 
the final, postfault values for these fields for Ka 5 100, 200, 50, and 10. 
Referring to Figure 12.3, what is the relationship between the reference 
voltage, and the steady-state terminal voltage and the field voltage?
SECTION 12.2
12.5	 An area of an interconnected 60-Hz power system has three turbine- 
generator units rated 200, 300, and 500 MVA. The regulation constants 
of the units are 0.03, 0.04, and 0.05 per unit, respectively, based on their 
ratings. Each unit is initially operating at one-half its own rating when 
the load suddenly decreases by 150 MW. Determine (a) the unit area fre-
quency response characteristic b on a 100-MVA base, (b) the steady-state 
increase in area frequency, and (c) the MW decrease in mechanical power 
output of each turbine. Assume that the reference power setting of each 
turbine-governor remains constant. Neglect losses and the dependence 
of load on frequency.
PW
PW
KA
KE
KG
KR
TA s
TE s
TG s
TR s
V
V
V
V
V
V
FIGURE 12.15
Problem 12.2

774	
Chapter 12  |  Power System Controls
12.6	 Each unit in Problem 12.5 is initially operating at one-half its own rating 
when the load suddenly increases by 100 MW. Determine (a) the steady-
state decrease in area frequency, and (b) the MW increase in mechanical 
power output of each turbine. Assume that the reference power setting of 
each turbine-generator remains constant. Neglect losses and the depen-
dence of load on frequency.
12.7	 Each unit in Problem 12.5 is initially operating at one-half its own 
rating when the frequency increases by 0.005 per unit. Determine the 
MW decrease of each unit. The reference power setting of each turbine- 
governor is fixed. Neglect losses and the dependence of load on frequency.
12.8	 Repeat Problem 12.7 if the frequency decreases by 0.005 per unit. Deter-
mine the MW increase of each unit.
12.9	 An interconnected 60-Hz power system consisting of one area has two 
turbine-generator units, rated 500 and 750 MVA, with regulation con-
stants of 0.04 and 0.06 per unit, respectively, based on their respective 
ratings. When each unit carries a 300-MVA steady-state load, let the area 
load suddenly increase by 250 MVA. (a) Compute the area frequency 
response characteristic b on a 1000-MVA base. (b) Calculate Df in per-
unit on a 60-Hz base and in Hz.
12.10	 Open PowerWorld Simulator case Problem 12_10. The case models the 
system from Example 12.4 except 1) the load increases is a 50% rise at 
bus 6 for a total increase of 250 MW (from 500 MW to 750 MW), 2) the 
value of R for generator 1 is changed from 0.05 to 0.04 per unit. Repeat 
Example 12.4 using these modified values.
12.11	 Open PowerWorld Simulator case Problem 12_11, which includes a tran-
sient stability representation of the system from Example 6.13. Each 
generator is modeled using a two-axis machine model, an IEEE Type 1 
exciter and a TGOV1 governor with R 5 0.04 per unit (a summary of the 
generator models is available by selecting either Stability Case Info, Tran-
sient Stability Generator Summary which includes the generator MVA 
base, or Stability Case Info, Transient Stability Case Summary). The con-
tingency is the loss of the generator at bus PEAR69, which initially has 
65 MW of generation. Analytically determine the steady-state frequency 
error in Hz following this contingency. Use PowerWorld Simulator to 
confirm this result; also determine the magnitude and time of the largest 
bus frequency deviation.
12.12	 Repeat Problem 12.11 except first double the H value for each of the 
machines. This can be most easily accomplished by selecting Stability 
Case Info, Transient Stability Case Summary to view the summary form. 
Right click on the line corresponding to the Machine Model class, and 
then select Show Dialog to view an editable form of the model parame-
ters. Compare the magnitude and time of the largest bus frequency devi-
ations between Problem 12.12 and 12.11.
PW
PW
PW

12.13	 For a large, 60 Hz, interconnected electrical system assume that follow-
ing the loss of two 1400 MW generators (for a total generation loss of 
2800 MW) the change in frequency is 20.12 Hz. If all the on-line gener-
ators that are available to participate in frequency regulation have an R 
of 0.04 per unit (on their own MVA base), estimate the total MVA rating 
of these units. 
SECTION 12.3
12.14	 A 60-Hz power system consists of two interconnected areas. Area 1 has  
1200 MW of generation and an area frequency response character-
istic b1 5 400 MW/Hz. Area 2 has 1800 MW of generation and b2 5 
600 MW/Hz. Each area is initially operating at one-half its total genera-
tion, at Dptie1 5 Dptie2 5 0 and at 60 Hz, when the load in area 1 suddenly 
increases by 400 MW. Determine the steady-state frequency error and 
the steady-state tie-line error Dptie of each area. Assume that the refer-
ence power settings of all turbine-governors are fixed. That is, LFC is 
not employed in any area. Neglect losses and the dependence of load on 
frequency.
12.15	 Repeat Problem 12.14 if LFC is employed in area 2 alone. The area 2 
frequency bias coefficient is set at Bf 2 5 b2 5 600 MW/Hz. Assume that 
LFC in area 1 is inoperative due to a computer failure.
12.16	 Repeat Problem 12.14 if LFC is employed in both areas. The frequency 
bias coefficients are Bf   1 5 b1 5 400 MW/Hz and Bf2 5 b2 5 600 MW/Hz.
12.17	 Rework Problems 12.15 through 12.16 when the load in area 2 suddenly 
decreases by 300 MW. The load in area 1 does not change.
12.18	 On a 1000-MVA common base, a two-area system interconnected by a tie 
line has the following parameters:
Area
1
2
Area Frequency Response 
Characteristic
b1 5 0.05 per unit
b2 5 0.0625 per unit
Frequency-Dependent  
Load Coefficient
D1 5 0.6 per unit
D2 5 0.9 per unit
Base Power
1000 MVA
1000 MVA
Governor Time Constant
tg1 5 0.25 s
tg2 5 0.3 s
Turbine Time Constant
tt1 5 0.5 s
tt2 5 0.6 s
	
Problems	
775
	
The two areas are operating in parallel at the nominal frequency of 60 Hz.  
The areas are initially operating in steady state with each area supplying 
1000 MW when a sudden load change of 187.5 MW occurs in area 1. 
Compute the new steady-state frequency and change in tie-line power 
flow (a) without LFC, and (b) with LFC.

776	
Chapter 12  |  Power System Controls
CASE Study QUESTIONS
a.	
As a result of the August 14, 2003 blackout in North America, what 
major electrical islands were formed?
b.	
What is the first step in restoration?
c.	
What lessons were learned from this blackout?
REFERENCES
1.	
IEEE Committee Report, “Computer Representation of Excitation Sys-
tems,” IEEE Transactions PAS, vol. PAS-87 (June 1968), pp. 1460–1464.
2.	
M. S. Sarma, Electric Machines 2d ed. (Boston, PWS Publishing 1994).
3.	
IEEE Committee Report, “Dynamic Models for Steam and Hydro Tur-
bines in Power System Studies,” IEEE Transactions PAS, vol. PAS-92, no. 6  
(November/December 1973), pp. 1904–1915.
4.	
N. Cohn, Control of Generation and Power Flow on Interconnected Sys-
tems (New York: Wiley, 1971).
5.	
L. K. Kirchmayer, Economic Operation of Power Systems (New York: 
Wiley, 1958).
6.	
L. K. Kirchmayer and G. W. Stagg, “Evaluation of Methods of Coor-
dinating Incremental Fuel Costs and Incremental Transmission Losses,” 
Transactions AIEE, vol. 71, part III (1952), pp. 513–520.
7.	
G. H. McDaniel and A. F. Gabrielle, “Dispatching Pumped Storage 
Hydro,” IEEE Transmission PAS, vol. PAS-85 (May 1966), pp. 465–471.
8.	
E. B. Dahlin and E. Kindingstad, “Adaptive Digital River Flow Predictor 
for Power Dispatch,” IEEE Transactions PAS, vol. PAS-83 (April 1964), 
pp. 320–327.
9.	
L. K. Kirchmayer, Economic Control of Interconnected Systems (New 
York: Wiley, 1959).
10.	
J. H. Drake et al., “Optimum Operation of a Hydrothermal System,” 
Transactions AIEE (Power Apparatus and Systems), vol. 62 (August 
1962), pp. 242–250.
11.	
A. J. Wood and B. F. Wollenberg, Power Generation, Operation, and Con-
trol (New York: Wiley, 1989).
12.	
B. Stott and J. L. Marinho, “Linear Programming for Power System Net-
work Security Applications,” IEEE Trans, on Power Apparatus and Sys-
tems, vol. PAS-98, (May/June 1979), pp. 837–848.

	
References	
777
13.	
E. H. Allen, R. B. Stuart, and T. E. Wiedman, “No Light in August: 
Power System Restoration Following the 2003 North American Black-
out,” IEEE Power and Energy Magazine, 12,1 (January/February 2014) 
pp. 25–33.
14.	
IEEE PES Task Force Report, “Interconnected Power System Response 
to Generation Governing: Present Practice and Outstanding Concerns,” 
IEEE 07TP180, May 2007.
15.	
K. Clark, N. W. Miller, and J. J. Sanchez-Gasca, “Modeling of GE Wind  
Turbine-Generators for Grid Studies,” Version 4.4, GE Energy, Schenec-
tady, NY, September 2009.
16.	
E. H. Camm et al., “Characteristics of Wind Turbine Generators for 
Wind Power Plants,” Proc. IEEE 2009 General Meeting, Calgary, AB, 
July 2009.


779
T
ransient overvoltages caused by lightning strikes to transmission lines and by 
switching operations are of fundamental importance in selecting equipment 
insulation levels and surge-protection devices. It is important, therefore, under-
stand the nature of transmission-line transients.
During our study of the steady-state performance of transmission lines in 
Chapter 5, the line constants R, L, G, and C were recognized as distributed rather 
than lumped constants. When a line with distributed constants is subjected to a dis-
turbance such as a lightning strike or a switching operation, voltage and current 
waves arise and travel along the line at a velocity near the speed of light. When these 
waves arrive at the line terminals, reflected voltage and current waves arise and travel 
back down the line, superimposed on the initial waves.
Because of line losses, traveling waves are attenuated and essentially die out  
after a few reflections. Also, the series inductances of transformer windings effectively 
13
Transmission Lines:  
Transient Operation
Power engineers 
with a Real  
Time Digital 
Simulator (RTDS)
(Courtesy of 
Tim Yardley, 
University of 
Illinois.)

780	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
block the disturbances, thereby preventing them from entering generator windings. 
However, due to the reinforcing action of several reflected waves, it is possible for 
voltage to build up to a level that could cause transformer insulation or line insula-
tion to arc over and suffer damage.
Circuit breakers, which can operate within 50 ms, are too slow to protect 
against lightning or switching surges. Lightning surges can rise to peak levels 
within a few microseconds and switching surges within a few hundred micro-
seconds—fast enough to destroy insulation before a circuit breaker could open. 
However, protective devices are available. Called surge arresters, these can be 
used to protect equipment insulation against transient overvoltages. These de-
vices limit voltage to a ceiling level and absorb the energy from lightning and 
switching surges.
This chapter begins with a discussion of traveling waves on single-phase 
lossless lines (Section 13.1). Section 13.2 presents boundary conditions, and 
the Bewley lattice diagram for organizing reflections is covered in Section 13.3. 
Discrete-time models of single-phase lines and of lumped RLC elements are 
derived in Section 13.4, and the effects of line losses and multiconductor lines 
are discussed in Sections 13.5 and 13.6. In Section 13.7 power system overvolt-
ages including lightning surges, switching surges, and power-frequency overvolt-
ages, followed by an introduction to insulation coordination are discussed in  
Section 13.8.
CASE STUDY 1
Two case-study reports are presented here. The first describes metal oxide 
varistor (MOV) arresters used by electric utilities to protect transmission 
and distribution equipment against transient overvoltages in power systems 
with rated voltages through 345 kV [22]. The second investigates the pos-
sible impact of large amounts of wind generation on frequency response 
in the United States Western and Eastern interconnections [23]. There is 
a fundamental difference between a wind turbine and the turbines (gas, 
steam, or hydro) supplying the majority of the world’s traditional power 
plants. With traditional turbines, synchronous generators are employed and 
the rotational speed is nearly constant and locked to system frequency. 
With a wind turbine, rotational speed is not synchronized with the system 
frequency but is asynchronously controlled to maximize active power out-
put. The investigation provides evidence that high levels of wind (and solar) 
generation can be tolerated with respect to frequency response in the U.S. 
Western and Eastern interconnections.

	
Case Study 1	
781
Surge Arresters
VariSTAR Type AZE Surge 
Arresters for Systems through 
345 kV IEEE Std C 62.11™ 
standard Certified Station 
Class Arresters*
General
The VariSTAR™ AZE Surge Ar-
rester from Cooper Power Systems 
offers the latest in metal oxide varis-
tor (MOV) technology for the eco-
nomical protection of power and 
substation equipment. This arrester 
is gapless and constructed of a sin-
gle series column of MOV disks. The 
arrester is designed and tested to the 
requirements of IEEE Std C62.11™ 
standard and is available in ratings 
suitable for the transient overvoltage 
protection of electrical equipment on 
systems through 345 kV.
Cooper Power Systems assures 
the design integrity of the AZE ar-
rester through a rigorous testing 
program conducted at our Thomas 
A. Edison Technical Center and at 
the factory in Olean, New York. The 
availability of complete in-house test-
ing facilities assures that as continu-
ous process improvements are made, 
they are professionally validated to 
high technical standards.
Table 1, shown below, contains 
information on some of the specific 
ratings and characteristics of AZE 
Series S (AZES) surge arresters.
Construction
External
The Type AZE station class arrester 
is avai­lable in two design configura-
tions—a metal-top design in ratings  
3-360 kV and a cubicle-mount design 
in ratings 3-48 kV. Cubicle-mount  
designs are ideally suited for confined 
TABLE  1
AZE Series S (AZES) Ratings and 
Characteristics
*Maximum working load should not exceed 40% 
of this value.
Arrester Characteristic
Rating
System Application Voltages
3-345 kV
Arrester Voltage Ratings
3-360 kV
Rated Discharge Energy, (kJ/ 
kV of MCOV)
Arrester Ratings: 3-108 kV
120-240 kV
259-360 kV
3.4 
5.6 
8.9
System Frequency
50/60 Hz
Impulse Classifying Current
10 kA
High Current Withstand
100 kA
Pressure Relief Rating,
kA rms sym
Metal-Top Designs
Cubicle-Mount Designs
65 kA 
40 kA
Cantilever Strength (in-lbs)*
Metal-Top Designs:
3-240 kV
258-360 kV
90000 
120,000
*(© 2011 Cooper Industries-www.cooperpower.com)
VariSTAR Type AZE Surge Arresters for 
Systems through 345 kV IEEE Std C62.11TM 
standard Certified Station Class Arresters,  
© 2011 Cooper Industries, www.cooperpower 
.com

782	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
spaces where clearances between live 
parts are limited.
The wet-process porcelain hou­
sing features an alternating shed de-
sign (ratings .48 kV) that provides 
excellent resistance to the effects of 
atmospheric housing contamination. 
AZE arresters are available with op-
tional extra creepage porcelains for 
use in areas with extreme natural at-
mospheric and man-made pollution.
The dielectric properties of the 
porcelain are coordinated with the elec-
trical protective characteristics of the 
arrester. The unit end castings are of 
a corrosion-resistant aluminum alloy 
configured for interchangeable mount-
ing with other manufacturers’ arresters 
for ease in upgrading to the VariSTAR 
arrester technology. This three-footed 
mounting is provided on a 8.5- to 10-inch  
diameter pattern for customer supplied 
0.5-inch diameter hardware.
High Cantilever strength as-
sures mechanical integrity (Table 1  
lists the cantilever strength of metal-
top AZES arresters). Cooper Power 
Systems recommends that a load limit 
of 100 pounds not be exceeded on the 
line terminal of cubicle mount de-
signs. Loads exceeding this limit could 
cause a shortening of arrester life. 
Housings are available in standard 
grey or optional brown glaze color.
Standard line and ground termi-
nal connectors accommodate up to a 
0.75-inch diameter conductor. Insulat-
ing bases and discharge counters are 
optionally available for in-service mon-
itoring of arrester discharge activity.
The end fittings and porce-
lain housing of each arrester unit 
are sealed and tested by means of a  
sensitive helium mass spectrometer; 
this assures that the quality and in-
sulation protection provided by the 
arrester is never compromised over its 
lifetime by the entrance of moisture. 
A corrosion-resistant nameplate is 
Figure 1  120 kV rated VariSTAR Type AZE 
surge arrester

provided and contains all information 
required by standards. In addition, 
stacking arrangement information 
is provided for multi-unit arresters. 
Voltage grading rings are included for 
arresters rated 172 kV and above.
Internal
VariSTAR AZE arresters are a to-
tally gapless MOV design. Gapless 
construction 
makes 
a 
significant 
contribution to the performance of  
METAL-TOP LINE TERMINALS
Accommodates No. 6 through 
500 MCM copper or aluminum 
conductor.
ALUMINUM-ALLOY END 
CASTINGS
Assure true vertical 
mounting, three mounting 
slots accommodate 
hardened 0.5” bolts.
METAL-OXIDE VALVE 
DISK (INTERNAL)
Specially formulated 
metal-oxide compound 
provides exceptional 
non-linear electrical 
characteristics for 
ideal energy-absorbing 
protective levels.
NAMEPLATE
Complete IEEE® arrester 
identiﬁcation; catalog number, 
voltage rating, MCOV rating, serial 
number, altitude and pressure 
relief ratings.
CUBICLE-MOUNT LINE TERMINAL
Accommodates No. 6 through 500 MCM 
copper or aluminum conductor.
PORCELAIN HOUSING
Withstands thermal and 
electrical shock; excellent 
self-washing character-
istics; skirts designed to 
provide high creepage 
distance.
SEAL
Tested with helium-
mass spectrometer 
to assure a leakproof 
seal.
PRESSURE-RELIEF 
SYSTEM
Pressure actuated 
system assures 
maximum safety 
and reliability; vent 
covers prevent 
foreign material from 
entering vent ports 
and also indicate 
operation.
GROUND TERMINAL
Accommodates No. 6 through 500 MCM 
copper or aluminum conductor.
Figure 2 VariSTAR Type AZE arrester construction details. Note: Multi-section  
arresters include an additional unit nameplate showing the order of  
assembly. For example, a 2-section arrester will have a bottom section  
with a unit nameplate labeled unit 1 of 2 and the top section with a unit 
nameplate labeled unit 2 of 2.
	
Case Study 1	
783

784	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
arresters through the elimination of 
gap reseal as a consideration associa­ted 
with the discharge of switching surge 
currents. The specially formulated 
metal-oxide varistors, manufactured 
under Cooper Power System’s exclus­
ive quality control, provide exceptional 
non-linear protective characteri­stics, 
durability, and dependable energy dis-
sipation capabilities.
Operation
The VariSTAR AZE arrester con-
ducts only a few milliamperes of 
leakage current when energized at 
normal system voltage. When a surge 
event occurs, the arrester conducts 
only the current, and consequently 
the energy necessary to limit the 
overvoltage. It provides precise and 
predictable protection, minimizes 
the absorbed energy, and does not 
discharge power frequency systems 
currents.
A controlled and directed 
pressure relief system is incorpo-
rated in the VariSTAR AZE arrester 
design. In the unlikely event of an 
arrester failure, this pressure venting 
system rapidly relieves internal pres-
sure and transfers the internal arc 
to the outside of the arrester por-
celain through vent ports in the end  
castings.
When called upon to oper-
ate, this mechanism vents internal 
pressures in fractions of a cycle—
preventing violent arrester failure. 
This mechanism is effective to system 
fault currents up to 65 kA in metal-
top designs and 40 kA in cubicle- 
mount designs.
General Application  
Recommendations
The rating of an arrester is the power-
frequency line-to-ground voltage at 
which the arrester is designed to pass 
the IEEE Std C62.11™ standard duty-
cycle test. Table 2 provides a general 
guide for the selection of the proper 
arrester for a given system voltage. 
Cooper Power Systems application en-
gineers are available to make specific 
system application recommendations.
Selection of Arrester Rating
In arrester rating selection it is prefer-
able to determine the lowest arrester 
rating that will ensure satisfactory 
operation. This is the optimum solu-
tion because the arrester selected will 
not only provide the greatest margin 
of insulation protection but also be 
the most economical choice.
Increasing the arrester rating 
above the minimum increases the 
likelihood of arrester survival during 
potential system contingencies, but 
compromises the protection of equip-
ment insulation. 
Rating selection should begin 
with consideration of the maximum 
system operating voltage. The maxi-
mum power frequency voltage expected 
under normal system conditions (line-
to-ground) should not exceed the se-
lected arrester’s maximum continuous 
operating voltage (MCOV).
The 
temporary 
overvoltage 
(TOV) capability of the VariSTAR 
AZE arrester is shown in Figure 3. The 
curves indicate the arrester’s ability to 
withstand abnormal system power  

frequency (sinusoidal) overvoltages 
for various durations. The values 
shown assume that the arrester has 
been energized at MCOV prior to 
an overvoltage event and that the ar-
rester is in an ambient temperature  
of 60°C. After the overvoltage dura-
tions shown, the arrester will thermally 
recover when once again energized  
at MCOV.
Figure 3 also illustrates the ar-
rester’s TOV capabilities with and 
TABLE  2
Commonly Applied Voltage Ratings of the VariSTAR Type AZE Arrester
System Voltage (kV rms)
Suggested Arrester Rating (kV rms)
Nominal
Maximum
Solidly Grounded 
Neutral Circuits
High Impedance 
Grounded, 
Ungrounded, 
or Temporar-
ily Ungrounded 
Circuits
2.4
2.52
—
3
4.16
4.37
3
6
4.8
5.04
—
6
6.9
7.24
—
9
12.47
13.2
9–10
—
13.2
14.0
10
15–18
13.8
14.5
10–12
15–18
20.7
21.8
15
—
23.0
24.2
—
24–27
24.9
26.4
18–21
—
27.6
29.0
21–24
27–30
34.5
36.5
27–30
36–39
46.0
48.3
—
48
69.0
72.5
54–60
66–72
115
121
90–96
108–120
138
145
108–120
132–144
161
169
120–144
144–168
230
242
172–192
228–240
345
362
258–312
288–360
	
Case Study 1	
785

786	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
without prior switching surge duties 
of up to the maximum capability of 
the arrester as listed in Table 1 (Rated 
Discharge Energy).
It is not recommended that the 
TOV curve be extended for periods in 
excess of 10,000 seconds (2.8 hrs.).
For ungrounded systems, sys-
tems utilizing high impedance or res-
onant grounding and other systems 
where the line-to-ground voltage may 
be elevated to line-to-line voltages for 
extended periods, arresters having an 
MCOV equal to line-to-line voltage 
may be required.
For non-sinusoidal transient vol­
tages caused by system switching 
operations, a transient network ana-
lyzer (TNA) study is recommended; 
Cooper Power Systems engineers are 
available to make these studies.
To assure proper application, 
the following information is normally 
required:
1.	 Maximum system operating 
voltage.
2.	 System grounding conditions.
	
A.	 For four-wire circuits, 
grounding conditions 
depend upon whether the 
system is multi-grounded, 
whether it has neutral 
impedance, and whether 
common primary and sec-
ondary neutrals are used.
	
B.	 For three-wire circuits, 
grounding conditions 
depend upon whether the 
system is solidly grounded 
at the source, grounded 
through neutral impedance 
at the source, grounded 
through transformers, or 
ungrounded.
Where unusual conditions exist (high 
ground resistance, high capacitive 
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000
10000
MAXIMUM DURATION (SECONDS) 
L
O
V
T
V
O
C
M
 
TI
N
U
 
R
E
P
 
N
I 
E
G
A
PRIOR DUTY CURVE
(RATED DISCHARGE
ENERGY, SEE TABLE 1)
NO PRIOR DUTY CURVE
60° C AMBIENT
TEMPERATURE
Figure 3 Temporary overvoltage capability of VariSTAR AZE surge arresters

load, unusual switching surge duty, 
etc.) the following supplementary  
information is required:
1.	 Type of unusual condition.
2.	 BIL of equipment and sepa-
ration distance to protected 
equipment.
3.	 Type of construction (phase 
spacing, length of line, conduc-
tor size, etc.).
4.	 Grounding and phase- 
sequence components of 
source impedances.
5.	 Phase-sequence components  
of load impedances.
6.	 Available fault current.
7.	 Potential for loss of neutral 
grounding during system events.
Routine Tests
A complete production test pro-
gram assures the quality of every 
VariSTAR AZE surge arrester. Each 
completed arrester is required to 
satisfactorily pass the following test 
regimen conducted in accordance 
with the procedures established in 
IEEE Std C62.11™ standard.
●
●
Partial Discharge Test at 1.05 
times MCOV;
●
●
Power Frequency Test at 1.20 
times MCOV;
●
●
Discharge Voltage Test; and
●
●
Sealing 
Effectiveness 
Test 
of Housing by helium mass 
spect­rometer.
Standards
The VariSTAR AZE surge arrester 
has been tested and certified to IEEE 
Std C62.11™ standard. Guaran-
teed performance characteristics are 
specified in this catalog section and 
in the relevant “Design Certification 
Test Report” Cooper Power Systems 
bulletin 95028.
Dimensions and Mounting
Figure 4 illustrates an in-line mount-
ing arrangement; the applicable 
minimum values of B and C may be 
found in Tables 4 and 5. Line and 
ground terminal details are shown 
in Figure 5; the supplied terminals 
accommodate aluminum and copper 
conductors to a maximum size of 
0.75 inch.
For other conductors the ter-
minal drilling pattern shown will 
DIRECTED
VENT PORT
C
C
B
B
Figure 4 Three-phase in-line mounting, top view. Note: Refer to 
Tables 4 and 5 for Dimensions B and C.
	
Case Study 1	
787

788	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
Arrester 
Rating  
(kV rms)
Arrester 
MCOV  
(kV rms)
TOV*  
(kV rms)
Front-of- 
wave Protec-
tive Level**  
(kV Crest)
Maximum Discharge Voltage (kV crest)  
8/20 ms Current Wave
Switching Surge Protective  
Level*** (kV crest)
1 sec
10 sec
1.5 kA
3 kA
5 kA
10 kA
20 kA
40 kA
125 A
250 A
500 A
1000 A
2000A
3
2.55
3.73
3.56
9.3
7.0
7.4
7.7
8.4
9.4
11.0
6.1
6.3
6.5
6.7
—
6
5.10
7.47
7.11
18.2
13.9
14.7
15.4
16.7
18.6
21.4
12.2
12.6
13.0
13.5
—
9
7.65
11.2
10.7
27.2
20.9
22.0
23.1
25.0
27.7
31.7
18.3
18.9
19.5
20.2
—
10
8.40
12.3
11.7
29.7
23.0
24.2
25.4
27.4
30.4
34.8
20.1
20.7
21.4
22.2
—
12
10.2
14.9
14.2
36.0
27.9
29.4
30.8
33.3
36.9
42.1
24.4
25.2
26.0
26.9
—
15
12.7
18.6
17.7
44.7
34.7
36.6
38.3
41.4
45.9
52.2
30.4
31.3
32.4
33.5
—
18
15.3
22.4
21.3
53.7
41.8
44.0
46.2
49.8
55.2
62.8
36.6
37.7
39.0
40.4
—
21
17.0
24.9
23.7
59.7
46.4
48.9
51.3
55.4
61.3
69.7
40.7
41.9
43.4
44.9
—
24
19.5
28.6
27.2
68.4
53.3
56.1
58.8
63.5
70.3
79.9
46.7
48.1
49.8
51.5
—
27
22.0
32.2
30.7
77.0
60.1
63.3
66.3
71.6
79.3
90.0
52.7
54.3
56.1
58.1
—
30
24.4
35.7
34.0
85.4
66.6
70.2
73.6
79.4
87.9
99.8
58.4
60.2
62.3
64.4
—
33
27.5
40.3
38.4
96.2
75.1
79.1
82.9
89.5
99.1
112
65.9
67.8
70.2
72.6
—
36
29.0
42.5
40.5
101
79.2
83.4
87.4
94.4
105
119
69.5
71.5
74.0
76.6
—
TABLE  3
Discharge Voltages—Maximum Guaranteed Protective Characteristics for AZES Surge Arresters
*Temporary overvoltage with prior duty energy surge.
**Based on a 10 kA current impulse that results in a discharge voltage cresting in a 0.5 ms.
***45–60 ms rise time current surge.
Line Terminal (Metal-Top Design)
Ground Terminal (also Line Terminal 
for Cubicle-Mount Design)
TYPICAL
4 PLACES
0.56”  (1.43 cm) DIA
HOLES ON 1.75”
(4.44 cm) CENTERS
3.0”
(7.62 cm)
1.75”
(4.44 cm)
3.75”
(9.52 cm)
TYPICAL
4 PLACES
3.75”
(9.52 cm)
3.0”
(7.62 cm)
1.75”
(4.44 cm)
CLAMP
0.75”
(1.90 cm)
0.56”  (1.43 cm) DIA
HOLES ON 1.75”
(4.44 cm) CENTERS
Figure 5  Line and ground terminals (suitable for copper or aluminum conductors up to 0.75-inch 
diameter)

39
31.5
46.1
43.9
111
86.0
90.6
95.0
103
113
129
75.4
77.7
80.4
83.1
—
42
34.0
49.8
47.4
119
92.8
97.8
103
111
122
139
81.4
83.9
86.8
89.7
—
45
36.5
53.4
50.9
128
99.7
105
110
119
131
149
87.4
90.0
93.1
96.3
—
48
39.0
57.1
54.4
136
107
112
118
127
140
159
93.4
96.2
99.5
103
—
54
42.0
61.5
58.6
147
115
121
127
137
151
171
101
104
107
111
—
60
48.0
70.3
67.0
167
131
138
145
156
173
196
115
118
123
127
—
66
53.0
77.6
73.9
186
145
153
160
173
191
217
127
131
135
140
—
72
57.0
83.5
79.5
200
156
164
172
186
205
233
137
141
145
151
—
78
62.0
90.8
86.5
217
169
178
187
202
223
253
149
153
158
164
—
84
68.0
99.6
94.9
237
186
196
205
221
245
278
163
168
174
179
—
90
70.0
102.5
97.7
245
191
201
211
228
252
286
168
173
179
185
—
96
76.0
111.3
106.0
265
208
219
229
247
274
310
182
188
194
201
—
108
84.0
123.0
117.2
293
229
242
253
273
302
343
201
207
214
222
—
120
98.0
143.5
136.7
321
255
269
279
298
328
366
226
232
238
247
—
132
106
155.2
147.9
349
276
290
302
323
355
396
244
250
258
267
—
138
111
162.5
154.9
365
289
304
316
338
372
415
256
262
270
280
—
144
115
168.4
160.4
378
300
315
327
350
385
430
265
272
279
290
—
162
130
190.3
181.4
427
339
356
370
396
435
486
300
307
316
327
—
168
131
191.8
182.8
430
341
359
373
399
438
489
302
309
318
330
—
172
140
205.0
195.3
459
365
384
398
426
468
523
323
331
340
352
—
180
144
210.8
200.9
472
375
395
410
438
482
538
332
340
350
362
—
192
152
222.5
212.0
499
396
417
432
463
509
568
350
359
369
383
—
198
160
234.2
223.2
525
417
439
455
487
536
598
369
378
389
403
—
204
165
241.6
230.2
541
430
452
469
502
552
617
380
390
401
415
—
216
174
254.7
242.7
570
453
477
495
529
582
650
401
411
423
438
—
228
180
263.5
251.1
591
469
493
512
548
602
672
415
425
437
453
—
240
190
278.2
265.1
623
495
521
540
578
636
709
438
449
462
478
—
258
209
—
—
684
547
568
580
605
666
771
—
—
502
526
535
264
212
—
—
693
555
576
588
613
675
782
—
—
509
533
543
276
220
—
—
720
575
598
611
637
701
811
—
—
528
553
563
288
230
—
—
751
602
625
639
665
732
848
—
—
552
578
589
294
235
—
—
767
615
639
652
679
748
866
—
—
564
591
602
300
239
—
—
781
625
650
663
691
761
881
—
—
574
601
612
312
245
—
—
801
630
655
669
709
780
903
—
—
578
606
617
330
267
—
—
872
698
726
741
772
850
985
—
—
641
671
683
336
269
—
—
879
704
731
747
778
856
991
—
—
645
676
689
360
289
—
—
945
756
785
802
836
920
1064
—
—
693
727
740
TABLE  3
(Continued )
	
Case Study 1	
789

790	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
Arrester 
Rating 
(kV, rms)
Arrester 
MCOV 
(kV, rms)
Catalog Number
Figure 8 
Dim. A 
(in.)
Figure 4 Dim. 
B Minimum 
Phase-to-Phase 
Clearance (in.)
Figure 4 Dim. 
C Minimum 
Phase-to-Ground 
Clearance (in.)
Housing 
Leakage 
Distance 
(in.)
Housing 
Strike 
Distance 
(in.)
Insulation Withstand Voltages
Weight 
(lbs.)
1.2/50 ms 
Impulse 
(kV Crest)
60 Hz Dry, 
60 sec 
(kV, rms)
60 Hz Wet, 
10 sec  
(kV, rms)
3
2.55
AZES001G002003
18.6
12
6
9.2
5.2
130
75
40
42
6
5.10
AZES001G005006
18.6
12
7
9.2
5.2
130
75
40
42
9
7.65
AZES001G007009
18.6
13
7
9.2
5.2
130
75
40
43
10
8.40
AZES002G008010
21.1
13
7
16.0
7.7
170
95
65
48
12
10.2
AZES002G010012
21.1
14
8
16.0
7.7
170
95
65
49
15
12.7
AZES002G012015
21.1
14
9
16.0
7.7
170
95
65
49
18
15.3
AZES003G015018
24.8
15
10
26.2
11.4
230
125
95
56
21
17.0
AZES003G017021
24.8
16
11
26.2
11.4
230
125
95
57
24
19.5
AZES003G019024
24.8
16
11
26.2
11.4
230
125
95
58
27
22.0
AZES004G022027
28.6
17
12
36.3
15.2
265
150
125
65
30
24.4
AZES004G024030
28.6
18
13
36.3
15.2
265
150
125
65
33
27.5
AZES004G027033
28.6
20
14
36.3
15.2
265
150
125
66
36
29.0
AZES004G029036
28.6
20
14
36.3
15.2
265
150
125
66
39
31.5
AZES005G031039
33.6
21
15
49.9
20.2
320
190
165
77
42
34.0
AZES005G034042
33.6
22
16
49.9
20.2
320
190
165
78
45
36.5
AZES005G036045
33.6
23
17
49.9
20.2
320
190
165
78
48
39.0
AZES005G039048
33.6
24
18
49.9
20.2
320
190
165
78
54
42.0
AZES006G042054
36.6
25
20
64.8
23.6
365
200
170
86
60
48.0
AZES006G048060
36.6
28
22
64.8
23.6
365
200
170
87
66
53.0
AZES007G053066
39.4
30
24
73.7
26.5
385
235
200
96
72
57.0
AZES007G057072
39.4
31
26
73.7
26.5
385
235
200
97
78
62.0
AZES008G062078
48.0
33
28
100.0
35.0
505
305
260
116
84
68.0
AZES008G068084
48.0
36
30
100.0
35.0
505
305
260
118
90
70.0
AZES008G070090
48.0
36
31
100.0
35.0
505
305
260
118
96
76.0
AZES008G076096
48.0
39
33
100.0
35.0
505
305
260
119
108
84.0
AZES009G084108
56.5
42
36
127.0
43.6
650
370
300
161
120
98.0
AZES009G098120
56.5
43
37
127.0
43.6
650
370
300
175
132
106
AZES012G106132
71.5
46
40
138.5
50.1
735
425
360
191
138
111
AZES012G111138
71.5
47
42
138.5
50.1
735
425
360
193
144
115
AZES013G115144
74.4
49
43
147.4
52.9
770
475
400
202
162
130
AZES014G130162
80.1
54
48
164.8
58.6
865
490
415
217
168
131
AZES015G131168
82.9
54
48
173.7
61.5
880
545
455
225
172
140
AZES021G140172
83.2
72
59
173.7
59.4
920
535
450
237
180
144
AZES022G144180
88.9
73
60
191.8
60.9
920
515
440
270
192
152
AZES022G152192
88.9
76
63
191.8
60.9
920
515
440
273
198
160
AZES023G160198
91.8
79
66
200.7
63.8
930
535
480
283
204
165
AZES024G165204
100.3
81
68
227.0
72.3
1065
595
545
303
TABLE  4
Catalog Numbers, Dimensional Information, Insulation Withstand Voltages and Weights for AZES Metal-Top  
Surge Arresters
Note: All arresters are available in grey (standard) or brown porcelain glaze. For brown glaze, substitute B for G in the eighth position 
of the catalog number.

Arrester 
MCOV  
(kV, rms)
Arrester 
MCOV  
(kV, rms)
Catalog Number
Figure 7 
Dim. “A” 
(in.)
Figure 4 Dim. 
“B” Minimum 
Phase-to- 
Phase  
Clearance (in.)
Figure 4 Dim. 
“C” Minimum 
Phase-to- 
Ground  
Clearance (in.)
Housing 
Leakage 
Distance 
(in.)
Housing 
Strike  
Distance 
(in.)
Insulation Withstand Voltages
Weight  
(lbs.)
1.2/50 ms 
Impulse 
(kV Crest)
60 Hz Dry, 
60 sec 
(kV, rms)
60 Hz Wet, 
10 sec  
(kV, rms)
3
2.55
AZES091G002003
13.4
8
4
9.0
4.7
95
65
32
23
6
5.10
AZES091G005006
13.4
8
5
9.0
4.7
95
65
32
24
9
7.65
AZES091G007009
13.4
8
5
9.0
4.7
95
65
32
24
10
8.40
AZES092G008010
15.9
8
5
16.0
7.2
128
93
46
29
12
10.2
AZES092G010012
15.9
9
6
16.0
7.2
128
93
46
30
15
12.7
AZES092G012015
15.9
10
7
16.0
7.2
128
93
46
30
18
15.3
AZES093G015018
20.2
11
8
26.4
11.0
182
119
75
38
21
17.0
AZES093G017021
20.2
12
8
26.4
11.0
182
119
75
38
24
19.5
AZES093G019024
20.2
12
9
26.4
11.0
182
119
75
39
27
22.0
AZES094G022027
23.4
13
10
36.8
14.7
230
148
115
47
30
24.4
AZES094G024030
23.4
14
11
36.8
14.7
230
148
115
47
33
27.5
AZES094G027033
23.4
15
12
36.8
14.7
230
148
115
47
36
29.0
AZES094G029036
23.4
16
12
36.8
14.7
230
148
115
48
39
31.5
AZES095G031039
28.4
17
13
50.7
19.7
294
174
143
59
42
34.0
AZES095G034042
28.4
18
14
50.7
19.7
294
174
143
60
45
36.5
AZES095G036045
28.4
19
15
50.7
19.7
294
174
143
60
48
39.0
AZES095G039048
28.4
20
16
50.7
19.7
294
174
143
60
216
174
AZES024G174216
100.3
84
71
227.0
72.3
1065
595
545
306
228
182
AZES025G182228
108.9
86
73
254.0
80.9
1185
655
580
348
240
190
AZES025G190240
108.9
89
76
254.0
80.9
1185
655
580
351
258
209
AZES067G209258
123.9
105
84
265.5
83.9
1265
690
625
472
264
212
AZES067G212264
123.9
106
85
265.5
83.9
1265
690
625
473
276
220
AZES069G220276
132.5
108
87
291.8
92.4
1300
750
675
499
288
230
AZES069G230288
132.5
111
90
291.8
92.4
1300
750
675
503
294
235
AZES070G235294
135.3
113
92
300.7
95.3
1405
765
725
524
300
239
AZES070G239300
135.3
114
93
300.7
95.3
1405
765
725
526
312
245
AZES071G245312
141.0
116
95
318.8
100.9
1475
805
730
558
330
267
AZES074G267330
152.4
136
108
354.0
109.5
1440
810
790
605
336
269
AZES074G269336
152.4
136
109
354.0
109.5
1440
810
790
606
360
289
AZES075G289360
161.0
143
115
381.0
118.0
1535
860
840
655
TABLE  5
Catalog Numbers, Dimensional Information, Insulation Withstand Voltages and Weights for AZES Cubicle-Mount  
Surge Arresters
Note: All arresters are available in grey (standard) or brown porcelain glaze. For brown glaze, substitute B for G in the eighth position 
of the catalog number.
	
Case Study 1	
791
TABLE  4
(Continued )

792	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
accommodate industry standard two 
(2) and four (4) hole flat pad con-
nectors having a 1.75 inch spacing. 
Figure 6 provides the dimensional de-
tails for universal base mounting.
The vent port in the base must 
be directed away from any adjacent 
equipment to control and prevent ion-
ized gases from damaging other equip-
ment in the unlikely event of arrester 
failure.
Performance and Protective 
Characteristics
Table 3 displays the Arrester Rating, 
Maximum Continuous Operating 
Voltage (MCOV) and the guaranteed  
protective characteristics of the AZES  
surge arrester.
The 
Front-of-Wave 
protec-
tive level is the maximum discharge 
voltage for a 10 kA current impulse 
which results in a discharge volt-
age cresting in 0.5 microseconds.  
Lightning impulse Discharge Volt-
ages represent the maximum volt-
age levels generated by the arrester 
when discharging lightning currents 
of the standard 8/20 microsecond 
wave-shape. The maximum Switch-
ing Impulse Discharge Voltages are  
based on a switching surge current  
having a time to crest of 45 to  
60 microseconds.  ■
60°
(3) .625" x 1.27" 
(1.6 x 3.2 cm) LG. MTG.
SLOTS (120 APART)
8.75"-10"(22.2 - 25.4 cm) 
DIA. BOLT CIRCLE
120°
THICKNESS OF
MOUNTING FEET
IS 0.87" (2.2 cm)
DIRECTED 
VENT PORT
Figure 6  Base mounting. Note: To develop rated cantilever strength use  
10-inch bolt circle mounting diameter and 0.5-inch hardened bolts 
and flat washers.

3-120 kV
132-168 kV
172-240 kV
258-288 kV
294-312 kV
330-360 kV
26"
(66 cm)
DIA.
42"
(107 cm)
DIA.
55"
(140 cm)
DIA.
42"
(107 cm)
DIA.
6.9"
(18 cm)
6.9"
(18 cm)
6.9"
(18 cm)
*FOR 172 kV ONLY
DIMENSION IS 12" (30 cm)
“A”
“A”
“A”
24"
(60 cm)
30"
(77 cm)
24"
(60 cm)
“A”
“A”
16"
(40 cm)
“A”
Figure 8  Dimensions of VariSTAR Type AZE metal-top surge arresters. Note: Refer 
to Table 4 for dimension A.
“A”
Figure 7  Dimensions of VariSTAR Type AZE cubicle- 
mount surge arrester. Note: Refer to 
Table 5 for dimension A.
	
Case Study 1	
793

794	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
CASE STUDY 2
Emergency Response 
By Nicholas Miller, Clyde Loutan, Miaolei Shao, and Kara Clark
The reliable operation of a power 
system depends on maintaining fre-
quency within predetermined limits 
around the nominal operating fre-
quency (60 Hertz in North America). 
A fundamental aspect of operating 
an electric power grid reliably is that 
the amount of power produced at any 
given instant must match almost ex-
actly the amount of power being con-
sumed. If extra power is produced, the 
frequency will tend to increase. If less 
power is produced, the frequency will 
tend to decrease. The frequency of 
the interconnected grid is mostly 
controlled by adjusting the output of 
generators in order to maintain a bal-
ance between generation and load. 
This balancing and frequency con-
trol occur over a continuum of time,  
using different resources that fall into 
the categories of primary, secondary, 
or tertiary controls.
Primary frequency control, or  
frequency response, depends on the 
rapid, autonomous action of re-
sources, particularly generation, in 
response to significant changes in 
system frequency. Inherent inertial 
behavior and then primary frequency 
control actions are the first lines of 
defense for the system to avoid invol-
untary interruption of service to cus-
tomers, which can occur within a few 
seconds following a system distur-
bance. Secondary frequency control 
is the fastest centralized control in the 
system. Secondary control actions 
are usually due to automatic genera-
tion control (AGC) instructions that 
are issued through a balancing au-
thority’s energy management system 
(EMS). They start within tens of sec-
onds and dominate system response 
for the first several minutes following 
a disturbance. Tertiary control en-
compasses dispatch actions taken by 
the system operator to get resources 
in place to handle current and future 
contingencies. Reserve deployment 
and reserve restoration following a 
disturbance are common types of 
tertiary control.
In the first few seconds fol-
lowing the loss of a large generating 
plant, the frequency dynamics of the 
system are dominated by the inertial 
response of the online generation. 
Synchronous machines inherently 
contribute some of their stored iner-
tial energy to the grid, reducing the 
initial rate of frequency decline. In 
synchronous machines, the inertial 
response is inherent to the machine 
physics and is not controllable. Slower 
initial rate of frequency decline can 
be helpful, allowing slower governor 
actions to nonetheless stabilize grid 
frequency. In some smaller systems, 
the initial rate of frequency decline 
is quite important. This does not ap-
pear to be as much of a concern in 
the major U.S. interconnections.
© 2013 IEEE. Reprinted, with permission, 
from Nicholas Miller, Clyde Loutan, Miaolei 
Shao and Kara Clark, “Emergency Response,” 
IEEE Power and Energy Magazine, 11, 6, 
November/December 2013, pp. 63–71.

There is widespread and grow-
ing concern in North America about 
system response to underfrequency 
events. The North American Electric 
Reliability Corporation (NERC) has 
led a frequency response initiative. Its 
report, issued on October 30, 2012, 
examines the trends in and causes of 
the deteriorating frequency response 
that has been observed over the past 
two decades. It provides the rationale 
for establishing the responsibilities for 
maintaining adequate frequency per-
formance laid out in a new standard 
on frequency response and bias that 
has recently (March 29, 2013) been 
submitted as a petition to the Fed-
eral Energy Regulatory Commission 
(FERC) for approval. In 2010, FERC 
sponsored work by the Lawrence 
Berkeley National Lab (LBNL) that 
identified metrics useful in planning 
and operations of a system with large 
amounts of variable generation. One 
focus is the concern that the addi-
tion of substantial amounts of wind 
power may exacerbate the observed 
decline in frequency response.
Wind Plant Frequency Response 
Today
There is a fundamental difference be-
tween a wind turbine and the turbines 
supplying motive power to the major-
ity of the world’s traditional power 
plants, be they gas, steam, or hydro 
turbines. With traditional turbines, the 
rotational speed is nearly constant and 
locked to system frequency. The speed 
of a wind turbine, however, is not 
synchronous with the grid and is con-
trolled so as to maximize active power 
production. Wind turbine power  
production is therefore not inherently 
coupled to the system frequency and 
does not provide inertial or governor 
response unless specifically controlled 
to do so. Historically, wind plants 
have usually not been required to par-
ticipate in frequency regulation.
With higher levels of wind and 
solar penetration, system operation 
changes. Thermal units may be de-
committed as their output is dis-
placed by lower-marginal-cost wind  
generation, or they may be dispatched 
to lower power levels. It can happen 
that the units most economical to 
displace also have the most desirable 
governor response. This leaves other 
resources running that do not provide 
the same governor characteristics. 
The remaining thermal units are also 
more frequently operated at a lower 
power output. This change in system 
operations is the primary reason for 
concerns that wind generation may 
exacerbate existing frequency perfor-
mance challenges.
The Incumbent Generators
The frequency response of systems is 
dominated by the amount and type 
of generation committed and how it 
is dispatched. For performance in-
vestigations, it is useful to distinguish 
generators in accordance with how 
they respond to frequency excursions.
Governor-responsive units have 
speed governors with a droop charac-
teristic and some available headroom 
(see the sidebar “Governor Basics”). 
These plants increase power output 
to support the grid when frequency 
declines. Other generation does not. 
This includes some generation that is  
	
Case Study 2	
795

796	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
operated so that it cannot increase 
output for frequency decline but can 
decrease output for overfrequency 
conditions. In the Western Intercon-
nection, these are referred to as base 
load units. Other generators may  
either lack governors or be operated 
with their governors disabled.
The ratio of generation that 
provides governor response to all 
generation running on the system 
is a useful metric used to quantify 
overall system readiness to provide 
frequency response. There are a 
number of physical and economic 
reasons why many power plants, 
particularly thermal plants, oper-
ate without underfrequency gover-
nor response. For example, steam 
plants are more efficient when op-
erated with valves wide open, in so-
called “boiler follow” mode. Nuclear 
plants in the United States are not 
permitted to have underfrequency 
response. The net result is that it is 
common in the major U.S. intercon-
nections for only about one-third of 
generation operating at any given 
time to provide governor response. 
This means that careful attention 
must be given during operation to 
this important subset of synchro-
nized generation.
Two New Investigations  
of Frequency Response
In this article, we present certain key 
findings of two new investigations 
Governor Basics
Most synchronous generators have a speed 
governor that, when enabled, helps maintain 
system frequency. The speed of a synchronous 
machine is a good proxy for system frequency. 
In steady state, the speed is always an integer 
multiple of grid frequency—nominally 60 Hz 
in North America. The gray line in Figure S1 
shows a representative governor characteristic. 
As frequency drops (moving left from nominal 
in the figure), once the deadband is exceeded, 
the generator output will increase along the 
droop line. The steepness of the line—the 
droop—is usually set so that a 1% drop in speed 
(i.e., 0.6 Hz) will result in a 20% increase in 
power output. The increase in power is limited 
by the physical limits of the generation: this is 
the headroom. Therefore, for a unit to usefully 
contribute to primary frequency response, the 
governor must be enabled and there must be 
some headroom.
Speed (for Synchronous Machines)
Frequency (for Wind Plants)
100%
(Normal Frequency)
Headroom
Plant Power
Droop
Plant Power Dispatch
= Actual Production
Plant Power Maximum
= Rating for Synchronous Plants
= Available for Wind Plants
Deadband
System Short
of Generation
System Needs
Power
Figure S1  A representative governor  
characteristic

of frequency response in the U.S. 
Western and Eastern interconnec-
tions. The work on the Western In-
terconnection (WI) system was done 
with California Independent System 
Operator (CAISO), with a focus on 
the performance of California. The 
Eastern Interconnection (EI) work 
was sponsored by the U.S. Depart-
ment of Energy (DOE) Office of 
Electricity Delivery and Energy Reli-
ability and managed by the National 
Renewable Energy Lab (NREL). The 
goals of both studies were to illustrate 
overall system frequency response, in-
vestigate the possible impact of large 
amounts of wind generation, and  
examine means to improve frequency 
response with the use of active power 
controls on wind plants.
California
This study was specifically designed 
to investigate the frequency response 
of California due to large loss-of- 
generation events of the type targeted 
by NERC Standard BAL-003-0.1b, 
Frequency Response and Bias, under 
system conditions with high levels of 
wind and solar generation, as envi-
sioned in the near future. It addressed 
the overall frequency response of the 
Western grid, without considering 
any changes to the limits of stability- 
limited transmission paths that may 
be warranted at higher penetrations 
of variable energy resources.
For this work, CAISO created 
a number of credible load flow and 
stability base cases that represent the 
high penetrations of wind and solar 
generation expected in California 
in the near future. These cases were 
deliberately selected with the expecta-
tion that they would represent some 
of the most challenging conditions 
for CAISO with respect to frequency 
response. A weekend morning, high-
wind and high-solar condition case 
represents an operating condition 
with a large number of synchronous 
generators displaced by variable re-
newable energy resources. In addition, 
some of the thermal power plants 
with synchronous generators were 
also assumed to have been retired 
due to once-through-cooling (OTC) 
regulation. At the snapshot of time 
represented here, the total WI load is  
111 GW. The fraction of California 
generation coming from wind plants 
is 28% (8.6 GW total). With an ad-
ditional 6.7 GW of solar generation 
included, California’s total vari-
able renewable generation reaches 
50% (14.3 GW total). Most of the 
simulations focused on the trip of 
two units at the Palo Verde Nuclear 
Power Station. This 2690-MW event 
is recognized by NERC as the larg-
est loss-of-generation event in the 
Western Interconnection for which 
involuntary 
load 
shedding 
and 
other stability consequences must be 
avoided.
Figure 1 shows the frequency 
response of the Western Intercon-
nection to the Palo Verde generation 
tripping event imposed at 1 s for the 
base case. Measuring the frequency 
at a specific single node in the grid 
following a disturbance can be 
confusing and misleading. Here, an 
equivalent frequency based on the 
weighted speed of all the synchronous  
	
Case Study 2	
797

798	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
machines in the system is used. It fil-
ters out the local swings and can be 
regarded analytically as the common 
mode of the system. The frequency 
nadir (point C) occurs at about 10 s at 
a frequency of 59.7 Hz, and the set-
tling frequency (point B) is 59.8 Hz.  
(For an explanation of these terms, 
see Table 1.) Figure 2 shows the elec-
trical and mechanical power output 
of the synchronous machines with 
enabled governors. By the time of 
frequency nadir (point Cp), the units  
on governor control are delivering 
about an extra 2000 MW, and by 
60 s, the interarea transients have 
settled out, frequency is largely 
uniform everywhere, and genera-
tor electrical and mechanical power 
are essentially equal. The change in 
generation by governor-responsive 
units represents the vast majority of 
system response and is nearly equal 
to the lost generation (2690 MW) 
after 60 s. The frequency nadir gives 
some margin above the first stage  
60.1
60.0
59.9
59.8
Bf
Cf
Ct
C
B
A
Frequency (Hz)
59.7
59.6
0
10
20
30
Time (s)
40
50
60
Figure 1  Frequency response to loss of generation  
(for the base case)
TABLE  1
Frequency terminology
Starting 
frequency
This is the system frequency before an upset; it is close to (but rarely 
exactly) 60 Hz.
Frequency  
nadir
This is the lowest frequency seen following an upset. It is usually 
expected to occur within several seconds of a big generation trip. It 
ought to stay comfortably above underfrequency load-shedding (UFLS) 
levels, i.e., 59.5 Hz in most of the United States.
Settling 
frequency
This is the frequency observed after the big swings are over and the 
primary frequency controls have acted but before secondary controls 
become significant. It ought to occur well before 1 min. after a  
big event.

of underfrequency load shedding 
(UFLS) at 59.5 Hz.
A Higher-Wind Case
For the base case, the level of wind 
generation outside of California was 
relatively low, especially compared 
with the levels within California.  
In order to test conditions under 
which the rest of the WI is also host to 
significant amounts of wind genera-
tion, a higher-renewable-penetration  
case was developed. The change in 
commitment and dispatch of the syn-
chronous generation as wind comes 
in is critical. In this case, changes 
were based on trends observed in 
the detailed economic evaluation of 
the Western Wind and Solar Inte-
gration Study (WWSIS ). For every  
3 MW of additional wind produc-
tion, there is about 2 MW of reduc-
tion in thermal unit commitment 
and a 1 MW reduction in thermal 
unit dispatch. The committed ther-
mal units that have the least annual 
operating time in the WWSIS study 
were selected to be displaced by 
wind turbine generators. Initially, 
the newly added wind turbine gener-
ators were assumed to have typical, 
nonfrequency-responsive con­trols and 
were also assumed to be operating at 
50% of rated capacity, in order to 
capture the operational reality that 
all wind plants in a system are never 
operating simultaneously at rated 
power. This assumption for the in-
cremental plants gives a reasonable, 
if somewhat simple, distribution  
of loadings on the wind plants in 
WECC. Thus in this case, 9508 MW  
of wind turbines were added to 
achieve an increased net wind dis-
patch of 4754 MW.
Coming up Short: Reduced  
Headroom
The system conditions in the higher- 
renewable-penetration case were fur-
ther modified to reflect an operating 
condition with a reduced fraction 
of 
generation 
providing 
gover-
nor response and with those units 
having reduced headroom. In this 
case, the overall system headroom  
Figure 2  Base case electrical and mechanical power 
response
38,000
37,500
37,000
Electrical and
Mechanical Power (MW)
36,500
36,000
35,500
35,000
0
10
20
30
40
Time (s)
Ct
Cp
Bp
50
60
Electrical Power (MW)
Mechanical Power (MW)
	
Case Study 2	
799

800	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
was reduced to about 8 GW. The 
system was deliberately stressed so 
as to consider the practical mini-
mum headroom. It is worth noting 
that the condition from which this 
case was developed was already 
considered to be challenging and 
representative of a realistic com-
mitment and dispatch for high wind 
and solar conditions. This case was 
designed to push headroom down 
to levels that we believe might occur 
relatively infrequently, that is, when 
the system is meeting just its mini-
mum operating reserve obligation 
plus regulation needs.
In the most extreme case ana­
lyzed, the headroom was further re-
duced to 3 GW. This was essentially 
equal to the outage event size. The 
case was designed as a test and is 
not necessarily representative of a 
condition that is either practical or 
one that the system operator would  
regard as acceptable. Rather, we 
were looking to understand what 
might happen and establish a case  
for which remediation of extreme 
conditions might be tested. It is worth  
reemphasizing that this condition 
corresponds to about 20 GW of in-
stantaneous production of wind and 
solar in the WI. Since one postulated 
cause of instantaneous operation at 
such acutely reduced headroom is 
from an unexpected drop in wind or 
solar production, one could reason-
ably suppose that this case is repre-
sentative of a future condition in 
which much more than the 25 GW 
of nameplate rating of wind plus  
solar of this case is operating in the 
WI. The loss of 5 GW of headroom 
thus represents a drop of roughly 20% 
of the total generation. The statistical 
expectation of such an extreme drop 
is small. A final important point for 
this particular case is that the UFLS 
was disabled to allow the compari-
son of frequency response with other 
cases without the complexity of con-
sidering UFLS effects.
The frequency response for the 
three 
higher-renewable-penetration  
and reduced-headroom cases is shown 
in Figure 3. The highest trace shows the  
60.1
60.0
59.9
59.8
59.7
59.6
59.5
59.4
0
10
20
30
Time (s)
40
50
60
Frequency (Hz)
Base Case
Higher Renewable Penetration Case
Practical Minimum Headroom
Extreme Minimum Headroom
Figure 3  Frequency response to loss of generation

response for the higher-renewable- 
penetration case; the third high-
est trace shows the response for the 
higherrenewable-penetration and prac-
ticalminimum-headroom case; and 
the lowest trace shows the higherre-
newable-penetration and extrememin-
imum-headroom case. In comparison, 
the response of the base case is plotted 
as the second highest trace.
Compared with the base case, 
the higher-renewable-penetration case  
has better frequency response. This 
is because the dispatch increased 
headroom when wind generation was 
added. This effect is nowhere near in 
proportion to the amount of wind 
generation added, yet it helps the 
system response. This case illustrates 
the possibility that normal economic 
operation of the system may result 
in improved system frequency per-
formance as wind power levels in-
crease. The initial rate of change of 
frequency (ROCOF) is essentially un-
changed between the cases, indicating 
that the reduction in system inertia 
that accompanies displacement of 
some synchronous generation has lit-
tle impact.
For the higher renewable pen-
etration and practical minimum 
headroom case, the frequency nadir  
is low and probably represents the 
lowest nadir that could be consid-
ered acceptable. For the extreme- 
minimum-headroom case, the fre-
quency nadir would have impinged 
on the UFLS threshold—an unac-
ceptable result. The settling frequency 
is barely above the minimum to avoid 
UFLS. This is evidence that the per-
formance is limited by the generators’ 
range of available response and static 
droop and not just the speed of re-
sponse of the governors.
These cases indicate that ex-
tremely depleted headroom will result 
in unacceptable system performance. 
The fraction of generation providing 
governor response, while important, 
is insufficient to anticipate frequency 
performance. Headroom needs to 
be considered—at least when it is in 
short supply.
Turning to Wind for Help
Ultimately, wind plant controls can 
provide system operators with yet 
another tool to manage frequency 
(see sidebar “New System Tools: 
Active Power Control from Wind 
Plants”). Under conditions of high 
stress that result in a shortage of 
headroom and generation provid-
ing governor response, wind gen-
eration may well be the least costly 
means of achieving the necessary 
primary frequency response. In an-
other test scenario, we start with  
the extreme-minimum-headroom case  
(the lowest trace in Figure 3).  
That case had unacceptable fre-
quency performance, due to an 
insufficient supply of primary re-
sponse. In the new case, about 41% 
of the wind generation is assumed 
to be operating slightly curtailed 
and with governorlike response en-
abled, using standard droop and 
deadbands. This adds 1812 MW of 
headroom.
A comparison of the cases is 
shown in Figure 4 for frequency re-
sponse and in Figure 5 for the power 
output of those wind plants with 
the controls on. The performance 
of this case is dramatically better. 
	
Case Study 2	
801

802	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
This case shows that, if necessary, 
primary frequency response from 
wind generation has the potential to 
greatly improve the system frequency 
performance of the entire grid. These 
cases do not include the inertial con-
trol that in general would be comple-
mentary to this control.
Eastern Frequency  
Response Study
A recently completed study of the EI 
investigated some of the same issues 
as the study of the WI, again focusing 
on the evaluation of frequency re-
sponse and generation control with 
increasing wind penetration. While 
New System Tools: Active Power Control from Wind Plants
Since wind generation tends to displace thermal generation, under some conditions the system 
would benefit from the frequency-sensitive response of wind plants to (1) overfrequency events 
caused by load rejections, since thermal plants are less likely to have substantial down-regulation 
capability, and (2) underfrequency events caused by generation trips. Some wind plants with 
modern turbines and plant controls have the ability to control active power output in response 
to grid frequency. A number of grid operators around the world have started requiring that wind 
plants have these controls.
Inertial Controls
Most modern MW-class wind generation does not inherently exhibit inertial response. It is pos-
sible, however, to program the wind plant controls to provide a form of inertial response. For 
large underfrequency events, the inertial control feature temporarily increases the power output 
of the wind turbine by about 5–10% of rated power for several seconds. Below rated wind, stored 
kinetic energy from the turbine-generator rotor is temporarily donated to the grid but is recov-
ered later. This inertial response is not quite energy-neutral, meaning that the period of increased 
power is followed by a longer period of decreased power.
Governorlike Controls
It is also possible to implement wind plant controls that provide something similar to governor 
response. Some active power controls that are commercially available are closely akin to gover-
nor controls for thermal and hydro generation. They respond to significant deviations in grid 
frequency, increasing or decreasing power output in response to low- or high-frequency events, 
respectively. To do this, the control alters the active power control reference targeted by the tur-
bine controls. In order to allow for an increase of wind plant active power output in response to 
an underfrequency condition, some active power production must be kept in reserve—this is the 
“headroom” shown in the governor figure. The maximum power production of the wind plant is 
therefore constrained to a value less than that available from the wind. This results in unrecover-
able loss of energy production (much like spilled water on hydro generation) and so has signifi-
cant economic implications. (Alternatively, some energy could be stored in a different medium, 
such as a battery, for delivery at this critical time, but that is a discussion for a different article.) 
The potential for wind generation to respond quickly makes this resource effective in arresting 
and correcting frequency deviations, much as fast governor response does on thermal generation.

the studies were similar in focus, one 
particularly important difference re-
quired attention. Although there are 
efforts under way to improve matters, 
the dynamic representations of the EI 
that are in widespread use today are 
known to poorly reflect the intercon-
nection’s observed behavior. The main 
goals of this work were therefore to:
●
●
Create 
a 
realistic 
baseline 
model of the EI for examining 
frequency response;
60.1
60.0
59.9
59.8
59.7
59.6
59.5
59.4
0
10
20
30
Time (s)
40
50
60
Frequency (Hz)
Extreme Minimum Headroom Case
Extreme Minimum Headroom
Case —With Frequency Droop
Figure 4  Frequency response, with and without wind 
plant frequency droop function
17,000
16,500
16,000
15,500
15,000
14,500
14,000
0
10
20
30
Time (s)
40
50
60
Type Three Wind Power (MW)
Extreme Minimum Headroom Case
Extreme Minimum Headroom
Case—With Frequency Droop
Figure 5 Wind power response, with and without  
frequency droop function
	
Case Study 2	
803

804	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
●
●
Illustrate overall system fre-
quency response;
●
●
Investigate the possible impact 
of large amounts of wind gen-
eration; and
●
●
Examine means of improving 
EI frequency response with the 
use of active power controls on 
wind plants.
For this investigation, a light-
load power flow case was again delib-
erately selected with the expectation 
that it would represent one of the more 
challenging conditions for the EI with 
respect to frequency response. At the 
snapshot of time represented in this 
case, the total EI load was 272 GW.  
Most of the simulations focused on 
the trip of multiple thermal plants in 
the region of Rockport, Indiana. This 
4455-MW event was patterned after 
the largest loss-of-generation event 
in the EI for which involuntary load 
shedding and other stability conse-
quences must be avoided.
Some Wrinkles in the Model
A simulation of the loss of 4455 MW 
of generation using this widely used 
model is shown in Figure 6. The Fre-
quency trace shows the frequency drop-
ping slightly and rapidly recovering. 
Over 200 GW of generation is shown in 
the red trace to rapidly and effectively 
respond. This is nice performance.  
Unfortunately, it does not resemble 
the observed behavior of the EI. This 
is mainly because the vast majority 
of synchronous generation in the dy-
namic model of the EI has active gov-
ernors modeled. Thus, the fraction of 
generation with governor response is 
78.9% for the EI in this case. This value 
is significantly higher than the 30–40% 
of recent U.S. industry experience.
Based on a better understand-
ing of thermal plant controls, the ini-
tial model was modified. Governors 
on plant types that typically do not 
have active governors were disabled. 
The fraction of generation with gov-
ernor response was reduced to 32%. 
60.05
209
208
207
206
Power (GW)
205
204
203
202
60.00
59.95
59.90
Frequency (Hz)
59.85
59.80
59.75
59.700
10
20
30
Time (s)
40
50
60
Frequency
Power
Figure 6  Frequency and governor response of the EI, 
using the old model

Further, plant controls representa-
tive of those that tend to override 
primary governor response creating 
“governor withdrawal” were added. 
These relatively common controls are 
intended to make certain that power 
plants adhere to their dispatch sched-
ule. Governor action in response 
to frequency excursions drives ma-
chines away from their dispatch (see 
“Governor Basics”). These controls 
return the plants to schedule, regard-
less of whether system frequency has 
returned to normal.
The system response to the loss 
of 4455 MW of generation for the new 
base case is shown in Figure 7. The 
Frequency trace shows the frequency 
of the EI. The frequency drops ini-
tially and stays generally depressed. 
This is the so-called “lazy-L behav-
ior” that has been observed for actual 
large­generation disturbances in the EI.  
This modified model was found to 
reasonably reproduce a large event that 
occurred on May 13, 2012. The Power 
trace in Figure 7 shows the mechani-
cal power output of the governor- 
responsive units. It presents quite a 
contrast to the Power trace in Figure 6.
To examine the possible impact 
of high levels of wind penetration on 
the EI, a test case was devised with 
new wind generation of approxi-
mately 85 GW rating, operating at a 
total of 68 GW production, added 
across all of the NERC regions ex-
cept those of the Southeast Electric 
Reliability Corporation (SERC) and 
the Florida Reliability Coordinating 
Council (FRCC). This represents an 
instantaneous penetration of about 
40% for those regions and of 25% for 
the EI as a whole. As noted earlier, 
wind generation normally displaces 
thermal generation during opera-
tions. An initial high-wind case dis-
placed governor-responsive thermal 
generation such that the fraction of 
generation providing frequency re-
sponse was reduced to about 27%. 
That resulted in somewhat poorer 
60.05
60.00
59.95
59.90
Frequency (Hz)
59.85
59.80
59.75
59.70
73
72
71
70
Power (GW)
69
68
67
66
60
0
10
20
30
Time (s)
40
50
Frequency
Power
Figure 7  Frequency and governor response of the EI, 
using the new model
	
Case Study 2	
805

806	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
frequency response. By modifying 
the case to bring the fraction of gen-
eration providing frequency response 
back to 32%, the frequency response 
was restored.
Wind Plant Controls: Governor 
and Inertial Controls Combined
To illustrate the potential benefits of 
frequency-sensitive wind plant con-
trol, most of the wind generation was 
again curtailed by 5% of the available 
wind power, and the governorlike 
controls were enabled. This condition 
added a total of 3.4 GW of head-
room. Unlike the WI case shown in 
Figures 4 and 5, for this case inertial 
control on the wind turbines was en-
abled as well.
The system frequency, as shown 
in Figure 8, is substantially better in 
the high-wind case with these controls 
as compared with the no-wind base 
case. The electrical power of all the 
wind turbines is shown in Figure 9.  
The lighter trace shows the com-
bined response of the governor and 
inertial controls. To help understand 
the impact of the inertial control, 
the darker trace shows only the 
contribution from the governor con-
trol. The energy associated with the 
inertial control is the area between 
the two curves. Notice that even 
though the inertial control is almost 
energy-neutral, it produces a per-
formance benefit by delivering extra 
energy to the system earlier, as the 
frequency is declining. This can be a 
substantial benefit, if there is suffi-
cient primary reserve on the system, 
as is the case here.
Conclusions
These investigations provide evidence 
that high levels of wind and solar gen-
eration can be well tolerated within 
the major U.S. interconnections with  
respect to system frequency response. 
The tendency for wind and solar 
60.05
60.00
59.95
59.90
Frequency (Hz)
59.85
59.80
59.75
59.700
10
20
30
Time (s)
40
50
60
New Base Case
High Wind Penetration with
Inertial Control Base
WTG Governor Response and
Figure 8  Frequency comparison: EI without wind versus 
high wind with governor and inertial response

generation to displace other synchro-
nous thermal generation that may 
contribute to healthy frequency re-
sponse needs to be considered during 
system operation. These findings re-
inforce the work of others who have  
found that the fraction of generators 
providing governor response at any 
given time is a critical operational 
metric. Minimum levels on the order 
of 25–35% of total online generation 
are needed at all times. This is true 
independent of wind generation. 
There is evidence that these mini-
mum levels are occasionally reached 
today. The fact that roughly two out 
of three operating generators may 
not contribute to primary frequency 
response under normal operating 
conditions is an economic reality  
of operation.
The headroom available for 
the fraction of generation that is 
contributing to primary frequency 
response can also be important under 
conditions of high stress. The sys-
tem must maintain a minimum MW 
level of synchronized, responsive 
generation in order to provide ade-
quate frequency performance. The 
speed of response of these reserves is  
important, since the frequency nadir 
following a major loss-of-generation 
event typically occurs within several 
seconds of the event. Contributions 
to primary frequency must be sus-
tained until secondary frequency re-
sponse, that is, automatic generation 
Figure 9 Wind turbine generator power comparison: three 
different controls
73
72
71
70
69
68
67
66
Power (GW)
0
10
20
30
Time (s)
40
50
60
High Wind Penetration Case
High Wind Penetration with WTG
Governor Response Case
High Wind Penetration with WTG
Governor Response and Inertial Control Case
	
Case Study 2	
807

808	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
control, asserts control—typically, 
within the space of several minutes. 
The fact that many thermal plants 
have controls in place that quickly 
withdraw their primary response 
contributes to degraded frequency 
performance. The WI work showed 
a roughly 20% degradation in perfor-
mance due to such controls.
The modeling of primary fre-
quency response, including the cap-
ture of key elements such as which 
generators are actually contributing, 
which generators have controls that 
withdraw primary response, and the 
contribution of load behavior, re-
quires careful attention. In the EI,  
today’s commonly used dynamic mod-
els capture observed frequency behav-
ior poorly. These studies showed that  
adjustments to the models can greatly 
improve model fidelity. But more 
work should be and is being done to 
improve the EI models.
As wind penetration increases, 
the potential participation of wind 
plants in frequency control becomes 
more important to the system. These 
investigations show that frequency­
sensitive controls on wind plants 
can have a substantial beneficial 
impact on system performance. In-
ertial controls from wind generation 
provide fast transient support, via 
a controlled inertial response from 
wind turbines, that can significantly 
improve the system’s frequency na-
dir. This is particularly the case if the 
frequency nadir is significantly lower 
than the settling frequency, which 
tends to be the case if the system has 
generators with adequate but slower 
control action. This means that these 
types of controls can reduce the need 
to worry about the speed of individ-
ual unit governor response. They do 
relatively little to correct a shortage 
in the amount of available response, 
however. Under normal conditions, 
these controls will add margin in 
avoiding UFLS. The participation 
of wind plants in providing primary 
frequency response, that is, by ex-
ploiting plants with governorlike 
controls, will have significant bene-
ficial impacts on both the frequency 
nadir and the settling frequency. 
This should prove valuable under 
conditions when the system is short 
of other resources. To provide this 
function, wind plants must be dis-
patched below available wind power, 
causing an opportunity cost equal 
to the value of the lost production. 
Like spilling water over a hydro dam, 
this can be expensive unless there is 
a means to be paid for providing this 
service to the grid. Since the controls 
can be quite fast relative to conven-
tional thermal and hydro generation, 
the benefit is greater. Other types of 
generation, active load controls, and 
energy storage devices may all be 
able to provide comparable benefits.
These investigations did not 
examine the operational practices 
or institutional mechanisms neces-
sary to take advantage of the tech-
nical options identified, nor did they 
consider whether existing practice 
is sufficient to ensure adequate fre-
quency response. The new NERC 
standards 
establish 
quantitative 
performance objectives. It is pos-
sible that new market mechanisms 
will be required to assure adequate 

	
Section 13.1 Traveling Waves on Single-Phase  Lossless Lines	
809
frequency response. These should 
be structured to achieve economy 
of operations by allowing all qual-
ifying resources, including variable  
renewable generation, to participate.  
These investigations, while exten-
sive, are by no means exhaustive. 
Further experience and analysis 
will help steer practice as levels of 
wind generation increase.
For Further Reading
N. 
W. 
Miller, 
M. 
Shao, 
and  
S. Venkataraman, “California ISO 
(CAISO) frequency response study,” 
GE Energy, 2011.
U.S. Department of Energy. 
(2013). Eastern frequency response 
study. [Online]. Available: www.osti 
.gov/servlets/purl/1083365/
“The reliability role of fre-
quency response,” NERC Frequency 
Response Initiative Report, NERC, 
Atlanta, GA, Oct. 30, 2012.
J. H. Eto, J. Undrill, P. Mackin, 
R. Daschmans, B. Williams, B. 
Haney, R. Hunt, J. Ellis, H. Illian, 
C. Martinez, M. O’Malley, K. 
Coughlin, and K. H. laCammare, 
“Use of frequency response metrics 
to assess the planning and operating 
requirements for reliable integration 
of 
variable 
renewable 
genera-
tion,” Lawrence Berkeley National  
Laboratory, Report LBNL-4142E,  
Dec. 2010.
Biographies
Nicholas Miller is with GE Energy 
Consulting, Schenectady, New York.
Clyde Loutan is a California  
Independent System Operator, Fol-
som, California.
Miaolei Shao is with GE Energy 
Consulting, Schenectady, New York.
Kara Clark is with the National 
Renewable 
Energy 
Laboratory, 
Golden, Colorado.  ■
13.1  Traveling Waves on Single-Phase  
Lossless Lines
First consider a single-phase two-wire lossless transmission line. Figure 13.1 shows a 
line section of length Dx meters. If the line has a loop inductance L H∙m and a line-
to-line capacitance C F∙m, then the line section has a series inductance L Dx H and 
shunt capacitance C Dx F, as shown. In Chapter 5, the direction of line position x 
was selected to be from the receiving end (x 5 0) to the sending end (x 5 l ); this selec-
tion was unimportant, since the variable x was subsequently eliminated when relating 
FIGURE 13.1
Single-phase two-
wire lossless line 
section of length Dx

810	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
the steady-state sending-end quantities Vs and Is to the receiving-end quantities VR 
and IR. Here, however, the interest is in voltages and current waveforms traveling 
along the line. Therefore, the direction of increasing x as being from the sending end 
(x 5 0) toward the receiving end (x 5 I) is selected.
Writing a KVL and KCL equation for the circuit in Figure 13.1,
y (x 1 Dx, t) 2 y (x, t) 5 2LDx −i(x, t)
−t

(13.1.1)
i(x 1 Dx, t) 2 i(x, t) 5 2CDx −y (x, t)
−t

(13.1.2)
Dividing (13.1.1) and (13.1.2) by Dx and taking the limit as Dx S 0, results in
−y(x, t)
−x
5 2L −i(x, t)
−t

(13.1.3)
−i(x, t)
−x
5 2C −y (x, t)
−t

(13.1.4)
Use partial derivatives here because y(x, t) and i(x, t) are differentiated with respect 
to both position x and time t. Also, the negative signs in (13.1.3) and (13.1.4) are 
due to the reference direction for x. For example, with a positive value of i∙t in 
Figure 13.1, y(x, t) decreases as x increases. Taking the Laplace transform of (13.1.3) 
and (13.1.4),
d V(x, s)
dx
5 2sLI(x, s)
(13.1.5)
d I(x, s)
dx
5 2sCV(x, s)
(13.1.6)
where zero initial conditions are assumed. V(x, s) and I(x, s) are the Laplace trans-
forms of y(x, t) and i(x, t). Also, ordinary rather than partial derivatives are used 
since the derivatives are now with respect to only one variable, x.
Next, differentiate (13.1.5) with respect to x and use (13.1.6), in order to elim-
inate i(x, s):
d 2
 V(x, s)
dx2
5 2sLd I(x, s)
dx
5 s2LCV(x, s)
or
d 2 V(x, s)
dx2
2 s2LCV(x, s) 5 0
(13.1.7)
Similarly, (13.1.6) can be differentiated in order to obtain
d 2 I(x, s)
dx2
2 s2LCI(x, s) 5 0
(13.1.8)
 

	
Section 13.1 Traveling Waves on Single-Phase Lossless Lines 	
811
Equation (13.1.7) is a linear, second-order homogeneous differential equation. 
By inspection, its solution is
V(x, s) 5 V1(s)e2sxyv 1 V2(s)e1sxyv
(13.1.9)
where
v 5
1
ÏLC   mys
(13.1.10)
Similarly, the solution to (13.1.8) is
I(x, s) 5 I1(s)e2sxyv 1 I2(s)e1sxyv
(13.1.11)
You can quickly verify that these solutions satisfy (13.1.7) and (13.1.8). The 
“constants” V1(s), V2(s), I1(s), and I2(s), which in general are functions of s but are 
independent of x, can be evaluated from the boundary conditions at the sending and 
receiving ends of the line. The superscripts 1 and 2 refer to waves traveling in the 
positive x and negative x directions, soon to be explained.
Taking the inverse Laplace transform of (13.1.9) and (13.1.11), and recalling 
the time shift properly, +  [ f(t 2 t)] 5 F(s)e2st, results in
y(x, t) 5 y11t 2 x
v2 1 y21t 1 x
v2
(13.1.12)
i(x, t) 5 i11t 2 x
v2 1 i21t 1 x
v2
(13.1.13)
where the functions y1( ), y2( ), i1( ), and i2( ), can be evaluated from the boundary 
conditions.
y1(t 2 x∙v) represents a voltage wave traveling in the positive x direction with 
velocity v 5 1yÏLC m/s. Consider any wave f 1(u), where u 5 t 2 x∙v. Suppose that 
this wave begins at u 5 u0, as shown in Figure 13.2(a). At time t 5 t1, the wavefront 
is at u0 5 (t1 2 x1∙v), or at x1 5 v(t1 2 u0). At a later time, t2, the wavefront is at  
u0 5 (t2 2 x2∙v) or at x2 5 v(t2 2 u0). As shown in Figure 13.2(b), the wavefront has 
FIGURE 13.2
The function f 1(u), 
where u 51t 2 x
v2

812	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
moved in the positive x direction a distance (x2 2 x1) 5 v(t2 2 t1) during time (t2 2 t1). 
The velocity is therefore (x2 2 x1)∙(t2 2 t1) 5 v.
Similarly, i1(t 2 x∙v) represents a current wave traveling in the positive x direc-
tion with velocity v. The expressions v1(t2 x∙v) and i1(t 2 x∙v) are called the forward 
traveling voltage and current waves. It can be shown analogously that y2(t 1 x∙v) 
and i2(t 1 x∙v) travel in the negative x direction with velocity v. Also, y2(t 1 x∙v) and 
i2(t 1 x∙v) are called the backward traveling voltage and current waves.
Recall from (5.4.16) that for a lossless line f l 5 1yÏLC. It is now evident that 
the term 1yÏLC in this equation is v, the velocity of propagation of voltage and cur-
rent waves along the lossless line. Also, recall from Chapter 4 that L is proportional 
to m and C is proportional to «. For overhead lines, v 5 1yÏLC is approximately 
equal to 1yÏm« 5 1yÏm0«0 5 3 3 108   mys, the speed of light in free space. For ca-
bles, the relative permitivity «∙«0 may be 3 to 5 or even higher, resulting in a value of 
v lower than that for overhead lines.
Next, evaluate the terms I1(s) and I2(s). Using (13.1.9) and (13.1.10) in 
(13.1.6),
s
v [2I1(s)e2sxyv 1 I2(s)e1sxyv ] 5 2sC[V1(s)e2sxyv 1 V2(s)e1sxyv]
Equating the coefficients of e2sxyv on both sides of this equation,
I1(s) 5 (vC)V1(s) 5 V1(s)
Î
L
C
5 V1(s)
Zc

(13.1.14)
where
Zc 5Î
L
C   V
(13.1.15)
Similarly, equating the coefficients of e1sxyv,
I2(s) 5 2V2(s)
Zc

(13.1.16)
Thus, (13.1.11) and (13.1.13) can be rewritten as
I(x, s) 5 1
Zc
 [ V1(s)e2sxyv 2 V2(s)e1sxyv ]
(13.1.17)
i(x, t) 5 1
Zc
 3y11t 2 x
v2 2 y21t 1 x
v24
(13.1.18)
Recall from (5.4.3) that Zc 5 ÏLyC is the characteristic impedance (also called surge 
impedance) of a lossless line.

	
Section 13.2 Boundary Conditions for Single-Phase Lossless Lines	
813
13.2  Boundary Conditions for Single-Phase 
Lossless Lines
Figure 13.3 shows a single-phase two-wire lossless line terminated by an impedance 
ZR(s) at the receiving end and a source with Thévenin voltage EG(s) and with Thévenin 
impedance ZG(s) at the sending end. V(x, s) and I(x, s) are the Laplace transforms 
of the voltage and current at position x. The line has length l, surge impedance Zc 5 
ÏLyC, and velocity v 5 1yÏLC. Assume that the line is initially unenergized.
From Figure 13.3, the boundary condition at the receiving end is
V(l, s)5ZR(s)I(l, s)
(13.2.1)
Using (13.1.9) and (13.1.17) in (13.2.1),
V1(s)e2slyv 1 V2(s)e1slyv 5 ZR(s)
Zc
 [ V1(s)e2slyv 2 V2(s)e1slyv ]
Solving for V2(l, s)
V2(l, s) 5 GR(s)V1(s)e22s t 
(13.2.2)
where
GR(s) 5
ZR(s)
Zc
2 1
ZR(s)
Zc
1 1
   per unit
(13.2.3)
t 5 l
v   seconds
(13.2.4)
GR(s) is called the receiving-end voltage reflection coefficient. Also, t, called the transit 
time of the line, is the time it takes a wave to travel the length of the line.
Using (13.2.2) in (13.1.9) and (13.1.17),
V(x, s) 5 V1(s)[e2sxyv 1 GR(s)es[(xyv)22t] ]
(13.2.5)
I(x, s) 5 V1(s)
Zc
 [e2sxyv 2 GR(s)es[(xyv)22t] ]
(13.2.6)
FIGURE 13.3
Single-phase two-
wire lossless line 
with source and  
load terminations

814	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
From Figure 13.3 the boundary condition at the sending end is
V(0, s) 5 EG(s) 2 ZG(s)I(0, s)
(13.2.7)
Using (13.2.5) and (13.2.6) in (13.2.7),
V1(s)[1 1 GR(s)e22st ] 5 EG(s) 23
ZG(s)
Zc 4V1(s)[1 2 GR(s)e22st ]
Solving for V1(s),
V1(s)53
ZG(s)
Zc
1 14 2 GR(s)e22st3
ZG(s)
Zc
2 146 5 EG(s)
V1(s)3
ZG(s)
Zc
1 14{1 2 GR(s)GS(s)e22st} 5 EG(s)
or
V1(s) 5 EG(s)3
Zc
ZG(s) 1 Zc43
1
1 2 GR(s)GS(s)e22st4
(13.2.8)
where
GS(s) 5
ZG(s)
Zc
2 1
ZG(s)
Zc
1 1

(13.2.9)
GS(s) is called the sending-end voltage reflection coefficient. Using (13.2.9) in (13.2.5) 
and (13.2.6), the complete solution is
V(x, s) 5 EG(s)3
Zc
ZG(s) 1 Zc4
 3
e2sxyv 1 GR(s)es[(xyv)22t]
1 2 GR(s)GS(s)e22st 4
(13.2.10)
I(x, s) 53
EG(s)
ZG(s) 1 Zc4
 3
e2sxyv 2 GR(s)es[(xyv)22t]
1 2 GR(s)GS(s)e22st 4
(13.2.11)
where
GR(s) 5
ZR(s)
Zc
2 1
ZR(s)
Zc
1 1
   per unit
GS(s) 5
ZG(s)
Zc
2 1
ZG(s)
Zc
1 1
   per unit
(13.2.12)

	
Section 13.2 Boundary Conditions for Single-Phase Lossless Lines	
815
Zc 5Î
L
C   V      v 5
1
ÏLC   mys      t 5 l
v   s
(13.2.13)
The following four examples illustrate this general solution. All four examples 
refer to the line shown in Figure 13.3, which has length l, velocity v, characteristic 
impedance Zc, and is initially unenergized.
Single-phase lossless-line transients: step-voltage source 
at sending end, matched load at receiving end
Let ZR 5 Zc and ZG 5 0. The source voltage is a step, eG(t) 5 Eu21(t). (a) Deter-
mine y(x, t) and i(x, t). Plot the voltage and current versus time t at the center of 
the line and at the receiving end.
SOLUTION
a.  From (13.2.12) with ZR 5 Zc and ZG 5 0,
GR(s) 5 1 2 1
1 1 1 5 0      GS(s) 5 0 2 1
0 1 1 5 21
The Laplace transform of the source voltage is EG(s) 5 E∙s. Then, from (13.2.10) 
and (13.2.11),
V(x, s) 51
E
s2(1)(e2sxyv) 5 Ee2sxyv
s
I(x, s) 5 (EyZc)
s
 e2sxyv
Taking the inverse Laplace transform,
y (x, t) 5 Eu211t 2 x
v2
i (x, t) 5 E
Zc
 u211t 2 x
v2
b.  At the center of the line, where x 5 l/2,
y 1
l
2, t2 5 Eu211t 2 t
22      i 1
l
2, t2 5 E
Zc
 u211t 2 t
22
EXAMPLE 13.1
(Continued )

816	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
At the receiving end, where x 5 I,
y (l, t) 5 Eu21(t 2 t)      i(l, t) 5 E
Zc
 u21(t 2 t)
These waves, plotted in Figure 13.4, can be explained as follows. At t 5 0 the ideal 
step voltage of E volts, applied to the sending end, encounters Zc, the character-
istic impedance of the line. Therefore, a forward traveling step voltage wave of E 
volts is initiated at the sending end. Also, since the ratio of the forward traveling 
voltage to current is Zc, a forward traveling step current wave of (E∙Zc) amperes 
is initiated. These waves travel in the positive x direction, arriving at the center of 
the line at t 5 t∙2, and at the end of the line at t 5 t. The receiving-end load is 
matched to the line; that is, ZR 5 Zc, for a matched load, GR 5 0, and therefore no 
backward traveling waves are initiated. In steady-state, the line with matched load 
is energized at E volts with current E∙Zc amperes.
FIGURE 13.4
Voltage and current 
waveforms for 
Example 13.1
Single-phase lossless-line transients: step-voltage source 
matched at sending end, open receiving end
The receiving end is open. The source voltage at the sending end is a step eG(t) 5 
Eu21(t), with ZG(s) 5 Zc. (a) Determine y(x, t) and i(x, t). (b) Plot the voltage and 
current versus time t at the center of the line.
EXAMPLE 13.2

	
Section 13.2 Boundary Conditions for Single-Phase Lossless Lines	
817
SOLUTION
a.  From (13.2.12),
GR(s) 5 lim
ZRS` 
ZR
Zc
2 1
ZR
Zc
1 1
5 1      GS(s) 5 1 2 1
1 1 1 5 0
The Laplace transform of the source voltage is EG(s) 5 E∙s. Then, from (13.2.10) 
and (13.2.11),
V (x, s) 5 E
s  1
1
22[e2sxyv 1 e s[(xyv)22t]]
I (x, s) 5 E
s  1
1
2Zc2[e2sxyv 2 e s[(xyv)22t]]
Taking the inverse Laplace transform,
y (x, t) 5 E
2 u21 1t 2 x
v2 1 E
2
 u211t 1 x
v 2 2t2
i(x, t) 5 E
2Zc
 u21 1t 2 x
v2 2 E
2Zc
 u211t 1 x
v 2 2t2
b.  At the center of the line, where x 5 l∙2,
y 1
l
2, t2 5 E
2 u21 1t 2 t
22 1 E
2
 u211t 2 3t
22
i 1
l
2, t2 5 E
2Zc
 u21 1t 2 t
22 2 E
2Zc
 u211t 2 3t
22
These waves are plotted in Figure 13.5. At t 5 0, the step voltage source of E 
volts encounters the source impedance ZG 5 Zc in series with the characteristic 
impedance of the line, Zc. Using voltage division, the sending-end voltage at t 5 0 
is E∙2. Therefore, a forward traveling step voltage wave of E∙2 volts and a forward 
traveling step current wave of E∙(2Zc) amperes are initiated at the sending end. 
These waves arrive at the center of the line at t 5 t∙2. Also, with GR 5 1, the back-
ward traveling voltage wave equals the forward traveling voltage wave, and the 
backward traveling current wave is the negative of the forward traveling current 
wave. These backward traveling waves, which are initiated at the receiving end at  
t 5 t when the forward traveling waves arrive there, arrive at the center of the line 
at t 5 3t∙2 and are superimposed on the forward traveling waves. No additional 
(Continued )

818	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
forward or backward traveling waves are initiated because the source impedance 
is matched to the line; that is, GS(s) 5 0. In steady-state, the line, which is open at 
the receiving end, is energized at E volts with zero current.
FIGURE 13.5
Voltage and current 
waveforms for 
Example 13.2
Single-phase lossless-line transients: step-voltage source 
matched at sending end, capacitive load at receiving end
The receiving end is terminated by a capacitor with CR farads, which is initially 
unenergized. The source voltage at the sending end is a unit step eG(t) 5 Eu21 (t),  
with ZG 5 Zc. Determine and plot y(x, t) versus time t at the sending end of  
the line.
SOLUTION 
From (13.2.12) with ZR 5
1
sCR
 and ZG 5 Zc,
GR(s) 5
1
sCRZc
2 1
1
sCRZc
1 1
5
2s 1
1
ZcCR
s 1
1
ZcCR
GS(s) 5 1 2 1
1 1 1 5 0
EXAMPLE 13.3

	
Section 13.2 Boundary Conditions for Single-Phase Lossless Lines	
819
Then, from (13.2.10), with EG(s) 5 E∙s,
V(x, s) 5 E
s  1
1
223e2sxyv 11
2s 1
1
ZcCR
s 1
1
ZcCR2e
 s[(xyv)22t]4
5 E
2 3
e2sxyv
s
1 1
s 1
2s 1
1
ZcCR
s 1
1
ZcCR2e
 s[(xyv)22t]4
Using partial fraction expansion of the second term above,
V(x, s) 5 E
23
e2sxyv
s
11
1
s 2
2
s 1
1
ZcCR2
es[(xyv)22t]4
The inverse Laplace transform is
y (x, t) 5 E
2 u211t 2 x
v2 1 E
2 [1 2 2e(21yZcCR)(t1xyv22t)]u211t 1 x
v 2 2t2
At the sending end, where x 5 0,
y (0, t) 5 E
2 u21(t) 1 E
2 [1 2 2e(21yZcCR)(t22t)]u21(t 2 2t)
y(0, t) is plotted in Figure 13.6. As in Example 13.2, a forward traveling step 
voltage wave of E∙2 volts is initiated at the sending end at t 5 0. At t 5 t, when the 
forward traveling wave arrives at the receiving end, a backward traveling wave is ini-
tiated. The backward traveling voltage wave, an exponential with initial value 2E∙2, 
steady-state value 1E∙2, and time constant ZcCR, arrives at the sending end at t 5 2t, 
where it is superimposed on the forward traveling wave. No additional waves are 
initiated, since the source impedance is matched to the line. In steady-state, the line 
and the capacitor at the receiving end are energized at E volts with zero current.
FIGURE 13.6
Voltage waveform 
for Example 13.3
(Continued )

820	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
The capacitor at the receiving end can also be viewed as a short circuit at the 
instant t 5 t, when the forward traveling wave arrives at the receiving end. For a 
short circuit at the receiving end, GR 5 21, and therefore the backward traveling 
voltage wavefront is 2E∙2, the negative of the forward traveling wave. However, 
in steady-state the capacitor is an open circuit, for which GR 5 11, and the steady-
state backward traveling voltage wave equals the forward traveling voltage wave.
Single-phase lossless-line transients: step-voltage source 
with unmatched source resistance at sending end, unmatched 
resistive load at receiving end
At the receiving end, ZR 5 Zc∙3. At the sending end, eG(t) 5 Eu21(t) and ZG 5 2Zc. 
Determine and plot the voltage versus time at the center of the line.
SOLUTION 
From (13.2.12),
GR 5
1
3 2 1
1
3 1 1
5 21
2      GS 5 2 2 1
2 1 1 5 1
3
From (13.2.10), with EG(s) 5 E∙s,
V(x, s) 5 E
s  1
1
32
[e2sxyv 2 1
2es[(xyv)22t]]
1 1 _1
6e22st+
The preceding equation can be rewritten using the following geometric series:
1
1 1 y 5 1 2 y 1 y2 2 y3 1 y4 2 Á
with y 5 1
6e22st,
V(x, s) 5 E
3s 3e2sxyv 2 1
2es[(xyv)22t]4
331 2 1
6e22st 1 1
36e24st 2 1
216e26st 1 Á4
Multiplying the terms within the brackets,
V(x, s) 5 E
3s3e2sxyv 2 1
2
 es[(xyv)22t] 2 1
6
 e2s[(xyv)12t] 1 1
12
 es[(xyv)24t]
1 1
36
 e2s[(xyv)14t] 2 1
72
 es[(xyv)26t] 1 Á4
EXAMPLE 13.4

	
Section 13.2 Boundary Conditions for Single-Phase Lossless Lines	
821
Taking the inverse Laplace transform,
y (x, t) 5 E
3 3u211t 2 x
v2 2 1
2 u21 1t 1 x
v 2 2t2 2 1
6
 u211t 2 x
v 2 2t2
1 1
12 u21 1t 1 x
v 2 4t2 1 1
36
 u211t 2 x
v 2 4t2
2 1
72
 u211t 1 x
v 2 6t2 Á4
At the center of the line, where x 5 l∙2,
y 1
l
2, t2 5 E
3 3u211t 2 t
22 2 1
2 u21 1t 2 3t
22 2 1
6
 u211t 2 5t
22
1 1
12 u211t 2 7t
22 1 1
36 u21 1t 2 9t
22 2 1
72
 u211t 2 11t
2 2 Á4
y(l∙2, t) is plotted in Figure 13.7(a). Since neither the source nor the load is 
matched to the line, the voltage at any point along the line consists of an infinite 
series of forward and backward traveling waves. At the center of the line, the first 
forward traveling wave arrives at t 5 t∙2; then a backward traveling wave arrives at 
3t∙2, another forward traveling wave arrives at 5t∙2, another backward traveling 
wave at 7t∙2, and so on.
The steady-state voltage can be evaluated from the final value theorem. That is,
yss(x) 5 lim
tS`  y (x, t) 5 lim
sS0  sV(x, s)
5 lim
sS0 5s1
E
s2 1
1
32
[e2sxyv 2 1
2es[(xyv)22t]]
1 1 1
6e22st
6
5 E1
1
32 1
1 2 1
2
1 1 1
62 5 E
7
(Continued )
FIGURE 13.7
Example 13.4

822	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
13.3  Bewley Lattice Diagram
A lattice diagram developed by L. V. Bewley [2] conveniently organizes the reflec-
tions that occur during transmission-line transients. For the Bewley lattice diagram, 
shown in Figure 13.8, the vertical scale represents time and is scaled in units of t, 
the transient time of the line. The horizontal scale represents line position x, and 
the diagonal lines represent traveling waves. Each reflection is determined by multi-
plying the incident wave arriving at an end by the reflection coefficient at that end.  
The steady-state solution can also be evaluated from the circuit in  
Figure 13.7(b). Since there is no steady-state voltage drop across the lossless line 
when a dc source is applied, the line can be eliminated, leaving only the source and 
load. The steady-state voltage is then, by voltage division,
yss(x) 5 E1
ZR
ZR 1 ZG2 5 E 1
1
3
1
3 1 22 5 E
7
FIGURE 13.8
Bewley lattice  
diagram for 
Example 13.5

	
Section 13.3 Bewley Lattice Diagram	
823
The voltage y(x, t) at any point x and t on the diagram is determined by adding all 
the terms directly above that point.
Figure 13.10 shows a forward traveling voltage wave V1
A arriving at the junction 
of two lossless lines A and B with characteristic impedances ZA and ZB, respectively. 
Lattice diagram: single-phase lossless line
For the line and terminations given in Example 13.4, draw the lattice diagram and 
plot y(l∙3, t) versus time t.
SOLUTION 
The lattice diagram is shown in Figure 13.8. At t 5 0, the source voltage encoun-
ters the source impedance and the line characteristic impedance, and the first 
forward traveling wave is determined by voltage division:
V1(s) 5 EG(s)3
Zc
Zc 1 ZG4 5 E
s  3
1
1 1 24 5 E
3s
which is a step with magnitude (E∙3) volts. The next traveling wave, a backward 
one, is V2(s) 5 GR(s)V1(s) 5 _21
2+ V1(s) 5 2E∙(6s), and the next wave, a forward one, 
is V3(s) 5 Gs(s) V2(s) 5 _1
3+ V2(s) 5 2E∙(18s). Subsequent waves are calculated in a 
similar manner.
The voltage at x 5 l∙3 is determined by drawing a vertical line at x 5 l∙3 on 
the lattice diagram, shown dashed in Figure 13.8. Starting at the top of the dashed 
line, where t 5 0, and moving down, each voltage wave is added at the time it in-
tersects the dashed line. The first wave V1 arrives at t 5 t∙3, the second y2 arrives 
at 5t∙3, y3 at 7t∙3, and so on. y(l∙3, t) is plotted in Figure 13.9.
EXAMPLE 13.5
FIGURE 13.9
Voltage waveform 
for Example 13.5
FIGURE 13.10
Junction of two 
single-phase  
lossless lines

824	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
This could be, for example, the junction of an overhead line and a cable. When V1
A 
arrives at the junction, both a reflection V2
A on line A and a refraction V1
B on line B 
will occur. Writing a KVL and KCL equation at the junction,
V1
A 1 V2
A 5 V1
B
(13.3.1)
I1
A 1 I2
A 5 I1
B
(13.3.2)
Recall that I1
A 5 V1
AyZA, I2
A 5 2 V2
AyZA, and I1
B 5 V1
ByZB. Using these relations in 
(13.3.2),
V1
A
ZA
2 V2
A
ZA
5 V1
B
ZB

(13.3.3)
Solving (13.3.1) and (13.3.3) for V2
A and V1
B in terms of V1
A yields
V 2
A 5 GAAV1
A
(13.3.4)
where
GAA 5
ZB
ZA
2 1
ZB
ZA
1 1

(13.3.5)
and
V1
B 5 GBAVA
(13.3.6)
where
GBA 5
21
ZB
ZA2
ZB
ZA
1 1

(13.3.7)
Note that GAA, given by (13.3.5), is similar to GR, given by (13.2.12), except that 
ZB replaces ZR. Thus, for waves arriving at the junction from line A, the “load” at the 
receiving end of line A is the characteristic impedance of line B.
Lattice diagram: overhead line connected to a cable,  
single-phase lossless lines
As shown in Figure 13.10, a single-phase lossless overhead line with ZA 5 400 V, 
vA 5 3 3 108 m∙s, and lA 5 30 km is connected to a single-phase lossless cable 
with ZB 5 100 V, vB 5 2 3 108 m∙s, and lB 5 20 km. At the sending end of line A,  
EXAMPLE 13.6

	
Section 13.3 Bewley Lattice Diagram	
825
eg(t) 5 Eu21(t) and ZG 5 ZA. At the receiving end of line B, ZR 5 2ZB 5 200 V. 
Draw the lattice diagram for 0 ≤ t ≤ 0.6 ms and plot the voltage at the junction 
versus time. The line and cable are initially unenergized.
SOLUTION 
From (13.2.13),
tA 5 30 3 103
3 3 108 5 0.1 3 1023   s    tB 5 20 3 103
2 3 108 5 0.1 3 1023   s
From (13.2.12), with ZG 5 ZA and ZR 5 2ZB,
GS 5 1 2 1
1 1 1 5 0      GR 5 2 2 1
2 1 1 5 1
3
From (13.3.5) and (13.3.6), the reflection and refraction coefficients for waves  
arriving at the junction from line A are
GAA 5
100
400 2 1
100
400 1 1
5 23
5       GBA 5
2100
400
100
400 1 1
5 2
56
 from line A
Reversing A and B, the reflection and refraction coefficients for waves returning to 
the junction from line B are
GBB 5
400
100 2 1
400
100 1 1
5 3
5      GAB 5
2400
100
400
100 1 1
5 8
56
 from line B
The lattice diagram is shown in Figure 13.11. Using voltage division, the first 
forward traveling voltage wave is
V1(s) 5 EG(s)1
ZA
ZA 1 ZG2 5 E
s  1
1
22 5 E
2s
When y1 arrives at the junction, a reflected wave y2 and refracted wave y3 are 
initiated. Using the reflection and refraction coefficients for line A,
V2(s) 5 GAAV1(s) 51
23
5 2 1
E
2s2 5 23E
10s
V3(s) 5 GBAV1(s) 51
2
52 1
E
2s2 5 E
5s
(Continued )

826	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
When y2 arrives at the receiving end of line B, a reflected wave V4(s) 5 GRV3(s) 5 
1
3(E∙5s) 5 (E∙15s) is initiated. When y4 arrives at the junction, reflected wave y5 
and refracted wave y6 are initiated. Using the reflection and refraction coefficients 
for line B,
V5(s) 5 GBBV4(s) 51
3
52 1
E
15s2 5 E
25s
V6(s) 5 GABV4(s) 51
8
52 1
E
15s2 5 E
75s
Subsequent reflections and refractions are calculated in a similar manner.
The voltage at the junction is determined by starting at x 5 lA at the top of 
the lattice diagram, where t 5 0. Then, moving down the lattice diagram, voltage 
waves either just to the left or just to the right of the junction are added when they 
occur. For example, looking just to the right of the junction at x 5 l1
A, the voltage 
wave y3, a step of magnitude E∙5 volts occurs at t 5 tA. Then at t 5 (tA 1 2tB), 
FIGURE 13.11
Lattice diagram  
for Example 13.6

	
Section 13.3 Bewley Lattice Diagram	
827
The preceding analysis can be extended to the junction of more than two lossless 
lines, as shown in Figure 13.13. Writing a KVL and KCL equation at the junction for 
a voltage V1
A arriving at the junction from line A,
V1
A 1 V2
A 5 V1
B 5 V1
C 5 V1
D 5 Á 
(13.3.8)
I1
A 1 I2
A 5 I1
B 1 I1
C 1 I1
D 1 Á 
(13.3.9)
Using I1
A 5 V1
AyZA, I2
A 5 2V2
AyZA, I1
B 5 V1
ByZB, and so on in (13.3.9),
V1
A
ZA
2 V2
A
ZA
5 V1
B
ZB
1 V1
C
ZC
1 V1
D
ZD
1 Á
(13.3.10)
Equations (13.3.8) and (13.3.10) can be solved for V1
A, V1
B, V1
C, V1
D, and so on in terms 
of V1
A. (See Problem 13.14.)
two waves y4 and y5, which are steps of magnitude E∙15 and E∙25, are added to y3. 
y(lA, t) is plotted in Figure 13.12.
The steady-state voltage is determined by removing the lossless lines and 
calculating the steady-state voltage across the receiving-end load:
yss(x) 5 E 1
ZR
ZR 1 ZG2 5 E 1
200
200 1 4002 5 E
3
FIGURE 13.12
Junction voltage 
for Example 13.6
FIGURE 13.13
Junction of lossless 
lines A, B, C, D, and 
so on

828	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
13.4  Discrete-Time Models of Single-Phase 
Lossless Lines and Lumped RLC Elements
Our objective in this section is to develop discrete-time models of single-phase 
lossless lines and of lumped RLC elements suitable for computer calculation of 
transmission-line transients at discrete-time intervals t 5 Dt, 2Dt, 3Dt, and so on. 
The discrete-time models are presented as equivalent circuits consisting of lumped 
resistors and current sources. The current sources in the models represent the past 
history of the circuit—that is, the history at times t 2 Dt, t 2 2Dt, and so on. After 
interconnecting the equivalent circuits of all the components in any given circuit, 
nodal equations can then be written for each discrete time. Discrete-time models, first 
developed by L. Bergeron [3], are presented first.
SINGLE-PHASE LOSSLESS LINE
From the general solution of a single-phase lossless line, given by (13.1.12) and 
(13.1.18):
y (x, t) 1 Zci(x, t) 5 2y11t 2 x
v2
(13.4.1)
y (x, t) 2 Zci(x, t) 5 2y21t 1 x
v2
(13.4.2)
In (13.4.1), the left side (y 1 Zci) remains constant when the argument (t 2 x∙v) is 
constant. Therefore, to a fictitious observer traveling at velocity v in the positive x 
direction along the line, (y 1 Zci) remains constant. If t is the transit time from ter-
minal k to terminal m of the line, the value of (y 1 Zci) observed at time (t 2 t) at 
terminal k must equal the value at time t at terminal m. That is,
yk (t 2 t) 1 Zcik(t 2 t) 5 ym(t) 1 Zcim(t)
(13.4.3)
where k and m denote terminals k and m, as shown in Figure 13.14(a).
Similarly, (y 2 Zci) in (13.4.2) remains constant when (t 1 x∙v) is constant. To a 
fictitious observer traveling at velocity v in the negative x direction, (v 2 Zci) remains 
constant. Therefore, the value of (v 2 Zci) at time (t 2 t) at terminal m must equal 
the value at time t at terminal k. That is,
ym (t 2 t) 2 Zcim(t 2 t) 5 yk(t) 2 Zcik(t)
(13.4.4)
FIGURE 13.14
Single-phase two-
wire lossless line

	Section 13.4 Discrete-Time Models of Single-Phase Lossless Lines and Lumped RLC Elements	
829
Equation (13.4.3) is rewritten as
im (t) 5 Im(t 2 t) 2 1
Zc
 ym(t)
(13.4.5)
where
Im (t 2 t) 5 ik(t 2 t) 1 1
Zc
 yk(t 2 t)
(13.4.6)
Similarly, (13.4.4) is rewritten as
ik (t) 5 Ik(t 2 t) 1 1
Zc
 yk(t)
(13.4.7)
where
Ik (t 2 t) 5 im(t 2 t) 2 1
Zc
 ym(t 2 t)
(13.4.8)
Also, using (13.4.7) in (13.4.6),
Im (t 2 t) 5 Ik(t 2 2t) 1 2
Zc
 yk(t 2 t)
(13.4.9)
and using (13.4.5) in (13.4.8),
Ik (t 2 t) 5 Im(t 2 2t) 2 2
Zc
 ym(t 2 t)
(13.4.10)
Equations (13.4.5) and (13.4.7) are represented by the circuit shown in  
Figure 13.14(b). The current sources Im(t 2 t) and Ik (t 2 t) shown in this figure, which 
are given by (13.4.9) and (13.4.10), represent the past history of the transmission line.
Note that in Figure 13.14(b) terminals k and m are not directly connected. The con-
ditions at one terminal are “felt” indirectly at the other terminal after a delay of x seconds.
LUMPED INDUCTANCE
As shown in Figure 13.15 (a) for a constant lumped inductance L,
y (t) 5 L di(t)
dt 
(13.4.11)
Integrating this equation from time (t 2 Dt) to t,
#
t
t2Dt
di(t) 5 1
L #
t
t2Dt
y (t)dt
(13.4.12)
Using the trapezoidal rule of integration,
i(t) 2 i(t 2 Dt) 51
1
L2 1
Dt
22[y (t) 1 y (t 2 Dt)]
Rearranging gives
i(t) 5
y (t)
(2LyDt) 13i(t 2 Dt) 1 y (t 2 Dt)
(2LyDt) 4

830	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
or
i(t) 5
y (t)
(2LyDt) 1 IL(t 2 Dt)
(13.4.13)
where
IL(t 2 Dt) 5 i(t 2 Dt) 1 y (t 2 Dt)
(2LyDt) 5 IL(t 2 2Dt) 1 y (t 2 Dt)
(LyDt) 
(13.4.14)
Equations (13.4.13) and (13.4.14) are represented by the circuit shown in Figure 13.15(b).  
As shown, the inductor is replaced by a resistor with resistance (2L∙Dt) V. A current 
source IL(t 2 Dt) given by (13.4.14) is also included. IL(t 2 Dt) represents the past his-
tory of the inductor. Note that the trapezoidal rule introduces an error of the order (Dt)3.
LUMPED CAPACITANCE
As shown in Figure 13.16 (a) for a constant lumped capacitance C,
i(t) 5 C dy (t)
dt 
(13.4.15)
Integrating from time (t 2 Dt) to t,
#
t
t2Dt
dy (t) 5 1
C #
t
t2Dt
i(t) dt
(13.4.16)
Using the trapezoidal rule of integration,
y (t) 2 y (t 2 Dt) 5 1
C 1
Dt
22 [i(t) 1 i(t 2 Dt)]
FIGURE 13.15
Lumped  
inductance

	Section 13.4 Discrete-Time Models of Single-Phase Lossless Lines and Lumped RLC Elements	
831
Rearranging gives
i(t) 5
y (t)
(Dty2C) 2 IC(t 2 Dt)
(13.4.17)
where
IC(t 2 Dt) 5 i(t 2 Dt) 1 y (t 2 Dt)
(Dty2C) 5 2IC(t 2 2Dt) 1 y (t 2 Dt)
(Dty4C) 
(13.4.18)
Equations (13.4.17) and (13.4.18) are represented by the circuit in Figure 13.16(b).  
The capacitor is replaced by a resistor with resistance (Dt∙2C) V. A current source 
IC(t 2 Dt), which represents the capacitor’s past history, is also included.
LUMPED RESISTANCE
The discrete model of a constant lumped resistance R, as shown in Figure 13.17, is 
the same as the continuous model. That is,
y(t) 5 Ri(t)
(13.4.19)
NODAL EQUATIONS
A circuit consisting of single-phase lossless transmission lines and constant lumped 
RLC elements can be replaced by the equivalent circuits given in Figures 13.14(b), 
13.15(b), 13.16(b), and 13.17(b). Then, writing nodal equations, the result is a set of 
linear algebraic equations that determine the bus voltages at each instant t.
FIGURE 13.16
Lumped  
capacitance
FIGURE 13.17
Lumped resistance
Discrete-time equivalent circuit, single-phase lossless line 
transients, computer solution
For the circuit given in Example 13.3, replace the circuit elements by their 
discrete-time equivalent circuits and write the nodal equations that determine the 
sending-end and receiving-end voltages. Then, using a digital computer, compute 
the sending-end and receiving-end voltages for 0 ≦ t ≦ 9 ms. For numerical calcu-
lations, assume E 5 100 V, Zc 5 400 V, CR 5 5 mF, t 5 1.0 ms, and Dt 5 0.1 ms.
EXAMPLE 13.7
(Continued )

832	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
SOLUTION 
The discrete model is shown in Figure 13.18, where yk(t) represents the  
sending-end voltage y(0, t) and ym(t) represents the receiving-end voltage y(l, t). 
Also, the sending-end voltage source eG(t) in series with ZG is converted to an equiv-
alent current source in parallel with ZG. Writing nodal equations for this circuit,
1
1
400 1 1
4002              0
0              1
1
400 1 1
102  3
yk(t)
ym(t)4 53
1
4 2 Ik(t 2 1.0)
Im(t 2 1.0) 1 IC(t 2 0.1)4

Solving,
yk(t) 5 200[1
4 2 Ik(t 2 1.0)]
(a)
ym(t) 5 9.75610[Im(t 2 1.0) 1 IC(t 2 0.1)]
(b)
The current sources in these equations are, from (13.4.9), (13.4.10), and (13.4.18), 
with the argument (t 2 t) replaced by t,
Im(t) 5 Ik(t 2 1.0) 1 2
400 yk (t)
(c)
Ik(t) 5 Im(t 2 1.0) 2 2
400 ym (t)
(d)
IC(t) 5 2IC(t 2 0.1) 1 1
5 ym (t)
(e)
3
4
FIGURE 13.18
Discrete-time 
equivalent circuit 
for Example 13.7

	Section 13.4 Discrete-Time Models of Single-Phase Lossless Lines and Lumped RLC Elements	
833
Output
Computer Program Listing
Time 
ms
VK 
Volts
VM 
Volts
0.00
50.00
0.00
10 REM EXAMPLE 12.7
0.20
50.00
0.00
20 LPRINT ”TIME VK VM”
0.40
50.00
0.00
30 LPRINT “ms Volts Volts”
0.60
50.00
0.00
40 IC 5 0
0.80
50.00
0.00
50 T 5 0
1.00
50.00
2.44
60 KPRINT 5 2
1.20
50.00
11.73
65 REM T IS TIME. KPRINT DETERMINES THE PRINTOUT INTERVAL.
1.40
50.00
20.13
70 REM LINES 1 10 to 210 COMPUTE EQS(a)2(e) FOR THE FIRST
1.60
50.00
27.73
80 REM TEN TIME STEPS (A TOTAL OF ONE ms) DURING WHICH
1.80
50.00
34.61
90 REM THE CURRENT SOURCES ON THE RIGHT HAND SIDE
2.00
2.44
40.83
100 REM OF THE EQUATIONS ARE ZERO. TEN VALUES OF
2.20
11.73
46.46
105 REM CURRENT SOURCES IK(J) AND IM(J) ARE STORED.
2.40
20.13
51.56
110 FOR J 5 1 TO 10
2.60
27.73
56.17
120 VK 5 200/4
2.80
34.61
60.34
I30 VM 5 9.756I*IC
3.00
40.83
64.12
I40 IM(J) 5 (2/400)*VK
3.20
46.46
67.53
150 IK(J) 5 (22/400)*VM
3.40
51.56
70.62
I60 IC52IC 1 (I/5)*VM
3.60
56.17
73.42
170 Z 5 (J21)/KPRINT
3.80
60.34
75.95
I80 M 5 INT (Z)
4.00
64.12
78.24
190 IF M 5 Z THEN LPRINT USING “*****”; T,VK,VM
4.20
67.53
80.31
200 T 5 T 1 .I
4.40
70.62
82.18
210 NEXT J
4.60
73.42
83.88
220 REM LINES 250 to 420 COMPUTE EQS(a)2(e) FOR TIME T
4.80
75.95
85.41
230 REM EQUAL TO AND GREATER THAN 1.0 ms. THE PAST TEN
5.00
78.24
86.80
240 REM VALUES OF IK(J) AND IM(J) ARE STORED
5.20
80.31
88.06
250 FOR J 5 1 TO 10
5.40
82.18
89.20
260 REM LINE 270 IS EQ(a).
5.60
83.88
90.22
270 VK 5 200*((1 /4)2IK (J))
5.80
85.41
91.15
280 REM LINE 290 IS EQ (b).
6.00
86.80
92.00
290 VM 5 9.756 1*(IM (J) 1 IC)
6.20
88.06
92.76
300 REM LINE 310 IS EQ (e).
6.40
89.20
93.45
3I0 IC52IC 1 (I/5)*VM
6.60
90.22
94.07
320 REM LINES 3302360 ARE EQS (c) and (d).
6.80
91.15
94.64
330 CI 5 IK(J) 1 (2/400)*VK
7.00
92.00
95.15
340 C2 5 IM(J)2(2/400)*VM
7.20
92.76
95.61
350 IM(J) 5 CI
7.40
93.45
96.03
360 IK(J) 5 C2
7.60
94.07
96.40
370 Z 5 (J21)/KPRINT
7.80
94.64
96.75
380 M 5 INT(Z)
8.00
95.15
97.06
390 IF M 5 Z THEN LPRINT USING “*****”; T,VK,VM
8.20
95.61
97.34
400 T 5 T 1.I
8.40
96.03
97.59
410 NEXT J
8.60
96.40
97.82
420 IF T , 9.0 THEN GOTO 250
8.80
96.75
98.03
430 STOP
9.00
97.06
98.22
FIGURE 13.19
Example 13.7
(Continued )

834	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
Example 13.7 can be generalized to compute bus voltages at discrete-time in-
tervals for an arbitrary number of buses, single-phase lossless lines, and lumped RLC 
elements. When current sources instead of voltage sources are employed, the un-
knowns are all bus voltages, for which nodal equations YV 5 I can be written at each 
discrete-time instant. Also, the dependent current sources in I are written in terms 
of bus voltages and current sources at prior times. For computational convenience, 
the time interval Dt can be chosen constant so that the bus admittance matrix Y is a 
constant real symmetric matrix as long as the RLC elements are constant.
13.5  Lossy Lines
Transmission-line series resistance or shunt conductance causes the following:
1.	 Attenuation
2.	 Distortion
3.	 Power losses
A brief discussion of these effects follows.
Equations (a) through (e) above are in a form suitable for digital computer solu-
tion. A scheme for iteratively computing yk and ym is as follows, starting at t 5 0:
	
1.	 Compute yk(t) and ym(t) from equations (a) and (b).
	
2.	 Compute Im(t), Ik(t), and IC(t) from equations (c), (d), and (e). Store Im(t) 
and Ik(t).
	
3.	 Change t to (t 1 Dt) 5 (t 1 0.1) and return to (1) above.
Note that since the transmission line and capacitor are unenergized for time t less 
than zero, the current sources Im( ), Ik( ), and IC( ) are zero whenever their argu-
ments ( ) are negative. Note also from equations (a) through (e) that it is necessary 
to store the past ten values of Im( ) and Ik( ).
A personal computer program written in BASIC that executes the above 
scheme and the computational results are shown in Figure 13.19. The plotted 
sending-end voltage yk(t) can be compared with the results of Example 13.3.
FIGURE 13.19
(Continued )

	
Section 13.5 Lossy Lines	
835
ATTENUATION
When constant series resistance R V∙m and shunt conductance G S∙m are included in 
the circuit of Figure 13.1 for a single-phase two-wire line, (13.1.3) and (13.1.4) become
−y (x, t)
−x
5 2R i(x, t) 2 L−i(x, t)
−t

(13.5.1)
−i(x, t)
−x
5 2G y (x, t) 2 C−y (x, t)
−t

(13.5.2)
Taking the Laplace transform of these, equations analogous to (13.1.7) and (13.1.8) are
d 2V(x, s)
dx2
2 g2(s) V(x, s) 5 0
(13.5.3)
d 2I(x, s)
dx2
2 g2(s)I(x, s) 5 0
(13.5.4)
where
g(s) 5 Ï(R 1 sL)(G 1 sC)
(13.5.5)
The solution to these equations is
V(x, s) 5 V1(s)e2g(s)x 1 V2(s)e1g(s)x
(13.5.6)
I(x, s) 5 I1(s)e2g(s)x 1 I2(s)e1g(s)x
(13.5.7)
In general, it is impossible to obtain a closed form expression for y(x, t) and 
i(x, t), which are the inverse Laplace transforms of these equations. However, for the 
special case of a distortionless line, which has the property R∙L 5 G∙C, the inverse 
Laplace transform can be obtained as follows. Rewrite (13.5.5) as
g(s) 5 ÏLC[(s 1 d)2 2 s2]
(13.5.8)
where
d 5 1
21
R
L 1 G
C2
(13.5.9)
s 5 1
21
R
L 2 G
C2
(13.5.10)
For a distortionless line, s 5 0, d 5 R∙L, and (13.5.6) and (13.5.7) become
V(x, s) 5 V1(s)e2ÏLC [s1(R/L)]x 1 V2(s)e1ÏLC [s1(R/L)]x
(13.5.11)
I(x, s) 5 I1(s)e2ÏLC [s1(R/L)]x 1 I2(s)e1ÏLC [s1(R/L)]x
(13.5.12)
Using v51/ÏLC and ÏLC (R/L) 5 ÏRG 5 a for the distortionless line, the inverse 
transform of these equations is
y(x, t) 5 e2axy11t 2 x
v2 1 e1axy21t 1 x
v2
(13.5.13)

836	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
i(x, t) 5 e2axi11t 2 x
v2 1 eaxi 21t 1 x
v2
(13.5.14)
These voltage and current waves consist of forward and backward traveling waves 
similar to (13.1.12) and (13.1.13) for a lossless line. However, for the lossy distor-
tionless line, the waves are attenuated versus x due to the e6ax terms. Note that the 
attenuation term a 5 ÏRG is constant. Also, the attenuated waves travel at constant 
velocity v 5 1yÏLC Therefore, waves traveling along the distortionless line do not 
change their shape; only their magnitudes are attenuated.
DISTORTION
For sinusoidal steady-state waves, the propagation constant g( jv) is, from (13.5.5), 
with s 5 jv
g( jv) 5 Ï(R 1 jvL)(G 1 jvC) 5 a 1 jb
(13.5.15)
For a lossless line, R 5 G 5 0; therefore, a 5 0, b 5 vÏLC, and the phase velocity 
v 5 vyb 5 1yÏLC is constant. Thus, sinusoidal waves of all frequencies travel at 
constant velocity v without attenuation along a lossless line.
For a distortionless line (R∙L) 5 (G∙C), and g( jv) can be rewritten, using 
(13.5.8) through (13.5.10), as
g(jv) 5ÎLC 1jv 1 R
L2
2
5 ÏLC 1jv 1 R
L2
5 ÏRG 1 j v
v 5 a 1 jb
(13.5.16)
Since a 5 ÏRG and v 5 1/ÏLC are constant, sinusoidal waves of all frequencies 
travel along the distortionless line at constant velocity with constant attenuation—
that is, without distortion.
It can also be shown that for frequencies above 1 MHz, practical transmission 
lines with typical constants R, L, G, and C tend to be distortionless. Above 1 MHz, 
a and b can be approximated by
a . R
2Î
C
L 1 G
2Î
L
C
(13.5.17)
b . vÏLC 5 v
v 
(13.5.18)
Therefore, sinusoidal waves with frequencies above 1 MHz travel along a practical line 
undistorted at constant velocity v 5 1yÏLC with attenuation a given by (13.5.17).
At frequencies below 1 MHz, these approximations do not hold, and lines are 
generally not distortionless. For typical transmission and distribution lines, (R∙L) is 
much greater than (G∙C) by a factor of 1000 or so. Therefore, the condition (R∙L) 5 
(G∙C) for a distortionless line does not hold.

	
Section 13.5 Lossy Lines	
837
Figure 13.20 shows the effect of distortion and attenuation of voltage surges 
based on experiments on a 132-kV overhead transmission line [4]. The shapes of the 
surges at three points along the line are shown. Note how distortion reduces the front 
of the wave and builds up the tail as it travels along the line.
POWER LOSSES
Power losses are associated with series resistance R and shunt conductance G. When 
a current I flows along a line, I2R losses occur, and when a voltage V appears across 
the conductors, V2G losses occur. V2G losses are primarily due to insulator leakage 
and corona for overhead lines, and to dielectric losses for cables. For practical lines 
operating at rated voltage and rated current, I2R losses are much greater than V2G 
losses.
As discussed above, the analysis of transients on single-phase two-wire lossy 
lines with constant parameters R, L, G, and C is complicated. The analysis becomes 
more complicated when skin effect is included, which means that R is not constant 
but frequency-dependent. Additional complications arise for a single-phase line con-
sisting of one conductor with earth return, where Carson [5] has shown that both 
series resistance and inductance are frequency-dependent.
In view of these complications, the solution of transients on lossy lines is 
best handled via digital computation techniques. A single-phase line of length l  
can be approximated by a lossless line with half the total resistance (Rl∙2) V 
lumped in series with the line at both ends. For improved accuracy, the line can 
be divided into various line sections, and each section can be approximated by 
a lossless line section, with a series resistance lumped at both ends. Simulations 
have shown that accuracy does not significantly improve with more than two line 
sections.
Discrete-time equivalent circuits of a single-phase lossless line, shown in  
Figure 13.14, together with a constant lumped resistance, shown in Figure 13.17, can 
be used to approximate a lossy line section, as shown in Figure 13.21. Also, digital 
techniques for modeling frequency-dependent line parameters [6, 7] are available but 
are beyond the scope of this book.
FIGURE 13.20
Distortion and 
attenuation of surges 
on a 132-kV overhead 
line [4] (Lacey, 
H.M., “The lightning 
protection of high-
voltage overhead 
transmission and 
distribution systems,” 
Proceedings of the 
IEE - Part II: Power 
Engineering, vol. 96, 
no. 50, pp. 287–299, 
April 1949. Reprinted 
by permission 
of Institution of 
Engineering and 
Technology.)

838	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
13.6  Multiconductor Lines
Transients on single-phase two-wire lines have been considered until now. For a 
transmission line with n conductors above a ground plane, waves travel in n “modes,” 
where each mode has its own wave velocity and its own surge impedance. In this sec-
tion “model analysis” for a relatively simple three-phase line [8] is illustrated.
Given a three-phase, lossless, completely transposed line consisting of three con-
ductors above a perfectly conducting ground plane, the transmission-line equations are
d V(x, s)
dx
5 2sLI(x, s)
(13.6.1)
d I(x, s)
dx
5 2sCV(x, s)
(13.6.2)
where
V(x, s) 53
Vag(x, s)
Vbg(x, s)
Vcg(x, s)4
    I(x, s) 53
Ia(x, s)
Ib(x, s)
Ic(x, s)4

(13.6.3)
Equations (13.6.1) and (13.6.2) are identical to (13.1.5) and (13.1.6) except that sca-
lar quantities are replaced by vector quantities. V(x, s) is the vector of line-to-ground 
voltages and I(x, s) is the vector of line currents. For a completely transposed line, the 
3 3 3 inductance matrix L and capacitance matrix C are given by
L 53
Ls
Lm
Lm
Lm
Ls
Lm
Lm
Lm
Ls4 Hym
(13.6.4)
FIGURE 13.21
Approximate model of 
a lossy line segment

	
Section 13.6 Multiconductor Lines	
839
C 53
Cs
Cm
Cm
Cm
Cs
Cm
Cm
Cm
Cs4 Fym
(13.6.5)
For any given line configuration, L and C can be computed from the equations 
given in Sections 4.7 and 4.11. Note that Ls, Lm, and Cs are positive, whereas Cm is 
negative.
Now transform the phase quantities to modal quantities. First, define
3
Vag(x, s)
Vbg(x, s)
Vcg(x, s)4
5 TV 3
V0(x, s)
V1(x, s)
V2(x, s)4
(13.6.6)
3
Ia(x, s)
Ib(x, s)
Ic(x, s)4
5 TI 3
I0(x, s)
I1(x, s)
I2(x, s)4
(13.6.7)
V0(x, s), V1(x, s), and V2(x, s) are denoted zero-mode, positive-mode, and negative-
mode voltages, respectively. Similarly, I0(x, s), I1(x, s), and I2(x, s) are zero-, positive-, 
and negative-mode currents. TV and TI are 3 3 3 constant transformation matrices, 
soon to be specified. Denoting Vm(x, s) and Im(x, s) as the modal voltage and modal 
current vectors,
V(x, s)5TVVm(x, s)
(13.6.8) 
I(x, s)5TI Im(x, s)
(13.6.9) 
Using (13.6.8) and (13.6.9) in (13.6.1),
TV 5
d  Vm(x, s)
dx
5 2sLTIIm(x, s)
or
d  Vm(x, s)
dx
5 2s(TV
21LTI) Im (x, s)
(13.6.10)
Similarly, using (13.6.8) and (13.6.9) in (13.6.2),
d  Im(x, s)
dx
5 2s(TI
21CTV) Vm (x, s)
(13.6.11)
The objective of the modal transformation is to diagonalize the matrix prod-
ucts within the parentheses of (13.6.10) and (13.6.11), thereby decoupling these 
vector equations. For a three-phase completely transposed line, TV and TI are 
given by
TV 5 TI 53
1
1
1
1
22
1
1
1
224
(13.6.12)

840	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
Also, the inverse transformation matrices are
T21
V 5 T21
I
5 1
33
1
1
1
1
21
0
1
0
214
(13.6.13)
Substituting (13.6.12), (13.6.13), (13.6.4), and (13.6.5) into (13.6.10) and (13.6.11) 
yields
d
dx 3
V0(x, s)
V1(x, s)
V2(x, s)4 5 3
2s(Ls 1 2Lm)
0
0
0
2s(Ls 2 Lm)
0
0
0
2s(Ls 2 Lm)4
33
I0(x, s)
I1(x, s)
I2(x, s)4
(13.6.14)
d
dx 3
I0(x, s)
I1(x, s)
I2(x, s)4 5 3
2s(Cs 1 2Cm)
0
0
0
2s(Cs 2 Cm)
0
0
0
2s(Cs 2 Cm)4
33
V0(x, s)
V1(x, s)
V2(x, s)4
(13.6.15)
From (13.6.14) and (13.6.15), the zero-mode equations are
d V0(x, s)
dx
5 2s(Ls 1 2Lm)I0(x, s)
(13.6.16)
d I0(x, s)
dx
5 2s(Cs 1 2Cm)V0(x, s)
(13.6.17)
These equations are identical in form to those of a two-wire lossless line, (13.1.5) and 
(13.1.6). By analogy, the zero-mode waves travel at velocity
v0 5
1
Ï(Ls 1 2Lm) (Cs 1 2Cm) m/s
(13.6.18)
and the zero-mode surge impedance is
Zc
0 5Î
Ls 1 2Lm
Cs 1 2Cm V
(13.6.19)
Similarly, the positive- and negative-mode velocities and surge impedances are
v1 5 v2 5
1
Ï(Ls 2 Lm)(Cs 2 Cm) mys
(13.6.20)

	
Section 13.7 Power System Overvoltages	
841
Zc
1 5 Zc
2 5Î
Ls 2 Lm
Cs 2 Cm V
(13.6.21)
These equations can be extended to more than three conductors—for exam-
ple, to a three-phase line with shield wires or to a double-circuit three-phase line. 
Although the details are more complicated, the modal transformation is straight-
forward. There is one mode for each conductor, and each mode has its own wave 
velocity and its own surge impedance.
The solution of transients on multiconductor lines is best handled via digital 
computer methods, and such programs are available [9, 10]. Digital techniques are 
also available to model the following effects:
1.	 Nonlinear and time-varying RLC elements [8]
2.	 Lossy lines with frequency-dependent line parameters [6, 7, 12]
13.7  Power System Overvoltages
Overvoltages encountered by power system equipment are of three types:
1.	 Lightning surges
2.	 Switching surges
3.	 Power frequency (50 or 60 Hz) overvoltages
LIGHTNING
Cloud-to-ground (CG) lightning is the greatest single cause of overhead transmis-
sion and distribution line outages. Data obtained over a 14-year period from elec-
tric utility companies in the United States and Canada and covering 25,000 miles of 
transmission show that CG lightning accounted for about 26% of outages on 230-kV 
circuits and about 65% of outages on 345-kV circuits [13]. A similar study in Britain, 
also over a 14-year period, covering 50,000 faults on distribution lines, shows that CG 
lightning accounted for 47% of outages on circuits up to and including 33 kV [14].
The electrical phenomena that occur within clouds leading to a lightning strike 
are complex and not totally understood. Several theories [15, 16, 17] generally agree, 
however, that charge separation occurs within clouds. Wilson [15] postulates that 
falling raindrops attract negative charges and therefore leave behind masses of pos-
itively charged air. The falling raindrops bring the negative charge to the bottom of 
the cloud, and upward air drafts carry the positively charged air and ice crystals to 
the top of the cloud, as shown in Figure 13.22. Negative charges at the bottom of the 
cloud induce a positively charged region, or “shadow,” on the earth directly below 
the cloud. The electric field lines shown in Figure 13.22 originate from the positive 
charges and terminate at the negative charges.
When voltage gradients reach the breakdown strength of the humid air within 
the cloud, typically 5 to 15 kV∙cm, an ionized path or downward leader moves from 
the cloud toward the earth. The leader progresses somewhat randomly along an  

842	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
irregular path, in steps. These leader steps, about 50 m long, move at a velocity 
of about 105 m∙s. As a result of the opposite charge distribution under the cloud,  
another upward leader may rise to meet the downward leader. When the two leaders 
meet, a lightning discharge occurs, which neutralizes the charges.
The current involved in a CG lightning stroke typically rises to a peak value 
within 1 to 10 ms, and then diminishes to one-half the peak within 20 to 100 ms. The 
distribution of peak currents is shown in Figure 13.23 [20]. This curve represents 
the percentage of strokes that exceed a given peak current. For example, 50% of all 
strokes have a peak current greater than 45 kA. In extreme cases, the peak current 
can exceed 200 kA. Also, test results indicate that approximately 90% of all strokes 
are negative.
FIGURE 13.22
Postulation of charge 
separation within 
clouds [16] (Based 
on G. B. Simpson 
and F. J. Scrase, 
“The Distribution 
of Electricity in 
Thunderclouds”, 
Proceedings of the 
Royal Society A: 
Mathematical, 
Physical and 
Engineering Sciences, 
161 (1937), p. 309)
FIGURE 13.23
Frequency of  
occurrence of 
lightning currents 
that exceed a given 
peak value [20] (IEEE 
Std C62.22-1997: 
IEEE Guide for the 
Application of  
Metal-Oxide Surge 
Arresters for 
Alternating-Current 
Systems. Reprinted 
with permission 
from IEEE. Copyright 
IEEE 1997. All rights 
reserved.)

	
Section 13.7 Power System Overvoltages	
843
It has also been shown that what appears to the eye as a single flash of lightning 
is often the cumulative effect of many strokes. A typical flash consists of typically  
3 to 5, and occasionally as many as 40, strokes, at intervals of 50 ms.
The U.S. National Lightning Detection Network® (NLDN), owned and op-
erated by Vaisala-GAI, Inc., is a system that senses the electromagnetic fields radi-
ated by individual return strokes in CG flashes. As of 2001, the NLDN employed 
more than 100 ground-based sensors geographically distributed throughout the  
48 contiguous United States. The sensors transmit lightning data to a network con-
trol center in Tucson, Arizona via a satellite communication system. Data from the 
remote sensors are recorded and processed in real time at the network control center 
to provide the time, location, polarity, and an estimate of the peak current in each  
return stroke. The real-time data are then sent back through the communications  
network for satellite broadcast dissemination to real-time users, all within 30240 sec-
onds of each CG lightning flash. Recorded data are also reprocessed off-line within a 
few days of acquisition and stored in a permanent database for access by users who 
do not require real-time information. NLDN’s archive data library contains over  
160 million flashes dating from 1989 [25, www.LightningStorm.com].
Figure 13.24 shows a lightning flash density contour map providing a repre-
sentation of measured annual CG flash density detected by the NLDN from 1989 
to 1998. As shown, average annual CG lightning flash densities range from about  
0.1 flashes/km2/year near the West Coast to more than 14 flashes/km2/year in portions 
FIGURE 13.24
Lightning flash density contour map showing annual CG flash densities (#flashes/km2/year) in the contiguous United States, 
as detected by the NLDN from 1989 to 1998 (Courtesy of Vaisala, Inc.)

844	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
of the Florida peninsula. Figure 13.25 shows a high-resolution, 2 mi 3 2 mi, CG 
flash density map in grid format.
Figure 13.26 shows an “asset exposure map” of all CG strikes in 1995 in a region 
that contains a 15-mile 69-kV transmission line. This map provides an indication of the 
level of exposure to lightning within an exposure area that surrounds the transmission 
line. By combining this data with estimates of peak stroke currents and transmission 
line fault records, the lightning performance of the line and individual line segments can 
be quantified. Improvements in line design and line protection can also be evaluated.
FIGURE 13.26
Asset exposure map 
showing CG strikes in 
1995 in a region that 
contains a 15-mile 
69-kV transmission 
line (Courtesy of 
Vaisala, Inc.)
HAMILTON
Ohio
KENTON
CAMPBELL
kentucky
BOONE
Customer Facility
Ohio River
Ohio River
FIGURE 13.25
High-resolution CG 
flash density map in 
grid format (Courtesy 
of Vaisala, Inc.)

	
Section 13.7 Power System Overvoltages	
845
Electric utilities use real-time lightning maps to monitor the approach of light-
ning storms, estimate their severity, and then either position repair crews in advance 
of storms, call them out, or hold them over as required. Utilities also use real-time 
lightning data together with on-line monitoring of circuit breakers, relays, and/or 
substation alarms to improve operations, minimize or avert damage, and speed up 
the restoration of their systems.
A typical transmission-line design goal is to have an average of less than 0.50 
lightning outages per year per 100 miles of transmission. For a given overhead line 
with a specified voltage rating, the following factors affect this design goal:
1.	 Tower height
2.	 Number and location of shield wires
3.	 Number of standard insulator discs per phase wire
4.	 Tower impedance and tower-to-ground impedance
It is well known that lightning strikes tall objects. Thus, shorter, H-frame structures 
are less susceptible to lightning strokes than taller, lattice towers. Also, shorter span 
lengths with more towers per kilometer can reduce the number of strikes.
Shield wires installed above phase conductors can effectively shield the phase 
conductors from direct lightning strokes. Figure 13.27 illustrates the effect of shield 
wires. Experience has shown that the chance of a direct hit to phase conductors  
located within 6308 arcs beneath the shield wires is reduced by a factor of 1000 [18].  
Some lightning strokes are, therefore, expected to hit these overhead shield wires. 
When this occurs, traveling voltage and current waves propagate in both directions 
along the shield wire that is hit. When a wave arrives at a tower, a reflected wave  
returns toward the point where the lightning hit, and two refracted waves occur. One 
refracted wave moves along the shield wire into the next span. Since the shield wire is 
electrically connected to the tower, the other refracted wave moves down the tower, 
its energy being harmlessly diverted to ground.
FIGURE 13.27
Effect of shield wires

846	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
However, if the tower impedance or tower-to-ground impedance is too high, IZ 
voltages that are produced could exceed the breakdown strength of the insulator discs 
that hold the phase wires. The number of insulator discs per string (see Table 4.1) is 
selected to avoid insulator flashover. Also, tower impedances and tower footing resis-
tances are designed to be as low as possible. If the inherent tower construction does not 
give a naturally low resistance to ground, driven ground rods can be employed. Some-
times buried conductors running under the line (called counterpoise) are employed.
SWITCHING SURGES
The magnitudes of overvoltages due to lightning surges are not significantly affected 
by the power system voltage. On the other hand, overvoltages due to switching surges 
are directly proportional to system voltage. Consequently, lightning surges are less 
important for EHV transmission above 345 kV and for UHV transmission, which 
has improved insulation. Switching surges become the limiting factor in insulation 
coordination for system voltages above 345 kV.
One of the simplest and largest overvoltages can occur when an open-circuited 
line is energized, as shown in Figure 13.28. Assume that the circuit breaker closes at 
the instant the sinusoidal source voltage has a peak value Ï2 V. Assuming zero source 
impedance, a forward traveling voltage wave of magnitude Ï2 V occurs. When this 
wave arrives at the open-circuited receiving end, where GR 5 11, the reflected voltage wave 
superimposed on the forward wave results in a maximum voltage of 2Ï2 V 5 2.83 V. 
Even higher voltages can occur when a line is reclosed after momentary interruption.
In order to reduce overvoltages due to line energizing or reclosing, resistors are 
almost always preinserted in circuit breakers at 345 kV and above. Resistors ranging 
from 200 to 800 V are preinserted when EHV circuit breakers are closed, and subse-
quently bypassed. When a circuit breaker closes, the source voltage divides across the 
preinserted resistors and the line, thereby reducing the initial line voltage. When the 
resistors are shorted out, a new transient is initiated, but the maximum line voltage 
can be substantially reduced by careful design.
Dangerous overvoltages can also occur during a single line-to-ground fault on 
one phase of a transmission line. When such a fault occurs, a voltage equal and op-
posite to that on the faulted phase occurs at the instant of fault inception. Traveling 
waves are initiated on both the faulted phase and, due to capacitive coupling, the 
unfaulted phases. At the line ends, reflections are produced and are superimposed 
on the normal operating voltages of the unfaulted phases. Kimbark and Legate [19] 
show that a line-to-ground fault can create an overvoltage on an unfaulted phase as 
high as 2.1 times the peak line-to-neutral voltage of the three-phase line.
FIGURE 13.28
Energizing an  
open-circuited line

	
Section 13.8 Insulation Coordination	
847
POWER FREQUENCY OVERVOLTAGES
Sustained overvoltages at the fundamental power frequency (60 Hz in the United 
States) or at higher harmonic frequencies (such as 120 Hz, 180 Hz, and so on) occur 
due to load rejection, to ferroresonance, or to permanent faults. These overvoltages 
are normally of long duration, seconds to minutes, and are weakly damped.
13.8  Insulation Coordination
Insulation coordination is the process of correlating electric equipment insulation 
strength with protective device characteristics so that the equipment is protected against 
expected overvoltages. The selection of equipment insulation strength and the protected 
voltage level provided by protective devices depends on engineering judgment and cost.
As shown by the top curve in Figure 13.29, equipment insulation strength is a 
function of time. Equipment insulation can generally withstand high transient over-
voltages only if they are of sufficiently short duration. However, determination of 
insulation strength is somewhat complicated. During repeated tests with identical 
voltage waveforms under identical conditions, equipment insulation may fail one test 
and withstand another.
For purposes of insulation testing, a standard impulse voltage wave, as shown 
in Figure 13.30, is defined. The impulse wave shape is specified by giving the time  
T1 in microseconds for the voltage to reach its peak value and the time T2 for the 
FIGURE 13.29
Equipment insulation 
strength
FIGURE 13.30
Standard impulse 
voltage waveform

848	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
voltage to decay to one-half its peak. One standard wave is a 1.2 3 50 wave, which 
rises to a peak value at T1 5 1.2 ms and decays to one-half its peak at T2 5 50 ms.
Basic insulation level or BIL is defined as the peak value of the standard im-
pulse voltage wave in Figure 13.30. Standard BILs adopted by the IEEE are shown 
in Table 13.1. Equipment conforming to these BILs must be capable of withstanding 
repeated applications of the standard waveform of positive or negative polarity with-
out insulation failure. Also, these standard BILs apply to equipment regardless of 
how it is grounded. For nominal system voltages 115 kV and above, solidly grounded 
equipment with the reduced BILs shown in the table have been used.
BILs are often expressed in per-unit, where the base voltage is the maximum 
value of nominal line-to-ground system voltage. Consider for example a 345-kV  
system, for which the maximum value of nominal line-to-ground voltage is 
Ï2(345yÏ3) 5 281.7 kV. The 1550-kV standard BIL shown in Table 13.1 is then 
(1550/281.7) 5 5.5 per unit.
Nominal System Voltage 
kV rms
Standard BIL 
kV
Reduced BIL* 
kV
1.2
45
2.5
60
5.0
75
8.7
95
15
110
23
150
34.5
200
46
250
69
350
92
450
115
550
450
138
650
550
161
750
650
196
900
750
230
1050
8252900
287
1300
100021100
345
1550
117521300
500
130021800
765
167522300
TABLE  13.1
Standard and reduced basic insulation levels [18]
*For solidly grounded systems
These BILs are based on 1.2 3 50 ms voltage waveforms. They apply to internal (or non-self-restoring) 
insulation such as transformer insulation, as well as to external (or self-restoring) insulation, such as 
transmission-line insulation, on a statistical basis.
(Based on Westinghouse Electric Corporation, Electrical Transmission and Distribution Reference Book, 
4th ed. (East Pittsburgh, PA: 1964).)

	
Section 13.8 Insulation Coordination	
849
Note that overhead-transmission-line insulation, which is external insulation, is 
usually self-restoring. When a transmission-line insulator string flashes over, a short 
circuit occurs. After circuit breakers open to deenergize the line, the insulation of the 
string usually recovers, and the line can be rapidly reenergized. However, transformer 
insulation, which is internal, is not self-restoring. When transformer insulation fails, 
the transformer must be removed for repair or replaced.
To protect equipment such as a transformer against overvoltages higher than 
its BIL, a protective device, such as that shown in Figure 13.31, is employed. Such 
protective devices are generally connected in parallel with the equipment from each 
phase to ground. As shown in Figure 13.29, the function of the protective device is to 
maintain its voltage at a ceiling voltage below the BIL of the equipment it protects. 
The difference between the equipment breakdown voltage and the protective device 
ceiling voltage is the protection margin.
Protective devices should satisfy the following four criteria:
1.	 Provide a high or infinite impedance during normal system voltages, to 
minimize steady-state losses;
2.	 Provide a low impedance during surges, to limit voltage;
3.	 Dissipate or store the energy in the surge without damage to itself; and
4.	 Return to open-circuit conditions after the passage of a surge.
One of the simplest protective devices is the rod gap, two metal rods with a 
fixed air gap, which is designed to spark over at specified overvoltages. Although it 
satisfies the first two protective device criteria, it dissipates very little energy and it 
cannot clear itself after arcing over.
A surge arrester, consisting of an air gap in series with a nonlinear silicon car-
bide resistor, satisfies all four criteria. The gap eliminates losses at normal voltages 
and arcs during overvoltages. The resistor has the property that its resistance de-
creases sharply as the current through it increases, thereby limiting the voltage across 
the resistor to a specified ceiling. The resistor also dissipates the energy in the surge. 
Finally, following the passage of a surge, various forms of arc control quench the 
arc within the gap and restore the surge arrester to normal open-circuit conditions.
The “gapless” surge arrester, consisting of a nonlinear metal oxide resistor 
with no air gap, also satisfies all four criteria. At normal voltages the resistance is 
extremely high, limiting steady-state currents to microamperes and steady-state 
losses to a few watts. During surges, the resistance sharply decreases, thereby limiting 
FIGURE 13.31
Single-line diagram 
of equipment and 
protective device

850	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
overvoltage while dissipating surge energy. After the surge passes, the resistance nat-
urally returns to its original high value. One advantage of the gapless arrester is that 
its ceiling voltage is closer to its normal operating voltage than is the conventional 
arrester, thus permitting reduced BILs and potential savings in the capital cost of 
equipment insulation.
There are four classes of surge arresters: station, intermediate, distribution, and 
secondary. Station arresters, which have the heaviest construction, are designed for 
the greatest range of ratings and have the best protective characteristics. Intermediate 
arresters, which have moderate construction, are designed for systems with nominal 
voltages of 138 kV and below. Distribution arresters are employed with lower-voltage 
transformers and lines, where there is a need for economy. Secondary arresters are 
used for nominal system voltages below 1000 V. A summary of the protective char-
acteristics of station- and intermediate-class metal-oxide surge arresters is given in 
Table 13.2 [20]. This summary is based on manufacturers’ catalog information.
Note that arrester currents due to lightning surges are generally less than 
the lightning currents shown in Figure 13.23. In the case of direct strokes to  
transmission-line phase conductors, traveling waves are set up in two directions from 
the point of the stroke. Flashover of line insulation diverts part of the lightning 
current from the arrester. Only in the case of a direct stroke to a phase conductor 
very near an arrester, where no line flash-over occurs, does the arrester discharge 
the full lightning current. The probability of this occurrence can be significantly  
Metal-oxide surge arrester selection
Consider the selection of a station-class metal-oxide surge arrester for a 345-kV 
system in which the maximum 60-Hz voltage under normal system conditions 
is 1.04 per unit. (a) Select a station-class arrester from Table 13.2 with a max-
imum continuous operating voltage (MCOV) rating that exceeds the 1.04 per-
unit maximum 60-Hz voltage of the system under normal system conditions. 
(b) For the selected arrester, determine the protective margin for equipment in 
the system with a 1300-kV BIL, based on a 10-kA impulse current wave cresting 
in 0.5 ms.
SOLUTION 
a.  The maximum 60 Hz line-to-neutral voltage under normal system conditions 
is 1.04(345/Ï3) 5 207 kV. From Table 13.2, select a station-class surge arrester 
with a 209-kV MCOV. This is the lowest MCOV rating that exceeds the 207 kV 
providing the greatest protective margin as well as economy. 
b.  From Table 13.2 for the selected surge arrester, the maximum discharge  
voltage for a 10-kA impulse current wave cresting in 0.5 ms ranges from 2.19 
to 2.36 in per-unit of MCOV, or 457–493 kV, depending on arrester manufac-
turer. Therefore, the protective margin ranges from (1300 2 493) 5 807 kV to  
(1300 2 457) 5 843 kV.
EXAMPLE 13.8

	
Section 13.8 Insulation Coordination	
851
Station Class
Steady-state operation system voltage and arrester  
ratings effectively grounded systems (NOTE 1)
Protective levels range of industry 
maxima per unit (crest of 60hz) of MCOV
Durability characteristics 
IEEE Std C62.11-2005
Max 
system 
rms L-L 
voltage kV*
Max system 
rms L-G 
voltage kV*
Min rms 
MCOV 
rating kV
Duty-cycle 
rms voltage 
rating kV
0.5 ms FOW 
protective 
level  
(NOTE 2)
8/20 ms 
protective 
level  
(NOTE 3)
Switching 
surge 
protective 
level  
(NOTE 4)
High crest 
current 
withstand 
A
Trans. line 
discharge 
Miles
Pressure 
relief rms 
(symmetrical) 
current kA 
(NOTE 5)
4.37
2.52
2.55
3
2.32–2.48
2.10–2.20
1.70–1.85
65 000
150
40–80
8.73
5.04
5.1
6–9
2.33–2.48
1.97–2.23
1.70–1.85
65 000
150
40–80
13.1
7.56
7.65
9–12
2.33–2.48
1.97–2.23
1.70–1.85
65 000
150
40–80
13.9
8.00
8.4
10–15
2.33–2.48
1.97–2.23
1.70–1.85
65 000
150
40–80
14.5
8.37
8.4
10–15
2.33–2.48
1.97–2.23
1.70–1.85
65 000
150
40–80
26.2
15.1
15.3
18–27
2.33–2.48
1.97–2.23
1.70–1.85
65 000
150
40–80
36.2
20.9
22
27–36
2.43–2.48
1.97–2.23
1.70–1.85
65 000
150
40–80
48.3
27.8
29
36–48
2.43–2.48
1.97–2.23
1.70–1.85
65 000
150
40–80
72
41.8
42
54–72
2.19–2.40
1.97–2.18
1.64–1.84
65 000
150
40–80
121
69.8
70
90–120
2.19–2.40
1.97–2.18
1.64–1.84
65 000
150
40–80
145
83.7
84
108–144
2.19–2.39
1.97–2.17
1.64–1.84
65 000
150
40–80
169
97.5
98
120–172
2.19–2.39
1.97–2.17
1.64–1.84
65 000
175
40–80
242
139
140
172–240
2.19–2.36
1.97–2.15
1.64–1.84
65 000
175
40–80
362
209
209
258–312
2.19–2.36
1.97–2.15
1.71–1.85
65 000
200
40–80
550
317
318
396–564
2.01–2.47
2.01–2.25
1.71–1.85
65 000
200
40–80
800
461
462
576–612
2.01–2.47
2.01–2.25
1.71–1.85
65 000
200
40–80
Intermediate class
4.37–145
2.52–83.7
2.8–84
3–144
2.38–2.85
2.28–2.55
1.71–1.85
65 000
100
16.1
TABLE  13.2
Typical characteristics of station- and intermediate-class metal-oxide surge arresters [20]
*Voltage Range A, ANSI C84.1-2006
NOTE 1—See Table 8 and 6.4 for typical arrester ratings for systems with noneffectively grounded neutral.
NOTE 2—Equivalent FOW producing a voltage wave cresting in 0.5 ms.
NOTE 3—The protective level is the maximum discharge voltage for a 10 kA impulse current wave on arrester duty-cycle rating through 312 kV, 15 kA for duty-cycle ratings 396 
kV to  564 kV, and 20 kA for duty-cycle ratings 576 kV to 612 kV, per IEEE Std C62.11-2005.
NOTE 4—Switching surge characteristics based on maximum switching surge classifying current (based on an impulse current wave a time to actual crest of 45 ms to 60ms) of 
500 A on arrester duty-cycle ratings 3 kV to 108 kV, 1000 A on duty-cycle ratings 120 kV to 240 kV, and 2000 A on duty-cycle ratings above 240 kV, per IEEE Std C62.11-2005.
NOTE 5—Test values for arresters with procelain tops have not been standardized, Pressure relief classification is in 5 kA. steps.
(IEEE std. C62.22- 2009. IEEE Guide for the Application of Metal-Oxide Surge Arresters for Alternating-Current Systems. Reprinted with permission from IEEE. Copyright IEEE 1997. 
All rights reserved.)

852	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
reduced by using overhead shield wires to shield transmission lines and substations. 
Recommended practice for substations with unshielded lines is to select an arrester 
discharge current of at least 20 kA (even higher if the isokeraunic level is above 40 
thunderstorm days per year). For substations with shielded lines, lower arrester dis-
charge currents, from 5 to 20 kA, have been found satisfactory in most situations [20].
When selecting a metal-oxide surge arrester, it is important that the arrester 
MCOV exceeds the maximum 60-Hz system voltage (line-to-neutral) under normal 
conditions. In addition to considerations affecting the selection of arrester MCOV, 
metal-oxide surge arresters should also be selected to withstand temporary overvolt-
ages in the system at the arrester location—for example, the voltage rise on unfaulted 
phases during line-to-ground faults. That is, the temporary overvoltage (TOV) capa-
bility of metal-oxide surge arresters should not be exceeded. Additional consider-
ations in the selection of metal-oxide surge arresters are discussed in reference [22] 
(see www.cooperpower.com).
PROBLEMS
SECTION 13.2
13.1	 From the results of Example 13.2, plot the voltage and current profiles 
along the line at times t∙2, t, and 2t. That is, plot y(x, t∙2) and i(x, t∙2) 
versus x for 0 ⩽ x ⩽1; then plot y(x, t), i(x,x), y(x,2t), and i(x,2x) versus x.
13.2	 Rework Example 13.2 if the source voltage at the sending end is a ramp, 
eG(t) 5 Eu22M 5 Etu21(t), with ZG 5 2Zc.
13.3	 Referring to the single-phase two-wire lossless line shown in Figure 13.3, 
the receiving end is terminated by an inductor with 2LR henries. The 
source voltage at the sending end is a step, eG(t) 5 Eu21(t) with ZG 5 Zc. 
Both the line and inductor are initially unenergized. Determine and plot 
the voltage at the center of the line y(l∙2, t) versus time t.
13.4	 Rework Problem 13.3 if ZR 5 Zc at the receiving end and the source 
voltage at the sending end is eG(t) 5 Eu21(t), with an inductive source 
impedance ZG(s) 5 s2LG. Both the line and source inductor are initially 
unenergized.
13.5	 Rework Example 13.4 with ZR 5 5Zc and ZG 5 Zc∙3.
13.6	 The single-phase, two-wire lossless line in Figure 13.3 has a series induc-
tance L 5 (1∙3) 3 1026 H∙m, a shunt capacitance C 5 (1/3) 3 10210 F∙m, 
and a 50-km line length. The source voltage at the sending end is a step 
eG(t) 5 100u21(t) kV with ZG(s) 5 100 V. The receiving-end load consists 
of a 100-V resistor in parallel with a 2-mH inductor. The line and load 
are initially unenergized. Determine (a) the characteristic impedance in 
ohms, the wave velocity in m∙s, and the transit time in ms for this line;  
(b) the sending-and receiving-end voltage reflection coefficients in per-
unit; (c) the Laplace transform of the receiving-end current, IR(s); and 
(d) the receiving-end current iR(t) as a function of time.

13.7	 The single-phase, two-wire lossless line in Figure 13.3 has a series induc-
tance L 5 2 3 1026 H∙m, a shunt capacitance C 5 1.25 3 10211 F∙m, and a 
100-km line length. The source voltage at the sending end is a step eG(t) 5 
100u21(t) kV with a source impedance equal to the characteristic imped-
ance of the line. The receiving-end load consists of a 100-mH inductor in 
series with a 1-mF capacitor. The line and load are initially unenergized. 
Determine (a) the characteristic impedance in V, the wave velocity in m/s, 
and the transit time in ms for this line; (b) the sending- and receiving-end 
voltage reflection coefficients in per-unit; (c) the receiving-end voltage  
yR(t) as a function of time; and (d) the steady-state receiving-end voltage.
13.8	 The single-phase, two-wire lossless line in Figure 13.3 has a series induc-
tance L 5 0.999 3 1026 H∙m, a shunt capacitance C 5 1.112 3 10211 F∙m, 
and a 60-km line length. The source voltage at the sending end is a 
ramp eG(t) 5 Etu21(t) 5 Eu22(t) kV with a source impedance equal to 
the characteristic impedance of the line. The receiving-end load consists 
of a 150-V resistor in parallel with a 1-mF capacitor. The line and load 
are initially unenergized. Determine (a) the characteristic impedance 
in V, the wave velocity in m∙s, and the transit time in ms for this line;  
(b) the sending- and receiving-end voltage reflection coefficients in per-
unit; (c) the Laplace transform of the sending-end voltage, VS(s); and  
(d) the sending-end voltage yS(t) as a function of time.
SECTION 13.3
13.9	 Draw the Bewley lattice diagram for Problem 13.5.
13.10	 Rework Problem 13.9 if the source voltage is a pulse of magnitude E and 
duration t∙10; that is, eG(t) 5 E[u21(t) 2 u21(t 2 t∙10)]. ZR 5 5Zc and ZG 5 
Zc∙3 are the same as in Problem 13.9.  Also plot y(1∙3, t) versus time t 
for 0 ≤ t , 6t.
13.11	 Rework Example 13.6 if the source impedance at the sending end of 
line A is ZG 5 ZA∙4 5 100 V, and the receiving end of line B is short- 
circuited, ZR 5 0.
13.12	 Rework Example 13.6 if the overhead line and cable are interchanged. 
That is, ZA 5 100 V, vA 5 2 3 108 m∙s, lA 5 20 km, ZB 5 400 V, vB 5 
3 3 108 m∙s, and lB 5 30 km. The step voltage source eG(t) 5 Eu21(t) is 
applied to the sending end of line A with ZG 5 ZA 5 100 V, and ZR 5 
2ZB 5 800 V, at the receiving end. Draw the lattice diagram for 0 ≤ t ≤ 
0.6 ms and plot the junction voltage versus time t.
13.13	 As shown in Figure 13.32, a single-phase two-wire lossless line with Zc 5 
400 V, v 5 3 3 108 m∙s, and 1 5 100 km has a 400-V resistor, denoted RJ, 
installed across the center of the line, thereby dividing the line into two 
sections, A and B. The source voltage at the sending end is a pulse of mag-
nitude 100 V and duration 0.1 ms. The source impedance is ZG 5 Zc 5 
400 V, and the receiving end of the line is short-circuited, (a) Show that 
	
Problems	
853

854	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
for an incident voltage wave arriving at the center of the line from either 
line section, the voltage reflection and refraction coefficients are given by
GBB 5 GAA 51
Zeq
Zc2 2 1
1
Zeq
Zc2 1 1  GAB 5 GBA 5
21
Zeq
Zc2
1
Zeq
Zc2 1 1
	
where
Zeq 5
RJZc
RJ 1 Zc
	
(b) Draw the Bewley lattice diagram for 0 ≤ t ≤ 6t. (c) Plot y(1∙2, t) ver-
sus time t for 0 ≤ t ≤ 6 t  and plot y(x, 6t) versus x for 0 ≤ x ≤ l.
13.14	 The junction of four single-phase two-wire lossless lines, denoted A, B, 
C, and D, is shown in Figure 13.13. Consider a voltage wave y1
A arriving 
at the junction from line A. Using (13.3.8) and (13.3.9), determine the 
voltage reflection coefficient GAA and the voltage refraction coefficients 
GBA, GCA, and GDA.
13.15	 Referring to Figure 13.3, the source voltage at the sending end is a step 
eG(t) 5 Eu21(t) with an inductive source impedance ZG(s) 5 sLG, where 
LG∙Zc 5 t∙3. At the receiving end, ZR 5 Zc∙4. The line and source induc-
tance are initially unenergized. (a) Draw the Bewley lattice diagram for  
0 ≤ t ≤ 5t. (b) Plot y(l, t) versus time t for 0 ≤ t ≤ 5t.
13.16	 As shown in Figure 13.33, two identical, single-phase, two-wire, lossless 
lines are connected in parallel at both the sending and receiving ends. 
Each line has a 400- V characteristic impedance, 3 3 108 m∙s veloc-
ity of propagation, and 100-km line length. The source voltage at the 
sending end is a 100-kV step with source impedance ZG 5 100 V. The 
receiving end is shorted (ZR 5 0). Both lines are initially unenergized. 
(a) Determine the first forward traveling voltage waves that start at time 
t 5 0 and travel on each line toward the receiving end. (b) Determine the  
sending- and receiving-end voltage reflection coefficients in per-unit,  
FIGURE 13.32
Circuit for  
Problem 13.13

(c) Draw the Bewley lattice diagram for 0 ≤ t ≤ 2.0 ms. (d) Plot the  
voltage at the center of one line versus time t for 0 ≤ t ≤ 2.0 ms.
13.17	 As shown in Figure 13.34, an ideal current source consisting of a 10-kA 
pulse with 50-ms duration is applied to the junction of a single-phase, 
lossless cable and a single-phase, lossless overhead line. The cable has a 
200-V characteristic impedance, 2 3 108 m∙s velocity of propagation, 
and 20-km length. The overhead line has a 300-V characteristic imped-
ance, 3 3 108 m∙s velocity of propagation, and 60-km length. The send-
ing end of the cable is terminated by a 400-V resistor, and the receiving 
end of the overhead line is terminated by a 100-V resistor. Both the line 
and cable are initially unenergized. (a) Determine the voltage reflection 
coefficients GS, GR, GAA, GAB, GBA, and GBB (b) Draw the Bewley lattice dia-
gram for 0 ≤ t ≤ 0.8 ms. (c) Determine and plot the voltage y(0, t) at x 5 
0 versus time t for 0 ≤ t ≤ 0.8 ms.
FIGURE 13.33
Circuit for  
Problem 13.16
FIGURE 13.34
Circuit for  
Problem 13.17
	
Problems	
855

856	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
SECTION 13.4
13.18	 For the circuit given in Problem 13.3, replace the circuit elements by their 
discrete-time equivalent circuits and write nodal equations in a form suit-
able for computer solution of the sending-end and receiving-end volt-
ages. Give equations for all dependent sources. Assume E 5 1000 V, LR 5 
20 mH, Zc 5 100 V, v 5 2 3 108 m∙s, l 5 40 km, and Dt 5 0.02 ms.
13.19	 Repeat Problem 13.18 for the circuit given in Problem 13.13. Assume  
Dt 5 0.03333 ms.
13.20	 For the circuit given in Problem 13.7, replace the circuit elements by their 
discrete-time equivalent circuits. Use Dt 5 100 ms 5 1 3 1024 s. Deter-
mine and show all resistance values on the discrete-time circuit. Write 
nodal equations for the discrete-time circuit, giving equations for all 
dependent sources. Then solve the nodal equations and determine the 
sending- and receiving-end voltages at the following times: t 5 100, 200, 
300, 400, 500, and 600 ms.
13.21	 For the circuit given in Problem 13.8, replace the circuit elements by their 
discrete-time equivalent circuits. Use Dt 5 50 ms 5 5 3 1025 s and E 5 
100 kV. Determine and show all resistance values on the discrete-time cir-
cuit. Write nodal equations for the discrete-time circuit, giving equations 
for all dependent sources. Then solve the nodal equations and determine 
the sending-and receiving-end voltages at the following times: t 5 50, 100, 
150, 200, 250, and 300 ms.
SECTION 13.5
13.22	 Rework Problem 13.18 for a lossy line with a constant series resis-
tance R 5 0.3 V∙km. Lump half of the total resistance at each end of 
the line.
SECTION 13.8
13.23	 Repeat Example 13.8 for a 500-kV system with a 1.08 per-unit  
maximum 60-Hz voltage under normal operating conditions and with 
a 2000-kV BIL.
13.24	 Select a station-class metal-oxide surge arrester from Table 13.2 for the 
high-voltage side of a three-phase 400 MVA, 345-kV Y∙13.8-kV D trans-
former. The maximum 60-Hz operating voltage of the transformer under 
normal operating conditions is 1.03 per unit. The high-voltage windings 
of the transformer have a BIL of 1300 kV and a solidly grounded neutral. 
A minimum protective margin of 1.4 per unit based on a 10-kA impulse 
current wave cresting in 0.5 ms is required. (Note: Additional consider-
ations for the selection of metal-oxide surge arresters are given in refer-
ence [22] (www.cooperpower.com).

CASE STUDIES QUESTIONS
a.	
Why are circuit breakers and fuses ineffective in protecting against tran-
sient overvoltages due to lightning and switching surges?
b.	
Where are surge arresters located in power systems?
c.	
How does one select a surge arrester to protect specific equipment?
d.	
What is the largest loss-of-generation event in the U.S. Western Inter-
connection as recognized by the North America Electric Reliability 
Corporation?
e.	
What is “frequency nadir”?
REFERENCES
1.	 A. Greenwood, Electrical Transients in Power Systems, 2d ed. (New York: 
Wiley Interscience, 1991).
2.	 L. V. Bewley, Travelling Waves on Transmission Systems, 2d ed. (New 
York: Wiley, 1951).
3.	 L. Bergeron, Water Hammer in Hydraulics and Wave Surges in Electricity 
(New York: Wiley, 1961).
4.	 H. M. Lacey, “The Lightning Protection of High-Voltage Overhead 
Transmission and Distribution Systems,” Proc. IEE, 96 (1949), p. 287.
5.	 J. R. Carson, “Wave Propagation in Overhead Wires with Ground 
Return,” Bell System Technical Journal 5 (1926), pp. 539–554.
6.	 W. S. Meyer and H. W. Dommel, “Numerical Modelling of Frequency- 
Dependent Transmission Line Parameters in an Electromagnetic Tran-
sients Program,” IEEE Transactions PAS, vol. PAS-99 (September/ 
October 1974), pp. 1401–1409.
7.	 A. Budner, “Introduction of Frequency-Dependent Line Parameters 
into an Electromagnetics Transients Program,” IEEE Transactions PAS,  
vol. PAS-89 (January 1970), pp. 88–97.
8.	 D. E. Hedman, “Propagation on Overhead Transmission Lines: I—
Theory of Modal Analysis and II—Earth Conduction Effects and Prac-
tical Results,” IEEE Transactions PAS (March 1965), pp. 200–211.
9.	 H. W. Dommel, “A Method for Solving Transient Phenomena in 
Multiphase Systems,” Proceedings 2nd Power Systems Computation Con-
ference, Stockholm, 1966.
10.	 H. W. Dommel, “Digital Computer Solution of Electromagnetic Tran-
sients in Single- and Multiphase Networks,” IEEE Transactions PAS,  
vol. PAS-88 (1969), pp. 388–399.
	
References	
857

858	
Chapter 13  |  Transmission Lines: Transient Operation
11.	
H. W. Dommel, “Nonlinear and Time-Varying Elements in Digital  
Simulation of Electromagnetic Transients,” IEEE Transactions PAS,  
vol. PAS-90 (November/December 1971), pp. 2561–2567.
12.	
S. R. Naidu, Transitorios Electromagneticos em Sistemas de Potencia, 
Eletrobras/UFPb, Brazil, 1985.
13.	
“Report of Joint IEEE-EEI Committee on EHV Line Outages,” IEEE 
Transactions PAS, 86 (1967), p. 547.
14.	
R. A. W. Connor and R. A. Parkins, “Operations Statistics in the Man-
agement of Large Distribution System,” Proc. IEEE, 113 (1966), p. 1823.
15.	
C. T. R. Wilson, “Investigations on Lightning Discharges and on the 
Electrical Field of Thunderstorms,” Phil. Trans. Royal Soc, Series A, 221 
(1920), p. 73.
16.	
G. B. Simpson and F. J. Scrase, “The Distribution of Electricity in Thun-
derclouds,” Proc. Royal Soc, Series A, 161 (1937), p. 309.
17.	
B. F. J. Schonland and H. Collens, “Progressive Lightning,” Proc. Royal 
Soc, Series A, 143 (1934), p. 654.
18.	
Westinghouse Electric Corporation, Electrical Transmission and Distri-
bution Reference Book, 4th ed. (East Pittsburgh, PA: 1964).
19.	
E. W. Kimbark and A. C. Legate, “Fault Surge Versus Switching Surge, 
A Study of Transient Voltages Caused by Line to Ground Faults,” IEEE 
Transactions PAS, 87 (1968), p. 1762.
20.	
IEEE Guide for the Application of Metal-Oxide Surge Arresters for 
Alternating-Current Systems, IEEE std. C62.22-2009 (New York: The 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, http://standards.ieee.org)
21.	
C. Concordia, “The Transient Network Analyzer for Electric Power Sys-
tem Problems,” Supplement to CIGRE Committee No. 13 Report, 1956.
22.	
Varistar Type AZE Surge Arresters for Systems through 345 kV, Cooper 
Power Systems Catalog 235–87 (Waukesha, WI: Cooper Power Systems. 
http://www.cooperpower.com, July 2011).
23.	
N. Miller et al., “Emergency Response,” IEEE Power & Energy Magazine, 
11, 6 (November/December 2013), pp. 63–71.
24.	
W. R. Newcott, “Lightning, Nature’s High-Voltage Spectacle,” National 
Geographic. 184, 1 (July 1993), pp. 83–103.
25.	
K. L. Cummins, E. P. Krider, and M. D. Malone, “The U.S. National 
Lightning Detection Network TM and Applications of Cloud-to-
Ground Lightning Data by Electric Power Utilities,” IEEE Transactions 
on Electromagnetic Compatibility, 40, 4 (November 1998), pp. 465–480.

859
M
ajor components of an electric power system are generation, transmission, 
and distribution. Distribution, including primary and secondary distribution, 
is that portion of a power system that runs from distribution substations  
to a customer’s service entrance equipment. In 2013 in the United States, distribution 
systems served approximately 146 million customers that consumed 3.73 trillion kWh  
(www.eia.doe.gov).
Distribution substation 
fed by two 22.9-kV 
(one overhead and 
one underground) 
lines through two 
15-MVA, 22.9D/ 
4.16Y-kV distribution 
substation transform-
ers. The transformers 
are located on either 
side of the switch-
gear building shown 
in the center. This 
substation feeds six 
4.16-kV radial primary 
feeders through 
5-kV, 1200-A vacuum 
circuit breakers
(Courtesy of Danvers 
Electric.)
14 Power Distribution

860	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
This chapter provides an overview of distribution. Sections 14.1–14.3 intro-
duce the basic configurations and characteristics of distribution including primary 
and secondary distribution. Sections 14.4 and 14.5 discuss the application of trans-
formers and capacitors in distribution systems. Then in Sections 14.6–14.9 distribu-
tion software, distribution reliability, distribution automation, and smart grids are 
introduced.
CASE STUDY
During the last five years distribution grids in the United States and in 
many other countries have been changing. There has been a notable 
installation of distributed energy resources (DERs) on distribution grids, 
either at medium- or low-voltage levels. For example, in 2013 alone in the 
United States, 155,000 grid-connected solar photovoltaic (PV) systems 
were installed, 94% of those on distribution grids. This is expected to 
nearly triple by 2016. The following article describes an integrated, proac-
tive approach to utility planning of distribution grids with DERs [20]. The 
article discusses the impacts of DERs on the following technical issues: 
voltage, protection, energy, capacity, and reliability.
It’s All in the Plans
By Jeff Smith, Matthew Rylander,  
Lindsey Rogers & Roger Dugan
Distribution planners are facing 
a new reality: the vast majority of 
new generation currently being con-
nected to the grid is through the 
distribution system. This “edge” 
of the grid, where utilities have the 
least amount of visibility and con-
trollability, is also where most of 
the change is occurring. The result 
is a new set of challenges associ-
ated with further integrating these 
ever-increasing levels of distributed 
energy resources (DERs). To meet 
these challenges, an integrated ap-
proach for planning is needed.
The U.S. electricity landscape 
is undergoing a gradual but far- 
reaching makeover. The existing 
power system was designed to con-
nect a relatively small number of 
large generation plants to a large 
number of consumers through an 
extensive high-voltage transmission 
system and a medium- to low-voltage  
distribution system. In recent years, 
there has been a notable influx of 
DERs onto the grid—particularly 
© 2015 IEEE. Reprinted, with permission, 
from J. Smith, M. Rylander, L. Rodgers and 
R. Dugan, “It’s All in the Plans,” IEEE Power 
Engineering Magazine, March/April 2015, 
pp. 20–29.

on the distribution system, either at 
the medium- or low-voltage level. 
Specifically, installations of solar 
photovoltaic (PV) systems are grow-
ing rapidly in the United States, 
with 12.1 GW installed by the end 
of 2013, according to the Interstate 
Renewable Energy Council, account-
ing for 471,000 total installations. 
In 2013 alone in the United States, 
155,000 grid-connected PV systems 
were installed, with distribution-con-
nected systems accounting for 94% 
of the additions. This is expected 
to nearly triple by 2016, translating 
to increased end-user self-genera-
tion and greater grid management 
expense. This shift alters the man-
ner in which electricity is being 
generated, transmitted, and man-
aged, thus necessitating a change in 
how utilities plan and integrate this  
resource.
The Immense Scale of 
Distribution
An entire distribution service terri-
tory often consists of multiple large 
planning areas in which substations 
and feeders have widely varying de-
sign and control parameters. Due to 
unique design and operating criteria 
developed over the years, two adjoin-
ing planning areas may have unique 
planning and operational require-
ments. Within each planning area, 
utilities may have tens or even hun-
dreds of substations that connect and 
deliver energy from the transmission 
system to serve hundreds or thou-
sands of different distribution feed-
ers. Each of these feeders is outfitted 
with equipment for providing both 
voltage control and system protec-
tion; this equipment is operated using 
custom settings to enable the utility 
to serve all customers in an efficient 
and reliable manner.
Within each feeder there are tens 
or hundreds of service transformers 
that convert power from the medium 
voltage down to a more usable, 
low-voltage service level. These trans-
formers distribute this service through 
multiple secondary systems that con-
nect each service transformer with in-
dividual residences, commercial build-
ings, and industrial complexes.
Therefore, customers located at  
the very “edge” of the grid—and 
distribution utilities often have hun-
dreds of thousands or even millions 
of customers—are served by a vast 
and diverse network of feeders, sub-
stations, planning areas, and, ulti-
mately, an entire distribution service 
territory (see Figure 1). In evaluating 
the grid from the transmission system 
all the way down to each individual 
customer, the amount of visibility 
(measurement data, models, and so 
on), controllability (voltage and pro-
tection), and flexibility (automation) 
lessens. Therefore, the vast major-
ity of the change is occurring where 
utilities have the least amount of 
information.
Regardless of whether the DER 
installations are connected to the grid 
at the customer side of the meter or 
directly to the medium-voltage grid, 
to properly evaluate the impact of 
DERs the complexity of the distri-
bution system and the uniqueness of 
each location and individual feeder 
must be considered.
	
Case Study	
861

862	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
The Grid Is Changing
Given the breadth of current DER 
additions, conflicts have already arisen 
between distribution systems designed 
for one-way power flow and DERs that 
want to force power flow in the oppo-
site direction. The structural diversity 
of the distribution system poses an even  
greater challenge, as each distribution 
feeder can have a unique response to 
this new resource. Screening methods 
exist to avoid adverse impacts due to 
DERs, but this is addressing the abun-
dance of DER interconnect requests 
and can result in higher overall costs if 
the resource isn’t fully integrated and 
located appropriately.
One example of this shift in 
planning philosophy is in designing a 
voltage regulation scheme for a feeder. 
Without DERs, a planner designs for 
a voltage drop from the substation to 
the feeder extremities. If the voltage is 
projected to drop too low during peak 
demand periods, a capacitor bank or 
voltage regulator is added to boost 
the voltage. Feeder voltage control 
is designed to yield voltages within  
ANSI C84.1. With DERs, the plan-
ner must also design for the voltage 
rise resulting from DER power output 
and must consider time in the analysis. 
This requires new or enhanced plan-
ning tools. An example of the time and 
location evaluation of PVs on a distri-
bution feeder is captured in Figure 2. 
The interaction of control devices and 
variable resources is evident in the em-
bedded video (to view the video, scan 
the QR code with a smartphone).
The daylight hours are simu-
lated at a 1-s resolution to capture  
the solar variability impacts on volt-
age magnitude and on voltage regu-
lator and capacitor operations. Three 
snapshots captured during the day are 
Distribution Diagrams Courtesy of Salt River Project
Distribution Diagrams Courte
Customer
Feeder
Planning Area
Service Territory
Substation
Transformer
Typical
Distribution Utility
Number
Service Territory
Planning Area
Substations
Feeders
Service Transformers
Customers
1
1s–10s
10s–100s
100s–1000s
1000s–1,000,000s
100,000s–1,000,000s
Figure 1 The large “scale” of distribution systems

shown in the figure to represent the 
impact of solar generation on voltage 
profiles. At the beginning of the day, 
the solar output is low, as shown by 
the surface plot of location-based so-
lar resource potential for power pro-
duction. The surface represents the 
solar resource as measured from sev-
eral ground-based measurement units, 
indicated by vertical lines. The actual 
power production is dependent on the 
location of the actual PV systems on 
the feeder. During the day, the solar 
resource and total power production 
fluctuate as clouds pass overhead. 
The impact this variability has on 
the feeder affects the voltage profile, 
which at times exceeds 105% (126 V 
on 120-V base). Increased voltage reg-
ulator and capacitor operations are 
observed as well.
Another example is the design 
of feeder protection. One reason 
most distribution feeders in the 
United States are built in a radial 
configuration is that such a design 
yields the lowest-cost protection sys-
tem while also providing safe and re-
liable service. A meshed system, like 
that found in transmission, may bet-
ter support DERs but requires an en-
tirely different planning paradigm for 
distribution. New types of line equip-
ment would be required to protect a 
new system configuration.
Given that the grid is becoming 
more complex, utility planning needs 
to change. Distribution utilities must 
transform existing planning methods 
into new planning methods that can ac-
commodate a more integrated system.
A New Approach Is Needed
To effectively plan and operate the 
distribution grid under this changing 
landscape, a more proactive approach 
1
0.5
Normalized Power
Production
0
1
0.5
Normalized Power
Production
0
1
0.5
Normalized Power
Production
0
1.05
1
0.95
0
5
10
15
Distance from Substation (km)
Total Power
Production (kw)
3236
108
0
100
200
300
400
Relative Time (min)
500
600
700
V (pu)
1.05
1
0.95
0
5
10
15
Distance from Substation (km)
V (pu)
1.05
1
0.95
0
5
10
15
Distance from Substation (km)
V (pu)
Figure 2 Time and location impacts of variable solar PV on voltage control
	
Case Study	
863

864	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
must be taken that accounts for the 
actual characteristics of the DERs 
as well as where the resources are 
connecting to the grid. While on the 
surface these aspects of the problem 
may seem obvious, they are quite 
challenging to capture.
What does a proactive plan-
ning approach look like? A proactive 
approach considers the true impact, 
both positive and negative, on distri-
bution. This approach considers how 
the location of DERs affects each 
distribution feeder differently and 
identifies where DERs can be located 
such that minimum system upgrades 
are necessary. Similarly, it also con-
siders where the DERs can most ben-
efit a distribution system, considering 
the unique assets and performance of 
each distribution feeder. A proactive 
approach can be applied across an 
entire distribution system to account 
for all feeders and their unique limita-
tions and capabilities.
Why is this more proactive ap-
proach important? If a more pro-
active approach is not taken, there 
could potentially be increased cost or 
decreased reliability and power qual-
ity for all customers. If a proactive 
planning approach is instituted, costs 
can be minimized, reliability and 
power quality can be maintained, and 
system performance can be improved 
by taking advantage of the DERs 
and their capabilities.
What Matters Most
While planning functions do not 
change, certain additional items 
should be considered to better 
integrate DERs and quantify the 
overall impact of such resources 
more precisely. The main factors that 
need to be considered in a proactive 
planning approach with DERs are (1) 
DER size and location, (2) the distri-
bution system’s response characteris-
tics, and (3) DER technologies. All of 
these factors are critically important 
when planning the integrated grid.
Size and Location
Centralized, utility-scale DERs have 
a specific impact on the grid that is 
based on where they are located along 
a distribution feeder. Dispersed, cus-
tomer-based generation has a quite 
different impact, even though the same 
amount of electricity may be produced.
Distribution Feeder Response 
Characteristics
Even though feeders may appear to 
have similar characteristics (such as 
voltage class, topology, and load), anal-
yses performed by the Electric Power 
Research Institute (EPRI) have shown 
that easily observed feeder character-
istics alone cannot definitively and ac-
curately determine how many DERs a 
feeder can accommodate. A distribu-
tion feeder’s response characteristics 
(like its voltage profile and short-circuit 
strength) can be used, however, to help 
determine what level of DERs can be 
accommodated and where.
DER Technologies
Variable generation such as wind and 
solar can have widely varying im-
pacts on voltage and capacity value 
compared with forms of generation 

that are dispatchable. The differences 
primarily emanate from the timing in 
which the electricity is generated and 
the character of the energy output. 
Rotating machines and static inverter 
interfaces have different impacts on 
system protection, for example.
Considering all of these factors 
can be rather challenging, particularly 
due to:
●
●
the sheer number of feeders 
associated with analyzing entire 
systems;
●
●
limited manpower and data 
with which to perform detailed 
analysis of an entire distribu-
tion system;
●
●
the reduced visibility in terms of 
what is happening at the edge of 
the grid (important for models 
and measurements); and
●
●
the wide range of results that can 
be seen based on the particular 
scenarios investigated (location, 
PV size, control, and so on).
To work around these chal-
lenges, planners have tried to esti-
mate DERs impacts based on load 
levels alone or have simplified the 
problem by limiting the analysis to 
only a few “typical” distribution feed-
ers. For the latter solution, feeders 
are chosen using clustering, or the 
grouping of feeders by topological 
characteristics. The downside of this  
approach is that it does not take into 
account the unique distribution sys-
tem response as a whole, since each in-
dividual feeder dictates how the distri-
bution system responds and changes 
as the system evolves over time.
These complex associations are 
the reason why one feeder can host 
more DERs than another. The host-
ing capacity of a feeder is defined as 
the amount of DERs a feeder can 
support under its existing topology, 
configuration, and physical response 
characteristics. When this hosting 
capacity is reached, any further ad-
ditions will result in a deterioration 
of service if remedial actions are not 
taken. If done properly, a hosting ca-
pacity assessment provides a range of 
information, including:
●
●
how many DERs can be 
accommodated without system 
upgrades
●
●
what issues arise at the hosting 
capacity limits
●
●
where DERs can be sited so 
that problems can be avoided
●
●
the locations where additional 
DERs are likely to cause issues 
on the grid.
Figure 3 illustrates results for 
these four topics, in this case specifi-
cally related to distributed PVs. The 
amount of PVs that can be supported 
for 28 different feeders is illustrated in 
Figure 3(a), where the colored regions 
represent no issues (impact below 
thershold), issues dependent on loca-
tion, and issues regardless of location 
(impact above thershold). In many 
cases, a range of impacts is observed 
even where PVs can be more or less 
optimally placed, based on its loca-
tion. The issues that arise are because 
of the increase in impact that comes 
along with the increased penetration 
of DERs, as illustrated in Figure 3(b).
	
Case Study	
865

866	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
The two images in Figure 3(c)  
offer a visual interpretation of the 
hosting capacity plotted against the 
schematic of the feeder. The dark-
ness and thickness of the schematic 
indicate where the DERs can be sited 
such that adverse issues are avoided 
and, conversely, where the DERs are 
more likely to be problematic.
One observation that can readily be 
made is that there is a considerable range 
in the amount of DERs that can be eas-
ily accommodated across all the feeders 
without taking preventative measures. 
Feeders 3, 6, 7, and 14, in particular, all 
have similar peak loads of 4.3–4.5 MW,  
as shown in Figure 3(b). The minimum 
hosting capacity—as indicated by the 
left area in Figure 3(a)—for these four 
feeders, however, ranges from 0.6–1.5 
MW. Therefore, indicators such as peak 
load fail to provide adequate estimates of 
DER hosting capacity.
A slightly more detailed approach 
would consider several feeder character-
istics to better understand their impact on 
a feeder’s ability to accommodate PVs. 
The four feeders in the previous example 
are also in the same voltage class, but it is 
clear that basing the analysis on those two 
characteristics alone will not improve a 
determination of impact. Additional char-
acteristics such as end-of-feeder length 
could be used in the clustering, but there 
is not much variation in those character-
istics for the four feeders: they are 2–4 mi 
long. Out of the 28-feeder data set, the 
end-of-line length ranges from 1 to 27 mi,  
so including line length in a clustering 
methodology may still group these four 
feeders together as being “similar.”
In 
short, 
such 
techniques 
for screening feeders and/or re-
ducing the number of feeders an-
alyzed reduces the time and effort 
that go into analysis. Both these 
25
20
15
10
5
0
0
1
2
3
4
Hosting Capacity (MW)
Impact
Below
Threshold
Impact
Above
Threshold
Impact
Depends
Nonoptimal
DER Location
Optimal
DER Location
Impact
Threshold
Feeder 14
Feeder 1
Feeder
Total DER Penetration
Feeder
Voltage
Class
Peak
Load
Minimum
Load
Total
Length (mi)
End of Line
Length (mi)
3
12.5
4.3
0.9
19
3
6
12.5
4.4
1.3
6
2
7
12.5
4.5
1.1
9
4
14
12.0
4.4
0.5
22
3
Impact
(b)
(c)
(a)
Figure 3  (a) Feeder hosting capacity, (b) impact of DER penetration and table 
showing the characteristics of four apparently similar feeders, and  
(c) determining the optimal location for DERs

techniques 
result 
in 
less-than- 
optimal visibility in terms of how 
DERs will potentially impact the 
grid, however, particularly when it 
comes to location. Feeder clustering 
can be used, however, when the clus-
tering is based on the actual feeder 
response rather than topological data. 
Taking into consideration such things 
as where the DERs are located as well 
as how the feeder responds provides a 
better metric for clustering.
There is a complex interrelation-
ship among the forces that determine 
distribution system, and that com-
plexity deepens when DERs produce  
two-way flows. The location, size, and 
DER technology are important consid-
erations and are interdependent with 
system strength and customer loads. A 
holistic plan must take into account the 
unique performance of the entire distri-
bution system as well as the character-
istics of DERs and how they affect the 
grid. Such an integrated approach is the 
foundation of a new methodology de-
veloped by EPRI for incorporation into 
distribution planning.
The Plan: An Integrated 
Approach
Distribution system assessment for 
DERs must focus on incorporating 
DERs while maintaining established 
standards of reliability and power 
quality. In other words, the first step 
in the plan is to establish the distri-
bution feeder’s ability to host DERs 
(determine its hosting capacity). As 
discussed previously, hosting capac-
ity is the amount of DERs that can 
be accommodated under current grid 
conditions without affecting power 
quality or reliability.
Understanding the hosting ca-
pacity under the system’s current ar-
rangement is, however, only the first 
step. To provide the proper analyti-
cal perspective, the analysis must be 
taken further to:
●
●
analyze the ability to expand 
hosting capacity through a 
series of mitigation options  
(if necessary); and
●
●
investigate the benefits that 
DERs can provide to the par-
ticular distribution system.
EPRI has developed and dem­
onstrated methods for conducting 
feeder-specific analyses that take all 
of these factors into account. Based 
on experience from detailed individ-
ual feeder analyses, EPRI has devel-
oped a new methodology that makes 
possible the practical characteriza-
tion of the impacts of various levels 
and arrangements of DERs on all of 
a utility’s feeders. The methodology 
uses commercially available analysis 
tools for most of its steps, in par-
ticular, for determining the hosting  
capacity based on voltage and protec-
tion evaluations.
EPRI’s methods for charac-
terizing the benefits and impacts on 
distribution of DERs are contained 
in the following five root-cause cate-
gories, as shown in Figure 4:
●
●
voltage
●
●
protection
●
●
energy
●
●
capacity
●
●
reliability
	
Case Study	
867

868	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
 
Voltage
Utilities design the distribution sys-
tem so as to maintain primary volt-
ages within standard ranges; typically, 
primary voltages are kept within ±5% 
of the nominal rating. DER instal-
lations have the potential to change 
voltage along a distribution feeder 
because of the power they inject into 
the grid. For variable generation, 
such as PVs and wind, unacceptable 
voltages can occur on either the pri-
mary or secondary systems, causing 
overvoltages and/or excessive voltage 
deviations that can affect regulation 
equipment and result in flicker. Al-
ternatively, when coordinated with 
utility regulation, additional voltage 
support can be achieved by means of 
dispatchable DERs and DERs with 
reactive power control capability.
Standard load flow analyses 
coupled with appropriate approxi-
mations for the distribution of DERs 
can effectively analyze the potential 
voltage benefits and impacts. Voltage 
magnitude, voltage deviation, and 
voltage imbalance are examined at all 
Voltage
Protection
Relay
Desensitization
Current
Unacceptable
Overvoltage
Limit
Time
Time
Voltage
Impedance
Unserved Energy
Energy
Exceeding Normal
Reliability
Energy
Month
Energy Losses
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Energy
Impedance
Watts
Load Only
Load
and PV
Capacity
Integrated
Approach
Figure 4 The five categories used in EPRI’s performance assessment 
methodology for characterizing distribution feeders

feeder primary and secondary nodes 
as well as at voltage regulation points. 
Various load levels, which also dic-
tate baseline response, are considered 
as well to better capture the range of 
impacts that can be expected.
Protection
Utilities must retain the ability to de-
tect and isolate faults as well as provide 
service restoration to all customers in a 
timely fashion. Additional DERs can 
affect the utility’s ability to perform 
these functions. Common impacts 
from integration of DERs include: 
nuisance fuse blowing, misoperation 
of equipment, increased short-circuit 
current, unintentional islanding, and 
sympathetic tripping of the feeder.
Standard fault current analysis 
can be used to compare the fault re-
sponse with and without the DERs to 
evaluate the potential impact on sys-
tem protection. Impact assessment 
includes the examination of feeder 
fault current magnitudes that can 
cause inadvertent or faulty operation 
of protection devices.
Energy
DER installations have the potential 
to reduce distribution losses because 
the generation is provided closer to 
where the energy is consumed. The ex-
tent to which DERs can reduce distri-
bution losses depends on the location 
of the resource and the length of time 
for which the energy is provided to  
the grid. Alternatively, a change in cus-
tomer voltage may counteract some  
of the change in losses.
Time-series analysis captures 
the time-coincident nature, or lack 
thereof, of the DER and load profiles 
so as to quantify the energy benefits 
and impacts. Annual 8760-hour sim-
ulation analyses are conducted with 
sequential load flow analyses that 
incorporate the varying load and 
generation profiles along with the  
automatic control devices such as 
load tap changers.
Capacity
Distribution systems are designed to 
provide service to all customers, es-
pecially at peak load periods when 
assets are most constrained. A poten-
tial benefit of integrating DERs into 
the distribution system is their ability 
to reduce net feeder demand and re-
lieve capacity on existing distribution 
infrastructure, potentially deferring 
distribution-capacity upgrades. For 
any resource to potentially provide 
distribution-capacity relief, it must be 
analyzed in terms of its ability to pro-
vide capacity during peak load peri-
ods when assets are most constrained 
and when feeder capacity is a limiting 
factor.
Capacity analysis requires spe-
cific information regarding thermal 
characteristics, the associated load 
profile characteristics, and projected 
load growth. Hence, capacity is ana-
lyzed separately for each feeder and 
substation to identify the potential 
benefits (in terms of asset investment 
deferral) arising from power being gen-
erated locally, as well as any adverse 
consequences of two-way power flows 
on feeder carrying capacity. Utilities 
have developed different approaches 
to evaluating capacity, and therefore 
the specific metrics and methods used 
	
Case Study	
869

870	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
to evaluate asset loading and loss of 
life are taken into account.
Reliability
Reliability is a measure of the num-
ber and duration of interruptions 
of electrical service experienced by 
consumers. DER installations have 
the potential to improve reliability, 
but they must use dependable technol-
ogies and be sited in locations on the 
distribution system where they can ef-
fectively deliver power during system 
failure events. As with capacity, DER 
output must be available at the time of 
need to improve distribution reliability.
Quantifying the impact of 
DERs on reliability is a difficult 
task even when the DERs are dis-
patchable. The analysis is by nature 
probabilistic because failures have 
a high degree of uncertainty. Re-
searchers have come up with various 
approaches to probabilistic planning 
that, for the most part, have not been 
embraced by utility planners. Utility 
distribution planners prefer more de-
terministic methods that are based on 
average failure rates and assume pre-
dictable interactions among circuit 
components. EPRI’s plan has yet to 
embrace a preferred method.
An overall assessment must 
consider the incremental impacts—
both positive and negative—that re-
sult from DER additions. The overall 
assessment must also consider the in-
terrelationship of the benefits and im-
pacts from each of the five categories. 
Once the full set of assessments have 
been performed, the result is a clearer 
picture of the full range of response 
that can be expected on a distribu-
tion feeder, one that considers unique 
feeder characteristics, constraints, and 
capabilities as well as the location- 
specific impacts of DERs (see Figure 5).
Performing such a thorough 
analysis can be challenging. The great-
est challenge lies in analyzing all feed-
ers within a service territory, which is 
necessary to better quantify the im-
pacts of DERs across a planning area 
and/or system and thus determine the 
overall costs and benefits that should 
be captured in an integration study. 
Systemwide Application
In 2010, EPRI began a detailed inves-
tigation into the impact that increas-
ing levels of DERs, specifically PVs, 
could have on distribution system per-
formance. Approximately 6 million 
uniquely different solar deployment 
Voltage
Capacity
Protection
Location 
Potential Benefit
Case by
Case Look
Needed
Location x
Potential Risk
Reliability
Energy
Figure 5  Integrated approach to determining the optimal placement of DERs

cases and the resulting feeder response 
outcomes have been analyzed across 
34 feeders throughout North America 
using the open-source distribution  
system simulator OpenDSS. A glimpse 
of the overall hosting capacities  
was provided in Figure 3.
From the outset, the goal of 
performing such a thorough, detailed 
analysis was that lessons should 
be learned and trends observed to 
develop better methods and tools. 
These improved methods would then 
let utilities efficiently and confidently 
answer such questions as: “What level 
of PVs is going to affect my system, 
and where will these issues occur?”
Throughout 2013 and 2014, 
EPRI analyzed a vast quantity of 
feeder hosting capacity results to 
identify trends. These trends form 
the basis for a streamlined method 
of determining, on a feeder-by-feeder  
basis, four important items:
●
●
the hosting capacities for indi-
vidual feeders;
●
●
the locations where PVs can  
be placed without requiring sys-
tem upgrades (optimal versus 
nonoptimal locations);
●
●
the issues that can arise due to 
increased levels of PVs; and
●
●
mitigation solutions for inte-
grated DERs beyond the base 
hosting capacity level.
This streamlined method for 
evaluating the hosting capacity of 
individual feeders can also be per-
formed across an entire distribution 
system in an automated fashion, as 
shown in Figure 6. Efficient imple-
mentation also enables qualified users 
to evaluate mitigation solutions on a 
feeder-by-feeder basis. As the distri-
bution system changes over time, the 
assessment method can be repeated as 
needed to account for changes to the 
Systemwide Assessment Capturing Feeder-Specific Results
=
Feeder Level
Feeder Level
Feeder Level
Substation Level
Feeder Level
Substation Level
Hosting Capacity Values
Figure 6  An illustration of system-level hosting capacity results
	
Case Study	
871

872	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
distribution system, such as reconfig-
urations implemented to accommo-
date load growth or for contingency 
reasons. This aspect is critical when 
there is a need to understand the 
impacts (in terms of cost and value) 
of DERs spread across an entire dis-
tribution service territory.
This streamlined hosting capac-
ity method utilizes the feeder model 
to determine voltage profiles, short-
circuit impedances, feeder topolo-
gies, and customer characteristics. 
Voltage and protection issues related 
to hosting capacity can be effectively 
determined by correlating several 
voltage profiles corresponding to dif-
ferent load levels with the shortcir-
cuit impedance of the feeder and the 
probable distribution of DERs. The 
locational distributions and resul-
tant hosting capacities are shown in 
Figure 7. The number of laterals and 
the overall feeder topology are also 
factors instrumental in determining 
the appropriate hosting capacity.
Determining a feeder’s hosting 
capacity is only part of the solution, 
however. Additional systemwide ben-
efits and impacts can be quantified 
and garnered through proper analy-
sis. In a manner similar to the stream-
lined method for performing hosting 
capacity assessments with respect to 
voltage and protection impacts, en-
ergy and capacity assessments across 
the fleet can be performed as well.
Various applications can be re-
alized after evaluating the distribu-
tion system in a more holistic manner 
by applying such a method across an 
entire distribution system and taking 
into consideration: (1) DER charac-
teristics, (2) locational impacts, and 
(3) grid performance metrics. Several 
key outcomes of this more integrated 
approach are described in Table 1. 
Programmatic 
Implementation 
of a Proactive Plan
This new knowledge lets utilities de-
velop strategies that can influence 
the locational deployment of DERs. 
Distribution utilities can tactically 
direct DER development to areas 
of the grid that are better suited  
to accommodate the resource. Costs 
associated 
with 
the 
deployment 
of DERs in suboptimal areas can 
be avoided. At the same time, the 
DER Distribution
Hosting Capacity
DER Location
DER Location
A
B
A
C
B
C
Figure 7  A simplistic illustration of the location and hosting capacity for a stream-
lined approach. The distribution describes what was evaluated, and the 
hosting capacity describes the outcome.

benefits of DERs can be used to sup-
port utility operations.
The targeted siting of future 
installations could potentially be in-
fluenced through a variety of mech-
anisms that leverage rates, grid in-
terconnection processes, enhanced 
information systems, and/or distri-
bution system upgrades. Examples 
include interconnection process im-
provements, locational incentives or 
interconnection costs, and holistic 
distribution upgrades. Strategies vary 
in effectiveness and ease of imple-
mentation; many of these solutions 
require that challenges due to regula-
tory constraints, concerns about cus-
tomer equity, and trade-offs between 
DER and non-DER customers be 
overcome.
There are a number of industry 
activities under way that are attempt-
ing to develop and/or implement a 
broader, more proactive planning 
approach at both the regulatory and 
utility levels. They include:
●
●
California 
Public 
Utilities 
Commission’s 
distribution 
resource plans: In August 2014, 
the California Public Utilities 
Commission opened a rule-
making process that seeks to 
establish policies and procedures 
for developing investor-owned 
Feeder-specific hosting capacities
Determine the existing hosting capacity for each 
feeder across the entire distribution system under 
current grid configurations
Optimal DER location
Identify locations that can minimize the upgrades 
necessary to accommodate DERs
Improved fast-screening techniques
Improve screening techniques that efficiently 
account for the proposed DERs and associated 
grid capacity at that location
Substation-level hosting capacities
Improve visibility into substation-level capacity for 
accommodating PVs connected at the individual 
feeder level
Range of issues and costs for 
accommodating DERs across the 
distribution system
Provide better insight into the specific issues that 
can arise and where and how often they may 
occur throughout the system
Range of values that can be garnered 
through widespread adoption of DERs
Provide better insight about the true value of 
widespread DER adoption throughout the system
Aggregate amount of DERs across a 
system for bulk system analysis
Identify locations and aggregate DERs for 
improved bulk system studies
Impact of DERs on system 
reconfiguration
Streamline processes that can be repeated in 
an automated fashion for additional distribution 
configurations
TABLE  1
The Potential Outcomes of an Integrated Approach
	
Case Study	
873

874	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
utility 
distribution 
resource 
plans in the state that integrate 
DERs into long-range grid plans 
by considering a range of loca-
tional values, including energy, 
capacity, power quality, reliabil-
ity, and resiliency.
●
●
Tennessee Valley Authority’s 
(TVA’s) Distributed Generation 
Integrated Value (DG-IV) ini-
tiative: In 2014, TVA launched 
a process to develop a method-
ology to adequately gauge the 
value DG provides to the elec-
tric grid. The goal of this effort 
is to develop a method that 
takes into account locational 
impact and cost.
●
●
EPRI’s Integrated Grid frame-
work: The Integrated Grid 
framework recently developed 
by EPRI is intended to provide 
a more comprehensive under-
standing of DERs impacts to 
present a more nuanced range 
of 
cost-effective 
integration 
strategies to utilities and grid 
operators.
Moving Forward
The electric power system is evolving 
from large, central generating sta-
tions interconnected with customers 
through grids of transmission and 
distribution lines into a system that 
includes substantial DERs. Consum-
ers of all sizes are installing DERs 
with technical and economic attrib-
utes that differ radically from the 
central energy resources that have 
traditionally dominated the elec-
tric power system. In many settings, 
DER installations have already had a 
sizable impact on the operation of the 
electricity grid.
If utilities had the luxury of in-
vesting in all the power delivery capacity 
they needed to support whatever might 
be connected to the distribution system, 
planning would be simply a matter of 
constructing new wire-delivery facil-
ities as needed. But they do not, and 
utility engineers increasingly find their 
systems stretched to the limits. Control 
and planning must be done with ever 
greater accuracy for utilities to operate 
successfully.
New engineering graduates will 
require training to analyze the inte-
grated distribution grid, in which 
power flows in multiple directions 
and can change quickly. For exam-
ple, most power engineering cur-
ricula today teach how to perform 
a static power flow analysis with 
simple load and generator models, 
but such deterministic approaches 
are no longer sufficient. Engineers 
must also learn how to capture the 
dynamic nature of a system that 
contains rapidly varying DERs and 
identify the time-dependent benefits 
and costs of DERs as well as their 
location-specific impacts as derived 
from traditional static methods. This 
will require a collaborative effort on 
the part of utility, research, and aca-
demic organizations to determine the 
new curricula.
Planners have to take into ac-
count how DER devices behave as 
well as the complexity of the distri-
bution system. This will require new 
capabilities in planning tools and 
new approaches to distribution plan-
ning. It will not be easy to make the 

transition in one leap: with a mas-
sive investment in models and data, 
existing tools will slowly evolve 
from their present state toward a  
new paradigm.
A planning approach for the 
electric grid that is integrated overall 
will fully realize the value of DERs 
while cost-effectively serving all 
customers at established standards  
of quality and reliability. Such a 
holistic approach to distribution 
planning is one of the core compo-
nents in what EPRI refers to as an  
integrated grid.
For Further Reading
“The integrated grid, phase II: A frame-
work,” EPRI, Palo Alto, CA , 2015.
“Distribution feeder hosting 
capacity: What matters most in plan-
ning for DER ?” EPRI, Palo Alto, CA, 
Tech. Rep. 3002004777, 2015.
“A new method for charac-
terizing distribution system hosting 
capacity for DER: A streamlined  
approach for PV,” EPRI, Palo Alto, 
CA, Tech. Rep. 3002003278, 2014.
Streamlined Methods for Deter-
mining Feeder Hosting Capacity for 
PV. Palo Alto, CA: EPRI, 2014.
“Distributed photovoltaic feeder 
analysis: Preliminary findings from 
hosting capacity analysis of 18 distri-
bution feeders,” EPRI, Palo Alto, CA,  
Tech. Rep. 3002001245, 2013.
“Analysis of high-penetration 
solar PV impacts for distribution plan-
ning: Stochastic and time-series meth-
ods for determining feeder hosting 
capacity,” EPRI, Palo Alto, CA, Tech. 
Rep. 1026640, 2012.
S. K. Price and R. C. Dugan, 
“Including 
distributed 
resources 
in distribution planning,” in Proc. 
IEEE Power Systems Conf. Expo., 
PES 2005, New York, NY, Oct.  
2004.
Biographies
Jeff Smith is with the Electric 
Power Research Institute, Knoxville, 
Tennessee.
Matthew Rylander is with the 
Electric Power Research Institute, 
Knoxville, Tennessee.
Lindsey Rogers is with the  
Electric Power Research Institute, 
Knoxville, Tennessee.
Roger Dugan is with the 
Electric Power Research Institute,  
Knoxville, Tennessee.  ■
14.1  Introduction to Distribution
Figure 14.1 shows the basic components of an electric power system [1–9]. Power 
plants convert energy from fuel (coal, gas, nuclear, oil, etc.) and from water, wind, or 
other forms into electric energy. Power plant generators, with typical ratings varying 
from 50 to 1300 MVA, are of three-phase construction, with three-phase armature 
windings embedded in the slots of stationary armatures. Generator terminal volt-
ages, which are limited by material and insulation capabilities, range from a few kV 
for older and smaller units up to 20 kV for newer and larger units.
	
Section 14.1 Introduction to Distribution	
875

876	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
To reduce transmission energy losses, generator step-up (GSU) transformers at 
power plant substations increase voltage and decrease current. Both the GSU trans-
formers and the buses in these substations are protected by circuit breakers, surge 
arresters, and other protection equipment.
The transmission system serves three basic functions:
1.	 It delivers energy from generators to the system.
2.	 It provides for energy interchange among utilities.
3.	 It supplies energy to the subtransmission and distribution system.
The transmission system consists of a network of three-phase transmission 
lines and transmission substations, also called bulk power substations. Typical 
transmission voltages range from 230 up to 765 kV. Single-circuit three-phase ratings 
vary from 400 MVA at 230 kV up to 4000 MVA at 765 kV. In some cases, HVDC 
lines with solid-state converters are embedded in the transmission system as well as 
back-to-back ac-dc links.
Power plant
Power plant
substation
Transmission
Bulk power
substation
Subtransmission
Subtransmission
Subtransmission
substation
Distribution
substation
Distribution
substation
Primary
distribution
feeder
Sectionalizing
fuse
Step-down
transformer
Step-down
transformer
Step-up
transformer
Circuit breaker
Generator
G
G
G
Primary lateral
Distribution transformer
Distribution transformer
Service conductor
Utilization
Secondary main
FIGURE 14.1
Basic components  
of an electric  
power system
(J. D. Glover, “Electric 
Power Distribution,” 
Encyclopedia of 
Energy Technology 
and The Environment, 
John Wiley & Sons, 
New York, NY, 1995. 
Copyright © 1995, 
John Wiley and 
Sons.)

	
Section 14.1 Introduction to Distribution	
877
The subtransmission system consists of step-down transformers, substations, 
and subtransmission lines that connect bulk power substations to distribution sub-
stations. In some cases, a subtransmission line may be tapped, usually through a cir-
cuit breaker, to supply a single-customer distribution load such as a large industrial 
plant. Typical subtransmission voltages range from 69 to 138 kV.
Distribution substations include step-down transformers (distribution substa-
tion transformers) that decrease subtransmission voltages to primary distribution 
voltages in the 2.2- to 46-kV range for local distribution. These transformers con-
nect through associated circuit breaker and surge arrester protection to substation 
buses, which in turn connect through circuit breakers to three-phase primary dis-
tribution lines called distribution circuits or feeders. Each substation bus usually 
supplies several feeders. Typical distribution substation ratings vary from 15 MVA 
for older substations to 200 MVA or higher for newer installations. Distribution 
substations may also include equipment for regulating the primary voltage, such as 
load tap changers (LTCs) on the distribution substation transformers or separate 
voltage regulators.
Typical primary distribution feeder ratings include 4 MVA for 4.16 kV, 12 MVA  
for 13.8 kV, 20 MVA for 22.9 kV, and 30 MVA for 34.5-kV feeders. Feeders are usually 
segregated into several three-phase sections connected through sectionalizing fuses 
or switches. Each feeder section may have several single-phase laterals connected to 
it through fuses. Three-phase laterals may also be connected to the feeders through 
fuses or reclosers. Separate, dedicated primary feeders supply industrial or large  
commercial loads.
Feeders and laterals run along streets, as either overhead lines or underground 
cables, and supply distribution transformers that step the voltage down to the sec-
ondary distribution level (120 to 480 V). Distribution transformers, typically rated 
5 to 5000 kVA, are installed on utility poles for overhead lines, on pads at ground 
level, or in vaults for underground cables. Distribution transformers are protected 
from overloads and faults by fuses or circuit breakers on the primary and/or the 
secondary side. From these transformers, energy flows through secondary mains and 
service conductors to supply single- or three-phase power directly to customer loads 
(residential, commercial, and light industrial).
Service conductors connect through meters, which determine kilowatt-hour 
consumption for customer billing purposes as well as other data for planning and 
operating purposes, to service panels located on customers’ premises. Customers’ 
service panels contain circuit breakers or fuses that connect to wiring that in turn 
supplies energy for utilization devices (lighting, appliances, motors, heating- 
ventilation-air conditioning, etc.).
Distribution of electric energy from distribution substations to meters at cus-
tomers’ premises has two parts:
1.	 Primary distribution, which distributes energy in the 2.2- to 46-kV range 
from distribution substations to distribution transformers, where the 
voltage is stepped down to customer utilization levels.
2.	 Secondary distribution, which distributes energy at customer utilization 
voltages of 120 to 480 V to meters at customers’ premises.

878	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
14.2  Primary Distribution
Table 14.1 shows typical primary distribution voltages in the United States [1–9]. Pri-
mary voltages in the “15-kV class” predominate among U.S. utilities. The 2.5- and 
5-kV classes are older primary voltages that are gradually being replaced by 15-kV 
class primaries. In some cases, higher 25- to 34.5-kV classes are used in new high- 
density load areas as well as in rural areas that have long feeders.
The three-phase, four-wire multigrounded primary system is the most widely 
used. Under balanced operating conditions, the voltage of each phase is equal in 
magnitude and 120° out of phase with each of the other two phases. The fourth wire 
in these Y-connected systems is used as a neutral for the primaries, or as a common 
neutral when both primaries and secondaries are present. Usually the windings of 
distribution substation transformers are Y-connected on the primary distribution 
side, with the neutral point grounded and connected to the common neutral wire. 
The neutral is also grounded at frequent intervals along the primary, at distribution 
transformers, and at customers’ service entrances. Sometimes distribution substation 
transformers are grounded through an impedance (approximately one ohm) to limit 
short-circuit currents and improve coordination of protective devices.
The three-wire delta primary system is also popular, although not as widely 
used as the four-wire multigrounded primary system. Three-wire delta primary 
systems are not being actively expanded. They are generally older and lower in 
voltage than the four-wire multigrounded type. They are also popular in industrial 
systems.
Rural areas with low-density loads are usually served by overhead primary lines 
with distribution transformers, fuses, switches, and other equipment mounted on poles. 
Urban areas with high-density loads are served by underground cable systems with 
Class, kV
Voltage, kV
2.5
2.4
5
4.16
8.66
7.2
15
12.47
13.2
13.8
25
22.9
24.94
34.5
34.5
TABLE  14.1
Typical Primary Distribution Voltages in the United 
States
Based on (J. D. Glover, “Electric Power Distribution,” 
Encyclopedia of Energy Technology and The Environ-
ment, John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY, 1995.)

	
Section 14.2 Primary Distribution	
879
distribution transformers and switchgear installed in underground vaults or in ground-
level cabinets. There is also an increasing trend toward underground residential distribu-
tion (URD), particularly single-phase primaries serving residential areas. Underground  
cable systems are highly reliable and usually unaffected by weather. But the installation 
costs of underground distribution are significantly higher than overhead.
Primary distribution includes three basic systems:
1.	 Radial
2.	 Loop
3.	 Primary network systems
PRIMARY RADIAL SYSTEMS
The primary radial system, as illustrated in Figure 14.2, is a widely used, economical 
system often found in low-load-density areas [1, 3, 4, and 9]. It consists of separate 
three-phase feeder mains (or feeders) emanating from a distribution substation in a 
radial fashion, with each feeder serving a given geographical area. The photograph at 
the beginning of this chapter shows a distribution substation that supplies six radial 
feeders for a suburban residential area. A three-phase feeder main can be as short 
Substation bus
Feeder
R
R
R
Fuse
Lateral
Sectionalizing fuse
Sectionalizing fuse
Normally open
tie switch
Adjacent feeder
Shunt
capacitor
bank
Recloser
FIGURE 14.2
Primary radial system
(J. D. Glover, “Electric 
Power Distribution,” 
Encyclopedia of 
Energy Technology 
and The Environment, 
John Wiley & Sons, 
New York, NY, 1995. 
Copyright © 1995, 
John Wiley and 
Sons.)

880	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
as a mile or two or as long as 30 miles (48 km). Single-phase laterals (or branches) 
are usually connected to feeders through fuses, so that a fault on a branch can be 
cleared without interrupting the feeder. Single-phase laterals are connected to differ-
ent phases of the feeder, so as to balance the loading on the three phases.
To reduce the duration of interruptions, overhead feeders can be protected by 
automatic reclosing devices located at the distribution substation, at the first overhead 
pole, or at other locations along the feeder [11]. As an example, Figure 14.3 shows a 
pole-mount recloser for a 22.9-kV circuit. Studies have shown that the large majority 
of faults on overhead primaries are temporary, caused by lightning flashover of line 
insulators, momentary contact of two conductors, momentary bird or animal con-
tact, or momentary tree limb contact. The recloser or circuit breaker with reclosing 
relays opens the circuit either “instantaneously” or with intentional time delay when 
a fault occurs, and then recloses after a short period of time. The recloser can repeat 
this open-and-reclose operation if the fault is still on the feeder. A popular reclos-
ing sequence is two instantaneous openings (to clear temporary faults), followed by 
two delayed openings (allowing time for fuses to clear persistent downstream faults), 
followed by opening and lockout for persistent faults between the recloser and fuses. 
FIGURE 14.3
Pole-mount recloser for a three-phase 22.9-kV circuit. This recloser has an 800-A 
continuous current rating and a 16-kA interrupting rating. The 22.9-kV feeder is 
located near the top of the pole. There are two three-phase 4.16-kV circuits below 
the recloser. An antenna located below the 4.16-kV circuits is for remote control  
of the recloser from the dispatch center. A normally open bypass switch located  
on the top crossarm can be manually operated if the recloser fails to reclose.
(Courtesy of Danvers Electric.)

	
Section 14.2 Primary Distribution	
881
For safety purposes, the reclosing feature is bypassed during live line maintenance. 
Reclosing is not used on circuits that are primarily underground.
To further reduce the duration and extent of customer interruptions, section-
alizing fuses are installed at selected intervals along radial feeders. In the case of a 
fault, one or more fuses blow to isolate the fault, and the unfaulted section upstream 
remains energized. In addition, normally open tie switches to adjacent feeders are in-
corporated, so that during emergencies, unfaulted sections of a feeder can be tied to the 
adjacent feeder. Spare capacity is often allocated to feeders to prevent overloads during 
such emergencies, or there may be enough diversity between loads on adjacent feeders 
to eliminate the need for spare capacity. Many utilities have also installed automatic 
fault-locating equipment and remote controlled sectionalizers (controlled switches) at 
intervals along radial lines, so that faulted sections of a feeder can be isolated and un-
faulted sections reenergized rapidly from a dispatch center, before the repair crew is sent 
out. Figure 14.4 shows a radio-controlled sectionalizing switch on a 22.9-kV circuit.
FIGURE 14.4
S&C normally open 
radio-controlled  
sectionalizing switch 
on a 22.9-kV circuit. 
This switch has a 
1200-A load-break 
capability.
(Courtesy of Danvers 
Electric.)

882	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
Shunt capacitor banks including fixed and switched banks are used on primary 
feeders to reduce voltage drop, reduce power losses, and improve power factor. Ca-
pacitors are typically switched off during the night for light loads and switched on 
during the day for heavy loads. Figure 14.5 shows a pole-mount switched capacitor 
bank. Computer programs are available to determine the number, size, and location 
of capacitor banks that optimize voltage profile, power factor, and installation and 
operating costs. In some cases, voltage regulators are used on primary feeders.
One or more additional, independent feeders along separate routes may be 
provided for critical loads, such as hospitals that cannot tolerate long interruptions. 
Switching from the normal feeder to an alternate feeder can be done manually or 
automatically with circuit breakers and electrical interlocks to prevent the con-
nection of a good feeder to a faulted feeder. Figure 14.6 shows a primary selective 
FIGURE 14.5
Pole-mount three-
phase 1800 kvar 
shunt capacitor bank 
for a 22.9-kV circuit. 
The capacitor bank, 
which is protected by 
50-A type K fuses, is 
a switched bank.
(Courtesy of Danvers 
Electric.)
Substation
bus
Substation
bus
Primary
feeder 1
Primary
feeder 2
Breaker
Breaker
Service
FIGURE 14.6
Primary selective 
system
(J. D. Glover, “Electric 
Power Distribution,” 
Encyclopedia of 
Energy Technology 
and The Environment, 
John Wiley & Sons, 
New York, NY, 1995. 
Copyright © 1995, 
John Wiley and 
Sons.)

	
Section 14.2 Primary Distribution	
883
system, often used to supply concentrated loads over 300 kVA [3, 4, and 9]. There are 
two primary feeders with automatic switching in front (upstream) of the distribution 
transformer. In case of feeder loss, automatic transfer to the other feeder is rapid and 
does not require fault locating before transfer.
PRIMARY LOOP SYSTEMS
The primary loop system, as illustrated in Figure 14.7 for overhead, is used where 
high service reliability is important [1, 3, 4 and 9]. The feeder loops around a load 
area and returns to the distribution substation, especially providing two-way feed 
from the substation. The size of the feeder conductors, which are kept the same 
throughout the loop, is usually selected to carry the entire load connected to  
the loop, including future load growth. Reclosers and tie switches (sectionalizers) 
are used to reduce customer interruptions and isolate faulted sections of the loop. 
The loop is normally operated with the tie switch (or tie recloser) open. Power to 
a customer at any one time is supplied through a single path from the distribution 
substation, depending on the open/close status of the reclosers/sectionalizers. Each 
of the circuit breakers at the distribution substation can be connected to separate bus 
sections and fed from separate distribution substation transformers.
Substation
bus
Primary
feeder 1
Primary
feeder 2
Recloser
Recloser
Breaker
Breaker
R
R
Service
Service
Transformer
R
R
Normally open
tie switch
(or tie recloser)
FIGURE 14.7
Overhead primary 
loop
(J. D. Glover, “Electric 
Power Distribution,” 
Encyclopedia of 
Energy Technology 
and The Environment, 
John Wiley & Sons, 
New York, NY, 1995. 
Copyright © 1995, 
John Wiley and 
Sons.)

884	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
Figure 14.8 shows a typical primary loop for underground residential distribu-
tion (URD). The size of the cable, which is kept the same throughout the loop, is 
selected to carry the entire load, including future load growth. Underground primary 
feeder faults occur far less frequently than in overhead primaries, but are generally 
permanent. The duration of outages caused by primary feeder faults is the time to 
locate the fault and perform switching to isolate the fault and restore service. Fault 
locators at each distribution substation transformer help to reduce fault locating times.
PRIMARY NETWORK SYSTEMS
Although the primary network system, as illustrated in Figure 14.9, provides higher 
service reliability and quality than a radial or loop system, only a few primary 
networks remain in operation in the United States today [1, 3, 4, and 9]. They are 
typically found in downtown areas of large cities with high load densities. The pri-
mary network consists of a grid of interconnected feeders supplied from a number 
of substations. Conventional distribution substations can be replaced by smaller, 
self-contained unit substations at selected network locations. Adequate voltage is 
maintained at utilization points by voltage regulators at distribution substations 
and by locating distribution transformers close to major load centers on the grid. 
However, it is difficult to maintain adequate voltage everywhere on the primary grid 
Substation
bus
Breaker
Breaker
Primary
feeder 1
Primary
feeder 2
Service
Service
Transformer
Normally open
switch
FIGURE 14.8
Underground primary 
loop
(J. D. Glover, “Electric 
Power Distribution,” 
Encyclopedia of 
Energy Technology 
and The Environment, 
John Wiley & Sons, 
New York, NY, 1995. 
Copyright © 1995, 
John Wiley and 
Sons.)

	
Section 14.3 Secondary Distribution	
885
under various operating conditions. Faults on interconnected grid feeders are cleared 
by circuit breakers at distribution substations, and in some cases, by fuses on the 
primary grid. Radial primary feeders protected by circuit breakers or fuses can be 
tapped off the primary grid or connected directly at distribution substations.
14.3  Secondary Distribution
Secondary distribution distributes energy at customer utilization voltages from dis-
tribution transformers up to meters at customers’ premises. Table 14.2 shows typical 
secondary voltages and applications in the United States [1–9]. In residential areas, 
120/240-V, single-phase, three-wire service is the most common, where lighting loads 
and outlets are supplied by 120-V, single-phase connections, and large household appli-
ances such as electric ranges, clothes dryers, water heaters, and electric space heating are 
supplied by 240-V, single-phase connections. In urban areas serving high-density resi-
dential and commercial loads, 108Y/120-V, three-phase, four-wire service is common, 
Primary feeder
Substation bus
Circuit breaker
Service
Service
Service
Distribution
transformer
Distribution
transformer
Fuse
FIGURE 14.9
Primary network
(J. D. Glover, “Electric 
Power Distribution,” 
Encyclopedia of 
Energy Technology 
and The Environment, 
John Wiley & Sons, 
New York, NY, 1995. 
Copyright © 1995, 
John Wiley and 
Sons.)

886	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
where lighting, outlets, and small motor loads are supplied by 120-V, single-phase con-
nections, and larger motor loads are supplied by 208-V, three-phase connections. In 
areas with very high-density commercial and industrial loads as well as high-rise build-
ings, 480Y/277-V, three-phase, four-wire service is common, with fluorescent lighting 
supplied by 277-V, single-phase connections and motor loads supplied by 480-V, three-
phase connections. Separate 120-V radial systems fed by small transformers from the 
480-V system are used to supply outlets in various offices, retail stores, or rooms.
Figure 14.10 shows a typical residential customer voltage profile along a radial 
feeder. In accordance with ANSI standards, during normal conditions utilities in the 
United States are required to maintain customer voltage at the customer’s service 
panel between 114 and 126 volts (±5%) based on a 120-V nominal secondary voltage. 
As shown in Figure 14.10, the first customer, closest to the substation, has the highest 
voltage, and the last customer, furthest from the substation, has the lowest voltage. 
Substation
128
125
120
115
110
Primary Feeder
Secondary
3 Volts
Primary Feeder
3 Volts
Distribution Transformer
3 Volts
Secondary & Service Drop
4 Volts
Customer Wiring
Distribution
Transformer
First
Customer
First Customer
Upper ANSI limit (126 V)
This point should not
exceed ANSI limits
This point should not
be less than ANSI limit
Lower ANSI limit (114 V )
Last
Customer
Last Customer
Voltage Drops
Secondary Voltage
FIGURE 14.10
Typical residential customer voltage profile along a radial feeder, assuming no shunt capacitors or voltage regulators along 
the feeder
Voltage
# Phases
# Wires
Application
120/240 V
Single-phase
Three
Residential
208Y/120 V
Three-phase
Four
Residential/Commercial
480Y/277 V
Three-phase
Four
Commercial/Industrial/High Rise
TABLE  14.2
Typical Secondary Distribution Voltages in the United States
(Based on J. D. Glover, “Electric Power Distribution,” Encyclopedia of Energy Technology and The Environ-
ment, John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY, 1995.)

	
Section 14.3 Secondary Distribution	
887
Proper distribution design dictates that the first customer’s voltage is less than 126 V  
during light loads and the last customer’s voltage is greater than 114 V during peak 
loads, so that all customers remain within 120 V ±5% under all normal loading 
conditions. Load-tap-changing distribution substation transformers and voltage 
regulators (see Section 14.4) as well as shunt capacitors (see Section 14.5) are used to 
maintain customer voltages within ANSI limits.
There are four general types of secondary systems:
1.	 Individual distribution transformer per customer
2.	 Common secondary main
3.	 Secondary network
4.	 Spot network
INDIVIDUAL DISTRIBUTION TRANSFORMER PER CUSTOMER
Figure 14.11 shows an individual distribution transformer with a single service sup-
plying one customer, which is common in rural areas where distances between cus-
tomers are large and long secondary mains are impractical [3 and 4]. This type of 
system may also be used for a customer that has an unusually large load or for a cus-
tomer that would otherwise have a low-voltage problem with a common secondary 
main. Although transformer installation costs and operating costs due to no-load 
losses are higher than those of other types of secondary systems, the installation 
costs of secondary mains are avoided.
COMMON SECONDARY MAIN
Figure 14.12 shows a primary feeder connected through one or more distribution 
transformers to a common secondary main with multiple services to a group of cus-
tomers [3 and 4]. This type of secondary system takes advantage of diversity among 
customer demands that allows a smaller capacity of the transformer supplying a 
group compared to the sum of the capacities of individual transformers for each 
customer in the group. Also, the large transformer supplying a group can handle 
motor starting currents and other abrupt, load changes without severe voltage drops.
Primary feeder
Fuse
(or circuit breaker)
Transformer
Service
FIGURE 14.11
Individual distribution 
transformer supplying 
single-service 
secondary
(J. D. Glover, “Electric 
Power Distribution,” 
Encyclopedia of 
Energy Technology 
and The Environment, 
John Wiley & Sons, 
New York, NY, 1995. 
Copyright © 1995, 
John Wiley and 
Sons.)

888	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
In most cases, the common secondary main is divided into sections, where each 
section is fed by one distribution transformer and is also isolated from adjacent sections 
by insulators. In some cases, fuses are installed along a continuous secondary main, 
which results in banking of distribution transformers, also called banked secondaries.
SECONDARY NETWORK
Figure 14.13 shows a secondary network or secondary grid, which may be used 
to supply high-density load areas in downtown sections of cities, where the high-
est degree of reliability is required and revenues justify grid costs [1, 3, 4, and 9].  
Primary feeder
Insulator
(or sectionalizing fuse)
Service
Secondary main
Secondary
circuit breaker
(or fuse)
Primary fuse
(or circuit breaker)
Transformer
FIGURE 14.12
Common secondary 
main (J. D. Glover, 
“Electric Power Distri-
bution,” Encyclopedia 
of Energy Technology 
and The Environment, 
John Wiley & Sons, 
New York, NY, 1995. 
Copyright © 1995, 
John Wiley and 
Sons.)
Substation bus
Breaker
Primary feeder
Network
transformer
Network
protector
Service
FIGURE 14.13
Secondary network
(J. D. Glover, “Electric 
Power Distribution,” 
Encyclopedia of 
Energy Technology 
and The Environment, 
John Wiley & Sons, 
New York, NY, 1995. 
Copyright © 1995, 
John Wiley and 
Sons.)

	
Section 14.3 Secondary Distribution	
889
The underground secondary network is supplied simultaneously by two or more 
primary feeders through network transformers. Most networks are supplied by three 
or more primary feeders with transformers that have spare capacity, so that the net-
work can operate with two feeders out of service.
Secondary grids operate at either 208Y/120-V or 480Y/277-V in the United 
States. Commonly used secondary cable sizes range from 4/0 to 500 kcmil AWG [5].
More than 260 cities in the United States have secondary networks [5]. New York  
City has the largest secondary network system in the United States with approximately 
23,000 network transformers feeding various secondary networks and an online 
monitoring system that continuously monitors transformer loadings. Some of the 
secondary networks in New York City are fed by as many as 24 primary feeders 
operating in parallel [9].
Network transformers are protected by network protectors between the trans-
formers and secondary mains. A network protector is an electrically operated low-
voltage air circuit breaker with relays and auxiliary devices that automatically opens 
to disconnect the transformer from the network when the transformer or the primary 
feeder is faulted, or when there is a power flow reversal. The network protector also 
has the ability to close automatically when a feeder is energized [5]. Fuses may also 
be used for backup of network protectors.
In many cases especially on 208Y/120-V secondary networks, main protection 
of secondary cables has come from the ability of the cable system to “burn clear” 
with no fuse or other protective device. However, in many instances for 480Y/277-V 
secondary networks, this practice was not able to successfully burn clear, resulting in 
fires and considerable damage. As a solution, special fuses called cable limiters are 
commonly used at tie points in the secondary network to isolate faulted secondary 
cables. Cable limiters, which are designed with restricted sections of copper which act 
like a fuse, do not limit the magnitude of fault current like current limiting fuses. In 
high short-circuit locations on the secondary network, current limiting fuses may be 
used instead of cable limiters.
In secondary network systems, a forced or scheduled outage of a primary 
feeder does not result in customer outages. Because the secondary mains provide 
parallel paths to customer loads, secondary cable failures usually do not result in 
customer outages, either. Also, each network is designed to share the load equally 
among transformers and to handle large motor starting and other abrupt load 
changes without severe voltage drops.
SPOT NETWORK
Figure 14.14 shows a spot network consisting of a secondary network supplying a 
single, concentrated load such as a high-rise building or shopping center, where a high 
degree of reliability is required [1, 3, 4, and 9]. The secondary spot network bus is 
supplied simultaneously by two or more primary feeders through network transform-
ers. In some cases, a spot network load as large as 25 MVA may be fed by up to six 
primary feeders. Most all spot networks in the United States operate at a 480Y/277-V 
secondary voltage [5]. Separate 120-V radial systems fed by small transformers from 
the 480-V system are used to supply outlets in various offices, retail stores, or rooms.

890	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
High service reliability and operating flexibility are achieved with a spot net-
work fed by two or more primary feeders through network transformers. The second-
ary bus is continuously energized by all network transformers. Network protectors 
are used to automatically disconnect transformers from the spot network bus for 
transformer/feeder faults or for power-flow reversal, and cable limiters or fuses are 
used to protect against overloads and faults on secondary cables. Scheduled or forced 
outages of primary feeders occur without customer interruption or involvement. Spot 
networks also provide a very compact and reliable arrangement of components [5].
14.4  Transformers in Distribution Systems
Transformers in distribution systems include distribution substation transformers 
and distribution transformers.
DISTRIBUTION SUBSTATION TRANSFORMERS
Distribution substation transformers come in a wide variety of ratings. Some of the 
typical characteristics of distribution substation transformers are given in Table 14.3.
Distribution substation transformers usually contain mineral oil for insulating and 
cooling purposes (older transformers manufactured prior to 1978 originally contained 
askarels with high PCB content, but many of these have either been retired or reclas-
sified as non-PCB transformers using per-chloroethylene). In some units, an inert gas 
such as nitrogen fills the space above the oil, in order to keep moisture and air out of the 
oil, and the transformer tank is sealed. Some sealed transformers have a pressure-relief 
diaphragm that is designed to rupture when the internal pressure exceeds a specified 
value, indicating possible deterioration of the insulation. Sealed transformers may also 
have a sudden pressure relay to either provide an alarm or de-energize the transformer 
when the internal pressure suddenly increases above a specified threshold [4].
Service
Spot network bus
Cable limiter
(or fuse)
Network
protector
Network
transformer
Disconnect switch
Primary feeder
Breaker
Substation bus
FIGURE 14.14
Secondary spot 
network
(J. D. Glover, “Electric 
Power Distribution,” 
Encyclopedia of 
Energy Technology 
and The Environment, 
John Wiley & Sons, 
New York, NY, 1995. 
Copyright © 1995, 
John Wiley and 
Sons.)

	
Section 14.4 Transformers in Distribution Systems	
891
Many distribution substation transformers have load tap changers (LTCs) that 
automatically regulate voltage levels based on loading conditions. Figure 14.15 shows 
a distribution substation transformer that has an internal LTC on the low-voltage side. 
Some distribution substations have distribution substation transformers with fixed 
taps and separate voltage regulators. A voltage regulator is basically an autotrans-
former with taps that automatically raise or lower voltage, operating in a similar way 
as LTCs on distribution substation transformers. Figure 14.16 shows a voltage regula-
tor at a distribution substation. In addition to voltage regulators for distribution sub-
stations, there are also pole-mount voltage regulators that can be placed on feeders.
Class, kV
Voltage, kV
Rating of High Voltage Winding
34.5 to 230 kV
Rating of Low Voltage Winding
2.4 to 46 kV
MVA Rating (OA)
2.5 to 75 MVA
Transformer Impedance
5 to 12 %
Number of Transformers in Substation
1 to 4
Loading
OA, OA/FA, OA/FA/FOA, OA/FA/FA
High Side Protection
Circuit Switches, Circuit Breakers, Fuses
Relay Protection
Overcurrent, Differential, Under-Frequency
Feeder Protection
Circuit Breakers, Reclosers
TABLE  14.3
Typical Characteristics of Distribution Substation Transformers [5]
Power distribution engineering: fundamentals and applications by Burke. Copyright 1994 by TAYLOR & 
FRANCIS GROUP LLC - BOOKS. Reproduced with permission of TAYLOR & FRANCIS GROUP LLC - BOOKS in the 
format Textbook via Copyright Clearance Center (Based on Burke, Power distribution engineering: fundamen-
tals and applications, 1994, Taylor & Francis.)
FIGURE 14.15
Three-phase 22.9 kVD/ 
4.16 kVY distribution 
substation transformer  
rated 12 MVA OA/ 
16 MVA FA1/20 MVA 
FA2. The transformer 
has fixed taps on the 
high-voltage side  
and an LTC on the 
low-voltage side
(Courtesy of Danvers 
Electric.)

892	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
Some outdoor distribution substation transformers are equipped with a tank 
on the top of the transformer called a “conservator,” in which expansion and con-
traction of the oil takes place. Condensation of moisture and formation of sludge 
occur within the conservator, which is also provided with a sump pump to draw off 
the moisture and sludge [4].
Distribution substation transformers have MVA ratings that indicate 
the continuous load that the transformers carry without exceeding a speci-
fied temperature rise of either 55°C (for older transformers) or 65°C (for newer 
transformers) above a specified ambient temperature (typically 40°C). Also, 
distribution substation transformers are typically equipped with external radiators 
with fans and/or oil circulating pumps, in order to dissipate heat generated by cop-
per and core losses. These transformers have multiple MVA ratings that include 
the following:
1.	 OA rating (passive convection with oil circulating pumps and fans off).
2.	 FA rating (with fans on but oil circulating pumps off).
3.	 FOA rating (with both fans and oil circulating pumps on). Some units, 
such as the one shown in Figure 14.15, may have two FA ratings, a lower 
FA rating with one of two sets of fans on, and a higher FA rating with 
both sets of fans on. Also, some units have water-cooled heat exchang-
ers. The nameplate transformer impedance is usually given in percent 
using the OA rating as the base MVA [5].
Most utilities have a planning and operating policy of loading distribution 
substation transformers within their nameplate OA/FA/FOA ratings during normal 
conditions, but possibly above their nameplate ratings during short-term emergency 
conditions. If one transformer has a scheduled or forced outage, the remaining trans-
former or transformers can continuously carry the entire substation load.
FIGURE 14.16
Voltage regulators at 
the 69/13.8 kV  
Lunenburg distribution 
substation,  
Lunenburg MA. The 
regulators are General 
Electric Type VR1 with 
ratings of 7.96 kV (line-
to neutral), 437 A
(Courtesy of Unitil 
Corporation.)

	
Section 14.4 Transformers in Distribution Systems	
893
Distribution Substation Transformer Rated Current  
and Short-Circuit Current
A three-phase 230 kVD/34.5 kV Y distribution substation transformer rated  
75 MVA OA/100 MVA FA/133 MVA FOA has a 7% impedance. (a) Determine the 
rated current on the low-voltage side of the transformer at its OA, FA, and FOA 
ratings. (b) Determine the per unit transformer impedance using a system base of 
100 MVA and 34.5 kV on the low-voltage side of the transformer. (c) Calculate the 
short-circuit current on the low-voltage side of the transformer for a three-phase 
bolted fault on the low-voltage side. Assume that the prefault voltage is 34.5 kV.
SOLUTION
a.  At the OA rating of 75 MVA,
IOA, L 5 75ysÏ3 3 34.5d 5 7.372 kA per phase
Similarly,
IFA, L 5 100y(Ï3 3 34.5) 5 9.829 kA per phase
IFOA, L 5 133y(Ï3 3 34.5) 5 13.07 kA per phase
b.  The transformer impedance is 7% or 0.07 per unit based on the OA rating 
of 75 MVA. Using (3.3.11), the transformer per unit impedance on a 100 MVA 
system base is:
ZpuSystem Base 5 0.07s100y75d 5 0.09333 per unit
c.  For a three-phase bolted fault, using the transformer ratings as the base quantities,
Isc3f 5 1.0/(0.07) 5 14.286 per unit
5 (14.286)(7.372)
5 105.31 kA/phase
Note that in (c) above, the OA rating is used to calculate the short-circuit current, 
because the transformer manufacturer gives the per unit transformer impedance 
using the OA rating as the base quantity.
EXAMPLE 14.1
Typically there are two emergency loading criteria for distribution substation 
transformers:
1.	 A two-hour emergency rating, which gives time to perform switching 
operations and reduce loadings.
2.	 A longer-duration emergency rating (10 to 30 days), which gives time to 
replace a failed transformer with a spare that is in stock.

894	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
As one example, the distribution substation shown in the photograph at the 
beginning of this chapter has two transformers rated 9 MVA OA/12 MVA FA1/ 
15 MVA FA2. The practice of the utility that owns the substation is to normally 
operate the substation at or below 15 MVA. As such, if there is a forced or scheduled 
outage of one transformer, the other transformer can supply all six 4.16-kV feeders 
without being loaded above its FA2 nameplate of 15 MVA. For this conservative 
operating practice, emergency transformer ratings above nameplate are not used.
Some utilities operate their distribution substation transformers above name-
plate ratings during normal operating conditions, as well as during emergency  
conditions. ANSI/IEEE C-57.91-1995 entitled, IEEE Guide for Loading Mineral- 
Oil-Immersed Transformers identifies the risks of transformer loads in excess of 
nameplate rating and establishes limitations and guidelines, the application of which 
are intended minimize the risks to an acceptable limit [21, 22].
Distribution Substation Normal, Emergency,  
and Allowable Ratings
As shown in Figure 14.17, a distribution substation is served by two 138-kV sub- 
transmission lines, each connected to a 40 MVA (FOA nameplate rating) 138 kVD/ 
12.5 kV Y distribution substation transformer, denoted TR1 and TR2. Both TR1 
EXAMPLE 14.2
138 kV
40 MVA
40 MVA
TR1
TR2
138 kVD/12.5 kV
138 kVD/12.5 kV
12.5 kV
12.5 kV
Bus 1
R
Bus 2
138 kV
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
FIGURE 14.17
Distribution 
substation for 
Example 14.2

	
Section 14.4 Transformers in Distribution Systems	
895
and TR2 are relatively new transformers with insulation systems designed for 
65°C temperature rises under continuous loading conditions. Shunt capacitor 
banks are also installed at 12.5-kV bus 1 and bus 2. The utility that owns this 
substation has the following transformer loading criteria based on a percentage 
of nameplate rating:
1.	 128% for normal summer loading;
2.	 170% during a two-hour summer emergency; AND
3.	 155% during a 30-day summer emergency.
(a)  Assuming a 5% reduction for unequal transformer loadings, determine the 
summer “normal” rating of the substation. (b) Determine the “allowable” sum-
mer rating of the substation under the single-contingency loss of one transformer.  
(c) Determine the 30-day summer emergency rating of the substation under the 
single-contingency loss of one transformer.
SOLUTION
a.  During normal operations, both transformers are in service. Using a 5% reduc-
tion to account for unequal transformer loadings, the summer normal substation 
rating is 1.28 3 (40 1 40) 3 0.95 5 97 MVA. With both transformers in service, 
the substation can operate as high as 97 MVA without exceeding the summer 
normal rating of 128% or 51.2 MVA for each transformer.
b.  The summer allowable substation rating, based on the single-contingency 
loss of one transformer, is 1.7 3 40 5 68 MVA. The transformer that remains 
in service is allowed to operate at 170% of its nameplate rating (68 MVA) for 
two hours, which gives time to perform switching operations to reduce the trans-
former loading to its 30-day summer emergency rating. Note that, even though 
the normal summer substation rating is 97 MVA, it is only allowed to operate up 
to 68 MVA so that a transformer will not exceed its two-hour emergency rating in 
case the other transformer has an outage.
c.  The 30-day summer emergency rating of the substation is 1.55 3 40 5 62 MVA.  
When one transformer has a permanent failure, the other can operate at 62 MVA 
for 30 days, which gives time to replace the failed transformer with a spare that 
is in stock.
DISTRIBUTION TRANSFORMERS
Distribution transformers connect the primary system (2.4 to 34.5 kV) to the second-
ary system (480 V and lower). Distribution transformers may be installed outdoors 
on overhead poles (pole-mount), outdoors at ground level on pads (padmount trans-
formers), indoors within buildings, or underground in manholes and vaults.
Pole-mount transformers for overhead distribution are liquid-filled transform-
ers that can be either single-phase or three-phase, depending on the load requirements 
and the primary supply configuration. Pole-mount distribution transformers may 

896	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
be manufactured as conventional transformers with no integral surge protection, 
overload protection, or short-circuit protection, or alternatively as completely 
self-protected (CSP) transformers.
For conventional pole-mount transformers, the protective devices are mounted 
external to the transformer. Typically a fuse cutout, which is a combination of a 
fuse and a switch, is installed adjacent to the conventional distribution transformer 
to disconnect it from the primary under overload conditions or an internal trans-
former failure. Similarly, a surge arrester is installed adjacent to the conventional 
transformer primary to protect it against transient overvoltages due to switching and 
lightning surges. Figure 14.18 shows three conventional single-phase pole-mount 
distribution transformers that are wired to form a three-phase bank rated 75 kVA 
supplying 120/208 V overhead secondary service for commercial customers.
For CSP transformers, a primary fuse is located within the transformer tank. 
The surge arrester is mounted outside the tank, but connected to the primary bush-
ing. Circuit breakers on the secondary side of CSP transformers provide protection 
from overloads and are coordinated with primary fuses.
Padmount transformers for underground distribution are liquid-filled or dry-
type transformers that can be either single-phase or three-phase, outdoors or in-
doors. Single-phase padmount distribution transformers are typically designed for 
underground residential and commercial distribution systems where safety, reli-
ability and aesthetics are especially important. Three-phase padmount distribution 
transformers are compact power centers usually for large commercial or industrial 
applications. Figure 14.19 shows a three-phase liquid-filled padmount transformer 
FIGURE 14.18
Three conventional  
single-phase 
pole-mount 25-kVA 
transformers. The 
transformers are wired 
to form a three-phase 
bank rated 75 kVA, 
4160VD-208/120 V 
grounded Y, which 
supplies secondary 
service for commercial 
customers. The trans-
formers are supplied 
from a 4160- V primary 
through fused cutouts, 
with surge arresters 
mounted vertically 
on the sides of the 
transformer tanks.
(Courtesy of Danvers 
Electric.)

	
Section 14.4 Transformers in Distribution Systems	
897
FIGURE 14.19
Three-phase oil-filled  
padmount transformer  
shown with doors 
closed (a) and open 
(b). This padmount, 
rated 1,500 kVA 
OA, kVD-480/277 
V grounded Y with 
internal fuses on the 
high-voltage side, 
supplies secondary 
service to an 
industrial plant. 
Courtesy of Danvers 
Electric.)

898	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
FIGURE 14.20
General Electric 500 
kVA, 13.8kVD- 
120/208V grounded Y 
network transformer 
from utility stock
(Courtesy of Unitil 
Corporation.)
that supplies 480/277 V underground secondary service to an industrial plant. Dry-
type padmount distribution transformers, whose insulation is solid (for example 
glass, silica, epoxy, or polyester resins) are primarily used where safety is a major 
concern, in close proximity to people such as at schools, hospitals, commercial build-
ings, and industrial plants, both indoors and outdoors.
Network transformers are large (300 to 2500 kVA) liquid-filled, three-phase 
distribution transformers that are designed for use in underground vaults or in spe-
cially designed rooms within buildings to supply power to either secondary networks 
or spot networks. Their voltage ratings vary from 4.16 to 34.5 kVD or grounded  
Y for the high-voltage windings, and either 216 grounded Y/125 V or 480 grounded 
Y/277 V for the low-voltage windings. Network transformers are designed to be con-
nected through network protectors that are integrally mounted on the transformer. 
Figure 14.20 shows a network transformer from utility stock. Network transformers 
are built as either “vault type” (suitable for occasional submerged operation) or “sub-
way type” (suitable for continuous submerged operation).
Table 14.4 shows typical kVA ratings of distribution transformers. The kVA 
ratings of distribution transformers are based on the continuous load the transform-
ers can carry without exceeding a specified temperature rise of either 55°C (for older 
transformers) or 65°C (for newer transformers above a specified ambient temperature 
(usually 40°C). When in service, distribution transformers are rarely loaded con-
tinuously at their rated kVA as they go through a daily load cycle. Oil-filled distri-
bution transformers have a relatively long thermal time constant; that is, the load 
temperature rises slowly during load increases. As such, it is possible to load these 
transformers above their kVA ratings without compromising the life expectancy of 

	
Section 14.4 Transformers in Distribution Systems	
899
the transformer. ANSI/EEE Std. C57.92-1981 is entitled IEEE Guide for Loading 
Mineral-Oil-Immersed Overhead and Pad-Mounted Distribution Transformers Rated 
500 kVA and Less with 65°C or 55°C Average Winding Rise [23]. Table 14.5 shows a 
typical loading guide, based on this standard.
Single-Phase
Three-Phase
kVA
kVA
    5
30
  10
45
  15
75
  25
112.5
  38
150
  50
225
  75
300
100
500
167
750
250
1000
333
1500
500
2500
3000
3750
5000
TABLE  14.4
Standard Distribution Transformer kVA Ratings
J. D. Glover, “Electric Power Distribution,” Encyclopedia 
of Energy Technology and The Environment, John Wiley 
& Sons, New York, NY, 1995. Reprinted with permission of 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (Based on ANSI/IEEE C.57 Standard)
Average Initial Load in Per Unit of Transformer Rating
Period of Increased
0.9
0.7
0.5
Loading, Hours
Maximum Load in Per Unit of Transformer Rating
0.5
1.59
1.77
1.89
1.0
1.40
1.54
1.60
2.0
1.24
1.33
1.37
4.0
1.12
1.17
1.19
8.0
1.06
1.08
1.08
TABLE  14.5
Permissible Daily Short-Time Loading of Liquid-Filled Distribution Transformers Based on Normal 
Life Expectancy [5]
Power distribution engineering: fundamentals and applications by Burke. Copyright 1994 by TAYLOR & 
FRANCIS GROUP LLC - BOOKS. Reproduced with permission of TAYLOR & FRANCIS GROUP LLC - BOOKS in the 
format Textbook via Copyright Clearance Center (Based on Burke, Power distribution engineering: fundamen-
tals and applications , 1994 Taylor & Francis.)

900	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
Note that in accordance with Table 14.5, short-time loadings can be as high 
as 89% above the nameplate kVA rating for short durations. Also note that dry-type 
distribution transformers, which are not considered as rugged as liquid-filled units of 
the same rating, are not normally loaded above their kVA ratings.
14.5  Shunt Capacitors in Distribution 
Systems
Loads in electric power systems consume real power (MW) and reactive power 
(Mvar). At power plants, many of which are located at long distances from load cen-
ters, real power is generated and reactive power may either be generated, such as dur-
ing heavy load periods, or absorbed as during light load periods. Unlike real power 
(MW), the generation of reactive power (Mvar) at power plants and transmission of 
the reactive power over long distances to loads is not economically feasible. Shunt 
capacitors, however, are widely used in primary distribution to supply reactive power 
to loads. They draw leading currents that offset the lagging component of currents in 
inductive loads. Shunt capacitors provide an economical supply of reactive power to 
meet reactive power requirements of loads as well as transmission and distribution 
lines operating at lagging power factor. They can also reduce line losses and improve 
voltage regulation.
Shunt Capacitor Bank at End of Primary Feeder
Figure 14.21 shows a single-line diagram of a 13.8-kV primary feeder supply-
ing power to a load at the end of the feeder. A shunt capacitor bank is located 
at the load bus. Assume that the voltage at the sending end of the feeder is 
5% above rated and that the load is Y-connected with RLoad 5 20 V/phase in 
parallel with load jXLoad 5 j 40 V/phase. (a) With the shunt capacitor bank 
out of service, calculate the following: (1) line current; (2) voltage drop across 
the line; (3) load voltage; (4) real and reactive power delivered to the load;  
(5) load power factor; (6) real and reactive line losses; and (7) real power, reactive  
power, and apparent power delivered by the distribution substation.  
(b) The capacitor bank is Y-connected with a reactance XC 5 40 V/phase. 
With the shunt capacitor bank in service, redo the calculations. Also calculate 
the reactive power supplied by the capacitor bank. (c) Compare the results of 
(a) and (b).
EXAMPLE 14.3

	
Section 14.5 Shunt Capacitors in Distribution Systems	
901
SOLUTION
a.  Without the capacitor bank, the total impedance seen by the source is
ZTOTAL 5 RLINE 1 jXLINE 1
1
1
RLOAD 1
1
jXLOAD
ZTOTAL 5 3 1 j6 1
1
1
20 1 1
j40
ZTOTAL 5 3 1 j6 1
1
0.0559/226.578
5 3 1 j6 1 17.89/26.568
ZTOTAL 5 3 1 j6 1 16 1 j8 5 19 1 j14
5 23.60/36.388 V/phase
1.  The line current is
ILINE 5 VSLNyZTOTAL 5
1.05(13.8yÏ3)/08
23.60/36.388
5 0.3545/236.388 kA/phase
Sending end
voltage VS
Shunt
capacitor
bank
Load
RLOAD
VLOAD
jXLOAD
jXLINE
–jXC
3 V
138/13.8 kV
Distribution
substation
transformer
Feeder impedance
Load voltage
j6 V
RLINE
FIGURE 14.21
Single-line diagram 
of a primary feeder 
for Example 14.3
(Continued)

902	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
2.  The voltage drop across the line is
VDROP 5 ZLINE ILINE 5 (3 1 j6)(0.3545/236.388)
5 (6.708/63.438)(0.3545/236.388)
5 2.378/27.058 kV
uVDROPu 5 2.378 kV
3.  The load voltage is
VLOAD 5 VSLN 2 ZLINEILINE 5 1.05(13.8yÏ3)/08 2 2.378/27.058
5 8.366 2 (2.117 1 j1.081) 5 6.249 2 j1.081
5 6.342/29.8148 kVLN
uVLOADu 5 6.342Ï3 5 10.98 kVLL
4.  The real and reactive power delivered to the three-phase load is
PLOAD3f 5 3(VLOADLN)2yRLOAD 5 3(6.342)2y20 5 6.033 MW
QLOAD3f 5 3(VLOADLN)2yXLOAD 5 3(6.342)2y40 5 3.017 Mvar
5.  The load power factor is
p.f. 5 cos[tan21(QyP)]
5 cos[tan21(3.017y6.033)]
5 0.89 lagging
6.  The real and reactive line losses are
PLINELOSS3f 5 3 I
2
LINE RLINE 5 3(0.3545)2(3) 5 1.131 MW
QLINELOSS3f 5 3 I
2
LINE XLINE 5 3(0.3545)2(6) 5 2.262 Mvar
7.  The real power, reactive power, and apparent power delivered by the  
distribution substation are
PSOURCE3f 5 PLOAD3f 1 PLINELOSS3f 5 6.033 1 1.131 5 7.164 MW
QSOURCE3f 5 QLOAD3f + QLINELOSS3f 5 3.017 1 2.262 5 5.279 Mvar
SSOURCE3f 5 Ï(7.1642 1 5.2792) 5 8.899 MVA

	
Section 14.5 Shunt Capacitors in Distribution Systems	
903
b.  With the capacitor bank in service, the total impedance seen by the source is
ZTOTAL 5 RLINE 1 jXLINE 1
1
1
RLOAD 1
1
jXLOAD 2
1
jXC
ZTOTAL 5 3 1 j6 1
1
1
20 1 1
j40 2 1
j40
ZTOTAL 5 3 1 j6 1
1
0.05 5 23 1 j6 5 23.77/14.628 V/phase
1.  The line current is
ILINE 5 VSLNyZTOTAL 5 1.05(13.8yÏ3)y08
23.77/14.628
5 0.3520/214.628 kA/phase
2.  The voltage drop across the line is
VDROP 5 ZLINE ILINE 5 (6.708/63.438)(0.3520/214.628)
5 2.361/48.818 kV
uVDROPu 5 2.361 kV
3.  The load voltage is
VLOAD 5 VSLN 2 ZLINE ILINE
5 1.05(13.8yÏ3)/08 2 2.361/48.818
5 8.366 2 (1.555 1 j1.778)
5 6.81 2 j1.778
5 7.038/214.628 kVLN
uVLOADu 5 7.038Ï3 5 12.19 kVLL
4.  The real and reactive power delivered to the three-phase load is
PLOAD3f 5 3(VLOADLN)2yRLOAD 5 3(7.038)2y20 5 7.430 MW
QLOAD3f 5 3(VLOADLN)2yXLOAD 5 3(7.038)2y40 5 3.715 Mvar

904	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
5.  The load power factor is
p.f. 5 cos[tan21(QyP)]
5 cos[tan21(3.715y7.430)]
5 0.89 lagging
6.  The real and reactive line losses are
PLINELOSS3f 5 3 I
2
LINE RLINE 5 3(0.3520)2(3) 5 1.115 MW
QLINELOSS3f 5 3 I
2
LINE XLINE 5 3(0.3520)2(6) 5 2.230 Mvar
7.  The reactive power delivered by the shunt capacitor bank is
QC 5 3(VLOADLN)2/XC 5 3(7.038)2/40 5 3.715 Mvar
8.  The real power, reactive power, and apparent power delivered by the 
distribution substation are
PSOURCE3f 5 PLOAD3f 1 PLINELOSS3f 5 7.430 1 1.115 5 8.545 MW
QSOURCE3f 5 QLOAD3f 1 QLINELOSS3f 2 QC
5 3.715 1 2.230 2 3.715
5 2.230 Mvar
SSOURCE3f 5 Ï(8.5452 1 2.2302) 5 8.675 MVA
c.  Comparing the results of (a) and (b), with the shunt capacitor bank in service, 
the real power delivered to the load increases by 23% (from 6.033 to 7.430 MW) 
while at the same time
●
●
The line current decreases
●
●
The real and reactive line losses decrease
●
●
The voltage drop across the line decreases
●
●
The reactive power delivered by the source decreases
●
●
The load voltage increases
The above benefits are achieved by having the shunt capacitor bank (instead of 
the distribution substation) deliver reactive power to the load.
The location of a shunt capacitor bank along a primary feeder is important. 
If there were only one load on the feeder, the best location for the capacitor bank 
would be directly at the load, so as to minimize I2R losses and voltage drops on the 
feeder. Note that if shunt capacitors were placed at the distribution substation, I2R 
feeder losses and feeder voltage drops would not be reduced because the total power 

	
Section 14.6 Distribution Software	
905
including MW and Mvar would still have to be sent from the substation all the way 
to the load. Shunt capacitors at distribution substations, however, can be effective in 
reducing I2R losses and voltage drops on the transmission or subtransmission lines 
that feed the distribution substations.
For a primary feeder that has a uniformly distributed load along the feeder, a 
common application is the “two-thirds” rule; that is, place 2/3 of the required reac-
tive power 2/3 of the way down the feeder. Locating shunt capacitors 2/3 of the way 
down the feeder allows for good coordination between LTC distribution substation 
transformers or voltage regulators at the distribution substation. For other load dis-
tributions, computer software is available for optimal placement of shunt capacitor 
banks. Note that capacitors are rarely applied to secondary distribution systems due 
to their small economic advantage [3, 5].
During the daily load cycle, reactive power requirements change as a function 
of time. To meet the changing reactive power requirements, many utilities use a com-
bination of fixed and switched capacitor banks. Fixed capacitor banks can be used 
to compensate for reactive power requirements at light loads, and switched capacitor 
banks can be added during heavy load conditions. The goal is to obtain a close-to-
unity power factor throughout the day by switching capacitor banks on when needed 
and off when not needed. Methods of controlling switched capacitor banks include 
the following:
1.	 Voltage control
2.	 Current control
3.	 Var control
4.	 Time control
5.	 Temperature control
6.	 Radio dispatch/SCADA control
14.6  Distribution Software
Computer programs are available for the planning, design, and operation of electric 
power distribution systems. Program functions include:
1.	 Arc flash hazard and fault analysis
2.	 Capacitor placement optimization
3.	 Circuit breaker duty
4.	 Conductor and conduit sizing—ampacity and temperature calculations
5.	 Database management
6.	 Demand management
7.	 Distribution reliability evaluation
8.	 Distribution short circuit calculations
9.	 Fault detection and location

906	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
10.	 Graphics for single-line diagrams and mapping systems
11.	 Harmonic analysis
12.	 Motor starting
13.	 Outage management
14.	 Power factor correction
15.	 Power flow/voltage drop computations
16.	 Power loss computations and costs of losses
17.	 Power quality and reliability
18.	 Relay and protective device coordination
19.	 Switching optimization
20.	 Tie capacity optimization
21.	 T & D modeling and analysis
22.	 Transformer sizing—load profile and life expectancy
23.	 Voltage/var optimization
Some of the vendors that offer distribution software packages are given as follows:
●
●
ABB Network Control, Ltd., Switzerland
●
●
ASPEN, San Mateo, CA
●
●
Cooper Power Systems, Pittsburgh, PA
●
●
Cyme International, Burlington, MA
●
●
EDSA Corporation, Bloomfield, MI
●
●
Electrocon International Inc., Ann Arbor, MI
●
●
Operation Technology, Irvine, CA
●
●
Milsoft Utility Solutions Inc., Abilene, TX
●
●
RTDS Technologies, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada
14.7  Distribution Reliability
Reliability in engineering applications, as defined in the The Authoritative Dictionary 
of IEEE Standard Terms (IEEE 100), is the probability that a device will function 
without failure over a specified time period or amount of usage. In the case of elec-
tric power distribution, reliability concerns have come from customers who want 
uninterrupted continuous power supplied to their facilities at minimum cost [11–17].
A typical goal for an electric utility is to have an overall average of one interrup-
tion of no more than two hours’ duration per customer year. Given 8760 hours in a 
non-leap year, this goal corresponds to an Average Service Availability Index (ASAI) 
greater than or equal to 8758 service hours/8760 hours 5 0.999772 5 99.9772%.
IEEE Standard 1366-2012 entitled, IEEE Guide for Electric Power Distribution 
Reliability Indices, defines the following distribution reliability indices [24]:

	
Section 14.7 Distribution Reliability	
907
System Average Interruption Frequency Index (SAIFI):
SAIFI 5 S Total Number of Customers Interrupted
Total Number of Customers Served

(14.7.1)
System Average Interruption Duration Index (SAIDI):
SAIDI 5 S Customer Minutes of Interruption
Total Number of Customers Served
(14.7.2)
Customer Average Interruption Duration Index (CAIDI):
CAIDI 5
S Customer Minutes of Interruption
Total Number of Customers Interrupted
5 SAIDI
SAIFI
(14.7.3)
Average Service Availability Index (ASAI):
ASAI 5 Customer Hours Service Availability
Customer Hours Service Demands 
(14.7.4)
In accordance with IEEE Std. 1366-2012, when calculating the above reliability 
indices, momentary interruption events are not included. A momentary interruption 
event has an interruption duration that is limited to the time required to restore ser-
vice by an interrupting device (including multiple re-closures of reclosers or circuit 
breakers). Switching operations must be completed within five minutes for a momen-
tary interruption event. As such, customer interruption durations less than five min-
utes are excluded when calculating the reliability indices. IEEE Std. 1366-2012 also 
includes a method, when calculating reliability indices, for excluding major events, 
such as severe storms, for which the daily SAIDI exceeds a specified threshold.
The above formulas for reliability indices use customers’ out-of-service and 
customer-minutes out-of-service data. Electric utilities with outage management 
systems including geographical information systems (GIS) and customer informa-
tion systems (CIS) are able to very accurately keep track of this data. Some utilities 
in the United States are required to report distribution reliability indices to state 
public service commissions, while other utilities may voluntarily report these indices to 
regional power associations. Typical values for these indices are given in Table 14.6 [24].
SAIDI
SAIFI
CAIDI
ASAI
90
1.1
76
99.982%
minutes/year
Interruptions/year
minutes/year
TABLE  14.6
Typical Values of Reliability Indices [24] (Based on IEEE Std. 1366-2003, IEEE Guide for Electric 
Power Distribution Reliability Indices, 2004.)

908	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
Distribution Reliability Indices
Table 14.7 gives 2010 annual outage data (sustained interruptions) from a utility’s 
CIS database for one feeder. This feeder (denoted circuit 7075) serves 2000 cus-
tomers with a total load of 4 MW. Excluding momentary interruption events (less 
than five minutes duration) and major events, which are omitted from Table 14.7, 
calculate the SAIFI, SAIDI, CAIDI, and ASAI for this feeder.
Outage Date
Time at Beginning of 
Outage
Outage Duration 
(minutes)
Circuit
Number of 
Customers 
Interrupted
3/17/2010
12:12:20
8.17
7075
200
5/5/2010
00:23:10
71.3
7075
600
6/12/2010
09:30:10
30.3
7075
25
8/20/2010
15:45:39
267.2
7075
90
8/31/2010
08:20:00
120
7075
700
9/03/2010
17:10:00
10
7075
1500
10/07/2010
10:15:00
40
7075
100
TABLE  14.7
Customer Outage Data for Example 14.4 [24] (Based on IEEE Std. 1366-2012, IEEE Guide for Elec-
tric Power Distribution Reliability Indices.)
SOLUTION
Using the outage data from Table 14.7 in (14.7.1) through (14.7.4):
SAIFI 5 200 1 600 1 25 1 90 1 700 1 1500 1 100
2000
5 1.6075 interruptions/year
SAIDI 5 s8.17 3 200d 1 s71.3 3 600d 1 s30.3 3 25d 1 s267.2 3 90d 1 s120 3 700d 1 s10 3 1500d 1 s40 3 100d
2000
SAIDI 5 86.110 minutes/year
CAIDI 5 SAIDI
SAIFI 5 86.110
1.6075 5 53.57 minutes/year
ASAI
5 8760 3 2000 2 fs8.17 3 200d 1 s71.3 3 600d 1 s30.3 3 25d 1 s267.2 3 90d 1 s120 3 700d 1 s10 3 1,500d 1 s40 3 100dgy60
8760 3 2000
ASAI 5 0.999836 5 99.9836%
EXAMPLE 14.4
The following example uses outage data given in IEEE Std. 1366 [24].

	
Section 14.7 Distribution Reliability	
909
Table 14.8 lists basic outage reporting information recommended by an IEEE 
committee [15]. Table 14.9 lists generic and specific causes of outages, based on a 
U.S. Department of Energy study [16]. Many electric utilities routinely prepare dis-
tribution outage reports monthly, quarterly, and annually by town (municipality) 
or by district. The purposes of the reports are to monitor and evaluate distribution 
reliability, uncover weaknesses and potential problems, and make recommendations 
for improving reliability. These reports may include:
1.	 Frequency and duration reports, which provide data for the number of 
interruptions on distribution circuits together with power interrupted, 
average interruption duration, and causes.
2.	 Annual reports that sort outages according to cause of failure and 
according to circuit classification (for example, sort for each primary 
voltage; or sort for each conductor type including overhead open 
wire, overhead spacer cable, underground direct-burial, and cable in 
conduit).
3.	 Five- or ten-year trends for reliability indices, and outage trends for 
specific causes such as tree-contact outages for overhead distribution or 
dig-in outages for underground distribution.
4.	 Lists of problem circuits such as the 20 “worst” (lowest ASAI) circuits 
in a district, or all circuits with repeated outages during the reporting 
period.
Methods for improving distribution reliability include replacement of older 
distribution equipment, upgrades of problem circuits, crew staffing and training 
for fast responses to outages and rapid restoration of service, formal mainte-
nance programs, and public awareness programs to reduce hazards in the vicinity 
of distribution equipment such as contractor dig-ins. Reliability evaluation has 
also become an important component of bid selections to procure new distribu-
tion equipment. Also, great strides in distribution reliability have come through 
distribution automation.
TABLE  14.8
Basic Outage Reporting Information [15]
© 1977 IEEE. Reprinted, with permission, from D. O. Koval and R. Billinton, “Evaluation of Distribution Circuit 
Reliability,” Paper F77 067-2, IEEE Winter Power Meeting, New York, NY (January/February 1977).
1.  Type, design, manufacturer, and other descriptions for classification purposes
2.  Date of installation, location on system, length in case of a line
3.  Mode of failure (short circuit, false operation, etc.)
4.  Cause of failure (lightning, tree, etc.)
5.  Times (both out of service and back in service, rather than outage duration alone), date, 
meteorological conditions when the failure occurred
6.  Type of outage, forced or scheduled, transient or permanent (momentary or sustained)

910	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
14.8  Distribution Automation
Throughout its existence, the electric power industry has been a leader in the appli-
cation of electric, electronic, and later computer technology for monitoring, control, 
and automation. Initially, this technology consisted of simple meters to show volt-
ages and flows, and telephones to call the manned substations to do control opera-
tions. Yet as early as the 1950s, supervisory control and the associated telemetering 
equipment was in widespread use, with a 1955 AIEE (American Institute of Elec-
trical Engineers) report [25] indicating 31% of transmission level stations (switch-
ing stations) had such control, and that the U.S. electric industry had more than 
30,000 channel miles for communication, and that continuous monitoring of watts, 
vars, and voltage was widespread. By the late 1960s increasingly sophisticated energy 
management systems (EMSs) were beginning to be deployed in electric utility control 
centers with applications that included automatic generation control, alarming, state 
Weather
Miscellaneous
System Components
System Operation
Blizzard/snow
Airplane/helicopter
Electrical & mechanical:
System conditions:
Cold
Animal/bird/snake
Fuel supply
Stability
Flood
Vehicle:
Generating unit failure
High/low voltage
Heat
Automobile/truck
Transformer failure
High/low frequency
Hurricane
Crane
Switchgear failure
Line overload
Ice
Dig-in
Conductor failure
Transformer overload
Lightning
Fire/explosion
Tower, pole attachment
Unbalanced load
Rain
Sabotage/vandalism
Insulation failure:
Neighboring power
Transmission line
system
Tornado
Tree
Substation
Public appeal:
Wind
Unknown
Surge arrester
Commercial & industrial
Other
Other
Cable failure
All customers
Voltage control equipment: Voltage Reduction:
Voltage regulator
0–2% voltage reduction
Automatic tap changer
Greater than 2–8%
Capacitor
voltage reduction
Reactor
Rotating Blackout
Protection and control:
Utility personnel:
Relay failure
System operator error
Communication signal error
Power plant operator error
Supervisory control error
Field operator error  
Maintenance error  
Other
TABLE  14.9
Generic and Specific Causes of Outages [16]
© 1976 IEEE. Reprinted, with permission, from IEEE Committee Report, “List of Transmission and Distribution 
Components for Use in Outage Reporting and Reliability Calculations,” IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus 
and Systems, PAS 95(4) (July/August 1976), pp. 1210–1215.

	
Section 14.8 Distribution Automation	
911
estimation, on-line power flows, and contingency analysis. Initially all of this moni-
toring, control, and automation was confined to the generators and the transmission 
level substations. Because of its larger number of devices and more diffuse nature, 
the costs of monitoring and automating the distribution system could not be justi-
fied. However, this is now rapidly changing.
The monitoring, control, and automation of the distribution system is known un-
der the general rubric of distribution automation (DA). While prototype DA systems 
date back to the 1970s, it has only been in the last 15 years or so, as communication and 
computer costs have continued to decrease, that they have started to become widespread.
A primary reason for DA is to reduce the duration of customer outages. As was 
mentioned in Section 14.2, distribution systems are almost always radial, with sec-
tionalizing fuses and circuit breakers used to clear faults, avoiding having prolonged 
outages for most customers upstream from the fault location. Then sectionalizing 
switches can be used to further isolate the faulted area, and by closing normally open 
switches the unfaulted downstream sections of the feeder can be fed from adjacent 
feeders. Prior to DA these switches were manually controlled, requiring delays of 
potentially more than an hour for a line crew to travel to the switch location. DA can 
greatly reduce the time necessary to complete this process by either
1.	 providing the distribution system operators with the ability to remotely 
control the various sectionalizing switches, or
2.	 automating the entire process.
Real-time monitoring of the voltages and power flows is used to ensure there is suffi-
cient capacity to pickup the unfaulted load on the adjacent feeders.
An example of this situation is illustrated in Figure 14.22, which can also be 
seen in PowerWorld Simulator by loading case Figure 14_22. This case represents a 
feeder system modeled using the primary loop approach from Section 14.2 with a 
FIGURE 14.22
Primary loop feeder 
example, before fault

912	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
nominal 13.8 kV feeder voltage. A total of 10 loads are represented, with each load 
classified as either primarily residential (‘res’), primarily commercial (‘com’), or in-
dustrial (‘ind’); the bus name suffix indicates the type. The left side of the loop goes 
from the substation distribution bus 2 to bus 8ind; the right side of the loop goes 
from the substation distribution bus 3 to bus 13ind. Substation buses 2 and 3 are 
connected by a normally open bus-tie breaker, while buses 8ind and 13ind are joined 
together by a normally open feeder segment to complete the loop. Each feeder line 
segment is assumed to use 336,400 26/7 ACSR line conductors and to be 0.6 miles in 
length giving a per unit impedance (on a 100 MVA base) of 0.0964 1 j0.1995. The 
two 12 MVA 138/13.8 kV transformers have an impedance of 0.1 1 j0.8 per unit.
Assume a persistent fault occurs immediately downstream from the bus 3 
breaker. This fault would be cleared by the bus 3 breaker, outaging all of the custom-
ers of the right branch feeder. Without DA, a line crew would need to be dispatched 
to locate the fault and then manually change the status of the appropriate sectional-
izers to restore service to most customers on this feeder.
In contrast, even with a simple DA, which just consisted of having the ability to 
remotely control the sectionalizers and monitor flow values/voltages, service could be 
more quickly restored to most customers on the feeder. This could be accomplished 
by first opening the sectionalizer downstream from bus 9com, then closing the sec-
tionalizer between buses 8ind and 13ind, then closing the distribution substation 
bus-tie breaker between buses 2 and 3 (after first balancing their taps to prevent cir-
culating reactive power). This new configuration is shown in Figure 14.23.
Another important application of DA is the use of voltage control devices, 
such as switched capacitor banks, load tap changers (LTCs) on the distribution 
substation transformers, or separate voltage regulators, to minimize distribution 
losses and to better manage the customer voltage. This is known as volt-var opti-
mization. Since the feeder load is continually varying, these devices often need to 
be changed in order to maintain the desired feeder voltages and minimize feeder 
FIGURE 14.23
Primary loop feeder 
example, after fault 
and switching

	
Section 14.9 Smart Grids	
913
losses. Without DA various techniques using only local information for local con-
trol have been employed. These included changing LTC transformer taps using 
the voltage sensed at the transformer, switching capacitors using local voltage, 
current, temperature, reactive power sensors, or just simple timers. While these 
approaches are better than nothing, they all have limitations. By providing a more 
global view of the entire feeder, DA can greatly improve the feeder voltage profile 
while minimizing losses.
To illustrate, again consider the Figure 14.22 case, which includes six 1.0 Mvar 
(nominal voltage) switched capacitors. The one-line display also shows the total sys-
tem losses, and allows variation in the load multiplier for each of the three customer 
classes (residential, commercial, industrial) with a typical value for each ranging be-
tween 0.5 and 1.25. Initially all of the capacitors are in-service with total losses of 
0.161 MW. However by manually opening the capacitors at buses 7res and 12res the 
losses can be decreased modestly to 0.153 MW. Under lighter loading situations the 
loss reduction from capacitor optimization can be even more significant.
DA can also help to reduce peak electric demands, potentially saving energy, 
by what is known as conservation voltage reduction (CVR). Because the power used 
by many loads is voltage dependent, the idea of CVR is to reduce the feeder voltage 
profile, while maintaining all customer voltages within the ANSI limits. A drop in 
the feeder voltage profile can result in an immediate decrease in power consumption. 
However, because some loads have their own closed-loop control systems, such as 
thermostats for electric heating, over the long-term these loads tend to behave more 
as constant energy resources. Overall energy savings from CVR are feeder specific 
and are estimated to be between 0.3% and 1% per percent voltage reduction.
While the benefits of DA can be substantial, what had been holding back more 
widespread adoption of DA was the costs, both for the initial updated equipment in-
stallations and the ongoing costs associated with maintaining the monitoring and con-
trol infrastructure, such as communication costs. However many of these costs have 
continued to decrease resulting in much more widespread adoption of DA technology.
14.9  Smart Grids
Over the last several years, the term “smart grid” has taken the electric power indus-
try by storm, with its use being further cemented in the power industry lexicon with 
the launch of the IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid Journal in 2010. While a new 
word, the smart grid actually represents an evolutionary advancement on the tech-
nological innovation that has been present in the power industry since its inception 
in the 1880s. Such pervasive innovation over more than a century resulted in electri-
fication being named the top engineering technology of the 20th century by the U.S. 
National Academy of Engineering in 2000. The smart grid represents a continuation 
of this application of advanced technology into the 21st century to take advantage 
of near ubiquitous computing and communication.
As defined in [29], “A smart grid uses digital technology to improve reliability, se-
curity and efficiency (both economic and energy) of the electric system from large gen-
eration, through the delivery system to electricity consumers and a growing number 

914	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
of distributed-generation and storage resources.” Probably the best definition of the 
attributes of the smart grid is also given in [29] with its listing of six key characteristics:
1.	 Enables informed participation by customers;
2.	 Accommodates all generation and storage options;
3.	 Enables new products, services, and markets;
4.	 Provides the power quality for the range of needs;
5.	 Optimizes asset utilization and operating efficiency; and
6.	 Operates resiliency to disturbances, attacks, and natural disasters.
While the smart grid covers large generation and high-voltage transmission, it 
is most germane to the distribution system and ultimately the end-use customer. The 
distribution system that, quoting from [28], “has traditionally been characterized as 
the most unglamorous component” of the power grid is suddenly front and center. 
Rather than just being a passive, radial conduit for power to flow from the networked 
transmission system, it is the means for supporting a bidirectional flow of informa-
tion and energy to customers who are no longer content to just receive a monthly 
electric bill. The large, new load potential of electric vehicles requires that the home 
electric meter and the distribution system become smarter, since the grid cannot rea-
sonably accommodate charging a large number of car batteries as people return to 
their garages in the early evening when the remainder of the electric load is at peak 
demand. Providing real-time prices to some loads can provide additional control 
flexibility. In many locations distributed energy resources such as solar photovoltaics 
are resulting in situations in which distribution feeders have reversible power flows, 
looking like net generation when the sun is shining and load when it is not.
Underlying the smart grid is the need for a trustworthy and resilient cyber in-
frastructure. As more smart grid technologies are deployed, the result will be a power 
grid increasingly dependent on communication and computing. Disruptions in this 
cyber infrastructure, either due to accidents, bugs, or deliberate attacks could result 
in wide scale blackouts.
PROBLEMS
SECTION 14.2
14.1	 Are laterals on primary radial systems typically protected from short cir-
cuits? If so, how (by fuses, circuit breakers, or reclosers)?
14.2	 What is the most common type of grounding on primary distribution 
systems?
14.3	 What is the most common primary distribution voltage class in the 
United States?
14.4	 Why are reclosers used on overhead primary radial systems and overhead 
primary loop systems? Why are they not typically used on underground 
primary radial systems and underground primary loop systems?

SECTION 14.3
14.5	 What are the typical secondary distribution voltages in the United States?
14.6	 What are the advantages of secondary networks? Name two disadvantages.
14.7	 Using the Internet, name three cities in the Western Interconnection of 
the United States that have secondary network systems.
SECTION 14.4
14.8	 A three-phase 138 kVD/13.8 kV Y distribution substation transformer 
rated 40 MVA OA/50 MVA FA/65MVA FOA has an 9% impedance. 
(a) Determine the rated current on the primary distribution side of the 
transformer at its OA, FA, and FOA ratings. (b) Determine the per-unit 
transformer impedance using a system base of 100 MVA and 13.8 kV on 
the primary distribution side of the transformer. (c) Calculate the short-
circuit current on the primary distribution side of the transformer for a 
three-phase bolted fault on the primary distribution side. Assume that 
the prefault voltage is 13.8 kV.
14.9	 As shown in Figure 14.24, an urban distribution substation has one 
30-MVA (FOA) and three 33.3 MVA (FOA), 138 kVD/12.5 kV Y trans-
formers denoted TR1-TR4, which feed through circuit breakers to a ring 
30 MVA
TR1
TR2
33.3 MVA
12.5 kV
33.3 MVA
TR4
TR3
33.3 MVA
6 Mvar
6 Mvar
9 Mvar
6 Mvar
NO
NO
FIGURE 14.24
Distribution 
substation for 
Problems 14.9  
and 14.10
	
Problems	
915

916	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
bus. The transformers are older transformers designed for 55°C tempera-
ture rise. The ring bus contains eight bus-tie circuit breakers, two of which 
are normally open (NO), so as to separate the ring bus into two sections. 
TR1 and TR2 feed one section, and TR3 and TR4 feed the other sec-
tion. Also, four capacitor banks, three banks rated at 6 Mvar and one at  
9 Mvar, are connected to the ring bus. Twenty-four 12.5-kV underground 
primary feeders are served from the substation, 12 from each section. The 
utility that owns this substation has the following transformer summer 
loading criteria based on a percentage of nameplate rating:
a.	
120% for normal summer loading.
b.	
150% during a two-hour emergency.
c.	
130% 30-day emergency loading.
	
Determine the following summer ratings of this substation: (a) the normal 
summer rating with all four transformers in service; (b) the allowable sub-
station rating assuming the single-contingency loss of one transformer; 
and (c) the 30-day emergency rating under the single-contingency loss 
of one transformer. Assume that during a two-hour emergency, switch-
ing can be performed to reduce the total substation load by 10% and to 
approximately balance the loadings of the three transformers remaining 
in service. Assume a 5% reduction for unequal transformer loadings.
14.10	 For the distribution substation given in Problem 14.9, assume that each 
of  the four circuit breakers on the 12.5-kV side of the distribution sub-
station transformers has a maximum continuous current of 2000A/phase 
during both normal and emergency conditions. Determine the summer 
allowable substation rating under the single-contingency loss of one 
transformer, based on not exceeding the maximum continuous current of 
these circuit breakers at 12.5-kV operating voltage. Assume a 5% reduction  
for unequal transformer loadings. Comparing the results of this problem 
with Problem 14.9, what limits the substation allowable rating, the circuit 
breakers or the transformers?
SECTION 14.5
14.11	 (a) How many Mvars of shunt capacitors are required to increase the 
power factor on a 10 MVA load from 0.85 to 0.9 lagging? (b) How many 
Mvars of shunt capacitors are required to increase the power factor on a 
10 MVA load from 0.90 to 0.95 lagging? (c) Which requires more reactive 
power, improving a low power-factor load or a high power-factor load?
14.12	 Rework Example 14.3 with RLoad 5 40 V/phase, XLoad 5 60 V/phase, and 
XC 5 60 V/phase. 
SECTION 14.7
14.13	 Table 14.10 gives 2010 annual outage data (sustained interruptions) from 
a utility’s CIS database for feeder 8050. This feeder serves 4500 customers 

with a total load of 9 MW. Table 14.10 includes a major event that began 
on 04/11/2010 with 4000 customers out of service for approximately 
six days (10,053 minutes) due to an ice storm. Momentary interruption 
events (less than five minutes’ duration) are excluded from Table 14.10.  
Calculate the SAIFI, SAIDI, CAIDI, and ASAI for this feeder:  
(a) including the major event; and (b) excluding the major event.
14.14	 Assume that a utility’s system consists of two feeders: feeder 7075 serving 
2000 customers and feeder 8050 serving 4000 customers. Annual outage 
data during 2010 is given in Table 14.6 and 14.10 for these feeders. Calcu-
late the SAIFI, SAIDI, CAIDI, and ASAI for the system, excluding the 
major event.
SECTION 14.8
14.15	 Open PowerWorld Simulator case Problem 14_15, which represents a 
lower load scenario for the Figure 14.22 case. Determine the optimal sta-
tus of the six switched shunts to minimize the system losses.
14.16	 Open PowerWorld Simulator case Problem 14_16, which represents a 
lower load scenario for the Figure 14.22 case and has the LTC trans-
former taps each changed to 1.025. Determine the optimal status of the 
six switched shunts to minimize the system losses for this case.
14.17	 Open PowerWorld Simulator case Problem 14_17 and note the case 
losses. Then close the bus tie breaker between buses 2 and 3. How do the 
losses change? How can the case be modified to reduce the system losses?
14.18	 Usually in power flow studies the load is treated as being independent 
of the bus voltage. That is, a constant power model is used. However, in 
reality the load usually has some voltage dependence, so that decreasing 
PW
PW
PW
PW
Outage Date
Time at Beginning  
of Outage
Outage Duration 
(minutes)
Circuit
Number of 
Customers 
Interrupted
1/15/2010
01:24:20
14.4
8050
342
4/4/2010
08:14:20
151.2
8050
950
7/08/2010
07:15:46
89.8
8050
125
9/10/2010
15:45:39
654.6
8050
15
10/11/2010
07:40:59
32.7
8050
2200
11/04/2010
22:30:00
10,053*
8050
4000*
12/01/2010
14:18:07
40
8050
370
TABLE  14.10
Customer Outage Data for Problem 14.13
* Major event due to ice storm
	
Problems	
917

918	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
the feeder voltage (such as for conversation voltage reduction) will result 
in less power consumption, at least temporarily. Open PowerWorld Simu-
lator case Problem 14_18, which contains the Figure 14.22 system except 
the load model is set so 50% of the load is modeled as constant power, 
and 50% of the load is modeled as constant impedance (i.e., the load var-
ies with the square of the bus voltage magnitude). By adjusting the tap 
positions for the two substation transformers and the capacitor banks, 
determine the operating configuration that minimizes the total load plus 
losses (shown on the display), with the constraint that all bus voltage 
must be at least 0.97 per unit.
14.19	 Repeat Problem 14.18, except using PowerWorld Simulator case Prob-
lem 14_19 (which has a different load level from the Problem 14.18 case).
SECTION 14.9
14.20	 Select one of the smart grid characteristics from the list given in this sec-
tion. Write a one page (or other instructor-selected length) summary and 
analysis paper on a current news story that relates to this characteristic.
CASE STUDY QUESTIONS
a.	
Do DER installations reduce distribution losses? If so, why?
b.	
Why are most distribution feeders in the United States built in a radial 
configuration?
c.	
What are the challenges associated with large penetrations of DERs in 
distribution systems?
REFERENCES
1.	
J. D. Glover, “Electric Power Distribution,” Encyclopedia of Energy Tech-
nology and The Environment (John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY, 1995).
2.	
D. G. Fink and H. W. Beaty, Standard Handbook for Electrical Engineers, 
11th ed. (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1978), Sec 18.
3.	
T. Gonen, Power Distribution Engineering (Wiley, New York, 1986).
4.	
A. J. Pansini, Electrical Distribution Engineering, 2nd ed., The Fairmont 
Press (Liburn, GA, 1992).
5.	
J. J. Burke, Power Distribution Engineering, Marcel Dekker (New York, 
1994).
6.	
Various co-workers, Electric Distribution Systems Engineering Handbook, 
Ebasco Services Inc., 2nd ed., McGraw-Hill (New York, 1987).
7.	
Various co-workers, Electrical Transmission & Distribution Reference 
Book, Westinghouse Electric Corporation (Pittsburgh, 1964).
PW

8.	
Various co-workers, Distribution Systems Electric Utility Engineering 
Reference Book, Vol. 3, Westinghouse Electric Corporation (Pittsburgh, 
1965).
9.	
Various co-workers, Underground Systems Reference Book, Edison Elec-
tric Institute (New York, 1957).
10.	
R. Settembrini, R. Fisher, and N. Hudak, “Seven Distribution Sys-
tems: How Reliabilities Compare,” Electrical World, 206, 5 (May 1992),  
pp. 41–45.
11.	
J. L. Blackburn, Protective Relaying, Marcel Dekker (New York, 1987).
12.	
R. Billinton, Power System Reliability Evaluation, Gordon and Breach 
(1988).
13.	
R. Billinton, R. N. Allan, and L. Salvaderi, Applied Reliability Assessment 
in Electric Power Systems, Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers 
(New York, 1991).
14.	
R. Billinton and J. E. Billinton, “Distribution Reliability Indices,” IEEE 
Transactions on Power Delivery, 4, 1 (January 1989), pp. 561–568.
15.	
D. O. Koval and R. Billinton, “Evaluation of Distribution Circuit Reli-
ability,” Paper F77 067-2, IEEE Winter Power Meeting (New York, NY, 
January/February 1977).
16.	
IEEE Committee Report, “List of Transmission and Distribution Com-
ponents for Use in Outage Reporting and Reliability Calculations,” IEEE 
Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, PAS 95, 54 (July/August 
1976), pp. 1210–1215.
17.	
U. S. Department of Energy, The National Electric Reliability Study: 
Technical Reports, DOE/EP-0003, (April 1981).
18.	
J. B. Bunch and co-workers, Guidelines for Evaluating Distribution Auto-
mation, EPRI-EL-3728, Project 2021-1, Electric Power Research Insti-
tute (Palo Alto, CA, November 1984).
19.	
T. Desmond, “Distribution Automation: What is it? What does it do?” 
Electrical World, 206, 2 (February 1992), pp. 56 & 57.
20.	
J. Smith et al., “It’s All in the Plans,” IEEE Power & Energy Magazine, 13, 
2, (March/April 2015), pp. 20–29.
21.	
ANSI/IEEE Std. C57.91-1995, IEEE Guide for Loading Mineral-Oil- 
Immersed Transformers, Approved June 14, 1995.
22.	
ANSI/EEE Std. C57.92-1981, IEEE Guide for Loading Mineral-Oil- 
Immersed Power Transformers Up to and Including 100 MVA with 55°C or 
65°C Average Winding Rise, Approved January 12, 1981.
23.	
ANSI/EEE Std. C57.92-1981, IEEE Guide for Loading Mineral-Oil- 
Immersed Overhead and Pad-Mounted Distribution Transformers Rated 
500 kVA and Less with 65°C or 55°C Average Winding Rise, Approved 
November 19, 1980.
	
References	
919

920	
Chapter 14  |  Power Distribution
24.	
IEEE Std. 1366, IEEE Guide for Electric Power Distribution Reliability 
Indices, 2003 and 2012 editions.
25.	
AIEE Committee Report, “Supervisory Control and Associated Teleme-
tering Equipment—A Survey of Current Practice,” AIEE Transactions 
Power Apparatus and Systems, Part III, (January 1955), pp. 36–68.
26.	
Technical and System Requirements for Advance Distribution Automa-
tion, EPRI Report 1010915, June 2004.
27.	
H. L. Willis, Power Distribution Planning Reference Book, 2nd Edition, 
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2004.
28.	
W. H. Kersting, Distribution System Modeling and Analysis, 3rd Edition,  
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2012.
29.	
Smart Grid System Report, U.S. DOE, July 2009.
30.	
Z. Wang and J. Wang, “Review on Implementation and Assessment of 
Conservation Voltage Reduction,” IEEE Trans. on Power Systems, vol. 
29, May 2014, pp. 1306–1315.

921

922	
Appendix

	
Appendix	
923

924	
Appendix

925
Index
A
AAAC. See All-aluminum alloy 
conductor (AAAC)
AAC. See All-aluminum 
conductor (AAC)
ABCD parameters, 274–275
ABCD parameters and nominal π 
circuit, 263–265
ABCD parameters of common 
networks, 261
ACCR. See Aluminum conductor 
composite reinforced 
(ACCR)
ac fault current, 439
ACSR. See Aluminum conductor, 
steel-reinforced (ACSR)
Active power, 44
Actual quantity, 108
Advantages, balanced three-phase 
versus single-phase  
systems, 68–69
Aeroderivative gas turbine  
sets, 678
All-aluminum alloy conductor 
(AAAC), 175
All-aluminum conductor  
(AAC), 175
Aluminum conductor 
composite reinforced  
(ACCR), 175
steel-reinforced (ACSR), 174
Ampacity, 68
Ampere’s law, 96
Area control error, 768
Area frequency response 
characteristic, 763
Areas, 376
Armature time constant, 440
Asset exposure map, 844
Asymmetrical fault current, 436
Asynchronous back-to-back 
tie, 2 HVDC transmission 
technologies, 42
Asynchronous ties, HVDC 
transmission technologies, 
248–249
Attenuation, 835–836
Automatic generation control 
strategy, 771
Autotransformers, 129–131
ideal single-phase transformers, 
129
single-phase autotransformers, 
130–131
Average power, 44
B
Back substitution, 331
Backup relays, 594
Balance beam relay, 646
Balanced abc currents, 497–498
Balanced-  and-Y loads, 61–62
Balanced-  loads, 58–60
Balanced line currents, 57–58
Balanced line-to-line  
voltages, 56–57
Balanced line-to-neutral  
voltages, 56, 496–497
Balanced three-phase circuits, 55–62
balanced-  and-Y loads, 61–62
balanced-  loads, 58–60
balanced line currents, 57–58
balanced line-to-line  
voltages, 56–57
balanced line-to-neutral 
voltages, 56
balanced-Y connections, 55–56
–Y conversion for balanced 
loads, 60–61
equivalent line-to-neutral 
diagrams, 62
Balanced three-phase fault, 568
Balanced three-phase transformer, 
voltage drop and fault 
current, 124–125
Balanced-Y and balanced-Δ loads, 
503
Balanced-Y connections, 55–56
Balanced-Y impedance load, 499
Base quantities, 108
Base quantities, rules for selecting, 
121
Basic single-phase two-winding 
transformer, 95
B coefficient, 387
Bewley lattice diagram, 822–827
junction, lossless lines, 827
junction, two single-phase 
lossless lines, 823
overhead line connected to 
cable, single-phase lossless 
lines lattice diagram, 824–827
single-phase lossless line lattice 
diagram, 823
Black-start, 686–687
Block and trip regions, 646
Bottom-up restoration, 671–672
Boundary conditions for single- 
phase lossless lines, 813–822
receiving-end voltage reflection 
coefficient, 813

Boundary conditions for single- 
phase lossless lines (Continued)
step-voltage source at sending 
end, matched load at 
receiving end, 815–816
step-voltage source matched at 
sending end, capacitive load 
at receiving end, 818–820
step-voltage source matched at 
sending end, open receiving 
end, 816–818
step-voltage source with 
unmatched source resistance 
at sending end, unmatched 
resistive load at receiving 
end, 820–822
transit time, 813
Brushless exciters, 757
Bundle, 175
Bundle conductor configurations, 
196
Bus impedance equivalent circuit, 
449
Bus impedance matrix, 445–454
bus impedance equivalent 
circuit, 449
mutual impedances, 448
parallel connection, unloaded 
synchronous machine 
internal-voltage sources, 449
self-impedances, 448
Zbus use to compute three-
phase short-circuit currents, 
447–448
Bus protection with differential 
relays, 647–648
Bus types, 345–346
C
California frequency response 
investigation, 797–802
Capacitance, 205–211
single-phase line, capacitance, 
admittance, reactive power 
supplied, 210
single-phase two-wire line, 206
three-phase line, capacitance, 
shunt admittance; charging 
current, reactive power 
supplied, 210–211
three-phase line with two 
conductors per bundle, 209
three-phase three-wire line with 
equal phase spacing, 207
Capacitive load, 43
Characteristic impedance, 267
Charge separation within  
clouds. 842
Circuit breaker, 455
Circuit breaker selection, 
 455–459
circuit breaker, 455
current ratings, 458
low-voltage circuit breakers, 455
outdoor circuit breakers 
ratings, 456
power circuit breakers, 455
related required capabilities, 457
voltage ratings, 458
Class current transformers, 617
Coal units, capacity committed 
and dispatched, 320
CO-8 time-delay overcurrent relay 
characteristics, 622
operating time, 623–624
Coherent machines, 694
Cold load pickup, 683–684
Collector system, 418
Common identities involving  
a 5 1/1208, 494
Common secondary main, 
887–888
Compensated transmission-line 
section, 290
Completely transposed three-
phase line 
capacitances, 510
sequence impedances, 509
Complex power, 47–52
balanced three-phase 
generators, 64–65
balanced three-phase motors, 65
balanced-Y and balanced-  
impedance loads, 65–66
generator convention, 48
load convention, 48, 49
negative reactive power, 49
positive reactive power, 49
power triangle and power 
factor correction, 50–52
real and reactive power, 
delivered or absorbed, 48–49
Conductance, 182
Conductors, design considerations, 
transmission lines, 174–175
all-aluminum alloy conductor 
(AAAC), 175
all-aluminum conductor 
(AAC), 175
aluminum conductor 
composite reinforced 
(ACCR), 175
aluminum conductor, steel- 
reinforced (ACSR), 174
bundle, 175
corona loss, 182
gap-type ZT-aluminum 
conductor (GTZACSR), 175
Consumption growth, 13
Continuous current, 458
Continuous current rating, 461
Control and operating principles, 
HVDC transmission 
technologies, 255–257
Conventional HVDC, 252–253
Conventional power plants versus 
wind power plants, 417–418
Converter station, 239
Coordination, fuse/recloser, 632
Coordination of economic 
dispatch, 771
CO relay characteristics 
comparison, 623
Core loss current, 102
Corona loss, 182
Costs, comparative of HVDC 
and EHV AC transmission 
alternatives, 247
CO2
average emissions by plant 
type, 322
emissions by scenario, 321
Critical clearing angle for cleared 
three-phase fault, 705–707
Critical clearing time for temporary 
three-phase fault, 703–705
CT. See Current transformers
Current in series R–L circuit with 
ac voltage source, 436
926	
Index

	
Index	
927
Current ratings, 458–459
continuous current, 458
interrupting MVA, 458–459
interrupting time, 458
momentary current, 458
short-circuit current, 458
Currents in sequence networks, 
513–514
Current transformers 
equivalent circuit, 618
performance, 619
performance determination, 
617–618
window design, 616
Customer outage data, 908
D
dc and ac resistance, 181–182
dc offset current, 436
dc power flow, 373–374
Δ–Δ transformer features, 519
–Y conversion for balanced 
loads, 60–61
Δ–Y transformer phase shift effect 
on fault currents, 564–566
Density contour map, 843
Deregulation, 2–9
degrees of regulation, 6
demand, 9
free markets, 2–3
infrastructure, 8
investment environment, 7
Public Utility Regulatory 
Policies Act of 1978, 4
regulation attempts, 3–4
variables in price, 5
DERs. See Distributed energy 
sources (DERs)
Design considerations, 
transmission lines, 174–179
conductors, 174–175
economic factors, 179
electrical factors, 178
environmental factors, 178
insulators, 175–176
mechanical factors, 178
shield wires, 176
support structures, 176
transmission-line 
characteristics, 177
Diagonal sequence impedances, 
505
Diesel generator sets, 678
Differential current, 646
Differential relays, 645–647
balance beam relay, 646
block and trip regions, 646
differential current, 646
Direct axis short-circuit sub- 
transient time constant, 439
Direct axis short-circuit transient 
time constant, 440
Directional relays, 633–634
block and trip regions in 
complex plane, 634
series with overcurrent relay, 633
Direct solutions to linear 
algebraic equations: Gauss 
elimination, 330–334
back substitution, 331
Gauss elimination and back 
substitution, 332–333
Gauss elimination: 
triangularizing a matrix, 
333–334
Discrete-time equivalent circuit, 
single-phase lossless line 
transients, 831–834
Discrete-time models, 828–834
discrete-time equivalent circuit, 
single-phase lossless line 
transients, 831–834
lumped capacitance, 830–831
lumped inductance, 829–830
lumped resistance, 831
nodal equations, 831
single-phase lossless line, 828–829
Distance relay, 641
Distortion, 836–837
Distributed energy sources 
(DERs), 860–875
distribution feeder response 
characteristics, 864
integrated approach, 867–870
proactive approach, 863–864
programmatic implementation 
of proactive plan, 872–874
scale of distribution, 861–862
size and location, 864
structural diversity of 
distribution system, 862–863
systemwide application, 870–872
technologies, 864–867
Distribution automation, 910–913
primary loop feeder after  
fault, 912
primary loop feeder before 
fault, 911
Distribution reliability,  
906–910
customer outage data, 908
indices, 908
outage causes, 910
outage reporting information, 
909
values of reliability indices, 907
Distribution substation 
transformers, 890–895
Distribution transformer kVA 
ratings, 899
Distribution transformers, 
895–900
Double-circuit line, single-line 
diagram, 219
Double line-to-ground fault, 
560–567
Δ–Y transformer phase shift 
effect on fault currents, 
564–566
faults summary, 567
short-circuit calculations using 
sequence networks, 562–564
Double line-to-ground fault 
(phase b to c to ground), 569
Doubly-fed asynchronous 
generator, 729–730
Doubly-fed asynchronous 
generator components, 728
Driving-point admittance, 54
E
Eastern frequency response study, 
802–806
Economic dispatch, 376–389, 741
areas, 376
B coefficient, 387
economic dispatch solution 
including generator limits, 
381–382

928	
Index
Economic dispatch (Continued)
economic dispatch solution 
including generator limits 
and line losses, 385–386
economic dispatch solution 
neglecting generator limits 
and line losses, 379–381
fossil-fuel generating unit 
incremental operating cost 
versus real power output, 378
fossil-fuel generating unit 
operating cost versus real 
power output, 377
fossil-fuel units, no inequality 
constraints or transmission 
losses, 377–381
heat rate, 377
inequality constraints effect, 
381–382
loss coefficient, 387
transmission losses effect, 
382–388 
Economic factors, design 
considerations, transmission 
lines, 179
Effective resistance, 180
Electrical factors, design 
considerations, transmission 
lines, 178
Electric energy generation by 
types, 17
Electric field and voltage, solid 
cylindrical conductor, 
202–205
Gauss’s law, 203
M solid cylindrical conductors 
array, 204
perfectly conducting solid 
cylindrical conductor  
with uniform charge  
distribution, 203
Electric field strength, conductor 
surfaces and ground  
level, 216–219
ground-level electric field 
strength, overhead 
conductor and image, 218
maximum ground-level 
electric field strength versus 
transmission-line voltage, 218
single-phase line, conductor 
surface, ground-level field 
strengths, 218–219
vector addition, electric fields 
at surface of one conductor 
in bundle, 217
Electric utility industry, 1–29
computers in, 21–22
deregulation, 2–9
history, 10–16
PowerWorld simulator, 22–28
structure, 20–21
trends, 17–20
Electromechanical time-delay 
overcurrent relay, 624
Emergency response, 794–809
base case electrical and 
mechanical power  
response, 799
California frequency response 
investigation, 797–802
Eastern frequency response 
study, 802–806
frequency and governor 
response, 804, 805
frequency comparison, 806
frequency response to loss of 
generation, 798, 800
frequency terminology, 798
governor basics, 796
incumbent generators, 795–796
power control from wind 
plants, 802
wind assistance, 801–802
wind plant controls, 806
wind plant frequency  
response, 795
wind power response, 803
wind turbine generator power 
comparison, 807
Emissions
CO2, average emissions by 
plant type, 322
CO2 emissions by scenario,  
321
NOx emissions by scenario,  
323
penalty for part-load 
operation, 313
ramping, 314
reductions, 321–323
SO2 emissions by scenario, 324
solar and wind, emissions 
start-up, 314
Environmental factors, design 
considerations, transmission 
lines, 178
Equal-area criterion, 697–707
critical clearing angle for 
cleared three-phase fault, 
705–707
critical clearing time for 
temporary three-phase fault, 
703–705
three-phase fault, transient 
stability during, 699–702
Equipment insulation  
strength, 847
Equivalent circuit for single cage 
induction machine, 724
Equivalent circuits for practical 
transformers, 101–107
core loss current, 102
versus ideal transformer, 101–102
inrush current, 106
magnetizing current, 102
nonsinusoidal exciting  
current, 107
practical single-phase two-
winding transformer, 102, 
103
saturation, 105–106
surge phenomena, 107
transformer short-circuit and 
open-circuit tests, 104–105
Equivalent line-to-neutral 
diagrams, 62
Equivalent π circuit, 271–273, 275
long line equivalent π circuit, 273
transmission line equivalent  
π circuit, 271
Equivalent Y-representation of 
balanced-Δ load, 502
Euler’s method, 707
Euler’s method and computer 
solution to swing equation 
and critical clearing  
time, 709–710

	
Index	
929
Euler’s method, modified, 708
Excitation curves for bushing  
CT, 618
Exciter, 757
External magnetic field, 184
F
Faraday’s law, 98
Fast decoupled power flow, 372
Faults 
currents, R–L circuit with ac 
source, 438
summary, 567
terminals, 548
Flash density map, 844
Flexibility and cycling the 
conventional fleet, 310–330
CO2, average emissions by 
plant type, 322
CO2 emissions by scenario, 321
coal units, capacity committed 
and dispatched, 320
contingency, regulating, and 
flexibility reserves, 317
data sets, 312–315
emission reductions, 321–323
emissions penalty for part-load 
operation, 313
emissions per MW of capacity, 
ramping, 314
emissions per MW of capacity, 
start-up, 314
five-minute dispatch stacks, 318
forecast errors, 328
lower-bound cycling cost, 326
median costs, cycling for 
various generation types, 315
NOx emissions by scenario, 323
production costs, 324
production costs, change for 
each scenario, 327
production costs, cycling, 325
renewable energy penetration 
levels, 316
solar and wind, emissions 
avoided per MWh, 322
SO2 emissions by scenario, 324
western grid operations, 
simulating, 317
western wind and solar 
integration study, 312
wind and solar, generation 
displaced, 319
wind- and solar-induced cycling 
operational costs, 323–327
wind and solar, system 
operation with high 
penetrations, 317–320
wind uncertainty and solar 
variability, 327–328
wind versus solar, 315–316
Fossil-fuel generating unit 
incremental operating cost 
versus real power output, 378
operating cost versus real 
power output, 377
Fossil-fuel units, no inequality 
constraints or transmission 
losses, 377–381
Frequency
California frequency response 
investigation, 797–802
comparison, 806
Eastern frequency response 
study, 802–806
and governor response, 804, 805
overvoltages, 847
response to loss of generation, 
798, 800
terminology, 798
Frequency of occurrence of 
lightning currents, 842
Fuse/recloser coordination, 632
Fuse selection, 460–462
continuous current rating, 461
interrupting current rating, 461
time response, 461, 462
voltage rating, 461
G
Gap-type ZT-aluminum 
conductor (GTZACSR), 
175
Gas-insulated substations (GIS), 
476–492
advantages, 478–479
causes of failure, 487
components, 477
components involved in 
failures, 485
construction, 477–478
defects in insulation system, 487
development trends, 482–484
dielectric failure rates, 486
environmental impact, 484
failures, 485–486
four-interrupter and closing 
resistor, 484
history and technological 
progress, 479–482
partial discharge mitigation 
methods, 488–490
partial discharge monitoring 
systems, 490–491
partial discharge origins, 
486–488
percentage evolution and 
development of HV 
substations in market, 481
short-circuit breaking current 
rating, 480
Gauss elimination, 330–334
Gauss elimination and back 
substitution, 332–333
Gauss elimination: triangularizing 
a matrix, 333–334
Gauss-Seidel method, divergence, 
339
Gauss-Seidel method, iterative 
solutions to linear algebraic 
equations, 337–338
Gauss-Seidel power flow solution, 
351–353
General three-phase impedance 
load, 504
Generator convention, 48
Generator internal voltage and 
real power output versus 
power angle, 696–697
Generator per-unit swing equation  
and power angles during 
short circuit, 692–693
Generator variation, rotator angle 
and clearing time, 722–723
Generator-voltage control, 757–761
brushless exciters, 757
exciter, 757

930	
Index
Generator-voltage control  
(Continued)
static exciters, 757
synchronous generator exciter 
response, 758–760
wind turbine (type 3) reactive 
power control, 760–761
GIS. See Gas-insulated 
substations (GIS)
Grid congestion, 168–174
back story, 168–169
costs, 169–170
definition, 168
efficiency, 173
forecast, 171–172
impact, 170–171
leveraging technology, 173
modern conductors, 173
progress, 171
strategy flaws, 172
Grounded Y-network transformer, 
898
Ground fault relays, 645
Ground-level electric field 
strength, overhead 
conductor and image, 218
GTZACSR. See Gap-type 
ZT-aluminum conductor 
(GTZACSR)
H
Heat rate, 377
High voltage dc (HVDC) 
transmission technologies, 
238–258
asynchronous back-to-back 
tie, 242
asynchronous ties, 248–249
comparative costs of HVDC 
and EHV AC transmission 
alternatives, 247
control and operating 
principles, 255–257
conventional HVDC, 252–253
converter station, 239
IGBT valve converter 
arrangement, 244
line-commutated current 
source converter, 239–242
long-distance bulk power 
transmission, 245–246
multiterminal systems, 250
offshore transmission, 249–250
power delivery to large urban 
areas, 250–251
reactive power compensation, 
242
self-commuted voltage source, 
243–244
solid-state converter 
development, 243
system configurations and 
operating modes, 251–252
thyristor valve arrangement, 241
transmission line, 239
underground and submarine 
cable transmission, 246, 248
voltage source converter 
operating range, 244
voltage source converters, 240
VSC-based HVDC, 253–255
History, electric utility  
industry, 10–16
consumption growth, 13
generator size growth, 13
interconnected operations, 15
natural gas generation, 11–12
nuclear plants, 11
renewable energy sources, 12
steam plants, 11
three-phase transmission 
voltage increases, 14
transmission in North 
America, 16
HVDC transmission technologies. 
See High voltage dc 
(HVDC) transmission 
technologies
Hydroelectric units, 678
I
Ideal single-phase transformers, 
129
Ideal transformer, 95–101
Ampere’s law, 96
assumptions, 96
basic single-phase two-winding 
transformer, 95
Faraday’s law, 98
Ohm’s law, 97
versus practical single-phase 
two-winding transformer, 
101–102
single-phase, phase-shifting 
transformer, 101
single-phase, two-winding 
transformer, 99–100
Ideal Y–Y transformer, 121, 517
IGBT valve converter 
arrangement, 244
Impedance loads sequence 
networks, 499–506
balanced-Y and balanced-Δ 
loads, 503
balanced-Y impedance load, 499
diagonal sequence impedances, 
505
equivalent Y-representation of 
balanced-Δ load, 502
general three-phase impedance 
load, 504
negative-sequence impedance, 
501
negative-sequence networks, 
501
off-diagonal sequence 
impedances, 505–506
positive-sequence impedance, 
501
positive-sequence networks, 501
three-phase symmetrical 
impedance load, 506
uncoupled equations, 500
zero-sequence impedance, 501
zero-sequence networks, 501
Impedance relay block and trip 
regions, 640
Impedance relays with directional 
capability, 641
Impulse voltage waveform, 
standard, 847
Impulse withstand voltage, 458
Individual distribution transformer 
per customer, 887
Inductance, 187–199
bundle conductor 
configurations, 196

	
Index	
931
inductive reactance, single-
phase line, 193
inductive reactance, three-
phase line, 195
inductive reactance, three-
phase line with bundled 
conductors, 196–197
single-phase two-conductor 
line, 191–193
single-phase, two-conductor 
line with composite 
transistors, 190
single-phase, two-wire line 
inductance, 187–188
three-phase three-wire line 
with equal phase spacing 
inductance, 189
three-phase transmission line 
with earth replaced by earth 
return conductors, 198
transposed three-phase line, 194
transposition, 194
Inductance, solid cylindrical 
conductor, 182–187
external magnetic field, 184
internal magnetic field, 183
M solid cylindrical conductors, 
186
permeability determination, 182
Induction generator, 725–726
Induction machine, external 
resistance variation effect on 
torque-speed curve, 727
Inductive load, 43
Inductive reactance, single-phase 
line, 193
Inductive reactance, three-phase 
line, 195
Inductive reactance, three-
phase line with bundled 
conductors, 196–197
Inequality constraints effect, 
381–382
Inrush current, 106
Installed generating capability by 
principal fuel types, 18
Instantaneous overcurrent relay, 621
Instantaneous power, balanced 
three-phase generators, 63–64
Instantaneous power, balanced 
three-phase motors and 
impedance loads, 64
Instantaneous power in single- 
phase ac circuits, 42–47
active power, 44
average power, 44
capacitive load, 43
inductive load, 43
instantaneous, real, and 
reactive power, 45–47
lagging power factor, 44
leading power factor, 44
power factor, 44–45
reactive power, 45
real and reactive power, 
physical significance of, 47
real power, 44
resistive load, 42–43
RLC load, 43–44
Instantaneous, real, and reactive 
power, 45–47
Instrument transformers,  
614–620
class current transformers, 617
coupling capacitor voltage 
transformers, 615
CT equivalent circuit, 618
CT performance, 619
CT performance 
determination, 617–618
current transformer window 
design, 616
excitation curves for bushing 
CT, 618
relay operation versus fault 
current and CT burden, 620
standard CT ratios, 617
standard VT ratios, 617
voltage transformer, 614
VT and CT schematic, 614
Insulation coordination, 847–852
characteristics of station- and 
intermediate-class metal- 
oxide surge arresters, 851
equipment insulation strength, 
847
metal-oxide surge arrester 
selection, 850
protective devices and 
equipment, 848
standard and reduced basic 
insulation levels, 848
standard impulse voltage 
waveform, 847
Insulators, design considerations, 
transmission lines, 175–176
Interconnected operations, 15
Intermediate substations effect on 
number of lines required for 
power transfer, 287–289
Internal magnetic field, 183
Iterative solutions to linear 
algebraic equations: Jacobi 
and Gauss-Seidel, 334–340
divergence, Gauss-Seidel 
method, 339
Gauss-Seidel method, iterative 
solutions to linear algebraic 
equations, 337–338
Jacobi method, iterative 
solutions to linear algebraic 
equations, 336–337
Iterative solutions to nonlinear 
algebraic equations: 
Newton-Raphson, 340–344
Newton Raphson method in 
four steps, 344
Newton-Raphson method: 
solution to nonlinear 
algebraic equations, 342–343
Newton-Raphson method: 
solution to polynomial 
equations, 340–341
Interrupting current rating, 461
Interrupting MVA, 458–459
Interrupting time, 458
J
Jacobian matrix and power flow 
solution by Newton- 
Raphson, 356–357
Jacobian matrix elements, 355
Jacobi method, iterative solutions 
to linear algebraic 
equations, 336–337
Junction, two single-phase lossless 
lines, 823

932	
Index
K
KCV. See Kirchoff’s current law
Kirchoff’s current law, 52
Kirchoff’s voltage law, 52
KVL. See Kirchoff’s voltage law
L
Lagging power factor, 44
Larger gas turbines units, 678
Leading power factor, 44
LFC. See Load-frequency control 
(LFC)
Lightning, 841–846
asset exposure map, 844
charge separation within 
clouds, 842
density contour map, 843
flash density map, 844
frequency of occurrence of 
lightning currents, 842
shield wires effect, 845
Line-commutated current source 
converter, 239–242
Line impedance locus, 640
Line loadability, 284–289
effect, intermediate substations 
on number of lines required 
for power transfer, 287–289
practical line loadability and 
percent voltage regulation, 
long line, 284–286
selection, transmission line 
voltage and number of lines 
for power transfer, 286–287
Line protection with impedance 
(distance) relays, 639–645
distance relay, 641
ground fault relays, 645
impedance relay block and trip 
regions, 640
impedance relays with 
directional capability, 641
line impedance locus, 640
modified impedance relays, 641
ratio relay, 639
reach of impedance relay, 641
345-kV transmission loop, 639
three-zone directional 
impedance relay, 642
three-zone impedance relay 
settings, 643–645
Line-to-line fault, 557–559
phase b to c, 569
short-circuit calculations using 
sequence networks, 559
Line-to-line (LL) faults, 431–432
Line-to-line-to-ground(LLG) 
faults, 431–432
LL faults. See Line-to-line (LL) 
faults
LLG faults. See Line-to-line-to-
ground (LLG) faults
Load change in interconnected 
system, response to,  
769–770
Load convention, 48, 49
Load flow, 310
Load-frequency control (LFC), 
679–680, 741, 767–772
area control error, 768
automatic generation control 
strategy, 771
coordination of economic 
dispatch, 771
load change in interconnected 
system, response to, 
769–770
Long-distance bulk power 
transmission, 245–246
Long line
equivalent π circuit, 273
practical line loadability and 
percent voltage regulation, 
284–286
theoretical maximum power 
delivered, 283–284
theoretical steady-state stability 
limit, 281–282
Loss coefficient, 387
Lossless lines, 274–282
ABCD parameters, 274–275
equivalent π circuit, 275
steady-state stability limit, 
279–282
surge impedance, 274
surge impedance loading (SIL), 
276–278
theoretical steady-state stability 
limit, long line, 281–282
transmission line loadability 
curve, 280
voltage profiles, 278–279
wavelength, 276
Lossy lines, 834–838
attenuation, 835–836
distortion, 836–837
power losses, 837–838
Low frequency withstand  
voltage, 458
Low-voltage circuit  
breakers, 455
Lumped capacitance, 830–831
Lumped inductance, 829–830
Lumped resistance, 831
M
Magnetizing current, 102
Maximum ground-level electric  
field strength versus 
transmission-line voltage, 218
Maximum voltage, 458
Mechanical factors, design 
considerations, transmission 
lines, 178
Median costs, cycling for various 
generation types, 315
Medium and short line 
approximations, 258–265
ABCD parameters and 
nominal π circuit, 263–265
ABCD parameters of common 
networks, 261
medium-length transmission 
line, 260
short transmission line, 259
short transmission line phasor 
diagram, 262
two-port network 
representation, 258
voltage regulation, 262
Medium-length transmission  
line, 260
Medium voltage switchgear, 
540–547
air-insulated masonry cubicles, 
542
AIS panel with drawout 
technology, 542

	
Index	
933
challenges, 544
circuit breaker technological 
evolution, 541–542
dedicated cable test device, 546
drawout oil circuit breaker with 
arc control, 541
drawout vacuum and SF6 
circuit breaker, 542
evolution of technology, 541–542
innovations, 544–546
primary GIS panel, 543
protection relays and sensors 
evolution, 544
SF6 Ring Main Unit with 
circuit breaker, 543
shielded solid insulation 
system, 545–546
single line diagram evolution, 
542–543
smart grid challenges, 544
smart grid readiness, 546
three-position diagram, 545
Metal-oxide surge arrester 
selection, 850
Method of images, 211, 212
Microgrids, 32–40
benefits, 32–33
Chevron Energy Solutions 
project, 35
Smart Grid R&D Program, 
33–40
Modified impedance relays, 641
Momentary current, 458
Motor starting, 680–681
M solid cylindrical conductors 
array, 186, 204
Multiconductor lines, 838–841
Multimachine stability, 711–718
computational procedure, 
713–714
N-bus power system, 711
rotor angle variation, 716–717
stability results, 37 bus 9 
generator system, 718
Ybus power-flow modification, 
714–716
Multiterminal systems, HVDC 
transmission technologies, 
250
Mutual admittance, 54
Mutual impedances, 448
N
Natural gas generation, 11–12
N-bus power system, 711
Negative reactive power, 49
Negative-sequence 
components, 493
impedance, 501
networks, 501
Negative-sequence phasor 
diagram for Y–  transformer  
bank construction, 119
Network equations, 52–55
driving-point admittance, 54
Kirchoff’s current law, 52
Kirchoff’s Voltage law, 52
mutual admittance, 54
nodal equations steps, 53–54
self-admittance, 54
transfer admittance, 54
Networks of practical 
transformers, 518
Newton Raphson method 
in four steps, 344
solution to nonlinear algebraic 
equations, 342–343
solution to polynomial 
equations, 340–341
Newton-Raphson power flow 
solution, 353–362
Jacobian matrix and power 
flow solution by Newton-
Raphson, 356–357
Jacobian matrix elements, 355
power flow program, change in 
generation, 359–360
power flow program: 37-bus 
system, 361–362
Nodal equations, 831
Nodal equations steps, 53–54
Nonsinusoidal exciting current, 
107
North America’s power grid, 
162–167
electricity exports and imports 
between Canada and the 
U.S., 165
electricity imports and exports, 
167
grid integration benefits, 166–167
major transmission 
interconnections, 164
US and Canada working 
relationship maximization, 
162–163
US-Canada electricity 
relationship, 163–166
NOx emissions by scenario, 323
Nuclear plants, 11
Numerical integration, swing 
equation, 707–711
Euler’s method, 707
Euler’s method and computer 
solution to swing equation 
and critical clearing time, 
709–710
Euler’s method, modified, 708
Numeric relaying, 654–655
O
Off-diagonal sequence 
impedances, 505–506
Offshore transmission, HVDC 
transmission technologies, 
249–250
Ohm’s law, 97
Oil-filed padmount transformer, 
897
Optimal power flow, 389–391, 741
Outage causes, 910
Outage reporting information, 909
Outdoor circuit breakers ratings, 
456
Overcurrent relays, 620–625
CO-8 time-delay overcurrent 
relay characteristics, 622
CO-8 time-delay overcurrent 
relay operating time, 
623–624
CO relay characteristics 
comparison, 623
electromechanical time-delay 
overcurrent relay, 624
instantaneous overcurrent 
relay, 621
pickup current, 620

934	
Index
Overcurrent relays (Continued)
solid-state relay panel, 625
time-delay overcurrent relay 
block and trip regions, 621
time-delay overcurrent relays, 
622
Overhead line connected to cable, 
single-phase lossless lines 
lattice diagram, 824–827
Overhead primary loop, 883
Overlapping protection around 
circuit breaker, 637
P
Parallel circuit three-phase lines, 
219–221
double-circuit line, single-line 
diagram, 219
Parallel connection, unloaded 
synchronous machine 
internal-voltage sources, 449
% conductivity, resistivity, and 
temperature constant of 
conductor metals, 180
Permeability determination, 182
Permissible daily short-time 
loading of liquid-filled 
distribution transformers, 899
Per-unit and actual currents, 
balanced three-phase 
networks, 114–115
Per-unit circuit, three-zone single- 
phase network, 111–113
Per-unit equivalent circuits of 
balanced three-phase 
two-winding transformers, 
120–125
balanced three-phase 
transformer, voltage drop 
and fault current, 124–125
ideal Y–Y transformer, 121
rules for selecting base 
quantities, 121
voltage calculations, balanced 
Y–Y and –Y transformers, 
122–123
Per-unit equivalent circuits, 
single-phase, two-winding 
transformer, 110
Per-unit impedance, single-phase 
transformer, 108–109
Per-unit sequence models of 
three-phase three-winding 
transformers, 522–524
Per-unit sequence models of 
three-phase two-winding 
transformers, 516–521
Δ–Δ transformer features, 519
ideal Y–Y transformer, 517
networks of practical 
transformers, 518
symmetrical series impedances, 
519
symmetrical Y-load, 519
three-phase networks with 
transformers using per-
unit sequence components 
solution, 520–521
Y–Δ transformer features, 519
Per-unit system, 107–115
actual quantity, 108
base quantities, 108
per-unit and actual currents, 
balanced three-phase 
networks, 114–115
per-unit circuit, three-zone 
single-phase network, 111–113
per-unit equivalent circuits, 
single-phase, two-winding 
transformer, 110
per-unit impedance,  
single-phase transformer, 
108–109
quantity calculation, 107–108
Phase-angle-regulating 
transformer, 136
Phase shift in –Y transformers, 
118
Phasors, 40–42
conversion from polar to 
rectangular form, 41
effective value, 40
relationships summary, 42
Pickup current, 620
Pilot relaying, 653–654
Pitch control, Type 3 or 4 wind 
turbine model, 767
Pole-mount recloser, 880
Pole-mount shunt capacitor bank, 
882
Pole-mount transformer, 896
Positive reactive power, 49
Positive-sequence 
components, 493
impedance, 501
networks, 501
phasor diagram construction, 
116–118
Power circuit breakers, 455
Power delivery to large urban 
areas, HVDC transmission 
technologies, 250–251
Power distribution, 859–920
automation, 910–913
components of electric power 
system, 876
distributed energy sources 
(DERs), 860–875
primary distribution, 878–885
distribution reliability, 906–910
secondary distribution, 885–890
shunt capacitors in distribution 
systems, 900–905
smart grids, 913–914
software, 905–906
transformers in distribution 
systems, 890–900
Power factor, 44–45
Power flow control, 363–369
generator Thévenin equivalent, 
363
means of control, 363
shunt capacitor bank, effect 
of adding to power system 
bus, 364
shunt capacitor banks, effect 
of, 365–369
Power flow problem, 344–351
bus types, 345–346
power flow input data and  
Ybus, 346–350
Power flows, 309–413
control of power flow, 363–369
dc power flow, 373–374
direct solutions to linear 
algebraic equations: Gauss 
elimination, 330–334

	
Index	
935
economic dispatch, 376–389
fast decoupled power flow, 372
flexibility and cycling the 
conventional fleet, 310–330
Gauss-Seidel power flow 
solution, 351–353
input data and Ybus, 346–350
iterative solutions to linear 
algebraic equations: Jacobi 
and Gauss-Seidel, 334–340
iterative solutions to nonlinear 
algebraic equations: 
Newton-Raphson, 340–344
Newton-Raphson power flow 
solution, 353–362
optimal power flow, 389–391
power flow problem, 344–351
program, change in generation, 
359–360
program: 37-bus system, 361–362
sparsity techniques, 369–372
wind generation modeling, 
374–376
Power frequency overvoltages, 847
Power in balanced three-phase 
circuits, 63–68
complex power, balanced three-
phase generators, 64–65
complex power, balanced three-
phase motors, 65
complex power, balanced-Y 
and balanced-  impedance 
loads, 65–66
instantaneous power, balanced 
three-phase generators, 63–64
instantaneous power, balanced 
three-phase motors and 
impedance loads, 64
power in balanced three-phase 
system, 66–68
Power in sequence networks, 
524–526
Power losses, 837–838
Power system controls, 739–777
generator-voltage control, 
757–761
load-frequency control, 767–772
restoration of system after 
blackout, 742–756
turbine-governor control, 
761–767
Power system overvoltages, 841–847
lightning, 841–846
power frequency overvoltages, 
847
switching surges, 846
Power system protective zones, 
636
Power system restoration, 671–689
aeroderivative gas turbine sets, 
678
black-start, 686–687
bottom-up restoration, 
671–672
cold load pickup, 683–684
diesel generator sets, 678
dynamic studies, 677–678
general philosophy, 673–674
hydroelectric units, 678
larger gas turbines units, 678
load frequency control, 679–680
motor starting, 680–681
plans and procedures, 674–675
self-excitation, 681–682
steady-stage concerns, 676–677
studies and analysis, 675–676
system stability, 682–683
top-down restoration, 671
transient overvoltages, 684–686
voltage control, 680
Power-system sequence networks 
and Thévenin equivalents, 
549–551
Power system three-phase short 
circuits, 442–445
calculation assumptions, 442
synchronous generator feeding 
synchronous motor, 443
three-phase short-circuit 
currents, power system, 
444–445
Power transfer
effect, intermediate substations 
on number of lines required, 
287–289
selection, transmission line 
voltage and number of lines, 
286–287
Power transformers, 87–159
autotransformers, 129–131
coils, 91
condition monitoring and 
maintenance program, 94
equivalent circuits for practical 
transformers, 101–107
ideal transformer, 95–101
installation and 
commissioning, 90, 92
life cycle, 91
life extension, 89
life management and extension, 
88–95
life of, 88
manufacturing, 90
operation and maintenance, 
92–94
per-unit equivalent circuits 
of balanced three-phase 
two-winding transformers, 
120–125
per-unit system, 107–115
specifying and purchasing, 89
three-phase transformer 
connections and phase shift, 
115–120
three-winding transformers, 
125–129
transformers with off-nominal 
turns ratios, 131–139
Power triangle and power factor 
correction, 50–52
PowerWorld simulator, 22–28
economic dispatch, including 
generator limits, 383–384
economic dispatch, including 
generator limits and line 
losses, 386–387
edit mode, 25–27
fault current, three-phase 
faults, 450–453, 453–454
introduction, 23–25
optimal power flow, 390–391
run mode, 27–28
symmetrical faults, 572–575
Practical line loadability and 
percent voltage regulation, 
long line, 284–286

936	
Index
Practical single-phase two-winding 
transformer, 102, 103
Primary distribution, 878–885
overhead primary loop, 883
pole-mount recloser, 880
pole-mount shunt capacitor 
bank, 882
primary loop systems, 883–884
primary network system, 
884–885
primary radial systems, 879–883
primary selective system, 882
radio-controlled sectionalizing 
switch, 881
underground primary loop, 884
US voltage distribution, 878
Primary loop feeder 
after fault, 912
before fault, 911
Primary loop systems, 883–884
Primary network system, 884–885
Primary radial systems, 879–883
Primary relays, 594
Primary selective system, 882
Propagation constant, 266
Protective devices and equipment, 
848
Public Utility Regulatory Policies 
Act of 1978, 4
Q
Quantity calculation, 107–108
R
Radial system protection,  
625–629
34.5-kV radial system, 626
time-delay overcurrent relay 
coordination, 626–629
Radio-controlled sectionalizing 
switch, 881
Rake-equivalent sequence 
networks, 568
Rated current and short circuit 
current, 893
Ratio relay, 639
Reach of impedance relay, 641
Reactive compensation 
techniques, 289–294
compensated transmission-line 
section, 290
series capacitive compensation 
to increase transmission-line 
loadability, 292–294
shunt reactive compensation to 
improve transmission-line 
voltage regulation, 290–292
static var compensators, 289
subsynchronous resonance, 290
Reactive power, 45
Reactive power compensation, 
HVDC transmission 
technologies, 242
Reactive power flow, 139
Real and reactive power, delivered 
or absorbed, 48–49
Real and reactive power, physical 
significance of, 47
Real power, 44
Real power flow, 139
Receiving-end voltage reflection 
coefficient, 813
Reclosers and fuses, 629–632
coordination, fuse/recloser, 632
13.8-kV radial distributor 
feeder, 630
time-current curves for radial 
distribution circuit, 631
Reference frame transformations, 
719
Regulation constant, 762
Regulatory recommendations 
and standards, blackouts, 
754–755
Related required capabilities, 457
Relay operation versus fault 
current and CT burden, 620
Relay protection upgrading, 
595–612
costs, 598–600, 605–606
drawings with as-left data 
completion, 609–610
enhanced relay security, 603
firmware and software 
advances, 602–603
hardware advances, 601–602
history of relays, 596–597
implementation, 606–607
installation data, 604–605
longevity, 598
primary/backup relay systems, 
600–601
replacing versus upgrading, 
597–598
second-generation numeric 
relays, 601–604
smart software, 603–604
update drawings, 607–609
Reliability indices values, 907
Renewable energy 
penetration levels, 316
sources, 12
Residential customer voltage 
profile, 886
Resistance, 179–182
dc and ac resistance, 181–182
effective resistance, 180
% conductivity, resistivity, and 
temperature constant of 
conductor metals, 180
SI and English units 
comparison for calculating 
conductor resistance, 179
skin effect, 181
Resistive load, 42–43
Resolving phase voltages, 493
Response to load change in 
interconnected power 
system, 764–766
Restoration of system after 
blackout, 742–756
Cleveland, 752–753
Detroit, 749–751
lessons learned, 752–754
New England, 745–747
New York, 742–745
Ontario, 747–749
regulatory recommendations 
and standards, 754–755
Southern Michigan, 751–752
R–L circuits, 418–420
RLC load, 43–44
Rotating machines sequence 
networks, 510–516
currents in sequence networks, 
513–514
subtransient impedance, 512

	
Index	
937
synchronous impedance,  
511, 512
three-phase motors sequence 
networks, 512
transient impedance, 512
unbalanced three-phase 
networks solutions using 
sequence components, 
514–516
Y-connected synchronous 
generator, 511
Rotor angle variation, 716–717
S
Saturation, 105–106
SCC comparison for symmetrical 
faults, 428–429
SCC from Type 1 WTG, 420–424
SCC from Type 2 WTG, 424–425
SCC from Type 3 WTG, 425–427
SCC for Type 4 WTG under 
different faults, 433
Secondary distribution, 885–890
common secondary main, 
887–888
individual distribution 
transformer per customer, 887
residential customer voltage 
profile, 886
secondary network, 888
spot network, 889–990
Secondary network, 888
Self-admittance, 54
Self-commuted voltage source, 
HVDC transmission 
technologies, 243–244
Self-excitation, 681–682
Self-impedances, 448
Sequence bus impedance matrices, 
567–575
balanced three-phase fault, 568
double line-to-ground fault 
(phase b to c to ground), 569
line-to-line fault (phase b to c),  
569
rake-equivalent sequence 
networks, 568
single line-to-ground fault 
(phase a to ground), 568
single line-to-ground 
short-circuit calculations  
using Zbus, Zbus1, and  
Zbus2, 569–572
Sequence networks, 475
impedance loads sequence 
networks, 499–506
power in sequence networks, 
524–526
rotating machines sequence 
networks, 510–516
series impedances sequence 
networks, 506–508
three-phase lines sequence 
networks, 508–510
Series capacitive compensation to 
increase transmission-line 
loadability, 292–294
Series impedances sequence 
networks, 506–508
three-phase series impedances, 
507
three-phase symmetrical series 
impedances, 508
Series impedances, three-phase 
line, neutral conductors, 
earth return, 197–202
circuit representation of  
series-phase impedances, 200
earth resistives and 60-Hz 
equivalent conductor 
distances, 199
neutral wire versus shield wire, 
197
Series R–L circuit transients, 
435–438
asymmetrical fault current, 436
current in series R–L circuit 
with ac voltage source, 436
dc offset current, 436
fault currents, R–L circuit with 
ac source, 438
short-circuit current—series 
R–L circuit, 437
steady-state fault current, 436
symmetrical fault current, 436
Shield wires
design considerations, 
transmission lines, 176
effect, 845
Short circuit behaviors under 
symmetrical faults, 418
Short circuit current, 458. See also 
SCC entries
Short-circuit current—series R–L 
circuit, 437
Short circuit modeling of wind 
power plant, 416–435
collector system, 418
conventional power plants 
versus wind power plants, 
417–418
line-to-line (LL) faults, 
431–432
R–L circuits, 418–420
SCC comparison for 
symmetrical faults, 428–429
SCC from Type 1 WTG, 420–424
SCC from Type 2 WTG, 424–425
SCC from Type 3 WTG, 425–427
SCC for Type 4 WTG under 
different faults, 433
short circuit behaviors under 
symmetrical faults, 418
single line-to-ground (SLG) 
faults, 430–431
Type 4 WTGs, 427–428
unsymmetrical faults, 429–430
wind turbine generators 
operation, 418
Short transmission line, 259
Short transmission line phasor 
diagram, 262
Shunt admittances, lines with 
neutral conductors and 
earth return, 211–216
method of images, 211, 212
single-phase line, effect of earth 
on capacitance, 212–213
three-phase line, neutral 
conductors and earth  
plane replaced by 
conductors, 214
Shunt capacitors in distribution 
systems, 900–905
control methods, 905
at end of primary feeder, 
900–904

938	
Index
Shunt reactive compensation  
to improve transmission-line 
voltage regulation, 290–292
SI and English units comparison 
for calculating conductor 
resistance, 179
SIL. See Surge impedance loading 
(SIL)
Simplified synchronous machine 
model and system 
equivalents, 695–697
generator internal voltage and 
real power output versus 
power angle, 696–697
synchronous generator 
connected to system 
equivalent, 695
Single line-to-ground fault (phase 
a to ground), 568
Single line-to-ground short-circuit  
calculations using Zbus, Zbus1, 
and Zbus2, 569–572
Single line-to-ground (SLG) 
faults, 430–431, 553–557
short-circuit calculations using 
sequence networks, 554–557
Single-phase autotransformers, 
130–131
Single-phase line, conductor 
surface, ground-level field 
strengths, 218–219
Single-phase line, effect of earth 
on capacitance, 212–213
Single-phase lossless line,  
828–829
Single-phase lossless line lattice 
diagram, 823
Single-phase, phase-shifting 
transformer, 101
Single-phase three-winding 
transformer, 126
Single-phase three-winding 
transformer, per-unit 
impedances, 127–128
Single-phase transformer 
differential relay protection, 
650
Single-phase two-conductor line, 
191–193
Single-phase, two-conductor  
line with composite 
transistors, 190
Single-phase, two-winding 
transformer, 99–100
Single-phase, two-winding 
transformer differential 
relay protection, 649
Single-phase, two-wire line 
inductance, 187–188
Skin effect, 181
SLG faults. See Single line-to-
ground (SLG) faults
Smart Grid R&D Program, 33–40
key R&D areas, 39
ongoing activities, 33–37
performance targets, 37
workshops, 37–38
Smart grids, 913–914
Smart grid technology, 19
Software for distribution, 905–906
Solid-state converter development, 
HVDC transmission 
technologies, 243
Solid-state relay panel, 625
SO2 emissions by scenario, 324
Sparsity techniques, 369–372
in 37-bus system, 371–372
Spinning reserve, 741
Spot network, 889–990
Stability results, 37 bus 9 
generator system, 718
Standard CT ratios, 617
Standard VT ratios, 617
Static exciters, 757
Static var compensators, 289
Station- and intermediate-class 
metal-oxide surge arresters 
characteristics, 851
Steady-state 
fault current, 436
frequency–power regulation, 
762
stability limit, 279–282
Steam plants, 11
Step-voltage source 
matched at sending end, 
capacitive load at receiving 
end, 818–820
matched at sending end, open 
receiving end, 816–818
at sending end, matched load 
at receiving end, 815–816
with unmatched source 
resistance at sending end, 
unmatched resistive load at 
receiving end, 820–822
Substation normal, emergency, 
and allowable ratings, 894–895
Subtransient fault current, 439
Subtransient impedance, 512
Support structures, design 
considerations, transmission 
lines, 176
Surge arresters, 781–793
application recommendations, 
784–792
dimensions and mounting, 
787–792
discharge voltages, 788–789
external construction, 781–783
internal construction, 783–784
operation, 784
performance and protective 
characteristics, 792
routine tests, 787
selection of arrester rating, 
784–787
specifications, 790–791
standards, 787
voltage ratings, 785
Surge impedance, 274
Surge impedance loading (SIL), 
276–278
Surge phenomena, 107
Swing equation, 689–694
coherent machines, 694
generator per-unit swing 
equation and power angles 
during short circuit, 692–693
two generating units equivalent 
swing equation, 693–694
Switching surges, 846
Symmetrical components, 
475–537
balanced abc currents, 497–498
balanced line-to-neutral 
voltages, 496–497

	
Index	
939
common identities involving  
a 5 1/1208, 494
gas-insulated substations 
(GIS), 476–492
impedance loads sequence 
networks, 499–506
negative-sequence components, 
493
per-unit sequence models of 
three-phase three-winding 
transformers, 522–524
per-unit sequence models of 
three-phase two-winding 
transformers, 516–521
positive-sequence components, 
493
power in sequence networks, 
524–526
resolving phase voltages, 493
rotating machines sequence 
networks, 510–516
series impedances sequence 
networks, 506–508
three-phase lines sequence 
networks, 508–510
unbalanced currents, 498–499
zero-sequence components, 493
Symmetrical fault current, 436
Symmetrical faults, 415–473
bus impedance matrix, 445–454
circuit breaker selection, 455–459
fuse selection, 460–462
power system three-phase short 
circuits, 442–445
series R–L circuit transients, 
435–438
short circuit modeling of wind 
power plant, 416–435
three-phase short circuit, 
unloaded synchronous 
machine, 438–442
Symmetrical series impedances, 519
Symmetrical Y-load, 519
Synchronous generator connected 
to system equivalent, 695
Synchronous generator exciter 
response, 758–760
Synchronous generator feeding 
synchronous motor, 443
Synchronous impedance, 511, 512
System configurations and 
operating modes, HVDC 
transmission technologies, 
251–252
System protection, 593–668
backup relays, 594
bus protection with differential 
relays, 647–648
design components, 612–613
differential relays, 645–647
directional relays, 633–634
instrument transformers, 
614–620
line protection with impedance 
(distance) relays, 639–645
numeric relaying, 654–655
overcurrent relays, 620–625
pilot relaying, 653–654
primary relays, 594
radial system protection, 625–629
reclosers and fuses, 629–632
relay protection upgrading, 
595–612
transformer protection with 
differential relays, 648–653
two-source system with 
directional relays protection, 
634–635
zones of protection, 635–638
System representation, 547–552
fault terminals, 548
power-system sequence 
networks and Thévenin 
equivalents, 549–551
three-phase bus, general, 548
three-phase bus, general, 
balanced system, 549
three-phase short-circuit 
calculations using sequence 
networks, 551–552
System stability, 682–683
T
Tap-changing three-phase 
transformer, per-unit positive-
sequence network, 133–135
Theoretical maximum power 
delivered, long line, 283–284
Theoretical steady-state stability 
limit, long line, 281–282
345-kV transmission loop, 639
13.8-kV radial distributor feeder, 
630
34.5-kV radial system, 626
Three-phase bus, general, 548
Three-phase bus, general, 
balanced system, 549
Three-phase fault, transient 
stability during, 699–702
Three-phase line, neutral 
conductors and earth plane 
replaced by conductors, 214
Three-phase lines sequence 
networks, 508–510
completely transposed three-
phase line capacitances, 510
completely transposed 
three-phase line sequence 
impedances, 509
Three-phase motors sequence 
networks, 512
Three-phase networks with 
transformers using per-
unit sequence components 
solution, 520–521
Three-phase series impedances, 507
Three-phase short-circuit 
calculations using sequence 
networks, 551–552
currents, power system, 444–445
currents, unloaded 
synchronous generator, 
441–442
Three-phase short circuit, 
unloaded synchronous 
machine, 438–442
ac fault current, 439
armature time constant, 440
direct axis short-circuit sub-
transient time constant, 439
direct axis short-circuit 
transient time constant, 440
subtransient fault current, 439
three-phase short-circuit currents, 
unloaded synchronous 
generator, 441–442
transient fault current, 440

940	
Index
Three-phase symmetrical 
impedance load, 506
Three-phase symmetrical series 
impedances, 508
Three-phase three-wire line 
with equal phase spacing 
inductance, 189
Three-phase transformer 
connections and phase  
shift, 115–120
negative-sequence phasor 
diagram for Y–  
transformer bank 
construction, 119
phase shift in –Y 
transformers, 118
positive-sequence phasor 
diagram construction, 
116–118
three-phase two-winding Y–  
transformer bank, 117
three-phase two-winding Y–Y 
transformer bank, 116
transformer core 
configurations, 120
Three-phase transformer differential 
relay protection, 652–653
Three-phase transmission line 
with earth replaced by earth 
return conductors, 198
Three-phase transmission voltage 
increases, 14
Three-phase two-winding Y–  
transformer bank, 117
Three-phase two-winding Y–Y 
transformer bank, 116
Three-phase, Y–Δ, two-winding 
transformer differential 
relay protection, 651
Three-winding, three-phase 
transformer, balanced 
operation, 128–129
Three-winding transformers, 
125–129
single-phase three-winding 
transformer, 126
single-phase three-winding 
transformer, per-unit 
impedances, 127–128
three-winding, three-phase 
transformer, balanced 
operation, 128–129
Three-zone directional impedance 
relay, 642
Three-zone impedance relay 
settings, 643–645
Thyristor valve arrangement, 
HVDC transmission 
technologies, 241
Time-current curves for radial 
distribution circuit, 631
Time-delay overcurrent relays, 
622, 635
block and trip regions, 621
coordination, 626–629
Time response fuse, 461, 462
Top-down restoration, 671
Transfer admittance, 54
Transformer core configurations, 
120
Transformer protection with 
differential relays, 648–653
single-phase transformer 
differential relay protection, 
650
single-phase, two-winding 
transformer differential 
relay protection, 649
three-phase transformer 
differential relay protection, 
652–653
three-phase, Y–Δ, two-winding 
transformer differential 
relay protection, 651
Transformer short-circuit and 
open-circuit tests, 104–105
Transformers in distribution 
systems, 890–900
distribution substation 
transformers, 890–895
distribution transformer kVA 
ratings, 899
distribution transformers, 
895–900
grounded Y-network 
transformer, 898
oil-filed padmount transformer, 
897
permissible daily short-time 
loading of liquid-filled 
distribution transformers, 
899
pole-mount transformer, 896
rated current and short circuit 
current, 893
substation normal, emergency, 
and allowable ratings, 
894–895
voltage regulators, 892
Transformers with off-nominal 
turns ratios, 131–139
phase-angle-regulating 
transformer, 136
reactive power flow, 139
real power flow, 139
tap-changing three-phase 
transformer, per-unit 
positive-sequence network, 
133–135
two transformers connected in 
parallel, 131
voltage-magnitude-regulating 
transformer, 136
voltage-regulating and 
phase-shifting three-phase 
transformers, 137–139
Transient fault current, 440
Transient impedance, 512
Transient operation in 
transmission lines, 779–858
Bewley lattice diagram, 
822–827
boundary conditions for single-
phase lossless lines, 813–822
discrete-time models, 828–834
emergency response, 794–809
insulation coordination, 
847–852
lossy lines, 834–838
multiconductor lines, 838–841
power system overvoltages, 
841–847
surge arresters, 781–793
traveling waves on single-phase 
lossless lines, 809–812
Transient overvoltages, 684–686
Transient stability, 669–737

	
Index	
941
design methods for 
improvement of, 730–732
equal-area criterion, 697–707
multimachine stability, 711–718
numerical integration, swing 
equation, 707–711
power system restoration, 
671–689
simplified synchronous 
machine model and system 
equivalents, 695–697
swing equation, 689–694
two-axis synchronous machine 
model, 719–723
wind turbine machine models, 
724–730
Transit time, 813
Transmission in North America, 16
Transmission-line ABCD 
parameters
long line, 269–271
summary, 269
Transmission-line characteristics, 
design considerations, 
transmission lines, 177
Transmission-line differential 
equations, 265–271
characteristic impedance, 267
propagation constant, 266
transmission line ABCD 
parameters, long line, 269–271
transmission line ABCD 
parameters, summary, 269
transmission-line section of 
length Δx, 265
Transmission line equivalent  
π circuit, 271
Transmission line, HVDC 
transmission technologies, 
239
Transmission line loadability 
curve, 280
Transmission line parameters, 
161–236
capacitance, 205–211
conductance, 182
design considerations, 174–179
electric field and voltage, solid 
cylindrical conductor, 
202–205
electric field strength, 
conductor surfaces and 
ground level, 216–219
grid congestion, 168–174
inductance, 187–199
inductance, solid cylindrical 
conductor, 182–187
North America’s power grid, 
162–167
parallel circuit three-phase 
lines, 219–221
resistance, 179–182
series impedances, three-phase 
line, neutral conductors, 
earth return, 197–202
shunt admittances, lines with 
neutral conductors and 
earth return, 211–216
Transmission-line section of 
length Δx, 265
Transmission lines: steady state 
operation, 237–307
equivalent π circuit, 271–273
HVDC transmission 
technologies, 238–258
line loadability, 284–289
lossless lines, 274–282
maximum power flow, 282–284
medium and short line 
approximations, 258–265
reactive compensation 
techniques, 289–294
transmission-line differential 
equations, 265–271
Transmission line voltage and 
number of lines for power 
transfer selection, 286–287
Transmission losses effect, 
382–388 
Transposed three-phase line, 194
Transposition, 194
Traveling waves on single-phase 
lossless lines, 809–812
Trends, electric utility industry, 
17–20
electric energy generation by 
types, 17
installed generating capability 
by principal fuel types, 18
smart grid technology, 19
Turbine-generator response 
to frequency change at 
generating unit, 763
Turbine-governor control, 761–767
area frequency response 
characteristic, 763
pitch control, Type 3 or 4 wind 
turbine model, 767
regulation constant, 762
response to load change in 
interconnected power 
system, 764–766
steady-state frequency–power 
regulation, 762
turbine-generator response 
to frequency change at 
generating unit, 763
Two-axis synchronous machine 
model, 719–723
generator variation, 722–723
reference frame 
transformations, 719
Two generating units equivalent 
swing equation, 693–694
Two-port network representa­tion, 
258
Two-source system with 
directional relays protection, 
634–635
and time-delay overcurrent 
relays, 635
two sources, 635
Two transformers connected in 
parallel, 131
Type 4 WTGs, 427–428
Type 3 DFAG model circuit 
diagram, 728
U
Unbalanced currents, 498–499
Unbalanced three-phase networks 
solutions using sequence 
components, 514–516
Uncoupled equations, 500
Underground and submarine 
cable transmission, HVDC 
transmission technologies, 
246, 248
Underground primary loop, 884

942	
Index
Unsymmetrical faults, 429–430, 
539–586
double line-to-ground fault, 
560–567
line-to-line fault, 557–559
medium voltage switchgear, 
540–547
sequence bus impedance 
matrices, 567–575
single line-to-ground fault, 
553–557
system representation, 547–552
U.S. voltage distribution, 878
V
Vector addition, electric fields at 
surface of one conductor in 
bundle, 217
Voltage calculations, balanced 
Y–Y and –Y transformers, 
122–123
Voltage control, 680
Voltage-magnitude-regulating 
transformer, 136
Voltage profiles, 278–279
Voltage range factor K, 458
Voltage rating, 458, 461
impulse withstand voltage, 458
low frequency withstand 
voltage, 458
maximum voltage, 458
voltage range factor K, 458
Voltage-regulating and  
phase-shifting three-phase 
transformers, 137–139
Voltage regulation, 262
Voltage regulator and turbine- 
governor controls for  
steam-turbine  
generator, 740
Voltage regulators, 892
Voltage source converter operating 
range, HVDC transmission 
techno­logies, 244
Voltage source converters, HVDC 
transmission technologies, 
240
Voltage transformer, 614
VSC-based HVDC, 253–255
VT. See Voltage transformer
VT and CT schematic, 614
W
Wavelength, 276
Wind 
assistance, 801–802
plant controls, 806
plant frequency response, 795
power response, 803
turbine generator power 
comparison, 807
Wind and solar 
emissions avoided per  
MWh, 322
generation displaced, 319
induced cycling operational 
costs, 323–327
system operation with high 
penetrations, 317–320
uncertainty of wind and solar 
variability, 327–328
wind versus solar, 315–316
Wind generation modeling, 
374–376
wind plant collector system 
topology, 375
wind speed versus power curve, 
376
Wind turbine generator. See WTG 
entries
Wind turbine generators 
operation, 418
Wind turbine machine models, 
724–730
doubly-fed asynchronous 
generator, 729–730
doubly-fed asynchronous 
generator components, 728
equivalent circuit for single 
cage induction machine, 724
induction generator, 725–726
induction machine, external 
resistance variation effect  
on torque-speed curve, 727
type 3 DFAG model circuit 
diagram, 728
Wind turbine (type 3) reactive 
power control, 760–761
Y
Ybus power-flow modification, 
714–716
Y-connected synchronous 
generator, 511
Y–Δ transformer features, 519
Z
Zbus use to compute three-phase 
short-circuit currents, 
447–448
Zero-sequence components, 493
Zero-sequence impedance, 501
Zero-sequence networks, 501
Zones of protection, 635–638
overlapping protection around 
circuit breaker, 637
power system protective  
zones, 636

To register or access your online learning solution or purchase materials  
for your course, visit www.cengagebrain.com.
POWER SYSTEM
ANALYSIS & DESIGN
Sixth Edition
Glover • Overbye • Sarma

