A Practical Introduction  
to Facilities Management
Ian C. Barker MCIOB

Published by
Whittles Publishing,
Dunbeath,
Caithness KW6 6EG,
Scotland, UK
www.whittlespublishing.com
© 2013 Ian C. Barker
ISBN 978-184995-096-1
All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted,
in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, recording or otherwise
without prior permission of the publishers.
The publisher and authors have used their best efforts in preparing this book, but 
assume no responsibility for any injury and/or damage to persons or property from the 
use or implementation of any methods, instructions, ideas or materials contained within 
this book. All operations should be undertaken in accordance with existing legislation 
and recognized trade practice. Whilst the information and advice in this book is believed 
to be true and accurate at the time of going to press, the authors and publisher accept no 
legal responsibility or liability for errors or omissions that may have been made.
Typeset by Exeter Premedia, India
Printed and bound in

v
Contents
List of theory and information slots
xiii
Abbreviations used
xv
Chapter 1  Getting started
1
What is Facilities Management?
1
The value of experience
2
The trainee
4
Aims and objectives: setting out your stall
5
Identify
5
Evaluate
5
Plan
10
Action
12
Review
13
Getting started
14
Chapter 2  The basics
15
Tools of the trade
15
Computer systems and software
15
Phones
16
Administration structure
16
Networking
18
Being a newbie 
19
Having a clear out
19
The quick fix
20
Understanding your portfolio
21
Physical assets
22
Understanding your service and how it f its onto your site
24

Contents
vi
Chapter 3  Managing people: staff and customers
27
Managing your staff
27
Choose your staff well: recruitment
28
Communication with your staff
30
Find out what makes them tick
33
Dangle the carrot 
34
Review
37
What about you?
37
Are you up to the job? The S curve and learning cycles
37
Your training
39
Do you have the necessary support structure?
39
Are you adequately resourced?
39
Teamwork: what makes a good team?
40
Staff training
42
Ability of staff to undertake their duties effectively
42
People must want to progress
43
Creation of stability and succession
44
Ability to meet legislative requirements
45
Ability to overlap services
45
How do you get staff to undertake training?
45
Rewarding progress
46
Fair and equal pay and training
49
Customer service
50
Creating a good impression
50
Providing good customer service
51
Practising what you preach
55
Development of customer services
55
Chapter 4  Policies, strategies, procedures, risks and liabilities
59
Policies
59
Strategies
61
What is a strategy?
61
What are the key points of a strategy?
62
Procedures
64
Guidance notes
65
Forms
66
Administrative f low
66
Monitoring and managing
67
What are you managing and monitoring?
68
Where are you are managing and monitoring?
68
When will you manage and monitor?
69
How will you manage and monitor?
70
Why are you managing and monitoring?
71

Contents
vii
Quality management
71
What is quality  ?
72
What is quality management?
73
Bench-marking
75
Why is quality so important?
76
Risks and liability
77
What is compliance?
77
Statutory requirements
78
Risks with new builds and defect periods
84
User requirements
87
Heating systems
87
Fire legislation
88
Emergency procedures
91
Risks to property
91
Building maintenance
92
Staff
97
Financial risks
99
Making mistakes
101
Chapter 5  Outsourcing of services or in-house staff?
102
Reasons to outsource services
102
Does the service work?
102
Does the service f it the requirements of the site?
103
Is the service f inancially sound?
103
Is there a sound reason for change?
104
Service drift
104
Outsourcing: advantages and disadvantages
106
Advantages of outsourcing
108
Disadvantages of outsourcing
108
Specif ications
109
Types of specif ication
110
Risk
112
The education sector: the learner experience   
and outsourcing
113
Working with contractors
114
Choosing your contractors
115
Performance and review
116
Quality
116
Waste
118
Health and safety
119
Contractor f iles
120
Procurement routes for FM
120

Contents
viii
Chapter 6  In-house teams
124
Maintenance team
124
Specialisms
125
Workload
125
Performance
127
Contracting in or out?
128
Site supervision team
129
Timing of service
131
Integration
131
Safety and security
132
Resourcing
132
Core times and resourcing
133
The  friendly  service
134
Helpdesk team
134
The hub for your department
135
The place to report defects or problems
135
Customer service department
136
Audit department
136
Helpdesk software specif ication
137
System requirements
138
Post team
140
Deliveries out to departments
140
Parcels and deliveries
141
Cleaning team
142
Timing
142
Supervision
144
The poisoned chalice 
144
Value added: sustainability and security
145
Consumables
146
Security team
146
Safeguarding
147
Intruders
147
Drugs and alcohol
148
Closed-circuit television
149
Patrols
149
Statistics
150
Chapter 7  Maintenance including new builds  
and space management
152
Types of maintenance
152
Reactive maintenance
152
Planned maintenance
154
Planned preventative maintenance
155

Contents
ix
Planned programme and planned survey
158
What is a planned survey document?
158
Planned programme
161
Space management
161
New builds and maintenance
163
Pre-build
163
Heating
164
Ventilation and chilling/cooling
166
Electricity use and new technologies
167
Disputes
167
Chapter 8  Sustainability, use of resources  
and sustainable technologies
169
What is sustainability?
169
Improving the sustainability of your organisation
171
Identif ication of resources used
171
Conversion of resource use into a carbon footprint
172
Setting bench-marks and targets
172
Setting future targets
173
Reporting progress and reviewing results
173
Sustainability: a whole organisation approach
174
Determining your carbon footprint
176
Carbon emissions from transport
177
Carbon emissions from waste disposal
177
Water usage
178
Carbon emissions and procurement
179
Your Carbon Team 
180
Organisational buy-in
181
Your carbon plan
181
Sustainable technologies
182
Ground source heat pumps
183
Air source heat pumps
184
Biomass boilers
184
Solar thermal panels
185
Photovoltaic panels
187
Wind generation
189
Voltage optimisation
189
Grey water
190
Building Management Systems
190
Installing sustainable technologies
191
Utilities
191
Establishing your base load
192

Contents
x
Procurement of electricity
192
Control of utilities
194
Educating the occupants of buildings
195
Chapter 9  Waste and how to deal with it
198
What is waste?
198
Paper waste
198
Sources of paper
199
Cost of paper copies
200
Waste paper
201
Food waste
202
Specialist waste
203
Batteries and toner cartridges
203
Oil waste
204
Fluorescent tubes
204
Radioactive sources
205
Building waste
206
Chapter 10  Fleet management
207
Drivers and licences
207
Drivers hours
209
Vehicles
210
Key control
210
Logging journeys
210
Trackers
211
Fuel cards
211
Capital purchases
211
Appendix 1    Strategic objectives and operational targets  
for a typical college
213
Appendix 2  Management strategy for heating and ventilation 
in a college environment
245
Appendix 3  Health and safety rules for contractors
255
Appendix 4  Sustainability policy
266
Appendix 5  Dealing with bomb threats
269
Appendix 6  Preliminaries and conditions
273
Appendix 7  Strategy for helpdesk
283
Appendix 8  Strategy for operations and maintenance
287

Contents
xi
Appendix 9     Service level agreements
289
Appendix 10  Cleaning specif ication
291
Appendix 11  Grounds maintenance specif ication for a college
307
Appendix 12  Health, safety and environment questionnaire
316
References
322
Index
325


1
Chapter 1
Getting started
What is Facilities Management?
Facilities Management (FM) can be defined in one simple phrase: “everything 
that is not core business.” Practising Facilities Managers must be prepared 
to turn their hands to an increasingly wide range of areas, some specialist, to 
allow the core functions of a company to function effectively.
This “everything” can differ from business to business and new areas are 
being added to the facilities mantle every day. Facilities Management services 
are often seen as the natural home for everything that is not the core activity, 
although, in general, data and management information systems, information 
technology, human resources and finance are defined as separate services.
For me, one of the attractions of going into FM as a profession was 
the variety that it provides in terms of job content. You could be doing a 
different job every day of the week, so there is never an opportunity to become 
bored or stale. Facilities Management is a developing area and requires the 
practitioner to be on top of their game at all times. You will be looking at new 
things on a daily basis and you will probably be expected to achieve a high 
level of knowledge quickly and be able to adapt that knowledge to suit the 
ever-shifting sands of FM.
As an FM practitioner, it is essential that you are highly organised and 
have robust systems in place to meet this requirement of remaining up to 
date and maintaining your Continuing Professional Development (CPD). This 
book aims to guide you through setting up robust systems that overlap all 
the FM functions and ensure that there is no over-duplication of your work.
As you work through this book, you will be introduced to some of the 
theories of FM through the use of examples. I have taken this approach 
because, as you become a practitioner of FM, you will quickly realise that there 
is no “one size fits all” answer to problems. There are tried and tested theories 

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
2
on FM, but rarely do all the pieces of the jigsaw fit together exactly. You will 
find that you may need to adapt, modify and fundamentally change accepted 
practices to make them work effectively in your own organisation. This is one 
of the fundamental threads that run through performance management and 
the Plan–Do–Review–Revise management mantra.
I cannot emphasise enough that it is essential that an FM practitioner 
is trained. There is no substitute for understanding the principles of both 
general management and specialist FM and using those theories and practices 
alongside this book to manage your portfolio. A fully trained FM professional 
is an essential prerequisite in today’s fast-paced FM environment.
The value of experience
Many older FM practitioners gained their professional knowledge through 
the “school of hard knocks”. Making mistakes is part of any learning process. 
Theory and information slot: the future of FM
Facilities Management has come of age and is here to stay. Increasingly, 
Facilities Managers are being viewed as strategic managers of the 
organisation they represent. They have always been seen as key members 
of the organisation’s team, but they are now being seen as having the 
ability to affect the bottom line of the organisation, rather than as a 
resource-sapping function.
The strategic stewardship of an organisation’s assets during times of 
austerity in particular brings confidence to an organisation, allowing 
them to focus on core activities rather than worry about the peripheral FM 
functions. It is this stewardship that can reduce risk to the organisation 
while adding positive value to the organisation’s estate.
Increasingly, the role of sustainability manager is sitting within the 
facilities function and, again, in times of austerity, social responsibility 
in the form of proactive sustainability can provide an added competitive 
edge to an organisation.
Note to self
Remember you are in a developing 
industry. However, the sheer diversity 
of functions allows innovation to 
drive the FM process forward.

1 Getting started
3
However, today’s new recruits to FM do not have the luxury of being able 
to make mistakes, as today’s pressurised environment means any mistake 
could have a detrimental effect on the core business. A key example of 
this occurred in 2012, when a series of IT crashes in the banking sector 
locked customers out of their bank accounts for days. Ultimately, this will 
cost the banks millions of pounds. This example shows how businesses can 
sometimes be dramatically affected by the loss of a separate support service, 
although, in this case, not FM.
You must understand, however, that you will inevitably make mistakes. 
A good FM practitioner will use this to his or her best advantage and come 
out of the experience far richer. The FM practitioner who says “I don’t make 
mistakes” is probably lying. All you can really do is learn from the mistake 
and make sure it does not happen again.
This book has been developed as a helping hand in an area of management 
where it is all too easy to become overwhelmed by the sheer size and 
volume of the role. Experience is the one thing that cannot be taught. Your 
experience will grow on a daily basis. Never be afraid to try new things and 
to make mistakes, as this will make you a stronger FM practitioner. Equally 
important, however, is never to be rash with your establishment’s assets. No 
one appreciates a gung-ho attitude, and certainly not your staff, who will be 
looking to you to create stability, not chaos.
When you move from one company to the next, you take with you the best 
work practices you have seen and developed, and leave behind those practices 
Theory and information slot: hard and soft services
When jobs for Facilities Managers are advertised, they are often grouped 
under the titles of Facilities Manager (Hard Services) or Facilities Manager 
(Soft Services), or an amalgam of the two (Hard and Soft Services). But 
what are “Hard” and “Soft” services?
Hard services generally relate to all mechanical and electrical services 
within a building. Sometimes referred to as M & E, they cover the 
specialist functions of heating, ventilation and their control systems. 
The Hard Services Manager invariably comes from a heating engineering 
background, or has been specifically trained to deal with hard services.
Soft services relates to most of the other trades that run through FM: 
cleaning, porterage, post room and maintenance disciplines such as 
painting and decorating or joinery. A Soft Services Manager is more 
focused towards personnel management than the Hard Services Manager.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
4
and policies which did not work. Experience is therefore a key element in 
your FM armoury and you should aim to build on your experience in a 
logical way when considering your CPD. Work closely with your professional 
institution to ensure that not only do you develop as a truly outstanding 
practising Facilities Manager, but that you also learn from your peers within 
the organisation and pass on your skills through networking. Choose your 
jobs wisely to encompass as wide a range of activities as possible. You will find 
that, as your skill levels improve, you will be able to apply your experience 
in a number of ways and use it to cross over into other disciplines, thus 
broadening your portfolio. Remember that there is no substitute for tried and 
tested FM and general management training.
The trainee
We don’t all start in FM as managers. The beauty of FM is that there are so 
many different levels that the trainee can start work in one of many disciplines 
and steadily work their way up while gaining 
that all-important key experience. The Trainee 
should have their eyes fixed on whatever level 
they ultimately see as their ideal position and 
use the skills of the personnel around them to 
enhance their own skills. Building that key 
experience is very important if you aspire to be 
a good all-round FM practitioner. Be sure that, 
while building your key experience, you also 
develop your academic side. Again, FM is so 
diverse that you can pick up FM skills in 
modules or batches of learning. I cannot emphasis enough that, to become a 
well-rounded FM practitioner, you need to understand FM thoroughly and 
you can only do that if you understand and have had a thorough grounding 
in theory. Very much like the quote “a dog is not just for Christmas,” FM is 
for life! Once it is under your skin, you cannot think of an alternative career.
Do you know that bloated feeling? When you go out for a celebratory 
meal and are faced with a banquet of new and interesting things, you have 
a tendency to over-eat, leaving yourself with that bloated feeling. When you 
become a Facilities Manager for the first time, you will suffer from that bloated 
feeling for a considerable period of time. The sheer volume of information, 
varieties of work, compliance constraints and pressures and, in particular, 
the diverse set of staff that you require, will at times push you to the edge of 
despair. You need to be able to control your workload effectively and not get 
that bloated feeling that will weigh you down, and wear you down, unless you 
­Warning
If you take on 
too much at once, 
you are likely to fail. 
Do things in bite-
sized chunks.

1 Getting started
5
can master and control it. You will ultimately be your own judge of whether 
you are successful. Don’t be too harsh or too demanding on yourself in those 
formative months, or indeed years, and allow yourself time to review your 
progress every step of the way.
Let’s start by setting a framework to follow. Don’t set off like a firework, 
shooting in all directions. You must be measured and practical about every 
area that you tackle.
Aims and objectives: setting out your stall
Don’t set off by ploughing your way through your workload without taking a 
step back and evaluating what it is that you are actually doing. Never assume 
that your predecessor had all the pieces of the jigsaw. Your strategy should 
always follow the same format: identify, evaluate, plan, action and review.
Identify
You first need to sit back and look at the services you provide.
•	
What. What services do you provide and are there any other services 
that you should be providing?
•	
How. How do you provide the services that you are responsible for?
•	
When. Obtain an overview of the times that you provide your services. 
You will probably not be there for the full operational day. Make sure 
you know what is going on when you are not on site, and make sure that 
these do actually take place. You will often find that services that should 
be provided at the end of the working day simply do not happen and 
that actual working hours do not match contractual hours. Remember 
that the provision of FM services may be 365 days of the year, 24 hours 
a day. Give equal merit to all aspects and parts of the working day.
•	
Why. Find out why you are providing particular services and what the 
rationales behind the services are, e.g. staffing levels.
•	
Where. Understand where services are provided from and why these 
locations are used. Are they located in the best place for ease of access 
and delivery?
Evaluate
The next stage is to evaluate whether all these services are essential and to 
determine any gaps within the service. It is clear that as a new and forward-
thinking manager you will want to develop your service to fit the requirements 

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
6
of your organisation. When you have got to grips with the service you have 
already, you can begin to understand how best to provide it. To see where 
the gaps in the service are, you need to have a full overview. You also need 
to know the aims and aspirations of the organisation in terms of where they 
want your provision of services to go.
Take time to understand the connections between services and to check 
that there are no unnecessary overlaps. There may be instant gains to be 
made by putting two services together to create stability and continuity of 
staff during illness and holidays. For example, putting the roles of Helpdesk 
and Post together can provide development opportunities for staff. Allowing 
both teams to increase their skills to provide stability during holidays also 
allows your staff to develop more interest in their roles and increases team 
spirit.
What is evaluation?
“Evaluation is a careful and measured appreciation of the subject area, 
creating an understanding of the subject as a whole.”
Evaluation is a measurement tool and sometimes it is difficult to assess 
something if raw data are not available on which to base decisions. Sometimes 
you can be “flying in the dark” or basing your decisions on gut instinct or 
staff perceptions on how good or bad a service is.
Your evaluation of the service should be an ongoing process. What you are 
aiming to do is draw a line in the sand and be able to quantify the success 
of the department in its entirety. You don’t want to have to replicate this 
exercise each year, so set up evaluation systems into which you can feed data 
to give you an appreciation of how far the service has successfully travelled. 
This needs to be one of your first tasks: effectively drawing a line in the sand 
by bench-marking your service. Defining the service in this way will give you 
a firm base from which to measure your success. Later in the book we will 
look at Quality Systems and these will help you to pull together evaluative 
tools that will stand you in good stead for the future.
What should be included in the evaluation of services?
Do not become too insular about evaluating your service. It is sometimes too 
easy to completely miss two very important parts of the jigsaw: the service 
that you provide and the people you are providing the service to.
Do not forget that you are one of the biggest cogs in the service you 
provide. Remember that if your service fails, it could be your fault. This is 
not always the case, as external influences inevitably contribute to failure; 

1 Getting started
7
however, you are the person in the driving seat and if the car crashes you 
could be held accountable.
Ensure that your processes are also evaluated and, more importantly, 
formulated to fit the service. Ensure that you leave an audit trail and 
document your evaluation in a coherent way. Sometimes you may get to 
the end of an evaluation and be challenged as to how you arrived at your 
conclusions. If you have not set your work out in a way that can be audited, 
you may struggle to justify your decisions if you cannot refer back to a set 
of coherent notes. You have the power to shape your own department, but, 
if your systems and processes for protecting the department are not robust, 
then the whole system is likely to fail.
Without the people you are providing the service to, there is no service 
to provide. A large proportion of your evaluation must include these people. 
Take time to speak to your clients and customers and make sure that their 
expectations of the service are being met. You may find that your service is 
wide off the mark in terms of meeting the customer’s expectations. Engage 
with staff and visitors. If you are in an education environment, speak to both 
staff and student groups and make them feel from the outset that your job is 
to provide a good service for them.
You may be lucky and drop into a service that is fully defined, e.g. a 
Private Finance Initiative (PFI), and this will certainly make your life easier. 
However, it is more likely that there will be no specification defining your 
service capabilities and requirements.
Your organisation’s strategic objectives will provide you with an invaluable 
guide to the service you need to provide. Do not, however, become drawn into 
promising too much in terms of service early in your tenure, before you can 
evaluate whether it is practical to do so. Under-promise and over-perform is 
a useful guide.
Sources of information for your evaluation
There may already be good, valuable sources of information for you to tap into 
as part of your evaluative process. These may include some of the following 
sources.
•	
Internal departmental reports. You may find that your predecessor 
has already evaluated certain aspects of your service. I am always 
suspicious of previous reports, not because I believe they are 
inaccurate, but because they rarely look at the whole service and can 
be one-sided, promoting a rosy picture. This could be misleading and 
make your job more difficult in the long term.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
8
•	
Questionnaire Data Processing (QPD). This is an independent company 
providing statistical data to educational establishments. It is a 
national questionnaire undertaken in colleges and compares certain 
aspects of college life between establishments. It can be very useful 
in terms of identifying areas such as cleaning, hygiene and security, 
which can influence QDP scores.
•	
Internal quality reports. Most quality systems will produce internal 
reports which may identify issues and suggest solutions.
•	
Service Assessment Reports (SARs). Again, in a college environment, 
all services including the core curriculum are judged on the SAR 
process. The SAR process defines the targets set for each aspect of 
service provision and periodically tests progress against those targets 
through progress meetings each term. This effectively becomes a self-
assessment of the service provision and strategic objectives of the 
organisation.
•	
Customer feedback reports. Key to any organisational success is the 
way in which the organisation treats its customers. These reports 
can be invaluable in understanding what customers feel about the 
service.
•	
Audit reports. Unbiased opinions from external auditors can help you 
to see where improvements need to be made.
Evaluative conclusion
It is important that, once you have evaluated your service provision, you 
reach a conclusion on the effectiveness of the service you are providing. This 
is the prime reason you began the evaluation in the first place. Take time 
to reach a summarised conclusion which identifies the key strengths and 
weaknesses of the department. Use of a “ragged” report (red, amber, green) 
will enable you to achieve the following:
•	
see where your strengths are and how importantly you rate those 
strengths in relation to the overall service provision
•	
identify your weaknesses and see where those key weakness affect the 
service in a detrimental way
•	
prioritise your actions
•	
set time-scales

1 Getting started
9
Table 1.1  Example of an evaluation of services report
Area
Strengths
Weaknesses
Area for  
improvement
Date for  
completion
Progress at  
Aug 2012
Progress at  
Jan 2013
Helpdesk
Fully functioning section 
with well-defined 
software
Motivated staff
Software not being 
used to full extent
Helpdesk not in high 
profile area
Training required to ensure 
software being used fully
Move Helpdesk to front of 
house
Jan 2013
A
Condition  
survey
50% of stock rebuilt 
within last three years
No full condition 
survey  
undertaken
Undertake full condition 
survey
Oct 2012
R
Health &  
Safety
Full risk assessments 
undertaken
Trained staff
Successful audit 
undertaken with 
positive outcome
Risk assessments 
need reviewing in 
Oct this year
Prepare for and 
calendar review of risk 
assessments later in year
Oct 2012
G
Utilities
Automated meter reading 
(AMR) in place
Targets set for reduction
No-one monitoring 
AMR
Utilities contracts up 
for renewal
Targets not being 
monitored
Delegate responsibility for 
reading AMR
Prepare tender for utilities
Make the person 
responsible for the AMR 
also responsible for 
reporting
June 2012
A
R = red, A = amber, G = green.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
10
Plan
Now that you have successfully evaluated your systems and service, you 
should be in a position to have a general overview of the service that you 
provide. You can’t just flick a switch and see everything fall into place. 
Installing a coherent system within a busy FM department will depend on 
the size of the institution.
Look to install and set up your basic system within the first year and then 
allow a further two years to evaluate and review your progress. This may 
sound like a long time, but the time will fly by quickly. You will obviously 
want to make a mark quickly in some areas, but keep a long-term strategy 
Table 1.2  Example of a time-scale of plans for improvement
Area
Area for  
improvement
Apr May Jun July Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar
Helpdesk Training 
required 
to ensure 
software 
being used 
fully
Helpdesk Move Helpdesk 
to front 
of house 
position
Condition 
survey
Complete 
condition 
survey
Health  
and 
Safety
Review risk 
assessments
Utilities
Secure 
responsible 
person
Prep tender for 
utilities
Set up 
reporting 
structure

1 Getting started
11
key to your development plan. Always remember that you need to keep an eye 
on the future horizon, so having a long-term strategy is essential.
Look initially at the things you can implement quickly and perhaps 
start with those, but always have a plan. Don’t just aimlessly try to install 
processes without setting yourself objectives and a time-scale, otherwise you 
will never achieve results.
Immediately you can begin to see that you have made room in your diary 
for the work needed and you have some clear deadlines to meet. Don’t be 
afraid to put detail into your plans. The more detailed your plans, the greater 
the likelihood that you have covered all the basics.
Planning, Organising, Commanding, Coordinating and Controlling form 
part of most modern management theories and form the bedrock of moving a 
service forward in a productive and measurable way. You, in turn, will develop 
Theory and information slot
Henry Fayol (1841–1925) considered that management consisted of six 
functions:
•	
Forecasting: predicting what will happen in the future
•	
Planning: developing a course of action and setting time-scales
•	
Organising: mobilising the work and allocating tasks
•	
Commanding: directing and motivating staff
•	
Co-ordinating: making sure all services pull together as one
•	
Controlling: monitoring progress against targets
Adapted from Fayol’s six managerial activities table 16.2 in Buchannan, 
D.A. & Huczynski, A.A. Organizational Behaviour (7th edition). Pearson 
Education Ltd: Essex, 2010.
Theory and information slot: Gantt charts and the Critical Path Method 
(CPM) in Gantt Buchannan, D.A. & Huczynski, A.A. Organizational 
Behaviour (7th edition). Pearson Education Ltd: Essex, 2010.
Gantt charts were developed by Henry L. Gantt (1861–1919) as a project 
management tool.
The CPM was developed by Morgan R. Walker in the 1950s. 
Adapted from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PDCA
Both have been developed into other systems, but remain the mainstay 
of modern project management plotting.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
12
your own interpretation of these classical subject headings, but never forget 
their origins and always start at the beginning.
I have already mentioned that you need to reflect the strategic objectives 
of the establishment and these are where you start. Lay out your policies 
and procedures and make sure that they reflect your strategic objectives. 
Policies and procedures are considered later, so I will not dwell on them now; 
however, they do need to be conveyed to your staff so that they understand 
what you are trying to achieve. Your plan also needs to be conveyed to your 
staff so that they understand your time-scales and, if necessary, this can be 
referred to if time-scales are not met.
If you do not define policies and procedures in a logical way and lay them 
out in an easily understandable format, your staff will, either by inaction or 
subversively, wreck your plans before you begin. Don’t be disheartened if you 
fail at the first attempt. Sometimes you need a failure to help focus staff by 
letting them know you are determined to follow your plans through. However, 
never believe for an instant that you have all the answers. As with most 
things in life, there is an element of compromise. If you feel you are going to 
have to go down this route, build excess into your plans to allow yourself a 
compromise position which suits you, not your staff.
Action
You now need to implement your plans. Your plans should be dynamic and 
ready to go before you start to implement them. Do not allow yourself to be 
rushed in this process, because if you fail to prepare, you must be prepared 
to fail. Your plans can be road tested by staff before implementation and this 
will also create buy-in to the plans by your staff.
Buy-in is essential for any system to work. Most importantly, you 
should believe in your plans. Do not approach things in a half-hearted 
fashion because, again, if you fail to convince your staff that you believe 
you are doing the right thing, there is no way that they will believe it for 
you.
You will never push everything through at the same time. Create a strategic 
plan or critical path which you can follow in a step format. Undertaking this 
in bite-sized chunks will make the whole plan easier to follow and will not 
overwhelm you. Create those chunks of activity with defined starts, middles 
and ends. Approaching this in a logical way will ease you through the process 
and allow you to see defined progress. This way you will avoid that bloated 
feeling.

1 Getting started
13
Review
Review, review, review and review again. The work you do requires constant 
appraisal and you will never be finished. Review is the strongest tool you 
can ever have and, if you link this 
in with your Quality Management 
System (QMS), it is a double 
winner as audit and review are 
good bed fellows: one identifies 
problems and the other solves 
them. Never undersell. Review 
and make sure it becomes part of 
your staff’s culture to constantly reappraise what you are trying to achieve. 
We will look more closely at a QMS later in the book.
Review needs to be an open task. It needs to be in the public domain or, 
rather, within the domain of the department. Everyone needs to see that the 
systems are working and, when they don’t work, people need to see that you 
are not blinkered, but are prepared to change to achieve the right result. This 
will encourage your staff to buy-in to the process and makes them more likely 
to help you to amend poor performance and continually strive for a better way 
of working.
Some staff will inevitably kick against all that you do. After all, they may 
have spent years building this cosy nest to hide in. They may never have 
been challenged. Try to move forward positively with 
change: there is no such thing as custom and 
practice. Try not to accept the old adage “this is the 
way we have always done it.” Inevitably, staff will 
point to this when they feel under threat.
Consider all the angles, but never assume you 
are always right. Check, review, revise. Never, ever, 
forget to provide feedback to staff on progress. Lack 
of feedback is an incentive for them to fail if they 
think you are not monitoring the processes you are 
asking them to implement. By far the best way to 
deal with an issue that your staff do not want to deal 
with, or that they protest about, is to try and make 
your ideas into their ideas. Try to sow the idea with 
them and let them come around to it by making it 
their idea. This way, they buy-in to the process.
Note to self
Never bite off more than you can 
chew at any one time. All you will do 
is overwhelm yourself and do each of 
the jobs poorly.

Plant the seed of an idea 
you want your staff to 
champion and let them 
nurture it to fruition as 
their own idea.


A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
14
Getting started
How to get started? Let’s remind ourselves of the process needed. You will see 
this process of Identify, Evaluate, Plan, Action, Review throughout the book and 
it will assist and guide you as we go along. This process will stand you in good 
stead as we assemble your FM function. It must be stressed that I am not trying 
to imply that all FM processes are flawed and that you should deconstruct them 
just for the sake of it, but, as with everything in modern life, if you stand still, 
then you fail. Continuous evaluation and review of your services can only be a 
good thing. Even when you feel you have got it right, there is always room for 
improvement. Standing still is not really an option in today’s fast-paced society. 
You need to keep striving for improvement in the way you provide your services.
Identify 
Evaluate 
Plan 
Action 
Review 
Try to bench-mark your service as you go along. This is by far the best tool 
you have, as, if bench-marked accurately, you will be able to plot improvements 
in service and convey those improvements both to your staff and to the wider 
organisation. If you do not feel comfortable with this methodology, adapt it 
to fit your work environment, or simply use the tried and trusted Plan, Do, 
Study, Act (PDSA) methodology.
Theory and information slot
Plan, Do, Study (check) and Act, or PDSA, was introduced by the 
renowned statistician Edwards Deming. The PDSA cycle is a continuous 
quality improvement consisting of four repeated steps for continuous 
learning and improvement. It is sometimes known as Deming’s Wheel, or 
the Continuous Improvement Spiral. 
Adapted from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PDCA

15
Chapter 2
The basics
Tools of the trade
No worker can work without tools. Set out your stall and ensure you have the 
tools of the trade.
Computer systems and software
You will obviously need a PC. The PC must be capable of running a number 
of applications, so make sure you get the highest specification of computer 
possible. Speak to your IT department and tell them what you want from 
the system and what programs you are likely to run. You may find that the 
number of programs you wish to run on the system will slow it down, leading 
to frustration. Planning ahead will allow you full functionality.
Current FM almost always demands the use of technology and you will find 
that you need to run a wide variety of software on your PC, from Computer 
Aided Design (CAD) programs, Helpdesk and financial software, to practical 
software solutions such as temperature monitoring, a Building Management 
System (BMS) and environmental systems. Make sure your PC is matched to 
your requirements.
Try to avoid buying a printer in the first instance. If you set yourself 
up in the correct way you can usually avoid the need for printing. This 
will help with your sustainability obligations. Start with systems that 
follow good practice and you will naturally follow this philosophy and the 
“need” to print documents will reduce. Information is king, but it can also 
paralyse you.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
16
Phones
One of the best resources I have is my phone. Yes, it seems obvious to have a 
phone, but today’s phones have more than one function. Modern phones are 
more like Swiss Army knives! They can be used for:
•	
making phone calls
•	
linking to your calendar to provide alerts for meetings
•	
linking to your emails to allow quick responses to queries
•	
Internet surfing, again allowing quick access to information
•	
access to your home area where data or information is held
•	
making voice memos on site that can be listened to later
•	
clock or timer
•	
various Apps, such as levels, compass, lights, taking photos
Administration structure
Information, information and information. If you don’t get this flow of 
information right from the start, you will be swimming upstream forever 
more. Most of the time the FM practitioner will be coming into an environment 
that has already had an FM function for a number of years. You may be faced 
with mountains of paperwork and archived material that is neither accessible 
nor in a logical form. Your first task is to sort this out and start building your 
FM strategy.
You cannot do everything at 
once: you are not superhuman, 
although you may think to the 
contrary. Do not try to adapt the 
systems you are inheriting. Start 
from scratch and then, over a 
period of time, try to integrate your 
information into the new system. 
However, you may find that parts 
of your inherited system work quite 
well. Don’t shut your eyes to this. 
Part of being a good FM practitioner 
is having the ability to recognise 
when something is working well 
Note to self
Use technology to the best effect. 
Think about what you want in 
advance rather than trying to fit it 
all together afterwards.
Note to self
Pull together all the information, 
lay it out in a logical format and fill 
in the blanks.

2 The basics
17
and leave it alone. As you gain experience, you will find that the best way 
forward for any FM practitioner is to start with something that best fits your 
needs, then steal ideas from other FM practitioners. Do not reinvent the 
wheel each time you approach a problem. Develop a networking philosophy 
and let your peers help you. This book aims to give you a framework on which 
to base your best practice. Never forget the value of management theory and 
make sure you utilise academic expertise to the full and use the principles 
and theories you have learned.
If you get your administration structure right, you will save yourself 
lots of time and effort. It is all about getting the maximum results from the 
minimum effort. You already have too much to do without making it harder 
by overcomplicating your admin support. Concentrate on the key aspects of 
your set-up and plan the way your systems are likely to run in advance. Avoid 
duplication whenever possible, although in practice this is rarely completely 
achievable.
Give the layout of information on your PC some real thought from day one. 
The way you access and save your work over a period of time can leave you 
with a chaotic mishmash of documents that don’t form a logical format. It 
then becomes increasingly difficult to locate the files you want and to access 
saved work.
• People
• Contracts
• Finance
• Buildings
All your
information relating
to buildings should
be stored here, such
as O & M schedules
and plans
Budget information
broken down by
year and major
budget head
Keep all of your
staff information
here, such as
appraisels,
timesheets,
holidays, training
Health & Safety
Details of your
service contracts
Start by breaking things down into streams of information as illustrated, 
but make sure that your process has seamless integration between each of 
the subject headings. Only by laying all of your workload out in a logical 
way will you ensure that you don’t miss things. Just as importantly, you will 
ultimately find it easier to find things saved onto your PC.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
18
Networking
Professional FM practitioners are rarely precious about their ideas and 
will generally give you ideas for systems, procedures and policies without 
obligation. As mentioned earlier, steal your ideas from people who have tried 
and tested systems and found them to work. If you become obsessed with 
this being all your own work, you will become so bogged down that you will 
not be able to move forward in a positive way. Networking can be the key to 
unlocking potential ideas, creaming the best ideas, or tweaking those you 
have already to gain the market edge.
Every area of the country will have an active FM group who meet on a 
regular basis to discuss current issues and to share ideas. Tap into this by 
contacting groups such as the Association of Colleges (AOC), the Chartered 
Institute of Building (CIOB) or the British Institute of Facilities Management 
(BIFM). All these organisations have special interest groups dealing with the 
specifics of areas you may wish to look at more closely. If you are paying 
the subscriptions to these institutions, then use them. Treat these FM 
practitioners as your resource library. After all, they probably did exactly the 
same when they started their new roles.
Be forceful. FM professionals are your best resource and will invariably 
part with their most prized possessions: systems and policies and procedures. 
Simply Google all the similar 
institutions in your area and ring 
them up. Remember, however, that 
as 
FM 
professionals 
are 
not 
precious about their systems, you 
must be prepared to part with your 
equivalent prized possessions. Not only does this cross-fertilisation help you 
to establish new and better systems, it can also help to forge friendships with 
your peers that can last a long time and be mutually beneficial.
Going out and looking at other institutions can be rather off-putting. 
You may come back with a sense of foreboding about the task ahead and 
sometimes think you may have taken on too much. This is good. It means 
you are starting to become self-critical about what you do. It means you are 
beginning to see that things need to change and that all in the garden is not 
always rosy. Only through being self-critical can you improve quality and 
take positive steps towards change.
Don’t forget to use technology. There are many social networks such as 
LinkedIn that have special interest groups or forums where open discussions 
on FM topics can take place. I would be lost without the resource of the 
Internet. You can find almost anything you wish on the Internet if you use 
Note to self
Don’t be too proud to pinch ideas 
from other people.

2 The basics
19
the correct terminology. We are increasingly using technology to reduce our 
reliance on paper-based systems. Using tablets and iPads to store data and 
minutes or notes of meetings helps us to achieve this. Syncing will allow you 
to integrate your iPad into your home area on your PC and allow you access 
to internal networks.
Being a newbie ’
As the newbie, you will get away with a lot because you are new. You are 
mostly also given the latitude to change things and usually an open ear from 
your senior managers. This is your opportunity to set out your stall and make 
an impression. Take advantage of this: be as forceful as you can and push 
things through while you have the opportunity. Once you have been there a 
while you will lose the ability to be radical as people get the measure of you.
Having a clear out
You will have inherited a lot and your predecessor will have left his or her 
mark on the organisation. This will be reflected in everything that you do and 
will come back to haunt you for years to come unless you are decisive. The 
following areas should be looked at as soon as possible.
•	
Letterheads. Is your predecessor’s name on any of the letterheads? 
This is the first thing to get rid of, even if it means you don’t have 
your stationery for some time. Don’t send your name out on your 
predecessor’s letterhead. It can instantly give the impression that you 
are not strong.
•	
Emails and telephone answering machines. Get rid of them as quickly 
as possible. I have fallen foul of this, having had the previous Facilities 
Manager’s voice on the emergency phone for over two years. No one 
wanted to tell me it was still on there. You need to find out for yourself.
•	
Internal documents. Documents such as policies and procedures may 
all carry the digital signature of your predecessor. Make sure these 
are updated. If you do this under the guise of review, then you can 
then legitimately put your name to these documents.
•	
Signage. You may find your name needs updating on signage around 
the buildings. This is by far the best way of getting your name 
embedded into your organisation’s culture.
•	
Organisation staff. Don’t quietly creep in through the back door. Make 
sure you introduce yourself to each member of the management 

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
20
team. These are the people you will be working for and a bit of early 
customer feedback can often set you on the right track.
•	
Contractors. All your contractors need to know who is now steering 
the ship. Make a start by inviting them all in to meet you. Forming 
early bonds with these people could prove beneficial in the future.
•	
Suppliers. These are just as important to your team as the contractors 
who work for you, so let them know you are in charge.
•	
Partners and local organisations. You may have affiliations with 
groups, subgroups and local authority partnerships. Making it clear 
there is someone new in charge can get you invited along to important 
networking activities.
•	
Police and emergency services. A good working relationship with the 
police is important. Developing an early relationship with the police 
helps you to tap into initiatives that may be run from time to time. 
This is particularly important in a town centre organisation where 
crime is likely to be on your doorstep. These early relationships with 
the police may get you a more sympathetic ear if you do get issues on 
your site.
The quick f ix
Day one of your new position usually means stepping into your new office 
with a sense of anticipation and dropping yourself into your new chair at 
your new desk to begin to formulate your ideas. Here are a few quick fixes to 
help you along.
•	
See your staff. Get this important task out 
of the way as soon as possible. You need to 
start to build relationships with these people 
as soon as you can. They are going to be 
the ones who fulfil your ambitions for the 
organisation. You need them to know that 
you are not a faceless boss who sits behind 
his or her desk all day. Book regular time in 
your diary during your first few months to 
get out of your office and see each of your 
staff in turn. It is much better to see them in 
their own environment. Let them know that 
you are there to help them and tell them how 
they can get hold of you when they need to.

It is worth the time and 
effort to obtain a full set of 
building plans. These will 
pay for themselves over 
and over again.


2 The basics
21
•	
Move some furniture. What better way 
to exert your influence than to change 
your office around? Change the position 
of the desk or filing cabinets, or even 
get the room decorated. This gives out 
a message to everyone that this is a new 
regime, a new era, and that changes are 
going to be made, as well as stamping 
your authority in your space.
•	
Get some plants. This not only takes the 
edge off a utilitarian space, but can have 
a calming effect on yourself when you 
become stressed.
•	
Get yourself a coffee machine. Not only 
will this provide you with fresh coffee, but it makes the office smell 
friendly.
•	
Get rid of clutter. Remove any clutter and artefacts from your 
predecessor. Try to create as much space as you can in the room.
•	
Contact suppliers and contractors. Ring around all the contractors and 
suppliers that you currently use and start a dialogue with them. You will 
probably find this a useful exercise as they will want continuity of service 
and will want to impress you in your early days. Ask the blunt question: 
how can I reduce the cost of the service and increase the quality? It’s 
a bit of a conundrum, but it will immediately let the contractor and 
supplier know you mean business. You may be surprised to find that 
they will come back with the some good ideas on how to save money or 
improve the service, leading to a quick win for you. However, be aware 
that large complex organisations are sometimes seen by contractors and 
suppliers as easy targets where they can cream maximum profits from 
minimum service. I am perhaps not being truly fair to all contractors 
and suppliers with that statement, but in my experience we often get 
taken for a ride in terms of value for money. Be cautious.
Understanding your portfolio
You need to fully understand the requirements of your portfolio. This may well 
be one of the most challenging things you will do. Sometimes it is difficult to 
even know where to start. You will probably never know everything there is to 
know about your site. It is essential that you adopt a strategy in approaching 
this initial information-gathering exercise. Begin with your physical assets. 

Get the new room painted, 
put up some pictures 
or 
your 
qualification 
certificates.


A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
22
To be able to know what you do, you need to know what you have. Sounds 
strangely too easy really, but unless you start out on the right foot, you will 
be dogged by duplication.
Physical assets
In the first phase of information gathering, this refers to the building stock 
and, in particular, the fabric of the building, not mechanical and electrical 
(M & E) assets.
Plans of your building stock are probably your most useful resource when 
planning any aspect of work. These plans should be in CAD form or another 
suitable format. Many aspects of your work will rely on accurate, up-to-date 
plans. If you are unable to draw up the plans yourself, commission someone 
to undertake this process as it will pay dividends in the future. An up-to-date 
set of plans will allow you to do far more than just look at layouts and will 
save you money over and over again, in some cases paying for themselves 
many times over. I have found my plans to be the best tool I have ever had.
Your plans will allow you to do the following.
•	
See what space you have and how that space is set up.
•	
Work out the gross internal area (GIA) and notional internal area 
(NIA) of your building stock. This is particularly useful in a college 
environment for your Emandate returns (Emandate is a national 
comparator for estates costs used by colleges throughout the UK; it 
allows comparison against your peers for all core FM costs, such as 
reactive maintenance per square metre).
•	
See where particular departments are and determine their size and 
layout to make comparative analysis.
•	
Create layers for M & E layouts and to build up a portfolio of working 
drawings.
•	
Define contractual borderlines for services such as cleaning, catering 
and security.
•	
Manipulate drawings to create scenarios, e.g. what would happen if I 
knock this wall down?
•	
Create defined locations for your software solution helpdesk.
Please remember, if you have spent time and money getting your drawings up 
to date and easily accessible from your PC, to make sure you keep them up 

2 The basics
23
to date. Make sure you do not duplicate or set up alternative versions of the 
same document, or all this effort will be compromised. Ultimately, this would 
mean that you are never really sure which drawing is the live one and which 
is the alternative version. Keep all your drawings in one place on your PC 
and, if you do need alternative versions, make sure they are in a completely 
different area on your PC.
Layers
What is a layer? A layer is exactly what it says: it is a level in a drawing. For 
those of you who remember when all drawings were on paper, you would 
provide an overlay on tracing paper which, when placed over the drawing, 
allowed you to see, e.g. a pipe layout. This was to avoid cluttering drawings 
with too much information. In CAD, a layer does exactly the same thing. It 
allows you to display information which would otherwise clutter the main 
drawing, making it too difficult to read.
Layers can be created in CAD for different levels of the drawing, e.g. M & E 
layouts. These can be turned on or off depending on what the viewer wants 
to see. This principle can be extended to all the services provided on site. 
With an up-to-date set of plans, layers can be added to indicate the following 
information:
•	
fire plans and escape routes
•	
cleaning schedules
•	
contractor information, such as access and egress points, parking 
places, waste drop off and pick points, specialist kit layouts and 
positions
•	
planned preventative maintenance (PPM)
•	
measurements and dimensions
Once you have understood the physical elements of your building stock, you 
need to look at the internal fixtures and fittings of the building. These can be 
layered over your plans if required.
Internal fixtures and fittings can be items such as furniture, either fixed 
or movable, or M & E plant. Never underestimate the value of putting all 
of your M & E kit onto your layer plans. You will find so many uses for 
this information, e.g. when putting together tenders for maintenance or 
replacement, to include in guidance notes to staff, or simply to give yourself 
an overview of where your plant and equipment is located in your plant rooms.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
24
Operation and maintenance manuals and plans
Operation and maintenance (O & M) manuals are your diary of the individual 
building. They are also a way of keeping all the information relating to a 
building in the same easily accessible format and in a style that can be 
worked through in a logical way.
Typically, an O & M manual will contain:
•	
details of the build, such as who built it and the name of the architect
•	
statutory details, such as permissions and building control certificates
•	
details of all the assets in the building, such as pumps and boilers
•	
details of manufacturers, manuals and warranty details
•	
PPM details for the entire building
•	
certifications, such as fixed wiring tests
A typical O & M manual can be expanded to deal with items such as 
service contract details and historical records, and details of checks and 
inspections.
Your building stock will generally contain a mixture of buildings of different 
ages and in different conditions. Your O & M manual should be organised by 
building and set up in a uniform way so that no matter what building you are 
looking at, you will find the information in the same place. 
To help in locating information, it is better to keep your building information 
in building-specific files rather than, for example, putting all the plans in 
one file and all service information in another. Keeping your information 
together in one place is the preferred method, but whatever works for you as 
a practising manager is never the wrong way to do it.
You will have sustainability objectives, so try to make sure you keep as 
much of your information as possible in digital form. You will quickly find 
that your files become full of information relating to each building, with each 
building ending up with multiple files. Compiling your information in a logical 
way will help you to filter out duplicate information.
Understanding your service and how it f its onto your site
Everyone likes a sponge cake: two layers of sponge bonded together with 
a glorious cream. Facilities Management is a bit like a sponge cake. Your 
bottom layer of sponge is your building stock and the top layer is the services 
you provide. The glorious cream is your staff, who make the whole cake come 
together as one wonderful tasty treat. Perhaps a strange analogy, but if you 

2 The basics
25
look at the services you provide on the site as an overlay of the site itself, you 
will start to think holistically about how things need to be put together. One 
area that cannot be seen in isolation as it is part of the overall “jam sponge” 
is the FM Department.
Understanding the services you provide is a key and integral part of FM, 
ensuring that nothing is missed and that you stay compliant. List the services 
you provide and try and categorise them into two distinct areas: hard services 
and soft services.
Your hard services will be:
•	
fire and intruder alarm service and maintenance
•	
fire extinguisher service
•	
heating and ventilation maintenance
•	
fixed wiring testing
•	
PAT testing
•	
Legionella and asbestos control
•	
lift services
Your soft services will be:
•	
cleaning
•	
porterage
•	
minor maintenance
•	
security
•	
window cleaning
•	
grounds maintenance
•	
post
You may find that you outsource 
all your hard services and source 
all your soft services in-house. 
However, some soft services may 
not be practical to provide in-house, 
e.g. security. Listing your services 
will assist you in setting up your 
administration so that nothing is missed and everything is carried out in a 
logical way. Building up a picture of your entire site in this way makes sure you 
do not miss the essential cogs in the machinery.
Note to self
Keep all the O & M information in 
one place; this makes it easy to 
access and update.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
26
Aide Memoire: The basics
•	
Get your administration structure right first.
•	
Make sure you have all the right equipment for the job: PC, 
phone, etc.
•	
Start to pull together a networking strategy; contact other similar 
institutions.
•	
Don’t be afraid to steal other people’s ideas. It can save you a lot of 
time in the long run.
•	
Stamp your authority by clearing out the old regime.
•	
Organise your information and administrative functions.
•	
Start to pull together an understanding of your site and property 
portfolio and how your service fits over this.

27
Chapter 3
Managing people: staff  
and customers
Managing your staff
Your staff are one of the deciding factors in whether your FM department is 
a success or failure. Success is fickle and can be destroyed by complacency. 
Your staff can make or break you, and finding the management styles that best 
suit the type of staff you have can make all the difference to your department. 
You will need to adopt more than one management style to deal with your 
staff, as no two people are the same and everyone needs to be treated in a 
slightly different way. In practical terms, adopting a rigid style to deal with all 
staff is doomed to failure. People are different, and what motivates one person 
in terms of incentives could be ineffective with another member of staff.
However, you must treat all your staff equally. Having favourites is a 
difficult issue. Sometimes you know who can and who cannot perform, and 
instinct and pressure of work dictate that you need to get the job done as 
quickly as possible. Inevitably, you may tend to favour one person, especially 
if you know they will come up with the goods. This in itself is not bad; you 
do, however, need all staff to be firing on all cylinders all of the time and you 
need to be careful. If you resort to favourites within your department, it will 
eventually come back to haunt you.
Staff need to fulfil a purpose. They need to drive your aspirations and 
ambitions and they need to fulfil the strategic objectives of your organisation. 
“Good staff are not born, they are made.” To some degree, I agree with this 
statement. Your staff do not arrive on your doorstep fully trained and ready 
to be unleashed on your site. They are rarely completely up to speed with 
your philosophy on how your department should be run and neither are they 
always fully trained in terms of understanding the various theories of FM. 

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
28
It is unusual for them to be self-driven, fully motivated individuals who will 
fulfil their role with the exuberance that you would like to see and with the 
efficiency your internal pressures demand. No member of staff is ever all of 
these things, although sometimes you may be lucky, and they are rarely so 
complete that you do not need to expend any energy in supervising them. 
Typically, you will need to fully train your staff to your way of thinking as 
early in the induction process as possible.
You need a five-point plan to ensure the success of your staff: choose 
your staff well; communicate with your staff; find out what makes them tick; 
“dangle the carrot”; and review.
Choose your staff well: recruitment
This seems logical; however, choosing them should be the biggest single 
investment in time that you give to your staff. These people ultimately ensure 
your success or failure. If you do not get the right person, you limit your 
ability to fulfil your overall desire for a perfect service. Ensure that you have 
the key ingredients before you begin the recruitment process.
Job description and person specif ication
Do you know exactly what you want the job to be? It is no good advertising 
for a plumber and then realising that you really need a heating engineer. Map 
out what you require the post-holder to do and be absolutely clear on the 
objectives of this post, e.g. how it will interface with other posts and what you 
want this post to be in one or five years’ time. Cover all the existing tasks and 
responsibilities and clearly define what you expect of the role.
One of the keys to the success or failure of any department is ownership of 
the work involved. It may sound simplistic to say, but unless people can define 
their job and look to and for guidance in their job description, then you will 
always have issues with job content and ownership of the workload. Your job 
descriptions need to detail clearly and as unambiguously as possible the area 
of work to be fulfilled. Your job descriptions need to be looked at as a whole 
rather than position by position. You need to create overlaps to reduce your 
overall risk of items being missed. However, one word of caution: if you make 
your job descriptions too descriptive, you may have people picking holes in them 
with comments like “it’s not in my job description.” Your job descriptions should 
be worded in such a way as to give a simplistic overview and must contain 
the immortal words “and any other duties as reasonably requested by your 
manager.”

3 Managing people: staff and customers 
29
All your job descriptions need to be consistent and uniform in their 
construction. You need to be sure that people on the same salary bands have 
commensurate job descriptions that are equal in content and cover the same 
level of work. This is really the subject for a full book on human resources. 
Making sure they are all equal across salary bands avoids divisions within 
the department and prevents accusations relating to fair and equal pay. This 
is particularly important in a large department. You may be lucky and never 
have to deal with fair and equal pay issues, but it could end up being your 
worst nightmare, affecting one group after another.
You need to be sure that this person is right for the role that you are 
advertising. Be clear about what skills you expect and what level of 
qualifications you require. Don’t fall into the trap of thinking everyone should 
have a degree. If you set the bar too high, you may miss the perfect candidate. 
Also consider the rest of the team; you need a mix of talents and styles to 
make the team move forward in a positive way.
Interview techniques
Don’t intimidate your candidates; after all, you are trying to get the right 
person for the job, not impress or overawe them. Make sure your questions 
cover the skills you want in your team. Make sure you also have a practical 
test of the required skills; this will speak volumes for the skill levels of the 
candidates taking the test. Don’t rely on gut instinct or sheer desperation to 
fill a post. You will only make a rod for your own back further down the line.
Probationary period
Do not be afraid to use this. You need the right person and if you can’t 
make that judgement in the first six months, then you are not doing your job 
properly. Set your new appointee tasks and push them to perform in the first 
six months. You will then know if they are capable of fulfilling the task well 
and this will also give you an indication of whether they can work well under 
pressure. Don’t be afraid to get rid of them if they fail to meet the grade or do 
not show the positive progress you expect. This may sound harsh, but if you 
are not decisive about your staff during their probationary period, you lose 
the ability to get rid of them easily and make more work for yourself in the 
future by needing to continually pull them up for poor performance. You are 
also not being fair to the person you appointed if they are never going to make 
the grade. Remember, you cannot devote time to lost causes. You must also 
be aware that you are not treating your other staff fairly if you allow someone 

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
30
to “get away with it” and you are not being fair to the candidate who genuinely 
may not be up to it. Look after, nurture and encourage your staff as they are 
the key to success, not you.
Communication with your staff
Staff need to be part of every process that occurs in the successful FM 
department and communication with staff is by far the most important area 
you need to deal with. Most FM and estates departments will be responsible 
for a number of teams, such as Maintenance, Helpdesk, Site Supervision, 
Security and Cleaning. These teams need to operate independently, but are 
also an intrinsic part of the overall FM philosophy and must come together as 
one. Each of your teams needs to have a reporting structure. In general, this 
can simply be a meeting schedule.
What is a meeting?
Meetings should be a general 
dialogue on the progress of the 
department. Sometimes meetings 
can be simply for the sake of 
having a meeting. This must never 
be so. A formal set of parameters 
should be drawn up, although 
these may change depending on 
the individual discipline. Your 
meeting structure should be relatively similar through each discipline. This 
is for a number of reasons.
•	
You are working with a team of individuals or team leaders within 
each department. Although each of these individuals will look to their 
own individual discipline, you must also encourage crossover between 
teams. This will leave you less vulnerable in the long run. If you have 
a uniform meeting structure, then the leaders in each team can easily 
pick up the thread of how each team is run.
•	
You yourself want to be able to pick out salient points within each set 
of minutes and a uniform structure enables you to focus in quickly on 
these. Remember what I said earlier: you will be swimming in a sea of 
information and anything that helps you get through that information 
quickly should be embraced.
Note to self
Set up a meeting schedule for all your 
team meetings, from Maintenance 
to Security; know exactly when 
meetings 
will 
take 
place 
and 
publicise the meeting schedule.

3 Managing people: staff and customers 
31
•	
You must use your team meeting minutes in a practical way. They 
are a reporting and audit tool and you need to bear this in mind with 
every set of minutes you take. Information contained within these 
documents must be retained and held in a logical format as you may 
need them in the future.
Meetings are the best and the worst part of a busy FM department, but they 
are necessary and must be taken seriously, otherwise they become pointless.
A successful meeting should:
•	
Be no more than 30 minutes long. This means you have to get to the 
point and not waffle. Focus in on the essentials.
•	
Be inclusive. Everyone within the meeting must contribute. A “round-
the-table” format works well and makes sure everyone has the 
opportunity to comment.
•	
Be two-way. It is not about people talking at each other. There needs 
to be a two-way flow of information.
•	
Be informative. What is the point of a meeting if there is nothing 
substantive to discuss?
•	
Record actions. This is your audit tool 
to gauge if your systems and strategies 
are working. You should be aiming to 
report your team’s actions in a clear and 
unambiguous fashion. Your minutes 
should be a summary, but succinct and 
in a uniform format.
•	
Develop strategy for the future. Your 
meeting notes should not stop with 
you. They are a clear methodology for 
senior management to see if policies and 
procedures are working and if targets are 
being met. If you don’t report this, how 
will they know if you are hitting your 
targets?
Meetings can be a useful tool for diagnosing 
future risks to the organisation. If you leave your 
reporting to, say, a report once in every college 

Your meetings are the best 
way to get your message 
across. If the structure of 
the meeting is fixed and 
the minutes recorded, you 
have permanent record of 
your discussions and the 
timing of your requests is 
noted.


A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
32
term, you could be missing a valuable advance warning of risk to your senior 
managers and they will not appreciate that.
Meetings should be good vessels for two-way communication, but they 
don’t always achieve this sufficiently for you to gain a full appreciation of 
what is going on in your department. Sometimes you get members of your 
team who are less comfortable with voicing concerns within a meeting format. 
You can’t ignore these comments; you could miss essential elements of 
the FM process. You need to provide a forum for these comments to come 
through. This could be achieved by informal meetings; however, there is 
really no such thing as an informal meeting. If, during an informal meeting, 
something crops up that you need to action, inevitably you will need to make 
these actions formal. Your job as a manager is to manage. You cannot shirk 
your responsibility by ignoring comments. All this will do is alienate staff and 
create friction within your department. Ultimately, your staff will lose faith in 
your ability to deal with issues.
Therefore, even during informal meetings, make it clear that you will note 
items and that you may be forced to take action. There are ways and means 
of saying this in a diplomatic and supportive way so as not to put pressure on 
staff. There is a balance to be achieved. You cannot be completely black and 
white with no shades of grey. Your staff need to know you will be sympathetic 
and supportive. When you are rigid in your approach, you will promote the 
same response back from your staff.
The chat
Remember you are never off-duty and sometimes it pays dividends to just have 
chance chats with your staff. This will break down formal relationships and 
engenders trust from your staff (even if this is unfounded). You must be seen to be 
human. Try not to get over-friendly with individuals as this can be misconstrued 
as favouritism by other members of staff; you can’t please everyone!
Suggestion boxes
Suggestion boxes are a very useful 
method for capturing the things that 
you would sometimes miss, such 
as staff unrest or internal conflicts. 
Anonymous 
comments 
sometimes 
cut to the quick and can provide 
information that will help you to manage your staff and, if nothing else, you 
will get the occasional laugh from notes put in them.
Note to self
If you say you are going to do 
something, do it. If you don’t, you 
will be seen as weak or ineffectual.

3 Managing people: staff and customers 
33
Theory and information slot
Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs specifies the following levels:
•	
Physiological needs. These are the basic requirements for human 
physical survival. These needs must be met first and include 
such basic essentials as food, water, shelter, oxygen and sleep.
•	
Safety needs. Once a person’s basic physical needs are met, his 
or her needs for safety emerge.
•	
Love and belonging needs. Once safety needs are satisfied, the 
need for belonging and love emerges, including the need to belong 
to a group and to feel accepted.
•	
Esteem needs. These include both self-esteem and the esteem of 
others. Self-esteem includes the feeling that one is worthwhile. 
The focus is not on just surviving, but on doing well and improving 
oneself.
•	
Self-actualization needs. These are the needs associated with 
realising one’s full potential; the person focuses on developing his 
or her talents and abilities to their fullest extent.
Adapted from Buchanan and Huczynski (2010), pp. 268–270.
Important: do what you say on the tin!
There is no point in having meetings, chats and suggestion boxes if you 
never action any of the items that are raised in them. Communication is not 
communication unless you do something with it. Always be true to your word 
and, if you promise things, keep your promises and, if you can’t, explain 
fully why you can’t. You need to build up a relationship with your staff and 
communication is the only way you can convey a message and then make 
sure that the message has been understood.
Find out what makes them tick
I mentioned previously that each member of staff is different. In any team 
you will have a mixture of characters whose traits will all be different. What 
appeals to one person will not appeal to another. A job that one does too 
quickly, another one will struggle with. Take time to get to know what makes 
your staff tick.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
34
Don’t be afraid to take notes (as long as you keep them securely); you can 
easily develop an overview of each member of staff, their likes and dislikes, 
strong points and weaknesses. These will help you to plan your training 
requirements. Once you understand your staff, you will get to know what 
motivates them and what their priorities in life are (these might not always 
be monetary). Getting the most out of your staff is about finding the right 
balance. It is about finding out what motivates them and, ultimately, if you 
can motivate your staff, you are halfway to winning the battle.
Dangle the carrot
The “carrot” can be anything you choose it to be. Very rarely are you, as a 
manager, able to throw money at issues and, likewise, you should never 
be throwing money at people to get them to meet your requirements. If it is 
contained within their job description, they should be doing it anyway. You 
will never influence some members of staff with anything but money; some will 
Theory and information slot
Adapted from Buchanan, D.A. and Huczynski, A. (2010)

3 Managing people: staff and customers 
35
respond more favourably to things that create stability in their life, while other 
crave responsibility or simply want to do well and develop themselves. Your job 
is to find out what motivates them. Generally speaking, most of your staff will 
respond favourably to things like praise, competition, responsibility and CPD.
Praise
Praise is probably the easiest thing for you to provide to your staff; equally, it 
is easy to make it seem crass and meaningless. If you overdo praise, you will 
soon be seen as someone who is easily pleased or completely disingenuous. 
Praise does not always have to take the form of a pat on the back. Some 
people respond just as well to just simply being mentioned in a report or in 
the minutes of a meeting. When you are under pressure, this is probably the 
one area of staff management that you forget about. Give yourself a reality 
check and get back to being that supportive and praise-giving boss.
Competition
Staff cannot help themselves if they sometimes feel they are in competition 
with each other, particularly if this is seen as legitimate and fair. This is 
explained further in the theory and information slot on Hertzberg. Creating 
competition that is holistic and fair encourages staff. Again, caution must be 
your watchword to ensure competition does not create a culture of favourites 
or seem to favour one group over another, e.g. if you create competition in one 
department, you also need to do the same in the other departments.
Responsibility
People sometimes crave responsibility and this is an area where you can 
make your most dramatic advances with staff. Responsibility does not always 
have to go hand-in-hand with monetary compensation (see Hertzberg’s 
“motivation factors”).
It is practical to encourage people to take on additional responsibility 
to allow them to build up their skill levels within a department. You can 
create opportunity, even if there isn’t any, by allowing people the chance 
to improve their skills while dangling the carrot of career development. You 
must, however, make it clear that although you are not able to provide a 
monetary incentive, you are able to provide support such as training and 
practical experience that could boost their confidence and their CV. You 
need to continually reinforce the point that you cannot provide monetary 
support, as what is seen as a perk in the first instance can be viewed by staff 

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
36
differently over time. If you do not continually reference the fact that you 
are helping their future employability and career development rather than 
working towards a pay rise, you will lose their flexibility. Discussing this with 
them will keep them on-board for longer.
Remember that you are not superhuman! You cannot take on everything 
and excel at it without help from your staff. This is the perfect example of 
how you can delegate tasks to individuals to bring them on. These are win-
win situations because, not only are you building the skill levels of your 
staff, you are achieving aims that you yourself would not have had the time 
to undertake. You are providing yourself with a long-term continuity of staff 
as you have ready-made managers who can step into roles efficiently and 
quickly. You must, however, devote time to managing this process. If you 
simply delegate tasks to people without getting their original buy-in, you 
are likely to be seen as simply putting more work on one person. Make it 
clear that this is all about career development and opportunity for the future. 
Nurture this in your staff and be attentive about their progress and you will 
genuinely hit the jackpot. People appreciate honesty and if you are up-front 
about your intentions for them in the future, you can generally ask more of 
your staff.
Theory and information slot
Mary Parker Follett (1868–1933) described management as “the art of 
getting things done through people”. 
Adapted from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mary_Parker_Follett
Continuing professional development
This is a given criteria for any professional body. If an individual wants to 
further their career, part of that process is getting them to become members 
of professional bodies such as the Chartered Institute of Builders (CIOB) or 
the British Institute of Facilities Managers (BIFM). Once your staff join these 
professional bodies it becomes incumbent upon them to undertake CPD 
annually to keep current skills up to date and to move their skill levels on. If you 
encourage staff to become members of these institutions, then they will naturally 
want to move on and will be more likely to take on additional tasks, particularly in 
areas they are not familiar with, to enrich their own CPD and global experience. 
Getting staff used to the principle of CPD irrespective of whether or not they are 
in a professional institution is an excellent way of boosting skill levels and makes 
it simpler and easier to undertake your appraisal process.

3 Managing people: staff and customers 
37
Review
You have now put in place all the systems to make sure your staff are 
motivated and up-skilled to the point where you are likely to get the best 
out of them. It is now essential that you review what you have achieved, 
check that the skills and traits of your staff are the right mix for the services 
you provide and continue to look for ways to improve how you provide your 
service by adding new skills. Your review process should sit snugly into your 
QMS and should have the ability to move your team on progressively.
Don’t forget to make your staff feel special. This is all about the personal 
touch. It is about making them feel like they are in charge, even when they 
are not. By “in charge,” I mean in charge of their own destiny. If staff are 
aware that their own actions or inactions dictate how well or how badly they 
are viewed in the department, it helps them to understand how they can 
influence their own futures. Taking time to talk to staff on a one-to-one basis 
and offering praise makes them feel special. Joining in with staff events, even 
if this is the Friday night pint at the local, can help to build that bond between 
you and your staff. Again, you have to be aware of not creating favourites, so 
make sure you apply this principal evenly across all your staff. Remember 
also equality and diversity. If you all agree to go out for a pint on a Friday 
night, you could be excluding some of your team through religious or social 
beliefs. However, if you overdo this, it can be seen as insincere. It is all about 
getting a balance that works for you and feels natural.
What about you?
Never forget you are also a member of staff and you also need to be able 
to function. You need to be able to provide the service to the same level of 
excellence as your staff and you need to be able to respond to issues quickly 
and decisively. Three main areas you need to look at are: are you up to the 
job; do you have the necessary support structure; and are you adequately 
resourced?
Are you up to the job? The S curve and learning cycles
Ask yourself, do you have the necessary skills to be able to deal with the 
many facets of your job? Never be afraid to ask for help with something that 
you don’t understand or an area that is unfamiliar to you. There is always 
the temptation when you are starting off as a Facilities Manager to say “yes” 
to everything blindly, without thinking through any long-term resourcing 
issues. Sometimes the previously mentioned sea of information can swamp 

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
38
you to such an extent that you 
simply drown in the sheer volume 
of work needed.
The S curve has been used 
for many years to define learning 
cycles. The S curve defines three 
phases. The first is the learning 
phase when growth is slow. This is usually followed by the growth phase, 
where growth is rapid as knowledge increases. This is followed by the decline 
phase when the learning and growth phases have reached maturity and 
Theory and information slot
According to Hertzberg’s: Motivational Theory, for a worker to be 
happy, and therefore productive, the overall work environment needs 
to be comfortable. Many managers believe that motivating employees 
requires giving rewards. Herzberg, however, believed that workers are 
motivated through feeling responsible for and connected to their work 
and contributing; in other words, making the work itself more rewarding. 
Hertzberg broke these factors down into two distinct groups:
•	
Hygiene factors. Aspects of work which remove dissatisfaction, 
but do not contribute to motivation, such as working conditions, 
salary, status, security and interpersonal relations.
•	
Motivation factors. Aspects of work which lead to high levels of 
satisfaction, such as achievement, achievement recognition, 
responsibility, advancement and growth.
The combination of hygiene and motivation factors can result in four 
conditions:
1.	 High hygiene/high motivation. The ideal situation, where 
employees are highly motivated and have few problems.
2.	 High hygiene/low motivation. Employees have few problems, but 
are not highly motivated.
3.	 Low hygiene/high motivation. Employees are motivated, but have 
a lot of problems.
4.	 Low hygiene/low motivation. The worst situation of unmotivated 
employees with lots of problems.
Adapted from Buchanan and Huczynski (2010), pp. 279–280.
Note to self
Remember you are in a developing 
industry. However, the sheer diversity 
of functions allows innovation to 
drive the FM process forward.

3 Managing people: staff and customers 
39
additional innovation is needed to start the curve again. Sometimes as a 
Facilities Manager we could have two or three of these S curves going on at 
the same time and the sheer volume of information can derail your progress. 
This can then show as a marked decline in your productivity. It is the old 
adage of “Jack of all trades, master of none.” The more you deal with, the 
less effective you become, until it gets to a tipping point where you actually 
start to undertake things badly. You become careless and mistakes start to 
creep in. Then, all of a sudden, the person who was considered a rising star 
becomes a liability and a poor worker. The trick is trying to see this point 
coming and off-load your unnecessary tasks in favour of concentrating on 
those that will pay the best dividends.
Your training
Don’t forget you will also require training. You don’t know everything and 
the speed at which FM grows means that you need to be taking on new 
challenges all the time and upgrading your skills to cope with the demands of 
new technology. Set yourself targets each year and keep your CPD up to the 
required level.
Do you have the necessary support structure?
Your support structure not only exists below you within your team, but above 
you at senior management level. It is important that you get these links right 
at an early stage to allow you to function correctly. Ensure that you get 
the correct level of support from your managers. Sometimes there can be a 
tendency to want to go it alone and only allow a light touch involvement from 
your senior managers. This can often be a mistake, as they are probably the 
best way of taking the pressure off you if they understand the problem. You 
need to convey these pressure issues to them effectively without it seeming 
like you are unable to cope.
Delegation can be one of the greatest tools for taking the pressure off 
you. However, this must be done wholeheartedly, while still allowing you to 
keep a firm hand on the reins. You have to make sure that your delegation 
is delegation and not abdication. You cannot shirk responsibility by simply 
giving a task to someone with the objective of blaming them if they fail.
Are you adequately resourced?
We live in a world where we are expected to do more for less. It is important 
to always keep a handle on what level of resource is needed for a task. Simply 

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
40
soaking up additional tasks without considering resources is a recipe for 
disaster. If you are under-resourced, you need to make that clear to your senior 
managers. If this affects your health, ultimately it is your responsibility to advise 
your senior managers that the volume of work cannot be undertaken with the 
available resources. You cannot blame them for putting you under pressure if 
you haven’t advised them of a lack of resources. You owe it to yourself to avoid 
getting to the point where you simply cannot cope with any more work.
To deal with under-resourcing effectively you need to undertake a risk 
assessment of your current functions, identifying which of these are critical 
and which less so, but still need to be managed. When you reach the tipping 
point where you cannot undertake all your functions, your risk assessment 
will identify which areas are less critical. You can then report this to your 
senior manager as a defined risk to the department. This won’t get rid of the 
problem, but at least you will have highlighted it. Remember that whatever 
you do, think of the process as a team function, think holistically about the 
task and the team together and remember that the best results will come 
from working towards a common goal as a team.
Teamwork: what makes a good team?
To drive any process forward within your FM department, you will need to 
create “the team,” because you cannot do all this on your own. You need a 
positive contribution from the rest of your staff. So what are the basics of 
successful teamwork? Teamwork was explored by George Elton Mayo in the 
Hawthorne Works Experiment and his results can be summarised as follows.
•	
Does the team have clear goals and do they understand those goals 
only when they understand the defined outcomes necessary to truly 
focus on the mission? (see The Golden Thread in Chapter 4).
•	
Has the team created an environment in which people are comfortable 
to put their point of view forward and where members of the team trust 
each other and understand their role in driving the process forward?
•	
Does the team feel comfortable in being able to express potential 
solutions to issues, does knowing the way the team is set up allow 
them the freedom to express themselves without fear of being alienated 
or ignored by other members of the team, and does the team promote 
equality and diversity?
•	
Does the team have an identity that clearly defines them as a group and 
do members of that team feel as though they are a coherent part of that 
group? Have they developed a common goal that they all buy-in to?

3 Managing people: staff and customers 
41
•	
Does the team consist of members with different but complementary 
skills which overlap and complement the skills of the other team 
members? Does the team have a mix of characters and skills?
•	
Is the team a place where aspiration, creativity and innovation, and 
different viewpoints are expected and encouraged, and a supportive, 
non-confrontational stance is seen as the norm?
•	
Can the team identify issues that may be stifling process and are they 
prepared to openly discuss those issues to improve progress while 
ensuring the team is not compromised by those issues or hindered 
in any way?
Theory and information slot
George Elton Mayo was in charge of certain experiments on human 
behaviour carried out at the Hawthorne Works of the General Electric 
Company in Chicago between 1924 and 1927. His findings have 
contributed to organization development in terms of human relations 
and motivation theory.
Mayo concluded that:
•	
Work is a group and not an individual activity.
•	
The social world of the adult is primarily patterned around work 
activity.
•	
The need for recognition, security and a sense of belonging is 
sometimes more important in determining workers’ morale and 
productivity than the physical conditions or environment they 
work in.
•	
A complaint is not necessarily borne out of factual issues; it is 
commonly a symptom of an issue with an individual’s more basic 
or psychological problem.
•	
A worker’s attitudes and effectiveness are influenced by both 
work and home demands.
•	
Informal groups within the work environment exercise strong 
social controls over the work habits and attitudes of the individual.
•	
Managers need to exact influence over informal groups to 
ensure cohesion within the work environment for the sake of the 
company.
Adapted from Buchanan and Huczynski (2010), pp. 305–308.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
42
•	
Does the team have a set of guidelines or terms of reference to analyse 
issues that occur which also allow them to resolve those issues in a 
supportive way? Does the team have a collective set of values?
•	
Does the team have a leader who controls the processes while at the 
same time allowing input from individuals to amend and improve 
processes for the betterment of the group? Is the leader able to provide 
and maintain a clear view of the requirements of the group and guide 
the group while maintaining control?
•	
Are final decisions made collectively as a group and does the group as 
a whole have complete buy-in for those decisions?
Staff training
One of the most important issues 
in relation to your service provision 
is to have fully trained staff who 
can perform their duties to the 
maximum competency. Training is 
the key to this and fundamentally 
addresses the following issues:
•	
the ability for staff to undertake their duties effectively
•	
the fundamental need for people to want to progress
•	
the creation of stability and succession
•	
the ability to meet legislative requirements
•	
the ability to overlap services
Within the FM department there are naturally a number of different disciplines 
that staff work in and each discipline needs a different skill set to fulfil. No 
one can expect staff to come into the job fully trained and ready to go. Staff 
need to be developed and you need to take advantage of their willingness 
to learn. However, you will always have negative staff who fundamentally 
believe that they cannot be taught anything and, no matter how much you 
encourage them, they will never be able to grasp that it is for their own good.
Ability of staff to undertake their duties effectively
You carefully recruit what appear to be the best people for the job, but you 
don’t spend time training them. Are they able to undertake their duties 
Note to self
Put together a full list of available 
training and construct a training 
matrix for the whole FM department. 
Include all the training needed to 
undertake each function

3 Managing people: staff and customers 
43
effectively? The answer is probably no. Even though you may have the 
right people and you may have clear procedures and service levels that are 
expected, they may still fail because they are using their interpretation of 
your procedures and this can produce a wide difference in service level. What 
you are looking for is consistency and the only way to get that is to ensure 
everyone gets the same message, told in the same way. Training will enable 
them to undertake duties effectively, but just as importantly it allows you to 
make judgements on performance knowing that each member of staff has 
received the same instruction. Without this overarching guidance you cannot 
expect staff to understand their role thoroughly.
People must want to progress
If you have recruited correctly, then you will have staff who want to progress. 
If you are recruiting people who don’t want to learn and are not interested, 
then you have recruited wrongly. Most people 
have an in-built desire to improve themselves 
and will thrive on being set challenges that push 
them and allow the development of a potential 
career strategy. These challenges for career 
progression may not be the same for older staff 
members, but most people will rise to the 
challenge of learning something new to freshen 
up a job which may have become stale.
When you have people who are not interested 
in training, it is far more difficult. You may take 
up a position where you have a considerable 
number of staff who have done the same job 
for a number of years and will no doubt say 
“you cannot teach me anything new” or “I’m 
too old to start learning new things.” These are 
the people that you need to convince first that 
training, and retraining in some instances, will 
be good for them. Still not convinced? Well, 
neither am I, to be honest. Over my lifetime in 
FM I have met many people like this and I have always found it difficult, and 
sometimes impossible, to tackle people who are so set in their ways that they 
are effectively cruising towards retirement.
One way of tackling this issue is to appeal to their ego. Yes, these people 
may have an in-built distaste for learning something new, but if they have 
been in their job for a long time, they will have amassed a fantastic level of 

Use your skilled staff to 
pass on some on-the-job 
training to other members 
of staff. Don’t be afraid 
to tap into the skills of 
other people. You may be 
surprised at how well they 
rise to the challenge.


A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
44
experience which you can tap into. Convince them that you need to pass 
on their skills to the younger workforce. Get them to construct a training 
schedule to pass on their experience. This could be as simple as, if they are 
a plumber, getting them to show all the staff where the cut-off valves are in 
each building and getting them to put that down on paper. Not only do you 
then get all your staff knowing how to shut down in an emergency, but you 
end up with a written record to update your O & M manuals.
You may be surprised to find that these staff then show a renewed vigour 
and may become more open to learning new things. Remember, everyone has a 
button you can push, although sometimes you may have to dig deep to find it.
Most staff will want to learn new things to provide them with opportunities. 
Your training must be controlled. Don’t make everyone undertake the same 
training even if it is outside their job area. Set up a training matrix which 
shows you each person and all the available training, so you can start to plan 
and provide essential training in a controlled fashion.
Creation of stability and succession
Your training matrix can create a sense of stability in which all your staff feel 
confident that they have received the right training and they are confident 
they can perform their job to the right level and apply the right skills to the 
tasks involved. When people feel unsure about what it is they are supposed 
to be doing, it is likely to make them shy away from approaching things 
wholeheartedly and to not give their full potential as they may be afraid of 
failing. They will be more tentative in the way in which they approach the 
tasks as they may be unsure and looking for constant guidance as to whether 
they are doing things right. Being unsure in this way will make them less 
creative and unable to move outside the sphere of written instructions.
From a succession perspective, each time you recruit for a replacement staff 
member it is far easier to recruit from within. Ensuring that all your staff are 
trained in preparation for succession will engender a far greater willingness to 
take on extra duties as they know that in the long term they will be rewarded.
Succession and career progression are sometimes far more important 
tools than salary enhancements. If you show an interest in someone’s future 
and help them in planning this, you immediately become more trusted in 
your decisions. From a perspective of change within your department, you 
are far more likely to be able to change processes and positions if all staff 
understand that they have a vested interest in that change and that you are 
training them to deal with it. Trust becomes embedded between you and your 
staff and they will, for the most part, understand that you do this in their best 
interests and in the best interests of the department.

3 Managing people: staff and customers 
45
Ability to meet legislative requirements
A lot of the work in a busy FM department revolves around compliance. To 
effectively deal with issues involving compliance, it is essential that staff are 
given full training on the implications of this and, in particular, what the 
effects on them and their employer are if compliance is not adhered to. Most 
of the work around compliance takes place in the background and is generally 
unseen. Inspections and testing, for example, are completely unseen until 
someone arrives to inspect your records. By that time, it is too late to worry. 
Training on legislative issues ensures that your staff are aware of their legal 
obligations and the consequences to both them and their employer in the 
event of inaction. Therefore training is emphatically the most important issue 
in relation to compliance.
Ability to overlap services
When you have specialisms within your department, you also become 
vulnerable from a number of different perspectives. Don’t put all your eggs 
into one basket! Be aware of the following issues.
•	
If only one person knows how to undertake a particular task, how do 
you know if they are doing it right and at full efficiency?
•	
If someone leaves, it can leave you with a huge skills void which may 
be difficult to fill through standard recruitment.
•	
All your anecdotal knowledge around a subject could be tied up in one 
person, e.g. where keys are kept for machinery or stores.
•	
If someone goes on holiday or is sick, your service effectively stops.
It is important to protect your department by ensuring your structure allows 
the overlap of duties and rolls. This allows you to train other individuals to 
fulfil those tasks seamlessly in the event of sickness or holidays. An effective 
training matrix such as that given in Table 3.1 can identify those areas where 
you need to train others to do the same job.
How do you get staff to undertake training?
To some extent you will need to be dictatorial on how and when your training 
is to be undertaken. If you allow flexibility by allowing people to choose when 
they take training, this may mean that some of them miss out on training. 
Try to make training obligatory and set it up so that the whole department 

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
46
can do it at the same time. When training involves legislative items it is clear 
that collective training can work effectively. Linking training to your appraisal 
system is also a good way of identifying your training requirements. It is 
also a good way to steer people in the direction that you want them to go by 
suggesting that they need to improve their individual skills via training.
Rewarding progress
In most cases you will not have the flexibility to give pay rises to reward 
progress. However, there are a number of ways in which you can entice 
people to undertake training other than threats. People generally respond 
well to the promise of long-term structured training, particularly if this can 
be done during their working day. Provision of vocational training to allow 
Theory and information slot
Douglas McGregor was an American social psychologist who believed 
that there are basically two types of people in the work environment.
Theory X person
•	
An average theory X person dislikes work.
•	
They must be controlled and threatened to work effectively.
•	
They prefer to be directed and do not show initiative.
•	
Theory X managers do not give opportunities to staff as they wish 
to remain fully in control.
Theory Y person
•	
Physical and mental effort in a work environment come naturally 
to a theory Y person.
•	
They will direct themselves and are committed to the aims of the 
organisation.
•	
When the job is satisfying, they are fully committed to the 
organisation.
•	
They will seek responsibility.
•	
They have imagination, creativity and ingenuity.
•	
They are never fully utilised and are easily developed.
Adapted from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Douglas_McGregor

3 Managing people: staff and customers 
47
Table 3.1  Example of a training matrix which can be adapted to suit your own organisation
Staff
Health 
and 
safety
Manual  
handling
Safe-  
guarding
Equality  
and  
diversity
Fire  
safety
Working  
at  
height
Lift  
release
PUWER
Asbestos  
awareness
Site supervisors
Employee A
M
M
M
M
M
R
M
R
R
Employee B
M
M
Completed 
12/10/12
M
M
R
M
R
R
Employee C
M
M
Completed 
12/10/12
M
M
R
M
R
R
Employee D
M
M
M
M
M
R
M
R
R
Security
Employee E
M
M
M
M
M
O
M
O
O
Employee F
M
M
M
M
M
O
M
O
O
Helpdesk staff
Employee G
M
M
M
M
M
O
O
O
O
Maintenance
Employee H
M
M
M
M
M
M
R
M
M
Employee I
M
M
M
Completed 
12/10/12
M
M
R
M
M
Employee J
M
M
M
Completed 
12/10/12
M
M
R
M
M
Employee K
M
M
M
M
M
M
R
M
M
Administration 
staff
Employee L
M
M
M
M
M
O
O
O
O
(Continued)

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
48
Table 3.1  (Continued)
Staff
Health 
and 
safety
Manual  
handling
Safe-  
guarding
Equality  
and  
diversity
Fire  
safety
Working  
at  
height
Lift  
release
PUWER
Asbestos  
awareness
Cleaners
Employee M
M
M
M
M
M
R
O
R
O
Employee N
M
Completed 
12/10/12
M
M
M
R
O
R
O
Employee O
M
M
M
M
M
R
O
R
O
Employee P
M
M
M
M
M
R
O
R
O
Employee Q
M
M
M
M
M
R
O
R
O
Employee R
M
M
M
M
M
M
O
M
O
Environmental 
staff
Employee S
M
M
M
M
M
M
R
R
R
Grounds staff
Employee T
M
M
M
M
M
M
R
R
R
Supervisory
Employee U
M
M
M
M
M
M
R
R
R
Managers
Employee V
M
M
M
M
M
M
R
R
R
Employee W
M
M
M
Completed 
12/10/12
M
M
R
R
R
M = mandatory; R = recommended; and O = optional.

3 Managing people: staff and customers 
49
someone to progress in his or her career need not be expensive and, if you 
working in an education environment you can generally get your training 
at no cost. Encouraging people to grow, not only within your department 
but, more importantly, in the skills that will make them more employable 
elsewhere, will usually get a positive response. This is particularly true for 
staff who are young and at the beginning of their careers, or people who have 
become stale and want to learn new skills.
It may sound unwise to train people to give them the potential to move 
on, but investing in people shows them that you have faith in them. You 
take the chance that they may leave and take those skills with them, but 
sometimes you will find that being happy in the job is the prime objective 
of a lot of people. You spend a lot of time at work and, if you are not happy, 
you are constantly on the lookout for a means of escape from your current 
employment.
Sometimes people don’t just crave additional skills to enable them to earn 
more money. Sometimes people crave power over and above money, and will 
take on additional training and responsibility for the opportunity to have 
some power. You must, however, be careful with these types of people as they 
can become more of a problem for you in the future if power goes to their 
heads. You can create monsters if you do not take the time to make them 
aware of the full picture and how they should behave with their staff.
Fair and equal pay and training
If you are offering training and responsibility 
in lieu of money, you must make clear the 
parameters of your offer and the reasons you 
are offering this opportunity. You must make 
it clear that this is not linked to any long-
term strategy or potential pay increase. It is 
also a good idea to put these arrangements in 
writing to ensure that you are not challenged 
on fair and equal pay if someone is given 
responsibility that is comparable with a 
colleague who is earns more money. Care 
must be taken not to create ticking time bombs. Putting arrangements in 
writing removes any ambiguity and prevents a challenge in the future. Make 
it clear within any offer of training that this is not linked to pay and that it is 
there to allow the person more opportunity with succession or the external 
job market.
­Warning
Ensure all 
your legislative 
requirements for the 
department are dealt 
with on your training 
matrix.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
50
Customer service
Customer service is a key element 
in projecting a professional image 
while functioning effectively. What 
does customer service mean to an 
FM department? Usually, but not 
exclusively, the FM department 
is not seen as a front line service 
in the same way as front line 
reception staff. It is seen more as 
a cross-business service that is 
sometimes better hidden away. To be honest, who wants to see your painters, 
plumbers and joiners? In fact, you probably go to great lengths to make sure 
the service does its work without being seen. Sometimes this is for practical 
reasons, such as health and safety and to ensure access and egress. However, 
do not lose the opportunity to show off your service. You should be proud of 
the service you provide and should show how professionally it operates in its 
day-to-day activities.
Creating a good impression
The first aspect of customer service success is 
to create a good impression. Let people know 
how good you are. Part of this process is the 
professional image of your department. Badge 
your services under a corporate umbrella. An 
FM uniform immediately gives the impression 
of a professional service. It also forms the other 
useful function of bringing your team together 
under one common purpose, providing your 
team with an identity that they can buy into.
Even if you have a corporate uniform for the 
FM department, changing it periodically helps 
to reinforce and freshen up that identity. For 
the new manager coming into a department, it 
will immediately stamp your ownership on the 
team and make them your team rather than 
your predecessor’s team. It should never be an 
arbitrary decision to allow your team to choose 
the uniform. Plant the seed and let them come 
Note to self
Make sure you budget for new 
uniforms 
throughout 
the 
FM 
department. Try to keep a common 
theme, but make sure that you do not 
exclude anyone in the department; 
go for practical designs.

When you choose your 
uniform, remember you 
need to put a logo on each 
piece of the workwear to 
avoid your staff having to 
pay for it through taxation 
as a perk.


3 Managing people: staff and customers 
51
around to the decision you would have chosen. For practical reasons choose 
a serviceable colour which will last. White or bright colours will look good 
on day one, but will soon look shabby. Therefore take care to choose your 
colours and styles carefully. Do not buy cheap materials. They will soon look 
shabby and you will need to replace them early.
You will need to consider a corporate image. If the organisation has 
corporate colours or designs, it is appropriate to mirror these in the style 
and colour of the uniform you choose. You want your team to have an image 
which makes them stand out, but if that style grates or is completely different 
to the overall corporate image, staff will not feel part of the overall institution 
and this can be counterproductive. It may ultimately make the team look like 
a bought-in service and not an integral part of the business itself.
Providing good customer service
Good customer service has to be your ultimate goal. You can be as slick as 
you want in terms of provision of service, but if the customer does not like the 
service you provide, they can always exercise their right to look elsewhere. 
Without good customer service, your department could disappear or be 
outsourced altogether.
Good customer service is all about bringing customers back. It is about 
sending them away happy and providing you with positive feedback. 
Customers need to feel when they have received your service that they would 
be happy to use it again and become repeat customers. If you work to the 
premise that your customers won’t have the opportunity to source your 
services elsewhere, you may never improve the service you provide as you do 
not have the incentive to improve. Always assume that the customer can buy 
your services in and then you will always be looking for a competitive edge to 
improve your customer services.
By definition, the FM department is continually shifting in terms of the 
services provided. New services are being added all the time. Providing a 
good customer service means your customers believe in you and that they 
trust you. It means that they look to you for solutions. It is all about building 
that relationship between you as service provider and the customer who 
uses your service. When your service naturally expands, your customer will 
have the confidence of knowing that you will deal with issues and deal with 
them in professional ways. The service you provide is ever-changing and 
developing. Your department needs to be able to adapt to suit this changing 
environment. If your systems are robust enough to monitor and manage the 
work, they will also provide you with the justification for new staff to take on 
new ventures.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
52
How do you develop, run and manage such a relationship with your 
client? You need to remember the one true secret of good customer service 
and acting accordingly: “You will be judged by what you do, not what you 
say.” Good customer service will give you the edge you need and will develop 
a close bond between yourself, your department and your customers. After 
all, this is what we are fundamentally here to do: “facilitate.” Providing good 
customer service is very simple. If you truly want to have good customer 
service, ensure that you carry out the following suggestions.
Answer the phones
Make sure that someone answers the phone when it rings. Your customer is 
waiting to give you a job; this is what you are here for and if you don’t answer the 
phone, you have failed and fallen at the first hurdle. Make sure your Helpdesk 
Theory and information slot
We all strive to be truly great managers who earn the respect of many and 
are inspiring; in short, a pleasure to work for. But it is not easy and, as 
many of us know, great managers are few and far between.
So what are the qualities that make an effective manager?
1.	 Integrity. Integrity fosters trust, which in turn builds loyalty.
2.	 Ability to empower staff. A good manager empowers staff to 
perform at their best.
3.	 Ability to motivate. People perform best when they are happy and 
motivated.
4.	 Ability to delegate. A good manager understands the skills and 
abilities of staff and knows how to delegate.
5.	 Adaptability. Ability to adjust quickly and to understand 
the implications of changes, adjusting goals and strategies 
accordingly.
6.	 Action. To be prepared to take action and address problems as 
they arise.
7.	 Role model. Able to set an example to all staff of appropriate 
behaviour and performance standards.
8.	 Value people.  Able to listen to people and be fair and understanding. 
However, this doesn’t mean they can always keep everyone happy.

3 Managing people: staff and customers 
53
phone is always answered and set up call groups where the phone will divert 
to if it is not answered within the first six rings. Make sure that your staff have 
all the tools and training they need in terms of telephone answering skills. Time 
taken working on these skills provides your department with a professional 
image and, if you’re not endeavouring to be professional, why are you here?
Don t make promises you can t keep
You should not plan to keep your promises: you must keep them. That’s what 
a promise is. Reliability is one of the keys to any good relationship and good 
customer service is no exception. If you say you will provide delivery today, 
then make sure it is there on time. If there is a repair to be done and you say 
it will be done tomorrow, do it today. Set yourself challenges to under-promise 
and over-perform. If you don’t and the opposite is true, you will always be seen 
as a department which fails to come up to the mark. Think before you give any 
promise, because nothing annoys customers more than a broken promise.
Listen to your customers
Is there anything more annoying than getting a 
call back from a contractor or supplier saying:  
“I didn’t quite catch what you said, what time do 
you want the service?” or “What was your name?” 
Listen to your customer. There is no magic 
formula, but you should encourage your staff to 
take notes during phone calls. Your Helpdesk is 
probably the hub of your department, so make 
sure these basic principles are engendered in 
this team first. Be ready with a pen as soon as the 
phone rings. One of the most satisfying things 
when dealing with someone over the phone is 
when, at the end of the call, they are able to 
remember your name, which was probably said 
only once at the beginning of the call. It makes 
you feel wanted and special, which is what good 
customer service is all about.
Deal with complaints
No one likes hearing complaints and many of us have developed a reflex 
shrug saying, “You can’t please all the people all the time.” Maybe not, but 

Make sure you deal with 
complaints in a formal way. 
Never allow them to be 
forgotten or swept under the 
carpet as they will come back 
to haunt you at a later date.


A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
54
if you don’t try and don’t have a philosophy of the customer always being 
right, you will never get it right. Give complaints your full attention and set 
yourself deadlines for responding to them. Include dealing with complaints 
as an internal SLA so that you can monitor your completion rate for dealing 
with them. If you give the complaint your full attention, you may be able to 
please this one person, this one time. You will then inspire the confidence for 
this person to trust you in the future.
Be helpful
Sometimes people will ring the FM 
department knowing full well that 
you will not be able to help them 
with a direct service. Engender 
your staff to try and help, to try 
and point the client in the right 
direction. Develop a name as the 
department which can and will go the extra mile to please the customer. 
Never moan or grumble about customers wasting your time. Never forget that 
good customer service is what your department is about.
Train your staff to be courteous and knowledgeable
Do the training yourself or hire someone in to train them. Most importantly, 
give every member of your staff enough information and power to make those 
small customer-pleasing decisions, so he or she never has to say: “I don’t 
know, but so-and-so will be back at...”. Again, this is ultimately down to you. 
If you don’t engender this type of behaviour in your staff and department, and 
expect it from them on every occasion, then you are in the wrong job.
Go that extra mile
Go that extra mile. If someone asks 
the direction to somewhere on the 
site, show them on a plan of the 
site or even get someone to take 
them to the place. When someone 
shows up on site and asks where 
they can park, don’t just say the 
car parks are full. Have some answers ready about local parking and fees. 
People don’t like to feel abandoned. They may not say so to you, but people 
notice when you make an extra effort and will tell other people.
Note to self
Pull together a training programme 
for all staff. Apply this consistently 
across all departments so everyone 
is singing from the same hymn sheet.
Note to self
Make sure you yourself are up to 
speed on customer service before 
you roll out any training programme 
across your department.

3 Managing people: staff and customers 
55
Throw in something extra
Customers appreciate getting something for nothing, especially when they don’t 
expect it. If some flat-pack furniture is delivered to the site and a particular 
department wants it delivered directly to them, offer to put it together for them 
as well. Add-ons or that little extra finesse to the service will get staff coming 
back to you for more. You cannot be expected to do everything, however. Don’t 
get drawn into doing things that are patently outside your scope of delivery, 
unless there is some genuine reason or advantage in doing so.
Practising what you preach
Your department is the all-singing, all-dancing department which goes that 
extra mile for the customer. You are getting fantastic comments back and your 
customer service is deemed a success. Don’t be the weak link in the chain 
by not practising what you preach. As the figurehead of your department, if 
you don’t provide the same level of service as your staff, you may undermine 
the overall effect. If you have extolled these virtues to your staff, but don’t 
come up to the same level yourself, how does this look to your customer and 
to your staff?
Make sure that you follow the same basic principles and engage with your 
customers. You have a vested interest in having close links with them. You 
will always get an honest answer from other department managers if they feel 
you are interested in what your department’s performance is like. Arranging 
regular meetings with your departmental heads (each term in an education 
environment) will pay long-term dividends for you. You will pick up poor 
performance early, allowing quick and decisive reactions and further enhancing 
your service. You will also start to develop a bond with your customers. It is 
all about loyalty. If your customer feels you do everything possible for them, 
then they will always be your best ally when, inevitably, things go wrong. Never 
underestimate the potential power of these close relationships.
Development of customer services
Customer service is not something which is put into place and never looked 
at again. It is a process of continuous development in which service levels 
are moved onto the next level of expectation. Working closely with your 
customers allows you to gauge what their perceptions of your customer 
service are and whether you meet the expected level of service requirement. 
You can only do this through SLAs, which are dealt with in detail later. Your 
team should always be looking to improve your service. In this way you will 

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
56
always have the competitive edge if your service is market tested against 
external organisations. In a college environment this is dealt with by the SAR 
(Self-Assessment Reports) process.
What is a SAR?
In real terms, a SAR is an annual report detailing what your service intentions 
are for the year, including the allocation of potential resources, the setting of 
time-frames and naming responsible persons. This SAR is then monitored as 
the year progresses and is usually 
“ragged” (red, not complete; amber, 
partially completed; and green, completed) 
in terms of completion status. Arguably, 
your SAR should contain all your SLAs, 
but in real terms this would make them 
too unwieldy to monitor. SARs generally 
deal with significant functions, whereas 
SLAs may deal with the minutia of the 
service provision. In either case, your 
SARs and SLAs must be your starting 
point. The principal of a SAR can be used 
in any FM department and is not exclusive to an educational environment. 
An example of a SAR is given in the Appendices.
You should review your service standards in discussions with your 
customers and suggest ways in which they can be improved and incorporated 
­Warning
Do not push 
service levels up 
without considering 
the implications for your 
budget (don’t promise 
things you can’t 
resource).
• Specification
• Implementation
• SARs or targets
• Review
 
Formal review to
establish progress
and compliance
with SAR
Detail of SAR to be
discussed with
Centre heads with
potential ideas on
improving service
Amendments to
specification
to improve service
Training and
implementation of
new updated SAR
The process of a SAR in action and how it creates a virtuous circle

3 Managing people: staff and customers 
57
into new and updated SLAs. As ever, this must take into consideration 
budgetary requirements. Never improve service quality without taking into 
account any budgetary effects.
Reviews of this type follow a set pattern and can be mapped out fairly 
easily by: discussions with department heads; altering specifications to suit 
changes; implementation; and review of progress (see diagram). The whole 
process is cyclical and, in real terms, never ends as you strive for continual 
improvement of your service.
Your customers are not just your department heads, however, and to 
discount everyone else’s views would be folly. Therefore you must engage 
with all your customers and treat every contact in the outside world as a 
potential customer.
Students
In an education environment, the students are the people that we are here to 
provide the service to. Without them, we wouldn’t have a service to provide. 
Your students will not shy away from giving you their views and engaging 
with students is critical to your success.
There are a number of ways the FM team can obtain feedback from 
students. The first is by attending student meetings. Most curriculum centres 
will be happy to allow you to attend student meetings. This is your chance to 
come face-to-face with your customers. This can be quite daunting, as you 
can never be sure what is going to come up at the meeting and what you are 
going to have to answer questions about. However, if FM is flagged up as a 
regular slot on the agenda, then you may get some very useful feedback on 
what the students are looking for from your department. Do not, however, 
ignore comments from a student meeting. You must respond positively to 
requests and not brush them under the carpet, no matter how trivial they 
may seem.
The QDP is a national bench-mark of how students feel about certain 
aspects of college life. This is usually curriculum-orientated, but there are a 
few topic headings that are useful to the FM team, such as: does the college 
feel safe; are the toilets clean; and does the college feel warm and welcoming? 
All of these will help to indicate where you need to improve. Use a weighted 
scoring system which will help you see your performance against the previous 
year. This will help you to target where you need to change in terms of next 
years’ service and also help you bench-mark against peer organisations.
Customer service cards are a good way of engaging in a non-contact way. 
You can strategically leave feedback forms for students to complete in, for 
example, catering areas. These could include questions such as: have you 

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
58
Aide Memoire: Managing staff and customers
•	
Set up a communications strategy for your whole department 
specifying meeting schedules and strategies.
•	
Check available skills and evaluate the skill requirements of the 
department.
•	
Construct a training schedule for the whole department, making 
sure you consider the strategic objectives of the organisation.
•	
Develop customer service for each section, making sure your staff 
focus on customer service techniques.
•	
Listen to your customers.
ever used the services of the FM department and, if so, was your experience 
good, average, poor; are the common rooms clean; or are the toilets clean? 
All of these will help you to gauge what it is that the students are looking for 
from the FM department when they come onto the site. Never assume that 
the student is just looking for qualifications. Increasingly, it is becoming all 
about the “learner journey,” the experience that the student has when they 
come to college. From the moment they come through the door of your college 
to the time they leave, they are picking up experience of the real world and 
college is the transitional step between school and the work environment. 
The experience they have will encourage them to come back time and time 
again to improve their individual CPD.
Theory and information slot
One of those credited for the invention and development of the SWOT 
analysis is Albert S. Humphrey.
A SWOT analysis looks at:
•	
Strengths. What are we good at?
•	
Weaknesses. What are we bad at?
•	
Opportunities. What are the chances of improving performance?
•	
Threats. What could cause us problems?
Adapted from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SWOT_analysis

59
Chapter 4
Policies, strategies, procedures,  
risks and liabilities
Your policies and procedures are the key to everything you do within an active 
Facilities Department. They define what you do, why you do it, and how you 
do it. Your policies and procedures will be dictated primarily by legislation and 
the strategic objectives of your organisation. In general, policies are generated 
by legislation and have legal implications. Similarly the risks and liabilities 
of your building stock and staff need to be interwoven and covered by your 
policies and procedures to ensure your compliance is complete and thorough.
Legislation can be simple and straightforward in that the requirements are 
laid out and it is usually fairly easy for you to determine the salient points. 
Every business will have in place a raft of policies to ensure compliance; 
however, compliance can change and you will generally find that some 
policies are put together in response to a particular piece of legislation. These 
are committed to paper, communicated to the staff who are trained in the 
appropriate area, then they generally sit on the intranet awaiting future use. 
Sometimes slight variations in legislation and updates can be missed and 
unless your Quality Assurance (QA) system picks these up (as it should), 
then policies can become out of date. Your first objective is to ensure that any 
policies are current in their application and meet the organisation’s objectives 
as well as all the necessary legal requirements.
The Appendices to this book give a number of the policies you may need 
to comply with. You can add further policies to these examples to meet the 
aims of your own organisation.
Policies
Policies are not just the pieces of paper required to ensure compliance; they 
act as definitions so that you and your staff can improve your department’s 

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
60
performance. You must ensure that all of your policies have the following 
characteristics.
•	
Thorough. Loose or open policies cause confusion. When something 
cannot be clearly defined, it cannot be followed clearly.
•	
Incorporate objectives. Your organisation must have strategic 
objectives for its long-term survival and these must be incorporated 
into your procedures. If they are in your procedures, they also need to 
be in your policies; if your policies do not mention strategic objectives, 
how will they be measurable or dealt with at a corporate level? Your 
strategic objectives must be incorporated into your policies otherwise 
they serve no useful purpose. Most policies deal with compliance 
in some way. For an organisation, compliance is legally binding. 
Your strategic objectives will include risk aversion, which includes 
legislative requirements.
•	
Applied. Policies can be rigid definitions. Your policies and procedures 
will form part of your training objectives and will drive measurable 
targets.
•	
Trained. Never just give policies to staff and expect them to simply 
run with them. You must be prepared to invest time in making 
sure that the fundamental messages within the policies actually 
get through and you cannot do this without using those policies 
as part of your staff training. This also helps to ensure that 
your policies are robust and uncompromising in terms of your 
strategic objectives. Training often identifies loopholes or missing 
information within your policies and is a way of reviewing whether 
they actually work.
•	
Review. Nothing stands still in FM. The goalposts are continually 
moving and your policies must also be capable of moving with your 
department’s development. You must have in place a formal review 
of each procedure and policy to keep track of changes. This can be 
formally built into any QA procedure such as ISO 9001, which we will 
deal with in a later chapter.
•	
Simple. Policies in particular should be a framework for your 
procedures to be built upon. If they are long winded, you may never 
pick out the embedded message. Try to keep policies to one page if 
you can. If you get into this habit you will be forcing yourself to get 
the message over in the least number of words. Your procedures can 
add detail to the policy.

4 Policies, strategies, procedures, risks and liabilities 
61
Strategies
To move your department forward 
in a positive way, you need to 
define what you want to achieve. 
Creating your strategies is the 
first step in defining the service 
you are trying to apply. Clearly 
setting out your strategy helps 
you to focus on the service you 
are trying to provide and to define the expectations of the users of the service.
Strategies describe how you are going to turn the aims and aspirations of 
your policies into action. They define where you hope to be at a certain time 
and are your route map of how you are going to achieve the targets you have 
set yourself. Your strategies should have the following characteristics.
•	
Time-bound. They should define when you are going to achieve your 
aims.
•	
Defined. They should start to put some flesh on the bones of your 
policies in terms of specific areas that you are going to look at.
•	
Realistic. They should represent an achievable level of service, while 
pushing the boundaries of that service to ensure improvement.
What is a strategy?
A strategy in the simplest terms is applying the parameters of the service you 
will provide in a clear unequivocal format. It is your plan of action and details 
fully your intentions.
This is a practical guide, so I am not going to concern myself with the 
theoretical ways in which you can analyse your processes to develop your 
strategy. In the end you will be concerned with practical issues and the correct 
strategy is whatever works for you. There is no “one size fits all” solution.
Never fall into the trap of creating strategies and then sticking too rigidly 
to them. Your strategies are a working open document which should be able 
to change when required. You need a framework and it has to be clear and 
concise, but the work of a Facilities Manager is always developing and you 
need to be flexible. Changes in our business may be forced by legislative, 
operational, or technical requirements and flexibility is essential.
Strategy is about setting a firm set of parameters, but allowing fluid 
movement of those parameters to meet the changing requirements of the site. 
An example is heating strategy.
Note to self
Your strategies will need love, care and 
attention. They need to be changed, 
updated, monitored and generally 
maintained to ensure they work for 
the department.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
62
•	
Who? Whose responsibility is it within your team to monitor and 
manage this strategy and what are their individual responsibilities 
on a day-to-day basis? Clearly defined lines of responsibility will not 
only help to clarify who should be dealing with this item on a day-
to-day basis, but will also allow you to interface this strategy with 
key objectives and link into the appraisal process to make appraisal 
targets easy to construct, manage and monitor. Your strategy should 
contain a flow chart indicating the lines of interpretation of the 
strategy to help provide a clear and unambiguous document.
•	
What? For example, define what heating is. Is this permanent or 
temporary heating? Is it linked to any other systems such as variable 
refrigerant flow (VRF) or ventilation strategies? Is it controlled by a BMS 
and, if so, what are the parameters by which the BMS will control it, e.g. 
set points, eco-settings, optimisation and compensation? What are your 
targets? Do you aim to keep the heating between 18 and 21°C? Will you 
aim to hit a constant 18°C 30 minutes before the first use of the day?
•	
Where? Where are you going to be heating and how is that influenced by 
the occupant’s use of the space, e.g. bakeries, workshops or art studios.
•	
When? Define when you are going to heat the building, e.g. will there 
be a defined heating season? Engage with users to ensure the provision 
of heating matches the work provision. There is no point heating a 
space when there is no one in the building and, conversely, you need 
the heating at an appropriate setting when the building or space is 
occupied.
Your list of strategies for your 
busy FM department may include 
the 
following: 
heating 
and 
ventilation; opening and closing; 
PPM; responsive maintenance; 
and Helpdesk.
What are the key points of a strategy?
Your strategy is your guidance document for whatever subject you are trying 
to define. To be effective, it has to be the following.
•	
Workable. There is no point in creating a strategy that is too difficult 
to manage or work. Do not create work for yourself by having content 
Note to self
Make a list of all the areas within 
your department where you will need 
a strategy. You don’t need to draft 
these immediately. Take time to get 
the job right.

4 Policies, strategies, procedures, risks and liabilities 
63
that is unrealistic or unworkable. Your strategy needs to be a practical 
working document and brevity should be the order of the day.
•	
Achievable. Your targets need to be realistic and achievable; there is 
nothing more demoralising to staff than to be given targets that they 
cannot achieve. Set your targets modestly in the first instance and 
allow for over-performance. This will spur on the staff who have to 
work with this document and will give results when applied to your 
appraisal targets. Your document should be a live, working, dynamic 
document capable of changing with the changing requirements of 
your organisation. If this is the case, then you can slowly increase 
your targets each year, allowing yourself time to build up experience 
and technical knowledge while, at the same time, allowing your 
department to perform and show continual improvement.
•	
Inclusive. Your targets must encompass the views of your team and 
the wider community. Sometimes your 
ideas may not take account of the 
technical 
knowledge 
of 
your 
staff. 
Allowing them to contribute will let you 
tap into their skills and expertise and 
also give them ownership of the strategy. 
Do not forget the expectations of the 
end-user. Allow them to set some of the 
parameters for you, even if these are 
unrealistic. Sometimes they may ask for 
things that are in conflict with other 
priorities, e.g. a user may ask for internal 
temperatures to be at a constant 23°C. 
You then have the opportunity to discuss 
your sustainability agenda with the user. 
Without explaining decisions, your objectives may not be fully 
understood and, if the users are not fully on board, you risk constant 
complaints such as “My workplace is too cold.”
•	
Comprehensive. You will never tick all the boxes because the 
goalposts are continually 
moving. If your strategy 
is fluid enough to absorb 
these 
changes 
and 
is 
maintained 
as 
a 
live 
document, then it will be 

Make life easy for yourself 
and use the templates 
in 
the 
Appendices 
to 
construct your policies.

Note to self
Start to pull together a full list of 
all your FM policies, strategies, 
procedures and forms.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
64
as near to comprehensive as possible. As with any live document, 
you need to maintain and regularly update it.
•	
Fluid. All your documents need to be able to quickly adapt to changes 
without compromising their overall effectiveness.
Strategies are part of your tool kit for explaining the service you are providing 
and, like any tool kit need to be maintained. It is useful to link all of your 
policies, procedures and strategies to your QMS. Sample policies, procedures 
and strategies are given in the Appendices.
Procedures
Your procedures are the nuts and bolts of how you will carry out your policies. 
They define how you will achieve the goals and aspirations set out in your 
policies.
Procedures should have the following characteristics.
•	
Purposeful. There is no point in writing a procedure that does not have 
a purpose. Everything you do within your busy department must 
have purpose and a reason for doing it. Some things can be difficult 
to quantify, but they must all have a purpose.
•	
Linked. Procedures must be linked to 
specific policy documents. Your policies 
should drive your strategic objectives 
and, if your procedures are not linked or 
annexed to a policy document, then they 
will not be fulfilling any of your strategic 
objectives.
•	
Specific. Procedures should specify the level 
of service you are trying to achieve and how 
you are going to achieve it.
•	
Owned. Your procedures must be aimed at a 
particular individual or group of individuals 
whose duty it is to action them. There is no 
point in having a procedure that does not 
have a target owner to action it.

Try to get a common 
feel to all your policies, 
strategies, procedures and 
forms. Connecting them 
in this way helps the flow 
of the documentation.


4 Policies, strategies, procedures, risks and liabilities 
65
•	
Measurable. If you have written policies and procedures and your 
staff have complied with them, but you are then unable to measure 
the effectiveness of the whole process, then there was no point in 
developing policies and procedures in the first place. If you do not 
build measurability into everything that you do, your service can 
never be measured or shown to have improved.
•	
Lean. Your procedures should be as lean as practical. Clarity of 
message comes from keeping things simple.
Guidance notes
From your raft of policies and procedures, you will have derived a number 
of tasks required to fulfil your policies and procedures. Both policies and 
procedure should be kept brief. However, brevity sometimes misses out detail. 
This is where your guidance notes come in. Guidance notes explain processes 
and practices in greater detail. They allow you to be more specific in your 
procedures. Guidance notes should have the following characteristics.
•	
Specific. Your guidance notes are your last chance to explain a process 
to your staff before they begin to action it. The level of detail will 
depend on the complexity of the process and what you are trying to 
achieve.
•	
Bite-sized. Policies and procedures provide an overview of what can 
sometimes be a complex subject, with many facets of the service 
provided included in each procedure. Your guidance notes should 
focus on each individual facet of the service and define what is 
required.
•	
Able to be monitored. Your supervisory staff should be able to use 
these guidance notes as a monitoring document to ensure that staff 
are complying with your requirements.
Theory and information slot
Strategic management is developing plans, policies and procedures that 
drive the organisation’s strategic objectives and mission statement forward. 
The process can be measured in many ways. Modern establishments 
sometimes use a “dashboard.” This was developed in the 1960s by French 
process engineers who created “tableau de bord” literally “dashboard.”

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
66
•	
Readable. Avoid the use of esoteric language and keep the text as 
simple as possible.
•	
Useable. Guidance notes need to be practical documents that are 
readily understood and capable of being used on a day-to-day basis 
and as a training aid.
Forms
Forms have been much maligned over the years as a bureaucratic 
embellishment for the paper-pusher. However, a form is your auditable 
compliance document. It will show that you have complied with a particular 
task while providing your audit team with written proof of compliance.
Forms should have the following characteristics.
•	
Simple. Keep your forms as simple as possible. Simple tick-sheets 
are far easier to fill in than long-winded handwritten descriptors of 
finished jobs. Don’t forget that you have to audit these sheets; simple 
ticks are easier to check than reams of handwritten notes.
•	
Concise. Keep the information on each form to a minimum. This will 
make it easier for you to audit, easier for your staff to use and easier 
for them to be trained to use it in the first place.
•	
Time-bound. Don’t forget to put the date forms. Simple as it may seem, 
if a form is not time-bound or time-stamped, then it really does not 
serve much purpose as an audit document.
Administrative f low
Try to create a natural flow of documentation that will assist, not hinder, you 
in meeting compliance obligations. An example of this is given in Appendix 1 
and in the diagram below.
Policies
Strategies
Procedures
Guidance
notes
Forms

4 Policies, strategies, procedures, risks and liabilities 
67
Monitoring and managing
Let’s start with the principles of what is monitoring and what is managing. 
Monitoring is the process by which you control an activity by proactively 
following its progress using key intervals to bench-mark the success or failure 
against a set of criteria or performance indicators. Managing in the context 
of this chapter means maximising the available resources to enable effective 
monitoring to effectively control the process in question. As this is meant to 
be a practical book on how to run an FM section from scratch, I hope by the 
end of this chapter to have shown you the value of analysing what you are 
trying to manage to maximise your time as a Facilities Manager.
Monitoring and managing can apply to monitoring and managing the 
following: staff, contracts, resources and environments. Although the 
Theory and information slot
Policies, rules and procedures are fundamental to an organisation. Rules 
guide employees’ actions, enabling consistent and acceptable behaviour 
and establishing prescribed levels of performance.
Adapted from Hellriegel, Don and Slocum, John W, Addison-Wesley Pub. 
Co. (Reading, Mass.): 1978, 2nd edition.
Ten reasons to use policies and procedures:
1.	 Allows a framework for your QMS.
2.	 Clearly defines and interprets strategic objectives of the 
organisation.
3.	 Clearly defines who is responsible for what.
4.	 Helps to link together various disciplines and subject areas.
5.	 Allows you to track work when linked to strategic aims and 
objectives.
6.	 Can provide a logical flow.
7.	 Reduces confusion amongst the workforce.
8.	 Ensures proper record keeping.
9.	 Ensures specific legislative items are contained within all 
spheres of work such as health and safety corporate social 
responsibility, equality and diversity.
10.	 Defines clear management and control.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
68
principles for each of these areas will be similar, 
they all vary in subtle ways and will be dealt 
with separately. The areas you need to focus on 
are:
•	
What are you managing and monitoring?
•	
Where 
are 
you 
are 
managing 
and 
monitoring?
•	
When will you manage and monitor?
•	
How will you manage and monitor?
•	
Why are you managing and monitoring?
Each of these areas needs to be defined to help 
you focus on the process so that you do not 
miss anything fundamental.
What are you managing and monitoring?
Unless you know exactly what it is you are 
dealing with, how you can be 100% sure you are effective? You need to 
define the process or activity you are managing and a set of parameters for 
the service or service levels. For example, if you are managing a cleaning 
contract, do you have a specification that defines what is to be cleaned and 
to what level? If you don’t have this simple information, how can you control 
the contract? If your specification is prescriptive in its wording, it is easy to 
check if it is not being carried out.
Where are you are managing and monitoring?
Do you know where these services 
are being provided? Is it clear from 
the descriptions in the contractual 
documents where the services are 
provided? If not, then this can lead 
to interpretation and, wherever 
there is interpretation there can 
be subjectivity. This can lead to unclear instructions, which can lead to 
increased costs. It is equally important to make these distinctions with in-
house contracts because this can also lead to subjectivity. When you are 
Note to self
A bit of careful analysis will help 
you to understand what you are 
monitoring and managing and why 
you are monitoring and managing it!

Pull together a matrix for all 
your contracts, pinpointing 
where and when each 
service is provided. This 
will give you an overview 
and allow you to see where 
your resources need to be 
focused.


4 Policies, strategies, procedures, risks and liabilities 
69
unable to define poor performance, you are equally unable to correct poor 
performance, and without that ability you are unable to control.
When will you manage and monitor?
There is no point in having a watertight contract, specification or service level 
agreement if you do not define a frequency at which you need to monitor and 
manage. It is far easier to manage something if you set aside time to do so. 
Make sure you book in, and adhere to, periodic meetings on progress. This 
shows the contractor two things: that you are methodical and that you are 
checking the contract. Without this, your contractor will take advantage of 
you. They will assume you are not bothered about quality and that you are 
easy to manipulate.
The advantage of a formal meeting is that you have an agenda and a 
methodology for tracking changes to the contract and a diary of discussions, 
which helps you to control costs and variations. Put all your checks on quality 
in a diary so that you don’t forget to do them, including all your key dates 
such as monthly valuations and 
contract start and end dates. 
This is a simple task in Outlook 
and ensures you are ready for re-
tender in good time with the 
option to formally review how well 
the previous contract has gone. 
Also put formal meetings with in-
house staff in the diary to look at 
progress and to check you are still following service level agreements and that 
the service is not suffering from drift. Any formal checks or audits that you 
are going to do should also be in your diary. This ensures that you make time 
and space for these meetings. If you don’t, something else will come in to fill 
the void. We are sometimes our own worst enemy in terms of filling our diaries 
to make sure that we look busy to the outside world. We then somehow 
convince ourselves that these tasks have enough meaning and substance to 
be left in our diaries.
Your job is to manage contracts and you never stop managing, from the 
moment you walk through the door in the morning to when you walk off-site; 
sometimes it does not even stop there. If you want to be successful in FM, you 
must never ease up on management. Never assume something is running 
smoothly and does not need to be managed. You will never be in this position, 
because the moment you relax your hold, your hard work will unravel.
Note to self
Use your Outlook calendar to put in 
all of your management activities. 
This ensures you find time to monitor 
issues prior to a significant event such 
as a valuation or on site meeting.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
70
How will you manage and monitor?
There are basically three ways in which you can manage and monitor a 
contract.
•	
Get out there and look at the service at ground level and check that it 
is being done to specification and that it is reaching the desired service 
level. Go out and muck in with the workers to test out assumptions 
on service levels at grass root level. This, for me, is the best and most 
honest and up front way of managing as it shows the contractor or 
your staff that you are not afraid of getting your hands dirty. You will 
gain so much respect from operating in this way that it is well worth 
the effort.
•	
Get the contractor to justify the contract success by providing you 
with raw data such as signing-in and signing-out sheets, worksheets 
and customer care questionnaires. This is particularly good where you 
are under-resourced yourself. It can, however, allow the contractor to 
manipulate data to give a better outcome. Don’t forget the old adage 
that there are lies, damn lies and statistics!
•	
The third method is to employ someone else to monitor the contract 
for you. This is particularly useful if you are under-resourced in 
terms of time and if there is a specific technical requirement to the 
contract which is outside of your skill set, such 
as lifts.
Whichever way you choose to manage and 
monitor, make sure you build in quality checks 
as you go. We have already discussed appraisal 
processes as a methodology of pushing forward 
quality by identifying poor practices and 
improving them. You must not forget to apply 
those principles to yourself. Not only is it likely 
that you will be appraised yourself and may wish 
to prove in statistically how well you are doing, 
but it should be standard practice for you to 
take a step back and apply a bit of self-analysis 
to your own performance. Building in quality 
systems to provide you with statistical data to 
allow you to analyse your performance can be an 
eye-opener. If you receive performance-related 
pay, this is essential.

Showing your staff that 
you are capable of doing 
the job by rolling up your 
sleeves and helping out will 
improve 
your 
credibility 
and help to create a bond 
between you and your staff.


4 Policies, strategies, procedures, risks and liabilities 
71
Why are you managing and monitoring?
Do you have a clear mandate on what, when and why you are managing and 
monitoring something? Are you monitoring something that does not need to 
be monitored? As with everything in FM, we can 
sometimes do something just because we think it is 
the right thing to do, because it is there and we feel 
we need to control it. FM is becoming busier every 
year and our core business and breadth of knowledge 
needed are increasing all the time.
Ask yourself the questions: what benefit do 
I or the service get from monitoring something 
closely; does the amount of effort needed justify 
the outcomes; and is there another way of getting the information without 
needing to compile it?
•	
What benefit do I or the service get? Are you collecting information and 
watching a process for a reason? Can you quantify what benefit the 
service gains from you watching it? Would what you are monitoring 
do exactly the same whether you watched it or not? Do you have faith 
in the staff undertaking the process?
•	
Does the amount of effort needed justify the outcomes? Are you putting 
in a lot of effort into one area to obtain only a small or marginal 
improvement? Does the fact that you are monitoring something make 
it any more efficient? If not, then why monitor it? Could your time be 
best used elsewhere on an income-critical area that would give you a 
better return on your time?
•	
Is there another way to get the information or manage something without 
your input? Can you effectively delegate the task? Can you make any 
data collection implicit in contract documents so that the contractor 
pulls the information together or quality manages it for you?
Whatever you do however, make sure that your prime reason for doing it is to 
improve quality, not just to decrease your workload. Remember: “delegation, 
not abdication.”
Quality management
Everything that you do as a Facilities Manager should be with a view to 
providing that service in the best possible way, building in quality as you 
go. This section aims to help you set up a QMS. Quality Management is not 
­Warning
Only monitor 
a service if it 
needs to be 
monitored

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
72
just a bolt-on service. It should be part of everything that you do within your 
department. Consider quality as just part of your specification for the work 
you do; it must be incorporated into everything and not just considered as an 
afterthought. What I mean by the word quality?
What is quality  ?
Quality in terms of the service that you provide is four things taken together: 
excellence, compliance, intelligence and review.
Excellence is the best that you can provide given the resources you 
have. Many people associate quality with the finer things in life and always 
they assume that it means the best that money can buy. This is not 
always the case. It is possible to provide an excellent service on a meagre 
budget; it is down to how you define excellence. Excellence is achieving 
the best possible outcome given the parameters set. So, if you have set 
the parameters of the service and you have driven the service to achieve 
them, then you have achieved excellence. We all know it is not as simple 
as that, because we rarely provide a service that cannot be compared 
against another provider. In the educational environment, excellence can 
readily be defined because we are compared through national statistics 
and surveys such as QDP.
Some cheat by setting the parameters of the service they provide too low, 
then by achieving those parameters claim they have achieved excellence. If 
you are not continually pushing the boundaries of your service by reviewing 
and increasing or improving your targets, you are not achieving excellence. 
Excellence is a self-driving aspiration because, for excellence to mean 
anything, continual improvement through development and self-analysis 
always move the goalposts. This is good.
Compliance 
is 
more 
than 
just 
adherence 
to 
legislative 
requirements it is about adhering 
to 
your 
strategic 
objectives 
and driving quality forward by 
ensuring you set goals, plan how 
you are going to achieve your 
goals, action your goals and 
review your outcomes, which, in 
turn, will define new goals. This virtuous circle is the basis for most quality 
systems. Some people become blinkered and look on compliance as being 
simply legislative. Being narrow-minded in this field prevents you from 
achieving more than simple legislative compliance.
Note to self
There is no excuse for a lack of quality 
in everything that you do. Just 
because your budgets are cut does 
not mean you can’t still provide a 
quality service.

4 Policies, strategies, procedures, risks and liabilities 
73
Compliance is also a form of audit. It is about driving quality through to 
the point where non-achievement is seen as non-compliance and is given the 
same significance as non-compliance to legislation.
Quality is not a blind, monotonous aspiration 
that relies on following a predefined path. It 
requires thoughtful, intelligent decisions to 
create outcomes. Systems work fine and can 
achieve very good results, but, unfortunately, 
as soon as you add humans into the equation 
your systems may fall down. Using intelligence 
is how a manager manipulates, cajoles and 
diplomatically pulls a diverse and disparate 
team 
together 
towards 
a 
common 
goal. 
Manipulates seems rather dictatorial; however, 
to get the best out of our staff we are forced 
into gentle manipulation to maximise their 
potential.
Intelligence is about adapting and keeping 
an open mind about what can and cannot be 
achieved with a group of people and setting your 
expectations to suit. For example, a solution or 
process that works for one set of employees may 
not work equally well for another set because of 
different characters within the groups. You may need to change the process 
to get the same result. Rigidly sticking to systems will reduce your ability to 
flex with the needs of individual groups.
If don’t review your outcomes, how do you know you have achieved what 
you set out to achieve? Review gives you the ability to define what you have 
done and should, if done correctly, allow you to see what you need to do next 
to start the whole process again. Review is, or should be, the springboard 
that allows you to take your service to the next level. Unfortunately, we often 
forget to review what we have done effectively, or give it just cursory credence 
and miss the opportunity to develop the service.
What is quality management?
Quality is therefore our driver and allows bench-marking and objective-
setting. It is clear that quality should be used as a tool to continually develop 
your service. Quality is not a process with a beginning and a fixed end-point; 
it should allow critical analysis and prevent you from making the same 
mistake twice.

Defining 
the 
level 
of 
service and therefore level 
of quality is essential 
to the success of your 
department. You should 
be striving for quality at 
every turn. Anything less 
is a missed opportunity.


A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
74
Quality Management is not always “high-end” service; it is about providing 
the best you can for the resources you have. If you provide a good service on 
a small budget, this proves you are working in a quality way. Throwing lots 
of money at a service should provide good outcomes, but are you getting 
the maximum return from your resources? Do not apply the word quality 
to a service that has more resources than it needs. You should substitute 
“quality” with the word “luxury” when applying that set criteria.
A quality service is:
•	
Defined. It has a set of parameters which are measurable.
•	
Resourced. It is funded sufficiently to ensure those parameters can 
be met.
•	
Managed. It is monitored and controlled to meet the measurable 
requirements.
•	
Time-bound. It is set out to hit key deliverables on time.
•	
Reviewed. It is evaluated to ensure targets have been met.
•	
Improved. Improvements are made to the service after reviewing it.
The key elements in setting up a quality system for FM are:
–
–
What is the service? You need a specification for the service you want 
to provide. Does your service represent the strategic objectives of the 
organisation? If not, why not?
–
–
What elements of the service do you want to measure? Also, what 
elements do you not need to measure? What elements of the service are 
critical? There is no point in measuring every output in a contract. Your 
system would be far too unwieldy. Do you really need any information 
other than service-critical measurements? Far better to pick a few key 
measurable parameters, especially those that demonstrate you are 
achieving strategic objectives.
–
–
What are your key deliverables? What are your service-level 
expectations? Have you set the key deliverables for the contract?
–
–
How and when are you going to monitor and manage the contract? This 
has been covered elsewhere in this chapter.
–
–
How are you going to review progress? What meetings and evaluations 
are you proposing and are these clearly set out in a way that can be 
followed?

4 Policies, strategies, procedures, risks and liabilities 
75
–
–
How are you going to verify progress? Are you going to bring in an external 
person to verify that your QMS is being followed and adhered to?
Bench-marking
Bench-marking is the ability to draw a line in the sand, or to define a level of 
service. Bench-marking should be easy if your data capture has been good 
and consistent. It is a measurement tool and probably the most important 
tool if you intend to be able to prove the ‘distance travelled’. Quality as a 
driver for any process needs targets and measurement. The ability to be 
able to accurately convert data into a definable percentage improvement is 
‘distance travelled’ and the ability to measure your progress can convert plain 
data into tangible bench-marks.
You have to be able to measure apples against apples. Comparing data that 
is flawed in any way or missing vital pieces of information is bound to result in 
a difference in results, making your data useless. You need to be assured that 
Theory and information slot
Frederick Winslow Taylor (1856–1915) is regarded as the father of scientific 
management. He was the first person who felt that work deserved systematic 
observation. Taylorism had four principles:
scientifically study tasks; scientifically select, train and develop 
employees; provide detailed work instruction; divide work practice 
equally between workers and management.
Taylorism, Buchannan, D.A. & Huczynski, A.A. (2010) Organizational 
Behaviour (7th edition) Pearson Education Ltd, Essex. (P 423)
Theory and information slot
Used by many councils and local authorities, the “Golden Thread” is when 
an organisation has a common or shared purpose which is owned by all the 
employees “all pulling in the same direction.” The organisational strategy 
is then aligned to this shared purpose to create and engender buy-in and 
ownership throughout every level of the organisation. Linking core aims and 
objectives and eliminating a behind closed doors philosophy builds a level of 
self-purpose and an engaged workforce.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
76
the information you collect this year is the same as the year before and the 
year before that. Without the assurance that your data are matched perfectly 
with previous data, your bench-marking information is flawed. At first, it may 
be that you have to settle for bench-marking as a principle and prepare your 
first year of data correctly as a baseline for the future.
However, this does not mean that you need to ignore previous data. There 
will still be certain aspects of this that you can reuse, such as meter readings 
for utilities and financial information on expenditure for maintenance or 
service contracts. There will always be valuable snippets of data within your 
department that you can take and turn into that notional “line in the sand.”
Why is quality so important?
Quality is so important that if, as a manager, you strive for anything less 
than quality services then you are destined to fail from the start. Quality is 
important because if you provide a service that needs to be defined, you need 
to be able to assess whether you are doing it in the best possible way. How 
will this help you to provide a good service?
If you follow these simple processes and practices and can ultimately prove 
you are running an effective service, how can you ever be challenged about 
your work? If your service meanders aimlessly, not changing, not developing 
and not progressing, then you will probably find you will get fall into the 
abyss of outsourcing your service to a more proactive supplier.
If you are serious about quality and want, not only to be able to define 
your quality but effectively manage it, ISO 9001 is probably what you need 
to look at. ISO 9001 involves mapping out the key processes within the 
organisation, ensuring conformity and clarity of all the process undertaken 
within your FM department. This is a top-down look at your systems, starting 
from your strategic objectives and moving down through strategies, policies 
and procedures to guidance notes and forms. All sit comfortably within your 
QMS. Defining all your processes in this way creates clarity and uniformity 
across your provision in a way that is easily understood by your staff and 
which is clear and unambiguous to audit.
The principle of the auditable system is that it can provide you with clear 
bench-mark data on progress, allowing you to plot the distance travelled by 
your section. This is of great benefit in an organisation that is driven by the 
need to improve. Your system needs top-down commitment from management 
to succeed and a properly managed and audited system gives clarity of 
intention of the organisation to work in a quality way with an emphasis on 
continual improvement. To be successful, the system needs to be certificated 
and auditable by an external assessor. This is the key to any QMS.

4 Policies, strategies, procedures, risks and liabilities 
77
Risks and liability
Compliance is a huge part of the Facilities Managers’ role. We need to make 
the site safe and secure, not just for staff, but also visitors. This is a duty that 
can easily be hidden, only coming to light when an inspector arrives, by which 
time it is usually too late. Better to be ahead of the game and have a system in 
place which helps you to monitor compliance. This can be linked to your QMS.
What is compliance?
Compliance is a positive response to legislative requirements, i.e. actually 
undertaking what individual items of legislation require and monitoring 
and managing that process. It is simple to say that legislation is easy to 
comply with; however, legislation rarely explains everything you need to do. 
It is generally sprinkled liberally with the phrase ‘as far as is reasonably 
practicable’ and while this phrase does give some latitude, this can lead to 
misinterpretation.
Theory and information slot
Some of the benefits to your organisation of ISO 9001 are:
Provides senior management with an efficient management process
Creates areas of responsibility across the organisation
Mandatory if you want to tender for some public sector work
Communicates a positive message to staff and customers
Identifies and encourages more efficient and time-saving processes
Highlights deficiencies in some processes
Reduces your costs and time
Provides continuous assessment and improvement
Marketing opportunities
Some of the benefits to your customers of ISO 9001 are:
Improved quality and service
Delivery on time
Adoption of the getting it right first time attitude
Fewer returned products or failed services and complaints
Independent audit demonstrates commitment to quality

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
78
Your policies and procedures should provide a framework to meet 
compliance obligations, so when you review your procedures it is essential to 
try and turn “interpretation” into “prescription.” This will allow you to define 
clearly what you need to do to comply with the legislation. It will also provide 
an audit guide. Interpretation is never easy to monitor and make judgements 
on the quality of work.
Statutory requirements
By far the biggest risks from the perspective of your organisation are the 
legislative requirements. These will see you in court if they are not met. The 
big three of the building requirements are: asbestos, Legionella and electrical 
testing.
Asbestos
There are still a number of buildings which contain asbestos in some form. 
This is far more prevalent in educational establishments because of the post-
war boom in school building around the time when asbestos materials were 
seen as the most economical to use for insulation and fire protection; this 
solved one problem and created another.
From your perspective, the essential things you need to know are:
•	
where are the materials containing asbestos?
•	
what type of asbestos is the material?
•	
what condition is the asbestos in?
Aide Memoire: policies, procedures, risk and liability
•	
Review all policies and procedures to ensure there is completeness 
and that, from policies through strategy to forms, make sure that 
there is a logical flow.
•	
Look at all of the risks and liabilities of the organisation and 
understand how you interface with these risks and liabilities and 
how you can affect them.
•	
Establish how you will monitor and manage your service and set 
up some key dates for your monitoring and managing tasks
Establish your levels of quality and work out how you will monitor and 
ultimately improve quality.

4 Policies, strategies, procedures, risks and liabilities 
79
•	
how do you prevent release of asbestos fibres?
•	
how do you monitor degradation?
The only way you can do this is by the following four-step process.
Survey
Commission a survey to identify the location of the asbestos. This is not 
something you can do yourself and you should 
not even try unless you have had the required 
training.
There are many materials similar to asbestos 
and the only way to confirm its presence is for 
samples to be taken under controlled conditions 
and then tested in a laboratory. Only then will 
you have the definitive answer to what kind 
of material you have on site. There are many 
companies who undertake these surveys. 
Make sure that they are certified by one of the 
accredited organisations such as the National 
Asbestos Training and Accreditation Scheme Ltd 
(NATAS). It does no harm to obtain competitive 
quotations for this work as it can vary widely in 
price. 
Your survey will indicate where all of your 
asbestos-containing materials (ACMs) are and 
will also give you details of what condition they are in, giving you, in risk 
assessment format, a matrix on whether they should be removed or managed 
in situ. Wherever possible, seek the solution of managing them in situ. It is 
far more economical than full removal.
Removal
Sometimes you may be forced into removal and, if you are, these should be 
tendered works to make sure that you get the best price. Your contractor 
will be able to advise on how long the works are likely to take, what impact 
they will have on the buildings and whether you will be able to continue 
to occupy them during removal. Be careful to factor these items into your 
considerations. You do not want a building out of operation at business-
critical times of the year. You should only remove items that are considered 
dangerous if left. Do not allow people to persuade you into accepting that 
all asbestos is too dangerous to be left in situ. It is only dangerous if it is 

Make 
sure 
when 
you 
tender for the identification 
of ACMs that you make it 
clear you will be tendering 
their removal separately. 
Contractors will then have 
no incentive for finding 
more ACMs.


A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
80
naturally degrading, i.e. flaking, or if it is in an area where constant contact 
by people is inevitable, or constant maintenance operations make it likely 
that it would be disturbed, allowing asbestos fibres to be released into the 
atmosphere. If you are in a position to manage and control access and the 
condition of the asbestos, then this is a far more economical way of looking 
after ACMs.
Management
Management of ACMs may seem onerous, but in real terms is relatively 
simple. You need to know where the materials are and this is the purpose of 
the initial survey. You then need to exclude activity from the area of the ACMs 
or place a barrier between the user of the area and the ACM. With asbestos 
sheeting this could be as simple as painting the asbestos board to seal it from 
flaking or releasing fibres into the atmosphere. It is also a sensible precaution 
to mark the board as containing asbestos using the official stickers.
You must also have a management system in place to prevent maintenance 
contractors from disturbing the ACMs. This 
system should allow contractors visiting your 
site to have access to the asbestos register. If you 
are aware of asbestos in a building and you do 
not declare this to the maintenance contractors, 
then you will be liable for any injuries they 
sustain, even if the contamination takes many 
years to manifest. It is better to be safe than 
sorry and to disclose ACMs to every contractor 
and with any tender that may include potential 
disturbance of the ACM.
If your staff are likely to come into contact with the ACMs, then they will 
need to have tests to determine whether they have been contaminated and 
then to assess the degree of contamination. This is essential in determining if 
your workforce has come into contact with ACMs before their employment at 
your institution. These tests must be undertaken when first appointing them 
to the position. You also need to arrange staff training to ensure that they are 
aware of the dangers of ACMs.
Maintenance
You cannot leave a dangerous substance like asbestos in a building without a 
long-term maintenance strategy to ensure that it is not disturbed and that it 
does not degrade and become dangerous. You need a repeat inspection of the 
ACMs to determine their condition. There is no fixed detail on the frequency 

4 Policies, strategies, procedures, risks and liabilities 
81
of these surveys, but I would recommend every three years. These should be 
undertaken by an external organisation. The advantages of using an external 
organisation are:
•	
You can forget about it to some degree, as your survey provider 
will advise you when your next survey is required, allowing you to 
concentrate on other issues.
•	
They will have more experience than you in undertaking these surveys.
•	
From an audit perspective, it is more credible to have an external 
agency verify your survey results.
Despite the fact that you may buy in expert help to undertake repeat 
inspections, you still have an onerous duty to ensure you monitor the ACMs. 
Part of this duty is to periodically check if items 
such as stickers are still in place, or if obvious 
damage to areas has taken place. It is prudent 
to record these minor inspections.
Your management system must look at how 
you prevent the ACMs from further damage. 
This is primarily about controlling access to 
these areas by contractors and staff. Having 
a full set of survey results available gives you 
the knowledge of where everything is. It is then 
prudent to keep an access record to these areas 
indicating when contractors and staff have 
worked on or near the ACMs.
It is also essential that you keep a record of any 
breaches in your system in terms of accidental 
disturbance. This should contain information 
such as who disturbed the ACM, when and to 
what degree it was disturbed and what action 
you took to remedy the risk. However, if an area 
of asbestos is that easy to disturb, you should 
seriously consider having it removed. It will be far less costly than dealing with 
litigation from someone who has been contaminated with the ACM.
Legionella
Legionella is one of those problems that sits quietly in the background and 
occasionally comes to the fore when a major outbreak brings it back into the 

As with asbestos, when 
you 
tender 
the 
risk 
assessment 
survey 
for 
Legionella, make it clear 
that you intend to place 
any 
remediation 
works 
with a different contractor.


A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
82
headlines. Legionella is usually dealt with under PPM. Managing Legionella is 
about controlling the environment where the bacteria can multiply and become 
a risk to your site. There are basically two areas that you need to concentrate 
on in terms of being compliant with legislation: survey and identification and 
management. I am not going into detail about what Legionella is and the 
dangers associated with it. My purpose here is to provide an overview of the 
problem.
Survey
In the same way as with asbestos, you need to know where the potential sites 
for Legionella are within your building stock. The best way to achieve this is 
to obtain a survey of the entire site by an external contractor to determine:
•	
the condition of the cold water tanks
•	
the location of the sentinel taps on the system
•	
schematic diagrams and layouts of the system
•	
identification of any dead-legs in the system
•	
the location of the shower heads
This then becomes your risk assessment document for the site, laying out the 
possible risks for the site in general. Surveys can be relatively cost-effective 
and take away the guesswork and can also provide a useful reference guide 
for your plumber.
Make sure that you write into your terms and conditions that the 
incumbent survey company provides awareness training to your staff as part 
of the package. Most Legionella management companies will be pleased to 
provide the training free of charge.
Management
This is one area that you need to be watertight on (pardon the pun). Your 
management will fall into the following areas, all of which can be covered by 
simple PPMs: sentinel taps, blowing down calorifiers, running of infrequently 
used taps, removal of dead-legs and shower head disinfection.
•	
Sentinel taps. Temperature tests need to be performed on your first 
and last taps on any system; these taps are known as sentinel taps. 
These temperature readings must be logged and records maintained. 

4 Policies, strategies, procedures, risks and liabilities 
83
Inform 
the 
Facilities 
Manager 
of 
any 
water 
outlets (taps, showers, etc.) 
that are not used. These 
can either be disconnected 
or removed. Any equipment 
that stores water should 
be cleaned, drained and 
replaced 
in 
accordance 
with the manufacturer’s 
instructions and infection 
control protocols. Ensure 
everyone seeks the advice of the Facilities Manager before purchasing 
any equipment that uses water.
•	
Blowing down calorifiers. This needs to be undertaken on an annual 
basis and will ensure that any build-up of sludge in the bottom of the 
calorifiers is removed.
•	
Running off infrequently used taps. 
Outlets that are not used at least 
once a week and cannot be removed 
should have all sources of water run 
off for at least three minutes, at least 
on a fortnightly basis this action and 
documented on a record sheet. This 
includes outlets that have been taken 
out of use on a temporary basis.
•	
Removal of dead-legs. Redundant or 
very infrequently used outlets should 
be removed from the system. You will 
often see sinks that have been removed 
from rooms without fully taking out the 
redundant pipes back to the nearest 
in-use line. This is often done because 
“we could need it later” or “they will ask 
for it to be reinstalled within a year.” 
However, these sometimes long dead-
legs can become the breeding ground 
for Legionella. It is better to disconnect the outlet and leave the pipes 
in situ. At least the pipes won’t have water in them.

Make it clear in your 
tender documents that the 
testing and any remedial 
works will be dealt with 
by different contractors 
to remove the incentive 
to the contractor to find 
issues and faults.

Note to self
Start to pull together information 
from the O & M files. If you have new 
buildings the original commissioning 
certificates for the electrics will 
be in there and you don’t need to 
electrically test these buildings until 
they are five years old. Be careful in 
relation to landlord’s responsibilities 
as these are different.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
84
•	
Shower head disinfection and cleansing. Shower heads often sit 
unused for long periods, particularly if your institution does not 
operate during the holiday periods. There is a potential for Legionella 
bacteria to build up in shower pipes and heads, so flush them out, 
remove the heads and disinfect them.
Electrical testing
Owners and landlords of buildings have a duty to ensure the electrical safety 
of the fixed wiring of a building. By fixed wiring, this means everything up to 
the plug of an appliance resting on your ring main. All non-domestic electrical 
installations are subject to a regular programme of testing and inspection 
to comply with current legislation. You must ensure that all necessary 
precautions are taken to reduce the risk of injury or death through electrical 
failure. This is a requirement under the IEE Wiring Regulations (Guidance 
Note 3: Inspection and Testing, 6th edition, 2011).
Sometimes known as periodic testing, these tests should be carried out on 
your installations on a cyclical basis. This may also be referred to within your 
fire risk assessment, so it is one 
that you really must comply with. 
Try to structure your tests over a 
period of time rather than a single 
one test period; this reduces your 
budgetary impact and allows you to smooth your budgets over a period rather 
than introducing peaks and troughs. You are obliged to keep these records 
for viewing if required and this will probably be one of the first documents 
your insurers will ask for if you ever have an electrical fire on site. Refer to the 
IEE Guidance Note 3: Inspection and Testing, 6th edition, 2011 for details on 
periodicity, as this varies depending on the type of installation.
There are two types of test. A routine check ranges in frequency from every 
four months to every year. A full inspection and test ranges in frequency from 
at each change of occupancy for a domestic property, to every six years for 
highway power supplies, but more generally every one to five years depending 
on the type of installation.
Other areas for health and safety are detailed in the following table.
Risks with new builds and defect periods
Your new build is a perfect example of building technology. It fits your users 
perfectly, has no defects and saves on your maintenance bill for the next five to 
ten years. If you believe that, then you are working under a big misapprehension. 
Your building could provide you with a nightmare from the day it first opens.
Note to self
You must keep accurate documents 
for all our compliance issues.

4 Policies, strategies, procedures, risks and liabilities 
85
Areas of risk
Area of risk
Relevant legislation
Reference
Slips, trips and 
falls
Workplace (Health Safety and 
Welfare) Regulations 1992
HSE (2005c)
Preventing Slips and Trips at 
Work. Series code: INDG225 
(rev2) (2012)
www.hse.gov.uk/slips
Hazardous  
substances
Control of Substances 
Hazardous to Health 
Regulations 2002 (COSHH) 
amended
HSE (2009b)
HSE (2007a)
www.coshhessentials.org.uk
Fire
The Regulatory Reform (Fire 
Safety) Order 2005
The Dangerous Substances 
and Explosive Atmospheres 
Regulations 2002 (DSEAR)
Controlling Fire and Explosion 
Risks in the Workplace. 
Series code: INDG370 (rev1)
(2013)
Falls from height
Work at Height Regulations 
2005
Provision and Use of Work 
Equipment Regulations 
1998
HSE (2007b)
HSE (2008c)
Lone working
Health and Safety at Work 
Act 1974; Management of 
Health and Safety at Work 
Regulations 1999
HSE (2009a)
Musculoskeletal 
disorders
Manual Handling Operations 
Regulations 1992 (as 
amended); Management of 
Health and Safety at Work 
Regulations 1999
HSE (2003b)
HSE (2002)
HSE Manual Handling at Work. 
Series code: INDG143(rev3) 
(2012)	
Noise
Control of Noise at Work 
Regulations 2005
HSE (2005a)
HSE (2005b)
www.hse.gov.uk/noise
Work equipment 
and 
machinery
Provision and Use of Work 
Equipment Regulations 
1998; Lifting Operations 
and Lifting Equipment 
Regulations 1998; 
Supply of Machinery 
(Safety) Regulations 1992 
(as amended) 1994
HSE (1999)
HSE (2008b)
(Continued)

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
86
Areas of risk  (Continued)
Area of risk
Relevant legislation
Reference
Workplace 
transport
Workplace Health, Safety 
and Welfare Regulations 
1992; Provision and 
Use of Work Equipment 
Regulations 1998; Lifting 
Operations and Lifting 
Equipment Regulations 
1998
HSE (2005d)
HSE (2000b)
HSE (2005e)
www.hse.gov.uk/
workplacetransport
Asbestos
Control of Asbestos 
Regulations 2012
HSE (2006a)
HSE (2006b)
www.hse.gov.uk/asbestos
Legionella
The Health and Safety 
at Work etc Act 1974; 
Control of Substances 
Hazardous to Health 
Regulations 1999
HSE (2000a)
www.hse.gov.uk/legionnaires
Electrical safety
Electricity at Work 
Regulations 1989; 
Provision and Use 
of Work Equipment 
Regulations 1998; 
Supply of Machinery 
(Safety) Regulations 
1992; Electrical 
Equipment Safety 
Regulations 1994; 
BS7617 2008–11 
Requirements for 
Electrical Installations 
IET Wiring Regulations 
17th edition. BS7671: 
2008 (2011). 
HSE Safety in Electrical 
Testing at Work. Series 
code: INDG354 (2002)
HSE (1998)
HSE (2003a)
www.hse.gov.uk/electricity
Gas systems
Gas Safety (Installation 
and Use) Regulations 
1998; Approved Code of 
Practice and Guidance
HSE (2011b)
Local exhaust 
ventilation
Control of Substances 
Hazardous to Health
HSE (2011a)
HSE (2008a)
HSE (2008d)

4 Policies, strategies, procedures, risks and liabilities 
87
User requirements
You will have undoubtedly gone to great lengths to ensure that all departments 
have had an opportunity to be part of the design process. They will have 
helped you to develop the requirements of the department or function. They 
will have signed off room data sheets and had the opportunity to review their 
designs, and will have been part of the process from start to finish.
You cannot avoid the precept that “I didn’t think it would look like that” 
or “it’s difficult to see what this would look like on a flat plan.” The truth is 
that no matter what you have done, what suited the department 18 months 
ago when the process started may not suit the department once the building 
is complete. You must not be disheartened to learn that you could be 
undertaking adaptations to your new building soon after the opening day. 
This is not being critical of individual departments for being indecisive; it is 
inevitable that change will affect your best laid plans.
Users expect that your bright new building will be the answer to their 
prayers. They will be far less tolerant of high or low temperatures or a lack 
of, or too much, ventilation. Your commissioning of the final heating and 
ventilation service must be very carefully undertaken and any anomalies 
dealt with as early as possible while you still have the bargaining tool of the 
defects period.
Heating systems
New and modern systems are far 
more likely to give you problems 
than the more traditional system. 
When accepting a new building, 
you 
need 
to 
concentrate 
on 
training. Your new building will 
undoubtedly be filled with new 
technologies and your heating 
system will be at the hub of these, whether it is a traditional boiler¸ a ground 
source heat pump, photovoltaic panels or solar thermal. You will be required 
to ensure that the system is 
maintained and run effectively 
from day one. You could outsource 
this requirement to an external 
company; however, this is costly. 
It may be better to have your own 
staff looking after the equipment. 
Note to self
Make sure that you obtain the full 
commissioning 
certificates 
from 
the construction company and ask 
them to prove the validity of the 
commissioning figures.
Note to self
Never expect your shiny new building 
to have zero defects and don’t be 
lulled into thinking you won’t need 
to make adaptations in year 1.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
88
This gives you the control and responsiveness 
you will require.
However, you cannot expect your staff to 
be able to deal with this without a thorough 
understanding of the system and how it is 
operated. To get the best out of the system, 
try to arrange training from day one, with a 
refresher course later in the year. If possible, 
build this into your new build tender documents 
to ensure you don’t end up paying for it as a 
separate item. Try to make sure the training 
spans two seasons, i.e. winter and summer, as 
you will find your system operates differently 
at different external temperatures and it is far 
easier to resolve training issues when faced with 
the greatest range of operating conditions. 
Make sure you are building in PPM from day 
one and make sure your PPM is split into that 
undertaken by external contractors, such as 
boiler maintenance, and that undertaken by in-
house staff, such as blowing down calorifiers. 
This way you are less likely to miss the essential 
items needed to use your new systems effectively. 
The Appendices to this book give a strategy for 
heating and ventilation.
Fire legislation
You will probably find that within a few days of 
opening your new building, various objects will 
appear in corridors and hung on walls that do 
not comply with the initial fire strategy for the 
building. It is imperative that this is dealt with 
decisively in the early days before it gets out of 
control. Inevitably your Fire Safety Officer will 
meet with you early in the operational life of the 
building. If they find you have ignored the fire 
strategy and filled all the fire-sterile areas with 
combustible items, he or she is not going to be 
very happy with you. Long-term relationships 
with your Fire Safety Officer can be made or 

This document is best 
pulled 
together 
by 
an 
unbiased 
external 
company. 
This 
gives 
you 
credence 
and 
validates/audits your fire 
precautions. 
Many 
ex-
fire officers have formed 
companies to undertake 
this service and, in my 
opinion, these are the best 
to undertake the work,


Make 
sure 
your 
construction 
contractor 
gives your on site staff 
full training in the use of 
the systems within the 
building; be cheeky and 
ask for a refresher after 
six months.


4 Policies, strategies, procedures, risks and liabilities 
89
broken by your actions on issues like this. If you show a decisive attitude 
you will find they will leave you alone; if not, you will experience an increased 
frequency in their visits and far more scrutiny.
Fire risk assessment
A key document in compliance, your fire risk assessment, if done correctly, 
can meet legislative requirements and make your life easier. Your fire risk 
assessment is an overview of fire safety arrangements for your building and 
also details any potential pitfalls with construction and subsequent works. It 
is a live document, which means it is never really complete. You need to add 
to it all the time.
Key elements of your fire risk assessment are:
•	
How you deal with fire as an institution and what procedures you 
have in place.
•	
Who is responsible for what elements of the document.
•	
What dangers exist and how are they dealt with.
•	
What defects exist and how and when you will deal with them.
Although the fire risk assessment is a live document, there are aspects of 
that document that are snapshots at the time of inspection. They will identify 
flaws with your processes, procedures and practices and look at the physical 
aspects of the building that may have changed. Therefore we can logically 
split these into two distinct areas: fixed detail and live detail.
Fixed detail items are those which, under normal circumstances, will not 
change, such as procedures, contact names and responsible persons. These 
are generally the basic details of compliance in terms of how you intend to 
deal with fires and what standards you set internally to monitor yourselves 
against. Live detail items are the results of inspections and tests, e.g. the fire 
log book, which details when items have been tested and by whom. Included 
in this list are: 
•	
Fire alarm tests. In an educational environment these should be on 
a weekly basis rotating call points, and also include sounder checks. 
This gets the users of the building used to the sound that the fire 
alarm makes, so that in the event of a fire so they do not panic.
•	
Tests on fire curtains and smoke removal fans.
•	
Details of external contractors, such as service and maintenance details.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
90
•	
Annual training of staff and induction.
•	
Physical details of faults found.
Faults found
Your fire risk assessment is generally an annual process and your 
nominated risk assessor is generally bought in to undertake this. Do 
not feel aggrieved if, at your re-inspection, you have a long list of non-
compliance items. Fifty-two weeks is a long time in any business. Things 
can happen to your site that should be under your control, but they happen 
because you cannot stand over people 24/7. The types of faults you will 
generally find are:
•	
Poor use. People propping fire doors open with door wedges, or 
obscuring fire safety notices.
•	
Failing items. For example, door closers not closing properly, smoke 
seals fraying or failing out.
•	
Non-adherence to procedures. Missed inspections and tests.
Theory and information slot
Five steps to risk assessment
The established Health and Safety Executive five-step process is the 
industry standard.
•	
Identify the hazards.
•	
Decide who might be harmed and how.
•	
Evaluate the risks and decide on precaution.
•	
Record your findings and implement them.
•	
Review your assessment and update if necessary.
A hazard is anything that may cause harm, such as chemicals, electricity, 
working from ladders or an open drawer and the risk is the chance, high 
or low, that somebody could be harmed by these and other hazards, 
together with an indication of how serious the harm could be.
The five-step process can be found at http://www.hse.gov.uk/risk/
fivesteps.htm

4 Policies, strategies, procedures, risks and liabilities 
91
•	
Faults to structure caused by others. For example, Intumescent strips 
being painted over by your painters or your IT contractors knocking 
holes in walls and then not using Intumescent foam to re-establish 
the fire integrity of the structure.
The risk assessment process is really a subject in itself and is only touched 
on this book. This key task for the Facilities Manager needs to be addressed 
fully as most compliance issues are dependent on the risk assessment 
process.
Emergency procedures
Any organisation needs to be sure that, in the event of emergency, it is able 
to deal with that emergency effectively. This is a requirement incumbent 
on all organisations. There are a number of situations that would require a 
response and the main ones are:
•	
fire evacuation
•	
intruders
•	
bomb threats
•	
business continuity
All these examples can be dealt with in the same way. Looking at each one as 
a risk assessment is the simplest and most effective way of dealing with the 
issues. The key elements to be addressed are:
•	
identify the hazards
•	
decide who might be harmed and how
•	
evaluate the risks and decide on precautions
•	
record your findings and implement them
•	
review your assessment and update if necessary
All emergency processes must be fully communicated to staff to be effective. 
Risks to property
Most of the risks you will have to deal with will centre on your property. Your 
building stock and the quality of that stock is your responsibility. It does not 

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
92
repair itself and it does not self-identify problems. This is your responsibility 
and yours alone, so if things go wrong the problem sits squarely on your 
shoulders. That is not to say that things can go wrong which are outside your 
control, but in general you should know about these in advance. In terms 
of risk aversion, there are two main areas to be considered: site building 
maintenance and planned or capital risks.
Building maintenance
Building maintenance is often 
overlooked when considering risk 
aversion, but it can be one of the 
areas, if treated correctly, that can 
significantly reduce your risks and 
liabilities on site. Prompt repair 
and maintenance helps to reduce 
the potential for breakdowns and prevents a fault becoming worse. There are 
basically two types of maintenance when considering risk aversion: reactive 
maintenance and PPM.
Reactive maintenance is responding to repairs as they occur and is 
unavoidable, as things will always break. It is how you respond to those 
breakages and in what time frame which increases your potential for risk 
aversion. Prompt repair is essential and shows a professional attitude from 
your department. However, getting a repair done can be a paper chase, 
with requests for repairs being passed from pillar to post, inspected and re-
inspected before the work is undertaken. You must try to reduce repair times 
to a minimum by removing these layers of administration and concentrate on 
getting the job done quickly.
Reactive maintenance can be a massive drain on your budgets and will, 
over time, increase as your building stock ages. If caught and dealt with 
early, these drains on your budget can be minimised.
Planned preventative maintenance is the most important type of 
maintenance to master and all too often it is missed or forgotten and 
ends up being reactive maintenance. A typical example is when filters on 
air-handling units clog up and this then flags up a failure on the BMS. 
The filters are replaced and the repairer assumes that he or she has 
undertaken PPM. All too often this is the norm, not the exception. PPM 
can save money in the long term, but, as a department, you need to deal 
with it properly, not pretend that you are managing it. This is dealt with 
further in Chapter 7.
Note to self
A desktop survey can pull together 
a huge amount of the data you will 
need for your planned survey if you 
have good records.

4 Policies, strategies, procedures, risks and liabilities 
93
Planned maintenance
Your approach to planned maintenance is one area where your risk aversion 
can be plotted in advance. Determining where the risks are for the future (and 
you must include the risk of needing funding to deal with future problems; 
risk is not simply health and safety) is the key to being proactive about the 
replacement status of your site.
The collection of data to confirm and validate your conclusions is the key 
to staring this task. This process is huge and could be a topic for its own 
book. Here, I am dealing solely with the risk aversion elements of planned 
maintenance. Your process of data collection should be as follows: data 
collection; planned survey; analysis of data and survey; planned programme, 
including property risk register; action; and review.
Data collection
To get the most out of your survey, you need to have at your disposal all the 
essential data that could influence your decisions as you progress. These 
may include items such as:
•	
Plans of the building. These are a useful way of making judgements 
about the structural elements of the building and allow you to see 
the interconnection between various elements. Plans are great to use 
as a sketch pad as you carry out your survey. Using a copy plan 
allows you to annotate problems as you proceed; this then becomes 
an aid when you get back to your desk. Plans can also help you to see 
services and M & E in a much clearer way than just simply lifting a 
few ceiling tiles here and there.
•	
Maintenance records. Sometimes maintenance records can give a 
great insight into the condition of plant and can give you warning of 
equipment coming to the end of its life span, e.g. a greater frequency 
of breakdown in a lift could indicate that major refurbishment is 
required.
•	
O & M manuals. These are one of your most valuable pieces of 
information relating to the building. They should provide all the data 
you are likely to need, if they have been set up correctly, such as: 
manufacturer’s warrantees; maintenance regimes, as sometimes 
critical maintenance operations or major replacements can be listed 
in the maintenance regimes section, e.g. the replacement of glycol in 

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
94
your ground-source heat pump between years 5 and 7, which would 
be a major unplanned cost if you didn’t factor it into your planned 
programme; and manufacturer’s anticipated lifespan for equipment. 
Manufacturers of M & E equipment in particular will suggest a 
lifespan for that kit, e.g. boiler plant could have a 20 year life span. It 
is clear you need to plan well in advance for items such as this.
Once you have all of your information in one 
place it will be then possible to get ready to verify 
some of your data and check the condition of the 
various elements. Pulling all the elements into 
one coherent document is really what you are 
trying to achieve. Your document should be in two 
parts: data collection and executive summary. 
It is easiest to use an Excel spreadsheet for 
the data collection element of the work. This 
can be organised into the constituent parts in 
a logical way; breaking things down into bite-
sized chunks makes it easier for you to pull the 
information together and then helps to justify or 
verify your conclusions by giving your reasons 
in an easily understood format. Your survey can 
now begin in earnest and will be in two parts: a 
desktop survey and a physical survey.
Your desktop survey brings all your paper evidence, such as O & M 
records, together and starts to break down the individual elements of the 
building into those bite-sized chunks. However, the physical survey is you 
getting out there and getting dirty. This could involve going up onto the 
roofs (please remember safety; conduct your risk assessment beforehand 
and ensure you have the correct access equipment) or, better still, getting 
somebody else to do it for you. You will find that your local roofer will only be 
too pleased to give you the benefit of their advice and do a full survey for you, 
sometimes for free, particularly if you promise to put them on the tender list 
when the works are ratified. You can use this principle for all of your major 
building elements.
You should have in place the essentials such as boiler and ventilation 
maintenance contracts; use these to give you an appreciation of your 
equipment or build this into your tender documents when you re-tender the 
service for an annual appraisal. If you settle on a format for the return of 
information to you, then you have a consistent reporting system with which 
to update your planned programme annually.

Get someone else to do 
all the hard work; use 
your service providers to 
give you details of the life 
expectancy of the various 
elements they maintain.


4 Policies, strategies, procedures, risks and liabilities 
95
Analysis of data
All these data need to be pulled together in a format that is easy to understand 
and manipulate and easy to add to or delete from. At this point you sometimes 
need to add in an element of subjectivity and reality. When you start to pull 
together your data, you will start to come to some conclusions about the cost of 
replacement and when items will need to be replaced. What you need is a smooth 
flow of work over your prescribed period; you don’t want all of your replacements 
bunched into one year, nor do you want a huge financial commitment in any 
one year. Your skill as a Facilities Manager should be to move items around so 
that you can smooth your resources over a period of time.
Planned programme
When you have finished allocating years and costs to your various projects 
you will have, the planned programme of works needed to bring your building 
stock back up to an acceptable standard. In an education environment this 
is known as Condition B.
Your planned programme needs to be understandable and easily digested. 
There is no point using esoteric language or acronyms; people need to be able 
to understand your document. You need to be able to appeal to the Finance 
Department more than any other, so make sure your calculations are correct 
and that your statements are simple, yet factual, otherwise your report will 
lose credibility.
Action
Your next action is to submit a lucid and 
easy-to-read executive summary for general 
consumption. If you present your full survey to 
your executive, you run the risk of diluting the 
intentions of the report, which are to identify 
those elements which pose the most risk in terms 
of health and safety and finance. A five-year 
summary focuses your efforts into identifying 
the key elements that are going to fail in the next 
five years.
Five years is about the furthest into the future 
you can predict with any certainty. You may wish 
to project an analysis further forward if you want 
to demonstrate a buildings obsolescence point, 
but, for the major elements within a building, 

Keep your planned data 
in 
bite-sized 
chunks. 
This keeps it far more 
manageable and easier to 
manipulate. It also makes 
it easier to alter at a later 
date.


A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
96
five years is the limit of accurate predictability. Your document should be live 
and able to be updated an annual basis. In subsequent years it will only take 
a nominal amount of work to update.
Your finished document needs to be dynamic and easy to read. It should 
be colourful and descriptive; boring documents are very rarely read, so make 
it as vibrant and interesting as possible. Remember, this is your chance to 
shine. If your target audience actually reads it you are more likely to get a 
positive result out at the end of the process.
Remember to undertake a cost-in-use exercise on the outcomes of 
replacing certain pieces of equipment. If you are not careful, you will miss the 
essential payback period.
Payback periods
This is the money you can save by 
replacing something with a more 
efficient piece of equipment. This 
could be more energy-efficient 
equipment which, over a period 
of time, uses less electricity. Or it 
could be something that requires less maintenance over a period of time. 
All these are essential reading for your Head of Finance, who will love items 
that pay for themselves. Never forget, however, that failing items cost more 
to maintain and the cost of premature failure to the organisation also needs 
be factored in, such as the cost to the organisation of a major boiler failure 
resulting in the closure of a building in the middle of winter. All these should 
feature on your risk register and they also give more credence on your report 
for long-term strategies. You should aim for every element of your replacement 
schedule to and pay for itself, although this is not always possible.
Review
Your document should contain a review element to check at set points 
that the data you have are correct and any updates have been included. 
There is no point in spending time and money in undertaking a full planned 
survey if it sits and gathers dust in a corner. Use it wisely and it will secure 
the long-term future of your stock and will make it easier for you to pull 
together information quickly should your executive team want an update on 
progress. I t also clearly defines you as a proactive Facilities Manager, not 
one who simply eats into budgets by dealing with everything in a knee-jerk 
fashion.
Note to self
Don’t expect your staff to stay 
compliant without you detailing their 
individual training requirements.

4 Policies, strategies, procedures, risks and liabilities 
97
Staff
Your staff can make or break you and are also your greatest liability in terms 
of their actions or inactions. They are capable of wrecking any process unless 
you are able to harness them to the maximum. Your staff need to be managed; 
this is an area you cannot delegate or abdicate from. You need to nurture and 
control them, while at the same time allowing them to grow and contribute 
to your department. In terms of risk and liability, you need to concentrate 
on three areas of staff management: training, certifications and monitoring.
Staff training
You cannot expect your staff to keep up with compliancy issues without 
devoting time to training. Training is not just a methodology for teaching 
someone how to do a job. It is primarily about training staff to understand 
the risks and liabilities of the functions that they undertake. This may sound 
cynical, but your staff will never be compliant without understanding the 
effects of their actions or inactions. Only by understanding the personal risk 
to themselves will they be motivated to learn and 
make sure they understand the implications of 
their actions.
Your training therefore needs to be structured 
to cover all aspects of their positions. This can 
be broken into two distinct areas: organisation 
compliance and personal compliance.
Organisation compliance
As an organisation, you have certain obligations 
in relation to your workforce and this needs to 
be conveyed to your staff in terms of formal, 
auditable training. These training sessions are for 
subjects such as: COSHH, from the perspective 
of personal contamination; manual handling 
(protection of your staff from musculoskeletal 
injuries); and general health and safety. This 
last area is sometimes forgotten. Your workforce 
needs to understand what health and safety 
actually is, otherwise they will not understand 
how the various elements fit together and 
interrelate.

Put together a list of all 
functions 
within 
your 
department, 
allocate 
training to each discipline, 
and then finally allocate 
staff to each element. 
This way you can see 
your 
training 
matrix 
holistically and make sure 
all are trained to ensure 
compliance is maintained.


A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
98
Personal compliance
At this level, you are moving some of the responsibility of an organisation 
onto the workforce. This may sound cynical, but your job is to protect the 
organisation as well as your workforce.
Listing your training
It is worthwhile compiling a full list of the training your staff will need (refer 
back to the training matrix in Chapter 3). . For this purpose it is best to list 
out all the jobs undertaken on site and then decide what training, and to 
what level, is required. Only then can you allocate names to this list. This is 
perhaps best done as an Excel spreadsheet, with a list of tasks across the 
top and the training necessary underneath, then a list of all your staff down 
one side. It is then simple to allocate staff to both tasks and training. This 
can then form part of your appraisal process and will save you having to 
think about development tasks for staff, allowing you to concentrate on their 
personal development.
Certif iations
Overlay your training matrix with details of any certifications your staff may 
need. Certain members of your staff, particularly those in particular specialist 
areas, may need to update their qualifications on a regular basis, e.g. Gas 
Safe or NICEIEC. Don’t forget to put these onto your training matrix. Even 
though they may only come up every two or three years, you need to factor 
them into your budgets.
Monitoring
It is not enough to simply assume that, because your staff are fully trained, 
they will act in your, or even their own, interests all the time. You need to 
monitor their personal health and safety. It must be made clear to your 
supervisors that this is exactly what they are there to do! Sometimes, when 
all is running well, your supervisory staff will take their eye off the ball and 
let things slip. Don’t forget you are there to monitor and supervise them 
as well.
Never underestimate training as your route to compliance; in fact, you 
must make it your cornerstone. Without training, your staff are ticking time-
bombs and a lack of training will come back to haunt you. Therefore devote 
time to it and, once in place, it will allow you time to concentrate on other 
issues and may just stop a few sleepless nights.

4 Policies, strategies, procedures, risks and liabilities 
99
Financial risks
Everything you do within your 
department is bound by finance. 
You 
cannot 
operate 
without 
available and accessible budgets. 
Therefore when you have the 
finance to undertake your work, 
you need to show due diligence for 
the work you do and the money you spend. Some of you will have large and 
complicated budgets and you need to be able to control these effectively and 
show an audit trail for everything that you do. This may sound obvious, but 
how many times in a busy department do you have to just do things and 
think about the finance later? This can leave you vulnerable if it becomes the 
norm rather than the exception.
Financial management
How you manage your budgets may ultimately be dictated to you by the 
financial procedures of your organisation. Compliance from the perspective 
of procedural management of your budgets will then be far easier. Even your 
tender and quotations procedures may be dictated by procedural management. 
If this is the case, then your life should be easier. However, there is usually 
a series of grey areas where procedures end and interpretation begins. It is 
these areas where you can easily fall foul of a lack of regimented adherence to 
due diligence. For example, there are bound to be certain aspects of the overall 
procurement process where you are able to influence the process. Unless you 
set yourself some rigid guidelines you can very easily find yourself in trouble.
Some things to avoid:
•	
Avoid tandem systems to your financial system. There is always the 
temptation to believe that you can control your finances better than 
your finance department. Invariably, your formal financial systems do 
not work in the present and can sometimes be as much as a month 
out of date in terms of predicting your current position. This has led to 
Facilities Managers becoming frustrated because accurately predicting 
your outcomes when you have large budgets is critical. Most modern 
financial systems provide accurate predictive outcomes. Talk to your 
Finance Department and tell them the kind of information you need. 
There is every chance that they will be able to give this to you as they 
can manipulate data to give you predictions of outcomes.
Note to self
Stay legal and ethical at all times; 
don’t bend financial rules and make 
sure that all your staff follow the 
same principles.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
100
•	
Not knowing the extents of your commitments. When agreeing contracts, 
make sure that your specifications are correct. If you commit yourself 
to something without tight specifications, you might as well sign a 
blank cheque.
•	
Never ever accept gifts. Even a bottle at Christmas can be a step too 
far. You cannot be impartial with a contractor or supplier if you have 
accepted gifts. If you accept a bottle at Christmas, declare this to your 
Finance 
Department. 
Even 
then, 
don’t 
be 
tempted to take it home 
yourself. One trick is to 
pool all the bottles and 
have a draw with all your 
staff. You may even win a 
bottle, but at least you will have been fair. However, never assume 
that even this is acceptable and check with your Finance Department 
to make sure you are clear and clean. If you never accept this type of 
offer, you can never be challenged on it. Sometimes contractors 
working as part of your team invite you out for “team-building events 
or meals.” Again, avoid these as these they could be construed as 
conflicting a interest, and how could you prove otherwise?
•	
Closed tenders and quotations. Always operate a system which 
guarantees the anonymity of the tenderers. Make sure your tenders 
and quotations come in at the same time in unmarked envelopes and 
that they are signed in by reception staff. Be rigid about late tenders; 
don’t allow them. It will teach the contractor a lesson and they won’t 
do it again. You cannot be challenged that you have given preferential 
treatment to one particular contractor. Your Finance Department will 
have some specific rules for each organisation. They may all differ 
slightly, but will follow the same principles of financial probity.
•	
Avoid endless re-negotiations on the same contract. A contract will 
often run for years because it is easier to say to the contractor “just 
give me an updated price.” If you do this, you cannot prove that you 
got the best price for the job. You could be accused of favouritism and, 
just as importantly, your specification may have drifted, e.g. you may 
have added or removed buildings, or have not accounted for updated 
legislation or changes in practices. All of a sudden you have a contract 
and you don’t know what services you are paying for. Remember you 
are in control and you will be accountable.
Note to self
Avoid rollover contracts that go 
on forever. You lose control of 
the specification and control over 
expenditure in the long run.

4 Policies, strategies, procedures, risks and liabilities 
101
Fraud
Fraud is all too easy in a busy department. When people are pushed to 
their limits in terms of high workload, they may realise that they can get 
something back from the institution to counter the amount of work they are 
doing. Items can go missing. Funds can be misappropriated and so can items 
purchased for and on behalf of your department. I do not want to dwell too 
long on this, but control is the issue here. If your systems are robust and you 
are monitoring them and challenging any discrepancies, you stand a good 
chance of avoiding this as an issue.
If fraud or theft is found within your department, deal with it quickly and 
decisively. Do not hesitate as you and the integrity of the department will be 
dealt a massive blow. Keep clean, and stay clean.
Making mistakes
Making mistakes is part of being human. You must try not to make too many 
mistakes, but sometimes they are inevitable. There is no Facilities Manager 
who has not made countless mistakes. It is by making mistakes that you 
learn how to amend your performance and move forward in a positive way. If 
you do make mistakes, own up to them and never try to hide them. You need 
to grow as a Facilities Manager and you need your integrity to grow with you. 
Start off with the right philosophy and you cannot go wrong.

102
Chapter 5
Outsourcing of services  
or in-house staff?
Reasons to outsource services
Outsourcing services can be a very emotive subject as you are dealing with 
the livelihoods of your staff. It must always be approached in a sensitive way 
and must be carried out under the scrutiny of your entire department. The 
choice to outsource a service or to use in-house staff must be made on the 
basis of sound rationale and should take into account the following issues.
•	
Does the service work; if it isn’t broken, don’t fix it!
•	
Does the service fit the requirements of the site?
•	
Is the service financially sound, or does it need a new financial model?
•	
Is there a sound reason for change?
Does the service work?
Do you like change? Be sure of one thing, your staff won’t. Unless you have a 
sound, rational reason to tinker with a 
system, then leave it well alone.
However, a good manager always looks to 
improve the service that he or she provides. 
You should continually appraise your service 
to see if it still meets your operational 
requirements. We have already looked at how 
operational requirements can change through 
the application of good customer service. 
Change for changes sake is a poor way to 
­Warning
Never approach 
change like a bull 
in a china shop; be 
methodical in your 
approach and plan 
well in advance.

5 Outsourcing of services or in-house staff? 
103
develop your working strategy for your team, although trying something new 
can be good in small steps; if you don’t test something, you will never know 
if it works. You need to develop a strategy to deal with these minor tweaks 
rather than approaching them in a cavalier way.
Outsourcing versus using in-house staff is exactly the same in terms of 
how you should approach it. You should not source any service in-house 
without first having carried out some background work to determine the type 
of service you are likely to end up with and whether this service would be 
better for your department and your client. Be careful. Once you start down 
the road of outsourcing your service, you may find that, if this is successful, 
internal politics may create a desire to outsource all your operations. Change 
is not always bad, but it needs to be embraced by all your staff from the start.
Does the service f it the requirements of the site?
Your goal must always be to provide the best possible service for the site. 
Only when you understand your site can you start to make decisions about 
whether the changes you are planning best suit the site. The hope is that 
through good, sound management practices your organisation will continue 
to grow. This is a natural desire of all businesses. With growth comes change, 
and this is likely to have a number of effects on your site and the service you 
provide. Things such as waste and recycling become much bigger issues that 
require managerial and strategic decisions to cope with and to keep within 
legislative requirements. You may have to start to add services which have 
never been needed before to ensure compliance, e.g. you may need a specific 
person to deal with waste or recycling. Or you may see a synergy between 
roles, combining roles to create a more streamlined service. Your site should 
come first, not your desire to create an empire. Any assessment of a service 
provided must be based on facts and figures, not on aspirations.
Is the service f inancially sound?
No Facilities Manager is lucky enough have an open chequebook for the 
provision of services. Your service delivery must be based on sound financial 
judgements and projections of likely outcomes. Although quality and service 
are important, if they are not financially sound in their application they will 
not be successful. However, sometimes services need to be provided that do 
not have a sound financial basis. These services are those that contribute 
to an organisation’s image. These services need to be clearly understood as 
areas that benefit an organisation, such as window cleaning, plant displays 
or litter-picking. The image of an organisation should never be undervalued, 

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
104
particularly in educational institutions. The 
“learner experience” is far more valued these 
days and may rate almost as high as the 
education itself.
This 
“learner 
experience” 
is 
an 
area 
where 
Facilities 
Managers 
can 
enhance 
their contribution by developing service. My 
background is in educational FM, so this book 
is sometimes biased towards education, but the 
same principles apply to all FM practices.
Is there a sound reason for change?
Sometimes issues come along that demand a change to the way you are doing 
things, such as financial austerity, which is currently high on the list of any 
government-funded agency or body. These boom or bust scenarios have been 
with us before and will no doubt be with us in the future. Sometimes it can be 
an organisation’s response to these critical events that makes it stand out from 
the rest. Funding cuts sometimes enforce change and for the Facilities Manager 
this creates a challenge as to how 
to cut services while maintaining 
compliance. If a Facilities Manager 
truly 
understands 
his 
or 
her 
organisation 
and 
the 
services 
provided, then these judgements 
and decisions will be easier to take 
and will, in the long term, create a 
more robust organisation.
If you are asked to reduce your budget and are expected to do this without 
it having any effect on the services you provide, then the first thing you are 
likely to feel is indignation. The assumption is that, if you can reduce your 
budget without changing the service, then you have been over-budgeting 
all along. The truth is, every now and again you need to re-evaluate your 
budgets and the services you provide to ensure you are not suffering from 
“service drift.”
Service drift
Service drift is where the service you provide develops unchecked and 
becomes something completely different from the original service. A simple 
service can organically grow through success and become something 
Note to self
When a business expands naturally, 
the services required will change. 
Always bear in mind whether you 
have the capacity to take on these 
new services, or whether you need to 
ask for additional resources.
­Warning
Service drift 
can undermine 
your service without 
you really knowing 
what’s going on.

5 Outsourcing of services or in-house staff? 
105
completely different. Constituent parts of the service may develop, sometimes 
in an ad hoc way, to move the service on. This organic growth can sometimes 
lead to an over-complication of the service and duplication of administration. 
As a result of the way in which services grow, 
they may develop traits or good practice from 
other services. This is particularly true of 
administration. For example, you could have 
two independent services following similar 
“best practice” methods of administration, 
undertaken by two different people. It might be 
more practical and more economical to roll 
these two positions together into one post. This 
generates staff savings and may reduce the 
overall administration requirement of the 
organisation.
Care must be taken to make these sorts 
of decisions based on workload, not just on 
similarity of position. It is not practical to think 
that one person can suddenly take on the roles 
of two people unless there is capacity there 
and you can make genuine changes to your 
operation to reduce the overall administration 
workload in the first place.
We often over-complicate things, particularly 
processes, for little extra added value. It is these over-complications that we 
can target to make subtle changes to the way we work. Streamlining processes 
can sometimes lift a burden from staff, who may feel enlivened and released 
from unnecessary duties. We need to consider:
•	
Why do we do a process?
•	
What value does that process create?
•	
Are there any alternatives?
When we began doing something, 
we had a valid reason for doing it. 
Or did we? Sometimes we do things 
because we feel we should. This is 
particularly prevalent in the public 
sector, where information and 
audit processes are so important. 

List all the administration 
processes that take place 
in your department, lay 
them out side by side 
and look for similarities 
between them and any 
items that are duplicated. 
This can be your starting 
point for review.

Note to self
Do we know if the things we do 
are worthwhile? Sometimes we do 
something because we think it is 
the right thing to do, but without it 
creating any real value.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
106
However, unifying processes may take that requirement away. Sometimes we 
collate information and statistics on one system, only to enter the same data 
on another system. This duplication of processes may go unnoticed and you 
may find it has been a constant cause of irritation to the staff who have been 
implementing it. This kind of duplication is rife in most departments and can 
become embedded in their culture.
Are you able to quantify the 
value of the process? In other 
words, do you ever use the 
information the process provides 
and is it really of any use? Again, 
you will probably find this has 
been a constant source of irritation 
to all your staff, but it has never 
been challenged.
You need to consider whether 
anybody 
has 
ever 
looked 
for 
alternatives to these processes or 
thought why you do them. Also, is 
there a better way of doing this? 
Sometimes 
departments 
never 
challenge 
why 
processes 
were 
started in the first place. If this culture is endemic, then you have a good chance 
of being able to make substantial changes without affecting the service provided.
Outsourcing: advantages and disadvantages
There are two types of outsourcing, each of which should be dealt with 
separately and which require a different approach. The first is simply 
buying in a contracted service from an external provider; the second is more 
protracted and involves market-testing an in-house function.
Outsourcing in its simplest terms is buying a service from the open 
market. To undertake this, you need to have:
•	
A formal specification of what is required, including service levels.
•	
A contract period, i.e. when the service will start and when it will end.
•	
The financial parameters of the contract, such as payment terms, 
how additions and deletions will be dealt with, the financial penalties 
to be imposed if the contract is not met and the bonuses awarded for 
successful completion.
Note to self
Make sure you fully understand 
every aspect of the service being 
provided before you construct the 
specification. Essential items are: 
who provides the service; what is 
the service they provide; when do 
they provide the service; who do they 
provide that service to; and where do 
they provide the service?
If you use this concept for all your 
contracts, you can focus on each one 
in turn.

5 Outsourcing of services or in-house staff? 
107
Where the outsourcing is of a current in-house 
function, then this is far more protracted. You 
need to consider whether you are sure that 
this is what you and the organisation want. 
The decision to outsource should never be 
taken lightly. You should consider the likely 
implications of the decision and thoroughly 
evaluate the effect that this is likely to have on 
your organisation.
Specification is an art in itself; however, 
your specification is the most important consideration and, for the outsourcing 
of an internal service, needs to be watertight. It is important that the service 
you are specifying mirrors the service you are currently providing. For 
example, if you put in your tender document that post is to be delivered to a 
department by 9.00 a.m., you don’t want to then find out that your staff have 
been delivering the post to sub-offices within the centre for the last year. This 
would have the effect of expectations not matching the specification, leading 
to amendment of the tendered contract and an increase in costs. You only 
need a few of these examples before you end up paying more for a service 
than you did before. You need to get your centres 
to buy-in to the concept of the new specification 
and encourage them to contribute to the 
specification process.
Remember that your staff are very important 
to you and if they are not fully on-board in any 
decisions on outsourcing, then negativity will 
build up within the workforce that may take 
years to put right. Your staff will be concerned 
about any changes and need to be part of 
the team that looks at the practicalities of 
outsourcing the service. Your trade unions also 
need to be part of the team to secure the rights of 
staff throughout the process. Staff consultation 
needs to be built in before putting a process out 
to tender.
You may need to build counselling into the 
process. Never underestimate the pressure that 
the process of tendering an in-house service 
puts on the staff involved. This must be adhered 
to throughout the process. Although you must 

It is a good idea to try 
and list the benefits and 
disadvantages 
of 
each 
individual contract. This 
will help you focus on why 
you are outsourcing in the 
first place and help you 
see what you really want 
out of the contract in the 
long term.

­Warning
Be sure that 
the organisation 
has an appetite for 
outsourcing before 
you go down this 
route.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
108
look at all times to the requirements of the organisation, never lose site of the 
fact that you are dealing with your staff’s livelihoods and that a sympathetic 
approach will be recognised and appreciated by all. However, you must also 
be aware that no matter how much effort you put into staff welfare, you will 
never please all of the people all of the time.
Advantages of outsourcing
Outsourcing allows you to concentrate on other services while the outsourced 
service is managed by others. By freeing up your time from the day-to-day 
monitoring of the service, you can focus on 
the provision of other services. Outsourcing 
moves some of the risk from you, the client, 
to the contractor or supplier, who will have 
most of the responsibility for the service. It 
allows you to bring in specialist staff, which 
can be cheaper for certain areas of your 
service. Many larger companies that provide 
outsourced services in FM carry specialist 
staff who cover a number of contracts. They 
can then justify their specialism by economy 
of scale.
Outsourcing reduces your HR input, which otherwise can be a burden, 
particularly for services such as cleaning that may have a considerable 
number of operatives on site. Providing HR support to all these people is 
costly, so moving that responsibility away can save money. Outsourcing can 
guarantee the cost of a service if the contract is correctly drawn up; you 
can fix the cost of service provision for a number of years, which can help 
in uncertain economic climates. Outsourcing can provide a cheaper service, 
which is worthwhile, unless you are striving for quality as you main aim. In 
today’s environment, the main driver is cost and outsourcing can help with 
this; for example, many catering companies will either update or put in brand 
new catering facilities as part of the initial contract.
Disadvantages of outsourcing
Outsourcing may end up costing more than the previous service if your 
specification is not tight enough, or does not deal sufficiently with variations. 
It is imperative to factor in your VAT costs, particularly if you are not able to 
claim these back.
­Warning
Always make 
sure you factor VAT 
into your calculations, 
especially if you are not 
set up to be able to 
reclaim it.

5 Outsourcing of services or in-house staff? 
109
You may also lose flexibility; your service provider will provide you with 
flexibility whenever you require it, but it will cost money unless correctly 
specified. Be careful when agreeing long contracts. Keeping your costs steady 
with a three-year contract sounds great, but if the service is poor and you 
have not written in robust termination clauses, you are stuck with a poor 
service for the duration of the contract. This can be draining on resources 
and draining on you.
Every change to the contract will require a variation. Never underestimate 
the power of the variation; even small variations can be expensive. Most 
modern companies providing FM 
services 
are 
masters 
at 
the 
interpretation 
of 
specifications. 
They will know at the outset what 
areas they can make profits on 
from variations and these will be 
exploited by the company to the 
maximum effect, even if you have 
been shrewd enough to include 
unit rates for these areas. However, this is what they are in business for, to 
make money, so you can’t really complain.
Your specification needs to be watertight, otherwise you have lost your 
control and will invariably cost your organisation a lot of money. You will pay 
a premium to cover risk; the risk factor of any contract is built into the final 
cost submitted by the contractor. The greater the likely risk, the greater the 
cost to your organisation.
Specif ications
A specification is an explicit series of written requirements used to describe 
the level of service required in a detailed, yet clear and unambiguous, fashion.
A specification must contain:
•	
Details of the work to be done. Every element of the service you want 
provided must be included in enough detail to accurately convey your 
requirements.
•	
Time frames. The times at which the service is to be provided must be 
included, otherwise you could end up with service provision outside 
normal hours. You would then need to resource opening, heating and 
lighting a building unnecessarily.
Note to self
Make sure your specification contains 
the following key deliverables: what 
is the work to be done; where will the 
work be done; when will the work be 
done; and to what level of service will 
the work be done?

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
110
•	
Levels of service required. In just the same way as you would write 
an SLA, your specification needs to detail the level of service required 
and the pinch points or target levels to be achieved.
•	
How the contract will be monitored. This should include how you are 
going to monitor progress and how you will evaluate compliance to 
specification on levels of service.
When writing specifications, some people fall into the trap of adding too much 
information on insurance, welfare, health and safety, payment and termination 
clauses, replicating this each time that they write a contract. In my opinion, 
the best way to deal with these areas is in a Prelims document. Prelims, or 
Preliminary Particulars, are the logical place to put peripheral information 
such as health and safety and payment schedules. These generally only vary 
slightly from one contract to the next, so why not create a standard document 
that can be tweaked for each contract depending on your requirements? This 
way, you know you have dealt with all the pertinent items without missing 
anything fundamental and you have saved yourself time by not rewriting 
standard clauses. A standard Prelim is given in the Appendices as an example.
Types of specif ication
There are basically two types of specification: prescriptive and performance. 
Prescriptive specifications describe the level of performance in very fine detail. 
For example:
4.1 Grass Cut 1
Cut grass by cylinder mower to 25 mm at weekly intervals between mid-March 
and the end of October
To include all follow-up mowing
Note: the follow-up mowing to include all banks obstacles and any rough grass 
areas beneath trees within the area designated for weekly cutting
Total number of cuts 33
4.2 Grass Cut 2
Cut grass every two weeks by cylinder or rotary boxed mower to 25 mm
Total number of cuts 16
This defines a height of grass cut and a frequency. This then becomes easy to 
monitor, sign off and control or measure performance. Payments are easy to 
quantify if unit rates are set up against each of the functions.

5 Outsourcing of services or in-house staff? 
111
Prescriptive specifications can work very well and are not open to 
interpretation, but need to be accurate in terms of quantifying the workload. 
The work is described accurately and the overall process of monitoring is far 
easier. Prescriptive specifications have gone out of fashion to some degree in 
favour of the performance specification. For me, however, they still have a 
part to play, particularly where you can exactly quantify what it is you need.
The benefits of a prescriptive specification are as follows.
•	
You know exactly what you are getting; if you specify a particular piece 
of machinery, you know that you will get that piece of machinery.
•	
If you buy in quality goods, your long-term maintenance costs will be less.
•	
It is far easier to compare like for like services if they are specified in 
exactly the same way.
The disadvantages of a prescriptive 
specification 
are 
that 
it 
can 
cost more than a performance 
specification and it does not allow 
the contractor or supplier any 
flexibility in sourcing items and 
therefore waiting times for parts 
may increase.
Performance specifications require a greater understanding of the task 
than prescriptive specifications and use a certain amount of subjectivity. 
They should be written with quality as the backbone for a positive outcome. 
The benefits of a performance specification over a traditional prescriptive 
specification are:
•	
it can transfer the risk for the design of the works or general 
administration of the contract to the contractor or supplier;
•	
it can allow the contractor or supplier to determine how to do things 
in the cheapest way and this may allow you to obtain the product or 
service cheaper;
•	
it allows innovation and invention into the process, perhaps leading 
to trailblazing results.
The disadvantages of a performance specification are:
•	
the contractor or supplier has almost free rein to provide whatever 
materials they need;
Note to self
When 
choosing 
a 
performance 
specification 
you 
need 
to 
fully 
understand the service and to be 
unambiguous in your statements.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
112
•	
when trying to source a cheaper way of doing something, contractors 
or suppliers could buy inferior or poor quality parts or services to 
complete the works more cheaply;
•	
if something is not defined fully, how do you monitor and manage the 
process when interpretation does not allow definitive assessment?
Examples of a cleaning specification and a grounds maintenance specification 
are given in the Appendices.
Risk
What is risk in relation to a contracted-in service, and how does it affect your 
organisation? Risk, in general, is rarely factored into contracts by the client 
and is sometimes over-factored in by the contractor. Risk is a risky business! 
In terms of contracts, risk can be described as “a potential adverse effect, 
either quantified or unquantified, which has the possibility to either create a 
detrimental condition or destabilising effect on the contract or those involved 
in the contract.” So what kind of risks can a contract have? These can be 
classified as financial, legal and disruption of service.
The main financial risks are as follows.
•	
The prime objective of a tender exercise is to purchase a product or 
service at the cheapest possible price; however, it must be understood 
that this is not always possible and the risk is that you could end up 
paying more for a service than you did before.
•	
If you get things wrong in tenders and contracts, you get them wrong 
for the whole period of the contract. That could be years, unless you 
have written in break clauses.
•	
If you have specified things incorrectly, then your costs can spiral out 
of control.
With regard to legal risks, most contracts contain contractual and legal 
provisions which, if not adhered to, can put both the client and contractor at risk. 
In particular, the implications of the Transfer of Undertakings and (Protection 
of Employment) Regulations 2006 (SI 2006/246) can put an additional risk on 
the contract that would not be there if in-house staff were used.
The following risks are associated with a disruption of service.
•	
If sourced poorly, a contract for the provision of services can cause 
a disruption to services. If services fail due to incorrect specification, 
then this presents an undue and unnecessary risk to the organisation.

5 Outsourcing of services or in-house staff? 
113
•	
Even if you have made the contractor financially responsible for 
breakdowns, the disruption to service from the breakdown of poor 
quality parts will live long in your staff’s minds, even when the original 
problem has been solved.
•	
If a specification drives down quality by putting a higher priority on 
quantity, then the level of service provided will be lower than that 
required by the organisation.
•	
Under-resourcing a function can affect both the quality and the overall 
provision of the service and may mean that the service does not reach 
the desired levels of SLAs.
The education sector: the  learner experience   
and outsourcing
What is the “learner experience”? As far as the FM department in an educational 
environment is concerned, it is one of two things: how the students interface 
with the site and how the students interface with your service. In other 
sectors, you could substitute the term “student” with “visitor” or “customer” 
and the “learner experience” with the “visitor/customer experience.” Both will 
give valid and vital areas for you to look at.
The site, in terms of the day-to-day activities of students, is secondary 
to the level and depth of the teaching experience; however, many of the 
judgements students will make about the organisation are based on how it 
affects them, such as:
•	
are the buildings warm and inviting
•	
are there suitable places for leisure, e.g. common rooms and cafes
•	
does the layout and signage of the buildings help the user to move 
around them
•	
are the classrooms conducive to learning
•	
does the site feel safe and welcoming
•	
are the toilets clean?
All of these influence the students” outcomes, sometimes in a small way, but 
sometimes significantly. Students have been known to leave college because 
it is cold or they do not feel safe. If a negative image is purveyed by the college, 
this will percolate through and affect the learner outcome. The services you 
provide can also influence the learner. If your staff are negative, then again 

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
114
this is likely to have a negative effect on learner outcomes. This is as much 
an issue for you as a Facilities Manager as it is for a Curriculum Manager. No 
one wants to be responsible for a student’s bad experience.
Sometimes buying in a service can alienate it from the site, as it no longer 
feels a holistic part of the provision. This can result in bought-in services 
seeming negative and uncaring towards the students. This, in turn, can have 
a negative effect on the way in which the service is provided.
The learner journey is often seen as a holistic process. From the moment 
a student sets foot in a college, they are forming opinions about the 
organisation. If they do not feel confident about the professionalism of  
the college staff, you can understand why they would not feel confident that 
the college is providing a good overall outcome. This could ultimately result 
in poor grades for the student or, 
at the very least, will give you a 
negative score on your QDP 
returns, which could undermine 
the level of service provided.  
It is therefore important when 
considering your site as a whole 
to also consider how your services 
will interact with the students. 
This is an example of customer 
service, so whether the customer is a student, visitor or consumer, the same 
principles apply.
Working with contractors
It is important to understand that you cannot economically provide in-house 
services to cover all the requirements of a busy site; at some point you will 
need to bring in contractors to fulfil certain functions around the site. The 
amount of additional specialist contract needed will depend on each individual 
site. Contractors should be used for specialist areas bound by specific skills 
or legislative requirements, such as heating engineers, or in areas where it is 
uneconomic for you to provide that particular service.
If you are going to use contractors, then you need to know the implications 
of this with respect to your duties as the procurer of that service and their 
duties as guests on your site. You need to know this before you start looking 
at what the contractors are doing on site and the specification of these duties. 
You are responsible for the contractors while they are on site and you can be 
held accountable for their actions.
Note to self
It is vitally important to check the 
quality and competency of the 
contractor’s service before engaging 
them. Afterwards is always too late 
and you will be criticised for making 
poor decisions if a service fails.

5 Outsourcing of services or in-house staff? 
115
Choosing your contractors
Choose your service providers carefully and build competency into your 
tender regime. Your contractor should be competent to provide the service. 
Make sure they are registered with an appropriate professional body for the 
function they are providing for you, e.g. gas engineers need to be Gas-safe 
registered and ventilation workers need HVCA certification. It is not just 
the professional bodies you should be looking to when using contractors; 
registered bodies such as the Contractors Health and Safety Assessment 
Scheme (CHAS) and Construction Line will provide a certain amount of 
surety that your contractors are competent to undertake the works. Speak to 
other local organisations and find out who has worked with them and what 
they thought of them.
Make sure your contractors are carry the relevant and necessary 
insurance and that they are insured to a sufficient value based on the size 
and complexity of the operations. Ensure that you obtain copies of both their 
personal and employer liability insurances and make sure they are current.
In an educational environment where the contractors may interface 
with your students, some of whom may be vulnerable, make sure that the 
individual operatives who come on site are covered by a current Disclosure 
and Barring Service (DBS) check. Try to encourage your contractors to keep a 
core of staff who come to your site. This makes sure you comply with the CRB 
requirements and also allows a relationship to build up between the contractor 
and your department. This relationship makes your life easier as problems 
are dealt with quicker when an operative or engineer knows the site and can 
identify problems. This is equally important in a retail or health environment.
Make sure the company is trading in a favourable financial position; 
you do not want a company going bankrupt midway through an important 
contract. If a company is fully solvent they are able to procure materials 
internally, thus providing a better service to your team.
The company must carry the necessary health and safety skills for 
the works needed and have a proven track record in these. Ask them to 
demonstrate this by providing a copy of their health and safety policies and 
procedures. You will soon gauge from the quality of this information and how 
it is completed if you are likely to have problems in this area. Health and 
safety compliance is of paramount importance when works undertaken by 
contractors could affect students and staff. Your contractors must not cause 
unsafe conditions on site which put your students at risk. It is preferable to 
have the same team working on site at all times; from a health and safety 
perspective this provides you the knowledge that contractors are conversant 
with your equipment and aware of your procedures, such as hot work permits.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
116
Contractors are increasingly being asked to report on their sustainability 
performance. Clearly this is an area which should tie into your own strategy 
on sustainability. Sustainability, as far as contractors are concerned, means: 
how and where they procure their parts and materials in terms of distance 
from site; are those parts and materials from sustainable sources; and how 
does the contractor deal with their waste? Sustainability is also about whether 
they set targets for sustainability each year. Are they achieving those targets 
and showing an annual improvement on their sustainability performance?
All this information, once collected, should be reviewed on an annual 
basis. Set up your administration procedures to reconcile your contractor 
information on an annual basis, requesting details of insurance and updates 
on sustainability and health and safety performance. This is easily done 
by setting up reminders in your Outlook calendar. Don’t forget you need 
to review to check compliance and completion and to link this in with the 
quality of the finished service. Do not forget that the drivers for quality used 
to measure your own staff should also be applied to external contractors. It is 
no good getting a cheap service, only to find the quality is poor. Build quality 
into every process and you will ensure you move forward in a proactive way.
Performance and review
Performance and review of your contractors are essential. Why pay good 
money for a service and then not check if you are getting what you paid for 
and obtaining good value for money? Work out a common methodology for 
scoring your contractors on the essential areas of competency, insurance, 
safeguarding, solvency, health and safety, sustainability and performance. 
Immediately you will have a set of criteria by which to measure your contractors 
against each other. Setting this up on a spreadsheet, setting up a scoring 
matrix and then setting a minimum acceptable score immediately gives you 
a methodology for assessing if you have sufficient quality contractors on your 
selection list and whether you need more contractors to give a high level of 
quality and allow your senior management 
team to see that you have shown due 
diligence in procuring their services.
Quality
Do not accept contractors simply because they 
are cheap. You need to be constantly looking 
to engender quality into your processes and 
this means that your contractor lists should 
­Warning
Avoid buying 
services simply 
because they are cheap. 
You are certain to get 
a poor service as a 
result.

5 Outsourcing of services or in-house staff? 
117
be subject to the same scrutiny. Quality is not always obvious in relation to 
contractors, particularly when taking on a new contractor or supplier. In the 
early stages of procuring new contractors you will find that they try to appear to 
be the most professional company in the world and will promise you anything 
to get you to commit to a contract. This does show a capability to perform, 
sometimes in a quality fashion, but you need them to provide consistent quality 
throughout the whole life of the contract, not just at the beginning.
The best way to ensure a consistently high level of service is to obtain 
references from previous clients. Don’t fall into the trap of asking for references 
from the company itself, because you will only get contacts from clients with 
whom they have had superb working relationships. Try to find out where the 
contractor provides a similar service locally and then make an unsolicited 
call to the previous client. Try to contact a similar institution to your own. 
Remember, as Facilities Managers we are all in the same boat and colleagues 
will usually be only too happy to report poor performance from contractors.
Any sizable contract such as cleaning or security should show collective 
team responsibility (CTR) in the provision of the service. This means they 
operate as one team, not as fragmented sections. They should act with a 
single purpose and not provide a variable service level on site, showing an 
overall team spirit and a desire to do well. Most of all, they should accept 
responsibility for the service and not expect you to continuously monitor 
performance and quality.
What should you ask for when speaking to potential referees? Generally 
your questions should cover the following areas.
•	
Do you get value from the service 
provided? Are variations accurate and 
not inflated and are invoices on time 
and accurate? Does the contractor 
seek variations proactively or are they 
prepared to negotiate and be flexible to 
suit the service?
•	
Is the service provided on site friendly and 
does the team buy-in to CTR? Does it reach 
the specified level of quality? Does it have 
a methodology of constant improvement 
and the desire to self-improve? Does the 
service engage with students? How many 
complaints have you had about service 
provision? How many positive comments 
have you had about the service?

Periodically undertake a 
spot check on the items 
going into your skips and 
front-end loaders on site. 
You may be surprised to 
find they are full of waste 
from your contractors.


A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
118
•	
From a management perspective, does the service appear to be run 
well? Does the management team attend regular feedback meetings? 
Does the on-site team rate the off-site head office function and, if not, 
why not. Does the team follow a QMS?
•	
From the works perspective, is the finished job completed well and on 
time? What are the levels of snags requiring rectification? How does 
the company respond to snags? Have they used quality materials? 
Do you have a lot of breakdowns (for M & E service provision)? Are 
your staff happy with the finished job? Sometimes you can glean a 
lot from asking staff what they feel about the quality of work. Are the 
contractors on site when they say they are?
I’m sure there are many more questions you could ask. The key is never being 
afraid to ask those questions before you enter into the contract. Once you 
have signed a contract you put yourself at a disadvantage and will end up 
doing far more work in the long term.
Waste
The contractor will provide waste, 
just the same as if you were 
providing the service yourself. This 
may be in the form of boxes or may 
be 
grass 
cuttings 
from 
the 
gardening team. You must make it 
clear in your contract that the 
contractor must remove all waste 
from the site. If you don’t do this, 
you will end up paying for the disposal of the waste generated by the contractor 
as they will just put it in your skips and front-end loaders. Make sure that 
this process is auditable and that you are able to see how the waste has left 
the site and how much has been removed. The best way to do this is by 
checking the waste transfer notes from the contractor.
There is, however, some waste 
from the contractor that you need 
to see to prove that they have 
completed the work, e.g. parts 
removed from machinery or kit on 
site; otherwise, how do you know 
they have replaced the defective 
Note to self
Pull together a standard set of 
questions to ask referees and use 
this to ask the same questions 
about each contractor. This gives 
uniformity and allows a consistent 
scoring matrix to be used.
Note to self
You need to find out who has used 
this contractor before you and how 
successful they were. Speak to your 
colleagues in other organisations.

5 Outsourcing of services or in-house staff? 
119
parts? The best way to do this is to have a waste parts box in each of your 
plant rooms. You can then see what has been removed from machinery and 
what has been repaired. You can ask them to empty this box and remove it 
from site at regular intervals.
Health and safety
Health and safety is definitely an area where 
you need to spend time making sure that your 
contractor or supplier complies with provisions 
while they are on your site. It is your duty is to 
supervise and check your contractors while on 
site and you have an obligation to look after the 
welfare of everyone who comes onto site; this 
means contractors as well as your own staff. 
Start as you mean to go on.
Checking your contractor for health and 
safety performance is the key to starting off on the 
right foot. This must be done before the contract 
starts to allow sufficient time to undertake 
the checks properly. A health and safety Pre-
Qualification Questionnaire (PQQ) is included in 
the Appendices to help you. These PQQs are not 
just pieces of paper; they need to be looked at in 
detail. If you knowingly take on a contractor who has a poor health and safety 
record and you have a serious issue on site, do not be surprised if you have to 
take responsibility for their poor performance. By unquestioningly accepting a 
PQQ from a contractor you make yourself culpable. Make sure you:
•	
Send out a health and safety PQQ that covers your liabilities and 
identifies poor performance clearly.
•	
Check the documents when they are returned; don’t simply file them.
•	
Act on any inconsistencies in the contractor’s return and challenge 
any seemingly poor returns.
•	
Do not take on a contractor who performs poorly on health and safety 
unless you are sure they can comply fully with your requirements and 
undertake the service you are requesting safely.
Compliance with health and safety issues can be part of contractual 
compliance. Many of us use Prelims for every contract. Generally these will 

Set up a standard health 
and safety checklist for 
each contract and append 
this into the contractor’s 
file.


A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
120
detail the health and safety requirements and should point the contractor in 
the right direction in terms of compliance on site. Contained within any good 
set of Prelims will be how the contractor is to monitor and manage health 
and safety while on site. If this is in your Prelims, you also have a duty to 
ensure that the contractor is adhering to those requirements. The best way to 
do this is for you to have health and safely as a formal agenda item at every 
site meeting. This way you can pick up early non-compliance and deal with 
it promptly. Also make sure that you include health and safety in your SLAs, 
with set targets to be achieved. This way the contractor will have to prove 
compliance to receive payment, taking some of the pressure off you.
Contractor f iles
It is important that you are able to control your information about every 
contractor who comes on site. The most useful way to do this is to set up a 
contractor file for each individual contractor. This will allow you to record 
details and store them in an easily accessible way. This can be a paper-based 
file or, better still, a file held on computer. This will enable you to quickly 
check and monitor whether you have up-to-date information on public and 
employer liability insurance, health and safety performance and CRB checks. 
It also proves from an audit perspective that you are compliant in your 
approach to the adherence of contractors to health and safety legislation.
This file should be distinct from the contract file as your contracts and 
contractors could change. You will need to keep your records on health and 
safety for a number of years, so keeping this information separate from the 
contract file will allow you to archive records not currently in use. There are 
examples in the Appendices of documents dealing with health and safety for 
contractors, including a health and safety questionnaire.
Procurement routes for FM
There are a number of tried and tested procurement routes for FM. The 
choice of route will depend on the service you are outsourcing and the 
complexity of the service. Much will depend on you knowing exactly what 
the service is and having the ability to put these definitions accurately into 
a specification. You need to know what you are trying to achieve, whether 
this is financial reductions, quality improvements, or simply the ability to 
undertake specialist functions outside the skill set of the organisation. The 
procurement route may also be influenced by the size of your organisation, 
its complexity and its geographic spread. The procurement routes available 
in the FM sector are described in the following Theory and information slots.

5 Outsourcing of services or in-house staff? 
121
Theory and information slot
Single service procurement is the purchase of individual services as and 
when required. There is no interlink between the service you are buying and 
others within your portfolio.
Benefits of this type of procurement include the following.
•	
It is a simple process which allows you to make purchases in 
bite-size chunks.
•	
It does not require integration between other services.
•	
Services can be procured over a period of time; purchasing a few 
services at the same time allows you to smooth your resources 
over time and to phase procurement.
•	
It allows you to choose the best individual services rather than 
a bundled pack of services that may have varying levels of 
performance.
Theory and information slot
Bundled services are when two or more services or functions are provided 
by the same provider.
Some of the benefits of adopting this approach include the following.
•	
A fixed price can be agreed for services.
•	
Risk can be moved from the client to the contractor, particularly in 
specialist areas such as heating and HVAC.
•	
Staff and multi-skilled workers can be optimised.
•	
Lower contract prices can be obtained because of economies of scale 
and sharing of administration.
•	
Specialist services that the client would find difficult to provide in a 
cost-effective way can be pooled.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
122
Theory and information slot
Integrated FM is the bringing together of several support services into a 
single management structure. The adoption of integrated services allows 
a collaborative approach between the supplier and client, while allowing 
streamlining of the management structure.
The benefits of integrated services are: a streamlined structure; cost 
savings; innovation between integrated services; shared best practice; and 
the viewing of service provision in the round, encouraging collaboration.
Theory and information slot
Total Facilities Management (TFM) is a single source of supply for all 
your FM needs and is an ongoing partnership with the service provider. 
All services are provided or bought in from an external provider and 
monitored by a client manager.
Some of the benefits of adopting the TFM approach include the following.
•	
A fixed price can be agreed for services.
•	
Risk can be moved from the client to the contractor.
•	
Staff and multi-skilled workers can be optimised.
•	
Lower contract prices can be achieved by economies of scale and 
sharing of administration.
•	
Management is streamlined by having only one point of contact.
•	
If applied correctly, a clear definition of service can be achieved.
•	
There is the potential for reduced administration cons on the 
client side.
•	
On larger contracts, services spread across the portfolio can 
generate economies of scale.
•	
TFM contractors have a vested interest in innovation and 
continuous improvement.
•	
The condition of buildings and stock can be more accurately 
defined and monitored.

5 Outsourcing of services or in-house staff? 
123
Theory and information slot
Total infrastructure FM (TIFM) is mainly used in larger organisations with 
both wide geographical spreads and diverse portfolios of building stock. 
It allows widespread stock to be compared and contrasted, while sharing 
best practice and creating a database of information and strategic tools 
for the organisation.
TIFM gives the following advantages.
•	
A reduction in overall cost by accurate tracking of the performance 
of stock.
•	
A more reasoned strategic view of operational needs based on 
facts.
•	
Integrated systems allow workload to be spread and better 
centring of costs.
•	
A reduction in capital expenditure; with the ability to accurately 
track resources comes the ability to see spare capacity, allowing 
reallocation rather than capital new build.
•	
Being able to visualise the portfolio allows you to see both 
anomalies and best practice.
•	
Accurate data allows you to visualise your portfolio and to use 
statistical information to show performance in a graphical format.
•	
TIFM can legitimise FM as it moves from being a functional to a 
strategic service, allowing the true worth of FM to be shown as a 
benefit to the business and not simply a support service.
Aide Memoire: Outsourcing of services or in-house staff?
•	
Have you evaluated whether the service provided fits the site’s 
requirements and meets the strategic objectives of the organisation?
•	
Have you looked at and documented the advantages and 
disadvantages of outsourcing versus keeping an in-house workforce?
•	
Have you looked at the specification to ensure that it is fit for purpose 
and meets the requirements of the site?
•	
Do you know how to evaluate your contractors?
•	
Have you chosen your procurement route?

124
Chapter 6
In-house teams
Maintenance team
The term Facilities Manager has been around for a long time, as has the term 
Maintenance Manager. The term maintenance has stayed with our role and, 
irrespective of whether you are a Facilities Manager or an Estates Manager, 
or a combination of both, people will always associate you with maintenance. 
It will generally be the first item on your job description and other members 
of staff will look to you as the person who arranges to change their light 
bulb when it goes out. Maintenance is rarely understood, even by many 
Maintenance Managers. We are much more than light bulb changers. We have 
complex roles and juggle multiple disciplines to fit the 37 (or probably closer 
to 60) hours of our working week. However, to be successful in our chosen 
trade, we must be maintenance specialists. This is one of the cornerstones of 
our job and the area we are expected to excel in.
Your maintenance team should never be more tuned into maintenance 
than you are. They will run you ragged if they think they know more than 
you. So you must be proactive about your maintenance team.
The size of your team will obviously vary between organisations depending 
on their size, location and available budgets. 
Team size should be tailored to your 
requirements and aspirations and dovetail 
into all the other teams on site. Maintenance 
teams generally have a hard time because 
of preconceived ideas about builders. 
Modern builders are no longer like those of 
the1970s and 1980s, but some stereotypes 
seek to unravel any hint of professionalism 
before it has a chance to flourish. Sometimes 
­Warning
Try to 
break down the 
stereotypical image of 
the builder. Tackle the 
team before tackling 
the image held by 
staff.

6 In-house teams
125
this stereotypical image is self-perpetuated by the team itself in an aim to 
look cool, but there is no real place for that sort of image in a modern 
organisation. This image does not fit the modern ethos of safeguarding, or 
the moral responsibility for equality and diversity. This is the first issue you 
will need to tackle in your maintenance team. However, the personality of 
the maintenance team rarely differs between organisations and they are 
always a friendly and jovial, if sometimes cheeky, bunch and this friendliness 
endears them to staff. Do not remove this trait, or your customer service 
levels may fall.
Specialisms
Unfortunately, the days of having specialists in each department have long 
gone and the one-man, one-job philosophy is also very outdated. You still 
need those dedicated specialists 
for roles such as electrician and 
heating 
engineer, 
but, 
if 
not 
economical, these services can be 
bought in. You are usually looking 
at a team consisting of a plumber, 
joiner, painter and perhaps a 
groundsman. You should try to make these trades interchangeable to obtain 
maximum flexibility and to allow your staff to learn the skills of the other 
professions in the team. Developing a multitasking team will create a good 
bond between team members and provide sickness and holiday cover without 
too many problems.
Workload
It is dangerous to just assume that there is there is enough work for the 
team. You need to be able to confidently detail what work your team is 
undertaking and be able to demonstrate that they are functioning at a 
notional level of performance. This can only be done by tracking the work 
that has been carried out. Generally this is achieved via the Helpdesk, where 
the jobs are issued. If you don’t have a Helpdesk, then the task becomes far 
more difficult.
At the very least you need to be able to track the following areas.
•	
how many jobs are being undertaken by each trade
•	
where those jobs are being undertaken
•	
performance, e.g. how long it took to do the job
Note to self
Get to know your maintenance team, 
understand what skills are available 
and try to encourage a multi-skill 
approach by staff.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
126
•	 materials used
•	 special arrangements made
•	 potential costs
It is important to recognise that the moment 
you start checking how much work is 
being done by your department, you will 
immediately open the floodgates of childish 
behaviour to try and prevent you checking up 
on them. It is human nature for staff to not 
want to be monitored; it does not necessarily 
mean they have something to hide (see the 
earlier discussions on Theory X and Theory Y 
workers in Chapter 3).
Why do you need to check the workload? 
There are a number of reasons why you need 
to know how many jobs are being undertaken.
•	
It allows you carry out like-for-like comparisons for each trade to give 
an overview of the productivity of individuals.
•	
It allows you to plan future works by comparing trends from previous 
years, e.g. how many jobs are carried out over the summer break, 
allowing you to plan round larger projects while maintaining cover for 
regular works.
•	
It allows a month-on-month view of levels of work, allowing you 
to see dips in volume; this can help you plan holiday breaks, for 
example.
Where are these jobs being undertaken? Again, there are a number of reasons 
for needing to check this.
•	
If you want to counter-charge departments, you need to know which 
jobs are being carried out in each department.
•	
It allows you to carry out comparative analysis on each building to see 
which are the biggest drains on your resources.
•	
It allows you to see where the failure rate is increasing in individual 
areas, which could influence your planned programme, e.g. an 
increased level of boiler failures may indicate the need to replace 
equipment.

Start to break down what 
your maintenance team 
does by quantifying all the 
elements, such as time, 
volume 
and 
materials. 
This will provide you with 
an auditable system.


6 In-house teams
127
Performance
It is not simply enough to see how many jobs are being undertaken by 
individual members of your team.
•	
Some jobs may be quicker than others, e.g. joinery jobs could be 
quick five-minute jobs such as easing a door or fitting a new lock 
barrel, whereas painting a whole room will take longer; recording the 
number of hours worked is very important.
•	
The total number of hours worked allows you to see where future 
resources need to be targeted.
•	
Monitoring performance can give you ammunition when the workload 
seems to outstrip the available resources, allowing you to justify 
additional staff.
•	
Monitoring can also allow you to see where staff are underutilised, 
not so that you can get rid of them, but to enable you to broaden their 
individual roles to strengthen the department.
•	
Records also need to be kept of materials used.
Special arrangements cover areas such as health and safety (working at height 
or hot work) and allow these to become part of your auditable tasks. Linking 
these tasks to jobs is your double-check that health and safety procedures 
are being adhered to.
It is important to be able to cost-centre works. It makes good practical 
and auditable sense to know exactly where your materials are going. In 
this way you can be sure that 
they are not disappearing off-site; 
unfortunately, this does happen. 
In terms of stock control, you need 
know exactly when you need to 
replenish your stores. You can also 
track where the materials have 
been used.
Knowing 
how 
much 
works 
cost 
is 
becoming 
increasingly 
important. Global costs will give you the running total for the site, but 
knowing what each individual building or discipline area costs allows you to 
make strategic judgements on buildings and trades. You can then establish 
and account for the service into the future. Knowing your liabilities is the key 
to understanding your site.
Note to self
Never forget to factor health and 
safety 
requirements 
into 
your 
working calculations. This is one of 
the most important areas to be able 
to account for in an environment 
where visitors are present and 
accidents can easily happen.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
128
Contracting in or out?
We have looked at insourcing in the previous chapter. Your maintenance 
team is one area where you may have a dilemma as to how to best provide the 
service. There is no doubt that you need service provision; things will always 
break and need repairing and equipment will always need to be serviced 
and maintained to prevent breakdown. However, how best to undertake this 
service is a debatable area.
The only sure way to work out the viability of service provision from an 
in-house or external perspective is to have an unambiguous and detailed 
assessment of the level of work on site, tied in with an appreciation of the 
cost of buying those services in. Your assessment of levels of performance can 
help you to make this judgement on outsourcing viability.
Your assessment on viability cannot be a simple figure pulled out of the 
air. It needs to be based on factual evidence. Your Helpdesk should provide 
you with details of the volume of work, the cost of that work, timings of that 
work, and success rates, e.g. whether it was completed on time. This is the 
basis for your assessment. However, you need to layer over this a number of 
other factors.
•	
Customer satisfaction. How well does the service perform its duties 
and does it meet all the criteria from the client in terms of completion 
without disruption and to the satisfaction of the work area?
•	
Response. This is the main reason most organisations plump for 
in-house services, because they undertake jobs quicker and more 
effectively. Response is usually the key selling point for an in-house 
service.
•	
Cost. The single biggest driver for most services. There is an 
assumption that in-house services are cheaper. Are you able to 
quantify the true cost of your service provision and have you included 
staff costs (including pensions and National Insurance, training), 
materials costs (sometimes these are lost in other budgets and not 
always charged or assessed as the total cost of the job), property costs 
(every team needs accommodation, storage space and delivery areas 
and insurance also needs to be considered), health and safety costs 
(sometime huge back-of-house functions exist to support an in-house 
team), HR and administration costs (again a back-of-house provision) 
and procurement costs.
You can see what a phenomenal task just costing your service can be and, 
the bigger the department, the bigger the task. Armed with your assessment 

6 In-house teams
129
of the volume of work, the service levels needed and the cost, you will begin 
to see the true cost of the service. You can then relate this back to cost per 
member of staff, or cost per building or per square metre. The options are 
as great as you choose them to be. Your assessment may then be sufficient, 
without doing further work, to identify:
•	
total jobs undertaken in each building or for the site as a whole
•	
total cost of providing those services
•	
details of service levels and prescribed service level indicators
•	
a workload appreciation throughout the year, taking into account the 
different academic terms and holiday breaks
•	
breakdowns by trade giving resource requirements
•	
how all of these tasks link to your strategic objectives
These will give you the necessary details to construct either your prescriptive 
or performance specification. This will allow you to build up an accurate 
estimation for going out to tender. Remember, the more accurate and detailed 
the specification, the more likely it is that you are going to get an accurate 
and realistic tender return.
Site supervision team
This is the most visible service you 
provide, yet it is the most elusive 
to quantify in terms of what your 
staff actually do. Site supervisory 
services are endless in terms of 
definition. In true FM spirit, these 
staff do everything that nobody 
else wants to do. Hence your site 
supervision or caretaking teams 
can be dealing with:
•	
locking and unlocking buildings
•	
set-ups for room changes
•	
moves and relocations
•	
janitorial duties, such as unblocking toilets and cleaning
•	
general porterage
Note to self
Make sure your site supervision 
section has a full set of directives 
and tasks to undertake. If these are 
not identified fully, they will always 
be seen as dispensable and will be 
the first area targeted when there 
are cutbacks. Make sure they have 
a quantifiable and measurable role.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
130
•	
post and deliveries (if you don’t have a post room)
•	
site security, over and above that done by your security team
•	
customer service, such as ferrying people around and guiding visitors
•	
health and safety, e.g. access and egress maintenance and helping 
people out of broken lifts
•	
minor repairs, such as putting up shelves
The difficulty with this wide range of duties and expectations is that this 
service can sometimes be seen as superfluous and be the brunt of any cuts 
needed within a department. You should aim to keep these staff as they can 
be worth their weight in gold.
This team can sometimes disappear into the background because of this 
inherent difficulty in defining what the service is. Your challenge is to quantify 
what they actually do, so you can justify the service when a challenge comes 
your way. Every function undertaken by site supervisors or caretakers is 
a job. These jobs should be logged and quantified in the same way as your 
maintenance jobs. How else are you going to quantify the workload, set bench-
marks and measure the service? It is also the easiest service to leave alone 
to get on with its work in the background. This is a simple mistake to make. 
Don’t assume that the work undertaken by this team is inconsequential; 
people would soon object if it was suddenly withdrawn as a service.
Your site supervision team, along with maintenance, is the team which 
controls your PPM process. Carefully planning PPM to be undertaken by your 
site supervision team can justify the team and give them something concrete 
to undertake, which influences your building maintenance strategy.
Your site supervision team are perfectly matched to PPM tasks such as:
•	
Legionella testing, e.g. hot and cold water temperature tests and 
running off infrequently used outlets
•	
window cleaning in key areas (but not at height)
•	
access and egress checks
•	
oiling of door closers and hinges
•	
external light checks
•	
room reports (checks on safety issues and wear and tear)
•	
sustainability checks such as turning off lights and PCs
These should be logged centrally on your database of PPMs and actioned, 
monitored, documented and audited.

6 In-house teams
131
Timing of service
Your site supervision team will be the team that spends most time on your site 
and will probably cover from 6 a.m. to 10 p.m., with occasional additional 
weekend shifts. It is therefore important to plan an even flow of times on site, 
or at least one which is matched to the 
workload. Matching your staff to your overall 
workload will prevent you accruing large 
overtime bills. A simple mapping exercise 
outlining your organisational requirements 
will show exactly when your service is needed. 
Don’t fall into the trap of trying to cater for 
services that you yourself provide, e.g. opening 
at 6 a.m. to accommodate a cleaning regime. 
Why not start your cleaners later and capitalise 
on not needing to bring your staff in early to 
cover? You also benefit from not needing to heat and light the buildings early 
in the morning and this will help you with your sustainability objectives.
Integration
It is sometimes a missed opportunity not to 
look at integrating services to get best value out 
of the service provision. This is not wholesale 
amalgamation of services, but using them 
wisely and using the strengths and weaknesses 
of the service to best effect.
A good example of this approach is looking 
at the synergies between services. For example, 
your site supervisors fulfil a security role 
because they can keep an eye on insecure areas 
and intruders on site and report these back to 
the security team. Your cleaning staff can also 
be your eyes and ears as far as security are 
concerned. Using all three teams holistically 
should give you a better coverage of your 
site. The enhanced security offered by taking 
account of all three tiers of security makes your 
risk assessment more robust.
Another example of integration is opening 
up and closing down procedures. If you 
­Warning
Make sure your 
team is fully trained 
as an accident could be 
expensive in terms of 
compensation  
claims.

Map out all the tasks 
undertaken by your site 
supervision 
teams 
and 
try to make connections 
or 
synergies 
between 
different jobs, e.g. which 
jobs could be carried out 
at the same time, such as 
parcel and reprographics 
deliveries.


A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
132
integrate your site supervisors and cleaning regimes to come together during 
locking down procedures, e.g. getting your cleaners to lock down areas as 
well as your site supervisory team, can help to stretch your resourcing of 
that function. You can them use some of your staff during the day on more 
productive items such as PPM. You must, however, be careful not to transfer 
staff duties from one team to another without first considering the potential 
for fair and equal pay comparisons. By changing one job slightly, you may 
end up making the job content similar to that of another role. If one group is 
paid more than the other, you could get a legitimate challenge under fair and 
equal pay that you would not be able to counter.
Think outside the box and try to pinpoint potential synergies between 
services so that when you need to reduce costs, you have a fallback position 
that does not compromise the safety of the site and the service you provide.
Safety and security
We have touched on this already, but there are other functions that your site 
supervisory team can provide and integrate into.
•	
Fire procedures. Use your site supervision team as your fire marshals 
throughout the site. This is one of the key functions of the facilities 
department; staff will look to your team to take the lead in fire strategy 
and management.
•	
Bomb threat response. Use your team to sweep buildings for suspect 
packages. Increasingly, your team need to adapt their fire safety 
procedures to suit the added burden of bomb threats and intruders. 
This is a key role that needs to be undertaken by your team. An example 
of bomb threat policies and procedures is given in the Appendices.
•	
Rescues. Your team can help people out of lifts which have jammed, 
or use Evac chairs during fire practices.
•	
Alarms. Your team can activate and silence alarms.
Resourcing
Your site supervision team is a bit of a mop-up service in terms of getting 
work done which does not fit into a specific niche. Of all the services you 
provide, your site supervision team needs to be the most flexible in both its 
approach and its capability. The staff you employ need to be the most flexible 
and should be encouraged to take on additional tasks. This flexibility may 
create the misunderstanding that they don’t really do a lot.

6 In-house teams
133
It is easy to slot this team into functions that are difficult to otherwise 
resource such as PPM and sustainability. Sustainability is one of those 
areas where they can really make an impact, undertaking works such as the 
following.
•	
turning lights off
•	
checking heating has gone off in accordance with timings on the BMS
•	
checking windows are closed
•	
taking thermometer checks of areas to ensure compliance and to 
justify heating adjustments
•	
carrying out external checks on lighting in public access areas
•	
checking whether classes are on to allow you to make recommendations 
about early building closures
•	
recycling duties such as sorting waste
Core times and resourcing
Core times are sometimes difficult to establish, particularly in a college or 
university environment. The curriculum day is getting longer each year as 
colleges become more flexible in their provision, 
so it is not unusual to have a college open from 
7 a.m. through to 10 p.m. It is obviously not 
practical to fully resource with equal numbers 
of staff for the full day, e.g. if you have eight site 
supervisors, logic tells you that you need two 
shifts, one a.m. and one p.m. to cover the full 
day, with four on the morning shift and four 
on the afternoon/evening shift. This may work 
for you, but you need to know when your core 
work is required. In an office or manufacturing 
environment, your core times may be far easier 
to establish and track.
This can be plotted if you understand your 
workload through schedules, work calendars, or 
the Helpdesk. You can easily become unstuck 
when resourcing your days because your 
employees may not advise you that you have 
too many staff working and you are not usually around in the evenings to 
monitor and manage their workload. Supervision is the key issue.

Look at when you need to 
provide services on site 
and try to match your 
structure to the times 
required, or you may find 
your overtime bill goes 
through the roof.


A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
134
There may be a valid requirement to keep the site open for the maximum 
amount of time to allow the organisation to provide the flexible service 
provision required in today’s market. This is an essential part of the site 
supervisory aspect of your service and needs to be dealt with and covered 
proactively. Your job is made harder by having to stretch resources to cover 
these changes. Of course, you could choose to cover the additional services 
by throwing overtime at the problem; and your staff will let you do this. 
Overtime should only be a temporary fix. If you need to commit large amounts 
of funding to overtime, your schedules and rotas are wrong and you need to 
think about restructuring. This situation is likely to get worse, not better. As 
a manager, you should be trying to think of practical ways to resource the 
changes without resorting to overtime.
The  friendly  service
Your site supervisors are the face of your department, sometimes even more 
so than the maintenance team. They are seen by most people as the first 
point of contact for FM. This is 
good, as you will find that your 
site supervisors build up a rapport 
with staff at every level and they 
can be helpful if things go wrong 
between your department and 
others within the organisation. 
Genuine feedback from your staff 
on the mood of other departments should be encouraged as it works for 
you, them and the other departments in a positive way. Customer service 
is very important for these frontline staff and training on customer service 
techniques will never be wasted. Presentable staff dressed in clean uniforms 
help to present a professional image. Making sure your team look right is 
vital in maintaining the identity of your department.
Helpdesk team
A Helpdesk should be at the centre of every FM department. It should be 
the channel for all work, both in and out of the department. The Helpdesk 
should be: the hub for the entire department; the place to report any defects 
or problems on site; a channel for work, e.g. issuing of works; the customer 
service department; and the audit department.
When used correctly and linked into all aspects of your work, the Helpdesk 
should effectively allow your department to become a fully customer-facing 
Note to self
Check out what happens on Friday 
evenings! 
Are 
you 
resourcing 
something when there is no one in 
the buildings?

6 In-house teams
135
operation. In some smaller businesses the Helpdesk duties may need to be 
rolled into the administrative function, as sometimes it is not always viable 
to allocate specific staff to the function of Helpdesk. Again, look for synergies 
between jobs. It could be that in its simplest format the Helpdesk is the 
maintenance team.
The hub for your department
Your Helpdesk is the hub of your department and should be the main 
interface with your customers. With this in mind, it should be located in a 
position where all staff can access it and see that this is the place to go to 
resolve all FM-related issues. It should also be the key area that FM staff 
themselves report to and liaise with to receive their workloads, report on 
progress, problems and completion and other work-related issues, and report 
follow-on or repeat works.
The place to report defects or problems
Location is the key to the success of the Helpdesk. If it is not visible, your 
service becomes a faceless department. Facilities Management problems can 
sometimes get out of control, or seem never to be resolved, because people 
can find it difficult to articulate problems accurately without that face-to-face 
friendly contact. A friendly service creates empathy between the client and 
the Helpdesk staff, who feel more self-worth if they are part of the customer 
service. Sometimes locating the Helpdesk within Reception is a good idea. 
Don’t shy away from creating an 
image for your department. This 
can help to give credence to the 
service and professionalise an 
area which is sometimes seen as 
a peripheral service. Your image 
should be dynamic, because the 
service you provide is dynamic 
and responsive. A front-of-house location puts your service on the map and 
shows all other departments that you are professional, self-confident, vibrant 
and dynamic.
Your Helpdesk system should be:
•	
capable of logging and tracking jobs
•	
capable of setting parameters for completion, e.g. within 24 hours or 
five days
Note to self
The Helpdesk needs to be dynamic 
and customer-oriented at all times, a 
showcase for the professionalism of 
the department.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
136
•	
capable of recognising and dealing with “planned” works, while still 
using the same credentials of checking completion within an allotted 
time
•	
capable of storing comments so that you can update staff on progress
•	
capable of storing building-specific or even department-specific data
•	
a channel for issuing work
Sometimes it may not be practical or financially viable to have a computerised 
package for issuing and tracking jobs. Realistically, for a Helpdesk work 
efficiently, it needs to be computer-based, even if that is simply a spreadsheet 
which details jobs. You need to be able to follow and track jobs to make sure 
they are completed. It is also far easier to produce statistical information 
using a spreadsheet.
Customer service department
Today’s sophisticated society is more than capable of making judgments on 
what is good and what is bad customer service. You need to be clear to your 
Helpdesk team and, indeed, all your staff, that customer service, or from the 
students’ perspective in an educational environment, “the learner journey,” 
is of paramount concern and time spent emphasising the message about 
customer service will be time well spent.
Audit department
Your Helpdesk should also be the arbiter of poor service. There should be 
supervisory staff in each department checking work and making sure you 
meet your targets on quality, but this is too good a chance to miss. You have 
the perfect opportunity to improve the quality of your service by getting your 
Helpdesk staff to contribute to your audit service by:
•	
undertaking quality audits on services
•	
undertaking customer satisfaction surveys on the quality of the 
service and works provided
•	
providing statistical data on quality to report to senior staff
The ability to self-analyse performance and learn and adapt to the 
changing face of the site are key to the success of your department. These 
data are essential in achieving this. Your Helpdesk should be developed 

6 In-house teams
137
to provide data to you in a format you can use effectively and in a way 
that can:
•	
justify your department in terms of value
•	
show the relationship between your workload and staffing levels
•	
allow you to bench-mark your service
•	
provide credible data to show your performance in relation to your 
peers in other institutions
•	
allow you to set realistic goals and targets
•	
demonstrate your achievement of targets set and complied with
•	
show risk where appropriate
Identify
work
Enter work
onto
Helpdesk
Action and
allocate
work
Sign off
completed
work
Audit
The cycle of work through a Helpdesk
Helpdesk software specif ication
Your computerised system should be a database of your entire building stock, 
providing you with a breakdown of your site in terms of what is in each 
building and allowing you to access more detailed information at floor level, 
including the size and type of space and rooms available with the appropriate 
occupancy level. More sophisticated systems also allow CAD plans to be 
uploaded to show your staff the locations of rooms. This can be invaluable for 
staff who do not know your site well or who are off site. Further levels of detail 

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
138
can show M & E assets in any area and allow special requirements such as 
permits to work to be uploaded. Additional information such as guidance 
notes can also be provided.
Ideally the system should be able to:
•	
interface with Outlook to use the email facility
•	
email jobs to the appropriate team member
•	
cut and paste information into and out of the job sheet
•	
move responsive jobs into the planned category if needed
•	
have a section for room schedules, e.g. availability of the room where 
the repair is needed
•	
add follow up jobs, e.g. paint after a repair
•	
show the top ten most fre-quent 
jobs based on performance 
indicators across the bottom of 
the screen
System requirements
The following are recommended:
•	
the capability to upload full details of each space on the site as a 
spreadsheet
•	
a “Go to” facility to access a predetermined job reference, the last 
place you looked at, or the top or bottom of a list
•	
the ability to print both single and batch jobs
•	
the ability to reprint orders without duplication
•	
the ability to allow individual users to customise their front-end and 
to save settings
•	
online tracking of jobs by the end-user
The system should also be capable of holding data on all your contractors, 
such as:
•	
contractor’s name
•	
contact name and number, including email address
Note to self
Set up the Helpdesk to be critical of 
the service it provides.

6 In-house teams
139
•	
details of public and employer liability insurance
•	
compliance with health and safety policies
•	
permit to work requirements, such as working at height or hot work 
permits
•	
an audit facility, so contractors can be tracked on the quality of their 
service
•	
the ability to automatically print vehicle and visitor passes
•	
the ability to generate an email to the PDA of the responsible manager 
when the contractor signs in
The system should also be capable of uploading all your PPM jobs. There are 
two types of PPM: internal and external. External PPM jobs are those covered 
by external contractors, such as lift maintenance, boiler maintenance, fire 
and emergency lighting and fire-fighting equipment. Your system should be 
capable of:
•	
logging contractor activity on a calendar
•	
sending a reminder email to the contractor
•	
providing a log in–log out facility to give time and date stamps
•	
providing details of work required
•	
allowing a job to be signed off by the maintenance supervisor via PDA
•	
providing information to the contractor, e.g. permit to work 
requirements
Internal PPMs include the cyclical and maintenance jobs undertaken by in-
house staff including: cleaning of gutters, blowing down calorifiers, running 
underused taps, Legionella testing, oiling door closers and hinges, changing 
filters and rotating pumps. Your system should be capable of the following:
•	
sending an email to the maintenance or site supervisory team (person-
specific)
•	
sending an email to each team, e.g. morning and afternoon shift 
supervisors
•	
providing details of works required
•	
interfacing with stores and a basic list of spares
•	
signing off a job by supervisor or manager

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
140
•	
providing permit to work requirements
•	
giving online access to risk assessments
•	
giving access to guidance notes on PPM processes
•	
interfacing with staff holiday dates ensure that staff are available
A Helpdesk strategy is given in the Appendices.
Post team
A thriving organisation will have a busy post room, with vast amounts of 
mail, both inbound and outbound, on a daily basis. Factor into this the 
amount of internal mail and documents that need to be dealt with on a daily 
basis, together with deliveries from suppliers, and you could have a logistical 
nightmare. Post rooms may have a steady and even workflow, but from time 
to time will explode in terms of volume.
Your structure needs to be able to cope with this ebb and flow of work 
and be able to manage peaks and troughs seamlessly to ensure a continuity 
of workload. It is no use pushing your staff to breaking point during times 
of high workload, then allowing them to be idle when the work dries up. It 
is much better to even out the work or spread it between different functions. 
With that in mind, it is useful to overlap services to allow peaks and troughs 
to be evened out. The most obvious way is to amalgamate Post with the 
Helpdesk. This way you have the opportunity to increase the skills of staff 
from both disciplines, while at the same time creating continuity and allowing 
succession within the department.
Don’t underestimate the amount of space you need to undertake this 
function, not just safely, but in an environment which is conducive to work. 
Create space for your franking machines and folders and try to create work 
flows which require the least movement between functions. Allowing room 
for post to be accurately sorted into batched sizes will speed up the franking 
process.
Don’t forget this is a service in which you meet customers face-to-face. 
Staff will visit the area each day to pick up or drop off mail. Making the whole 
process look professional will improve your image within the organisation.
Deliveries out to departments
There are various options for the delivery of post out to departments and 
you really have two considerations here: spread of locations and available 
manpower.

6 In-house teams
141
You may be lucky enough to have a single site where all mail can be 
delivered to a central point and then distributed around the site, or you 
may have a central base with a number of off-site centres miles away from 
the main hub. Your considerations may therefore be about creating various 
mini post centres or arranging a central pick-up point for all your post to 
come back to your central sorting office. There is no hard and fast blueprint 
for this, so this is one area you need to look at carefully and weigh up the 
options available. Rather than delivering mail to multiple areas, why not look 
at a single drop in, say, the administration area of each centre, allowing 
other staff to continue with the internal distribution of post from that point 
onwards. Considering all your options could provide you with a solution that 
has not been considered before.
You may be able to distribute parcels and post directly to work areas from 
your post room as they arrive on site. This shows good customer service, but 
is extremely costly and inefficient. The best and most efficient way to deliver 
post is once per day. This is best timed with the early delivery of the post 
to site, so that all departments receive the day’s mail before a set time, say 
10 a.m. Any residual mail can be tied in with the delivery of reprographics 
materials, parts or documents later in the day by your site supervision team. 
This frees up your Post staff to undertake Helpdesk duties; in addition, early 
post sorting can be undertaken with the assistance of the Helpdesk staff to 
share workload and encourage teamwork and bonding.
Be careful about requesting timed delivery from the Royal Mail as this 
will increase your post bill considerably. Currently standing at nearly £4000, 
the cost of a timed delivery can sometimes be seen as a luxury. Ask your 
departments if there is a special reason for having the post early. You may 
find only one department requires an early post. Look carefully at timed 
delivery as removing this can be a quick way to save money.
Another way to save on your postage costs is to batch your mail in sizes 
and in large volumes. The Royal Mail allows this type of mail to be discounted 
if it is batched in groups of more than 1000 and the addresses are typed. This 
can create substantial savings on your post bill.
Parcels and deliveries
The controlled delivery of goods to site is part of the general workload of this 
department. Ensuring and logging the delivery of parcels and supplies and 
how those deliveries are made is a crucial role in the control of stock and 
financial management of the busy post room.
It is important that all deliveries come to a central area whenever possible. 
This allows you to control what has come on to the site and when it arrived. 

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
142
Deliveries should be signed for and logged to allow tracking of those goods 
around the site. It is easy to lose control of valuable stock coming on site when 
you don’t know when it came, who received it, who moved it on to the end-user 
and who accepted responsibility for it when it finally reached its destination.
It is good practice to keep a 
tally of all deliveries and post 
coming on to and going off the site. 
This will allow you to undertake 
data analysis and assist you 
in 
justifying 
changes 
in 
the 
department as a result of changes 
in workflow. It may also help you 
to make the case for additional 
staff when workloads increase.
Cleaning team
You can never win with this service, as you will 
rarely be able to provide perfection. Cleaning, 
when done well, is rarely noticed. It simply 
blends into the background and is taken for 
granted. However, as soon as it goes wrong, your 
credibility diminishes rapidly.
Cleaning is likely to be the largest single 
service that you provide and the largest single 
budget you handle. Everyone thinks that they are 
a cleaning expert and will only be too pleased to 
tell you how they would deal with cleaning, how 
they would improve cleaning and how they can 
save money for you. When cleaning is sourced 
in-house, it also likely to be your biggest drain 
in terms of the time you to devote to HR and 
supervision.
Timing
Cleaning should never be seen. This is what is 
generally thought by most people. The cleaning 
process can get in the way of the day-to-day 
business of the establishment. No one wants to 
Note to self
Start to pull together statistics on 
how much mail is coming into and 
going out of the post room. This 
will help with budgeting and staff 
resourcing. Ask staff to help collate 
the figures.

Set up a focus group 
made up of staff from 
various 
departments 
to 
look 
at 
cleaning. 
Consider: times on site, 
standards, feedback and 
service 
improvements. 
Drive the service forward 
with high quality at all 
times and make your 
cleaning 
service 
your 
prime objective. Get this 
right and the rest will 
follow.


6 In-house teams
143
hear vacuum cleaners; the silence demanded by most office functions will 
generally 
preclude 
you 
from 
providing the service when the 
core activities of the establishment 
are taking place. Therefore your 
cleaning 
service 
is 
generally 
provided early in the morning or in 
the evening. This is the time when 
you are not on the premises 
yourself and therefore makes it 
difficult for you to bond with the service. It does not allow you the opportunity 
to interface with the staff who provide the service. If your cleaning staff don’t 
know you and never see you, they may never understand exactly what you 
want from the service. As a manager, you need to be visible to all staff. You 
have to be approachable and you have to be seen to be human. You can never 
command respect from your staff if they don’t know you. The way in 
which you supervise and manage this service therefore needs to be carefully 
mapped out.
It’s only cleaning! If you take that attitude, then shame on you. Your 
cleaning budget can be as much as a third of your entire budget. If you are 
prepared to under-manage this amount of budget, then you are asking for 
trouble. If you are seen as a manager who is only around when there are 
problems, this can further alienate your cleaning staff. If the only time you 
see them is when you are dealing with sickness or discipline, they will come 
to see you in a negative way.
There are times when you need to be available outside the core business 
hours. Your cleaning staff will work for you far better if they feel in touch 
with you. Try to arrange to be around on a regular basis, not every day, but 
perhaps once a week. Make sure you take time to walk around and have a 
chat with your cleaners. Block some time on your Outlook calendar and treat 
this time as you would any other meeting.
However, it has been proved that better productivities are achieved from 
cleaning staff when they are cleaning while other staff are working. If you can 
convince your senior managers of this, you will achieve better productivity. If 
your cleaning staff become part of the overall team, then they feel part of the 
whole process and an integral part of the FM department. Also, because the 
service is seen, other staff in the organisation will know that you are cleaning 
and you will receive far less complaints about the service. It is one of those 
feel-good factors; if people get to know the service they are far more tolerant 
of it.
Note to self
The cleaning service is a no-win 
service, but is probably your biggest 
budget area. Make sure you are clear 
about the service you want and give 
it the attention it deserves.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
144
Supervision
As you are unlikely to be around all the time, make sure that your supervision 
team is on your side. Make an extra effort to 
engage with them and make them feel part of 
the team. Take time out to have meetings with 
them, either formally or informally, and make 
sure they know what is expected of them. Create 
an SLA by which you can measure the service 
you provide and set them targets to achieve 
using the SMARTER target system explained 
earlier.
Your supervisors must be well trained. 
Your cleaning supervisors must be trained to 
the level where they can step up to management in just the same way as 
everyone else. You are training them to be your eyes and ears so that they 
can promote the organisation’s aspirations. If you get this service right, the 
rest will be easy to conquer.
The poisoned chalice
Cleaning is a very difficult service to get right because it is usually unseen, 
so no one believes it takes place, or it just blends into the background. Staff 
rarely see it as a professional service as “anyone can clean.” This is absolutely 
wrong! Anyone can clean, but not everyone can clean well. When you get it 
right, no one wants to know, but if it goes wrong, people cannot accept that 
you made a mistake with such a “simple” service. To understand the cleaning 
service is to understand its true complexity and the sheer effort needed to 
make it perform well.
Cleaners can be transitory. Some have stayed with the job for years and 
want nothing more, yet to others cleaning is seen as a stepping stone to 
a full-time job, based on the view that it is easier to get a job when you 
have a job. Sometimes cleaning can be a high turnover business, especially 
recruitment, training and the administration associated with HR. This can be 
very frustrating when trying to achieve stability in a department. Because of 
this transient nature, the overall application to the job can be less than from 
other departments. The motivation of cleaning staff can also be very difficult, 
so the more you engage with your cleaning staff, the more likely are likely to 
succeed.
­Warning
Never relax 
your control of a 
cleaning service. It 
needs constant 
management.

6 In-house teams
145
Value added: sustainability and security
Your cleaning team should never be seen as just cleaners; look for value-
added services that can be provided. Some managers miss some of the more 
obvious value-added services that can be provided by your cleaning staff in 
the execution of their duties, such as sustainability and security.
Sustainability
Not only can your cleaning team directly influence your sustainability 
performance, but there are successes that can be achieved by using your 
cleaning staff in a proactive way to improve your sustainability.
How often, if you are up early enough or behind late enough, do you 
find all the lights switched on, windows wide open and the heating on full? 
Encourage your cleaning staff to operate in one room at a time, turning lights 
on as they enter and off again as they leave. Most modern buildings have 
thermostatic valves on the radiators. Ask the cleaning staff to turn these 
down rather than open the windows. Cleaning is a physical job and working 
in a hot environment makes it more difficult to work, so cleaning staff may 
benefit from the heating being turned down or off early. However, don’t just 
turn off the heating without discussing it first, as you may end up with a 
walk-out on your hands.
Ask your cleaning staff to log off PCs while they are working; it will more 
than pay for itself in terms of time from the savings you will make. Other 
items such as heaters, projectors, photocopiers and air conditioning can also 
be turned off early, saving further money. If cleaners are the last into the 
building and don’t turn these items off, then they will be left on until the next 
day or over the weekend. In an educational environment, you could find that 
they are left switched on for the whole of the summer break. So a little bit of 
training in this area will save you a lot of money.
Be careful, however, what duties you load onto the cleaners. If you 
start to stray into other duties, you may find yourself faced with a fair 
and equal pay claim which you would find difficult to contest, e.g. if you 
ask cleaners to lock up and move things around, what is the difference 
in duties between your site supervisors and your cleaners? If your site 
supervisors are paid more for doing the same job, why should the cleaners 
not ask for the same pay for commensurate duties? So when mapping 
duties, make sure you can clearly justify the difference between one group 
and another.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
146
Security
Your cleaning staff are sometimes 
used as security staff, your eyes 
and ears around the site. Train 
them to be vigilant about strangers 
in the buildings and encourage 
them to challenge, in a polite way, 
people who don’t seem to be in the 
right place at the right time.
Ask them to work in tandem with your security and site supervision or 
caretaking teams. Asking them to lock as they go will reduce the locking 
down time of your caretaking team. Using them as a valuable resource for 
security will provide a far more robust, secure environment, which is also 
good for safeguarding issues.
Consumables
You will find a fixed link between the size of your cleaning service and the 
amount of consumables used. The more cleaners you have, the more cleaning 
materials are used and, consequently, the more you will spend on items such 
as cleaning chemicals, black bin bags and toilet rolls.
Because of the timing of the service, it is easy for these kinds of 
consumables to leave the site unchallenged. A few items leaving in this way 
throughout the year can make a huge difference to your annual stock levels. 
It is therefore necessary to have a robust stock control system to ensure and 
track your cleaning stock. Having a good stock control system is enough to 
deter minor pilfering. Remember that you need to monitor this service in the 
same way as every other.
Security team
Society has changed dramatically over the last 20 years. However, educational 
premises, in particular, have always been open and accessible, the main 
exception being junior and infant schools which have, for some time, been 
much tighter on security. Colleges are generally open, and because of this 
may be easy targets for theft and other crimes. The security of your premises 
is therefore one of balance.
Do you secure all entrances and exits and put guards on every door? 
This indicates to the outside world that you have a problem. Or do you go 
Note to self
Think laterally about what value-
added services you can achieve from 
your cleaning service. Don’t be afraid 
to think out of the box.

6 In-house teams
147
the other way and keep open access with a low key guarding structure, 
potentially putting yourself at risk of severe criticism if an incident results in 
media attention?
The basics of the security service are as follows.
•	
Policies and procedures. Link to your strategic objectives, one of which 
is likely to be safeguarding in an educational environment, and ensure 
your policies and procedures mirror each other.
•	
Define your service and publish your outcomes. Set your targets based 
on the statistical information you have collated and use these as 
bench-mark statistics to allow you to set further targets.
•	
Parameters of the service. Define exactly what the service consists 
of in terms of the following specific areas of concern: safeguarding, 
intruders, drugs and alcohol, CCTV and patrols.
Safeguarding
Curriculum departments deal with the pastoral side of safeguarding 
in educational institutions and your strategy should dovetail into that 
curriculum response. This is one area where you need to have a watertight 
connection between the service you provide and the service provided by 
curriculum departments. The two services must talk to each other in 
a coherent way to share intelligence that will provide that holistic service 
demanded by legislation. When setting out your meeting strategy, make sure 
that the pastoral staff receive your minutes or, better still, join the meeting 
and participate. This is the only real way of ensuring fusion between the 
two services. Don’t forget that safeguarding and its principles are just as 
important to a Facilities Manager in a shopping centre or a manufacturing 
industry. Strands of legislation will apply to all areas of FM in a number of 
different environments.
Intruders
You need to protect the site, staff and, in an education setting, students from 
intruders. This may be difficult because of an organisation’s open door policies 
with full accessibility. This is what puts colleges at the heart of the community. 
Over time, many routes through sites have become public rights of way and 
this makes it difficult to challenge intruders and strangers on site. The same 
principals of securing a site are important in all organisations and your security 
risk assessment will help to decide what level of security you need to implement.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
148
However, you must seek to prevent intruders from entering the premises. 
This can be achieved in a number of ways, particularly if financial or 
political reasons prevent you from using swipe card access on every door. 
Simple measures, such as requiring all staff to carry and show ID cards, 
can be useful if implemented sympathetically. Incentives such as reduced or 
discounted rates in cafes will encourage their use in proactive and productive 
ways, rather than labouring the negative aspects of security. This can also 
create a bond between staff and the company by making staff feel part of the 
organisation. In this way, people who are not wearing their badges become 
instantly recognisable as strangers.
One recent trend is for security services to dress down to give a more 
relaxed feel to the site. This can work by preventing strangers from immediately 
spotting security officers. The negative side is that they may become bolder if 
they feel there is no security on site. There are pros and cons for both views 
and it is up to each individual institution to decide what is best for their site.
Drugs and alcohol
Drug and alcohol abuse is becoming far more prevalent in society and it is a 
difficult subject to deal with without appearing to admit that you have a drugs 
problem on site. You may choose to carry out drugs checks or searches, which 
can introduce their own problems. In an educational environment, targeting 
your new student cohort with information and advice on drugs and providing 
support, particularly at the beginning of their tenure and repeating that 
message as the term progresses, is a good method of tackling the problem. 
Make sure that this is a combined exercise between your department and the 
pastoral staff.
You will probably find that your statistics for drugs in particular peak 
during the September intake. You may also see a sharp increase in the 
number of people dealing drugs on site and therefore may need additional 
resources early in the curriculum year. Many dealers see the start of term 
as an incentive to influence the new cohort, generally 16 to19 year olds 
who have just left school and are easily persuaded into buying drugs to 
experiment. Your strategy must be one of prevention rather than cure. This 
is an area that is of utmost importance and one that colleges need to tackle 
early in the year.
In other environments, you could display signs on zero drug tolerance 
for visitors to site. This promotes the social corporate responsibility of an 
organisation in, say, a shopping centre. You could also target drugs as an 
issue through staff newsletters or during induction procedures.

6 In-house teams
149
Closed-circuit television
Closed-circuit television (CCTV) can be a very useful tool. Even when not 
in use, a well-designed CCTV system is a great deterrent to intruders and 
drug dealers if they think their actions will be caught on camera. To be 
effective, your system needs to be well planned and to give as full coverage as 
is practical so you are able to track people as they go around your site. There 
are basically two levels to be considered: internal and external.
Internal cameras can be useful, but can also be seen by staff as “Big 
Brother is watching you.” Internal cameras will generally be fixed and 
focused on a particular area, such as a doorway into a building, a high risk 
area where money is stored, or food outlets where cash may be taken. Most 
modern systems will be digital.
Care must be taken when specifying your system. Make sure you are 
buying a good quality, tried and tested system. If necessary, speak to similar 
companies and see what has worked for them and what has not worked. 
Make sure you size your system to ensure you have enough continuous 
recording time. Also make sure that your storage space is large enough to 
allow expansion of your network. There is nothing worse than spending 
thousands of pounds on a system, only to find you only have one or two days 
of recorded storage space. Ask for guarantees of this from your installer. Try 
for five frames per second with 30 days of recording time, allowing for 25% 
spare capacity in the system for upgrades.
It may not always be possible to fully cover a site out of hours. Indeed, it 
may not even be necessary. If you have never had issues at night and you 
are confident that this will not change in the near future, then why invest in 
overnight monitoring of your CCTV systems? You can always review this to 
make sure that the situation has not changed.
Patrols
This is the aspect of the security guard service that most people identify 
with: your guards walking around the site keeping a check on things. It is far 
more than that, however. Your guarding service patrols are the visible face 
of the organisation. They need to be professional in their demeanour and 
to represent authority without being intrusive or threatening. They need to 
support staff when issues arise; visitors and guests as well as staff need to 
know that they are protected from external influences.
In an educational environment, the security patrols need to provide a 
friendly, but professional, service which engages with the students while 
making sure they know the parameters of acceptable behaviour. Groups of 

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
150
students will naturally push the boundaries of acceptable behaviour. Care 
must be taken to ensure that the guards are suitably trained. They must be 
routinely reminded that they should not become over-friendly with students 
or form liaisons with them, which are both unprofessional and inappropriate. 
This can easily create problems on site. A good team of security guards can 
provide you with much peace of mind about your service and a positive, 
friendly security team with good customer relations will have a positive effect 
on your business.
Structure your team’s breaks around natural breaks in the core activities, 
making sure that the guards are not on their breaks when incidents are 
historically most likely. Times such coffee breaks and lunch times are times 
for the service to be high profile.
Your strategy on reporting should be carefully thought through before you 
begin. This is because, as with any other service, the information you are 
providing must be accurate. If you can get your reporting strategy right in 
the first place, then your data further down the line will be more reliable and 
accurate and, importantly, consistent.
Statistics
Statistics, if collected in a consistent way, can help you to focus your stretched 
resources into areas where they will be most effective. Your statistics can also 
help staff to focus on at-risk groups and target issues such as bullying and 
harassment.
Your statistics can cover:
•	
Geography. This helps you to identify hotspots on the site where most 
incidents happen, focusing you on where your patrols need to be 
targeted. It helps to put a visible face in an area where it will send 
out the best message to those who may cause mischief on your site.
•	
Groups. There may be issues with a certain age, gender or ethnicity 
group and targeted reports will help you to focus on these in particular.
•	
Times. There could be times of the day when the problem becomes 
more noticeable. Breaking your information on incidents down into 
times of the day will help to pinpoint times when the site is most likely 
to have problems. This can then help you to provide the right number 
of guards at the right time.
Security is clearly an area which can have a massive impact on your 
organisation in terms of community perception. Bad press in relation to 

6 In-house teams
151
issues surrounding security have the potential to cause a substantial threat 
to the organisation. The balance of the service provided needs to be constantly 
reviewed to ensure it fully meets the requirements of the organisation. Using 
risk assessment to look at security will be beneficial in showing where the 
issues are and will focus you on service provision and issues you need to 
target.
Aide Memoire: In-house teams
•	
Get to know your teams and learn what skill sets you have 
available in the individual teams.
•	
Ensure you are able to quantify all the work undertaken by your 
individual teams.
•	
Check the performance of individual teams and ensure consistency 
of performance across all teams.
•	
Treat all teams the same and never allow one team to become a 
favourite.
•	
Ensure you can track how much each service costs by developing 
individual cost centres.
•	
Ensure the work of your teams is documented in terms of levels 
of service and content of workload.
•	
Ensure the individual services are being provided when required, 
i.e. matched to operational hours.
•	
Make sure each team’s work can dovetail into the next team and 
encourage crossovers between departments.
•	
Try to promote a friendly customer-oriented service.
•	
Ensure your Helpdesk sits at the heart of the service you provide 
and becomes the hub and driving force of the service.
•	
Ensure services such as cleaning become more visible.
•	
Ensure you don’t miss the potential for using your cleaning service 
for sustainability issues such as turning thermostats down.
•	
Make sure your security services dovetail into your other services.

152
Chapter 7
Maintenance including new builds 
and space management
Maintenance procedures are carried out when something needs corrective or 
pre-emptive action to be able to function correctly. Good maintenance helps 
to provide optimum performance and longevity of your buildings and plant.
When you arrive in your new post, you will probably see that a seemingly 
disproportionate amount of money is budgeted for reactive maintenance. If 
this is the case, then your FM department has probably been poorly run in 
the past. You now have the opportunity to develop your maintenance strategy 
proactively in a way that shows you are a credible Facilities Manager. This 
seems to imply that your predecessor has applied his or her resources poorly; 
however, you will generally find that many departments “fire-fight” maintenance 
and never get to grips with the philosophy of planned maintenance.
Types of maintenance
There are three distinct areas in maintenance: reactive, planned and planned 
preventative maintenance (PPM). Most people 
will say that PPM and planned maintenance 
are one and the same. In my opinion, they 
are not, as explained in this chapter.
Reactive maintenance
This is simply repairing things as they 
break. Reactive maintenance can be one of 
the biggest drains on your budget. If things 
break, it can be for a number of reasons.
­Warning
Never be 
tempted to buy 
cheaply, as inevitably 
you will need to buy 
the item again in the 
near future.

7 Maintenance including new builds and space management
153
The first reason is the poor quality of equipment or finished works. If 
you buy or repair things in an inferior way, then they are going to break 
more frequently. There is much to be said for the old adage “buy cheap, 
buy twice.” When we are striving to drive down prices, there is always the 
temptation to reduce specification. If we are rushed in our decisions when 
procuring, we can fall into the trap of not writing or choosing specifications 
that give longevity of the finished product or work. Remember always that 
you need to show due diligence when purchasing equipment and services for 
your organisation. Due diligence not only means being studious about the 
way in which you procure your goods and services, but is also about paying 
attention to quality to ensure you protect your organisation. Your mantra 
should be: quality, quality and quality. If you are not buying, procuring and 
managing your purchases based on quality, then not only will you make 
more work for yourself in the long term, but you will also be labelled as 
someone who does not care about the service you provide.
Another reason for breakages is poor maintenance as a result of ignorance. 
There is no point in spending hundreds and thousands, if not millions, of 
pounds on new buildings or refurbishments only to focus on something else 
and forget to maintain these properly. You will often see this where two or 
three years down the line a fan burns out because it has not been serviced. 
Kitchen fans become clogged up with grease because no one has put in place 
a regime for changing the filters. This, in my opinion, is ignorance of the 
systems and a general lack of care; due diligence again.
Poor maintenance can also be a result of budget pressures. This is potentially 
the worst position for a practising manager to be put in. Sometimes we all have 
to bear the burden of a reduction in budgets, but this must be done in a way 
that reduces the long-term liability 
of the services you provide. Risk 
assessment 
must 
be 
used 
to 
understand the long-term liabilities 
of not maintaining a piece of 
equipment, or dispensing with a 
service provider just to save money. 
In 
the 
long 
term 
you 
could 
potentially be creating a far bigger 
problem by not maintaining a piece 
of 
equipment. 
You 
need 
to 
understand this long-term view 
before committing yourself to a 
course of action. You cannot cut a 
Note to self
When you obtain a new building, 
make a list of all the plant, equipment 
and 
structures 
that 
will 
need 
maintaining. Put them all into you 
PPM schedules and start monitoring, 
managing and maintaining from day 
one. It will almost certainly help 
you to identify maintenance needs 
early, and will also validate your 
defects period if everything is fully 
maintained.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
154
service or maintenance regime without ensuring your senior managers, directors 
and governors also understand the long-term implications of doing so.
Poor skill levels of operatives or technicians can also result in higher 
maintenance costs. If they are not skilled to appropriate levels to manage 
and maintain equipment and processes, it follows that you will need greater 
resources to put things right when equipment fails. It pays in the long term to 
increase the skills of your staff. This will also reduce the frustration you can 
feel when seeing equipment continually breaking down as a result of your 
operatives not using it or maintaining it adequately.
When staff are under-resourced, they are also under pressure to do things 
quickly. This can result in jobs not being completed properly. For example, 
you may have a heating problem. Your heating engineer or plumber cannot 
immediately find the problem, but restarts the plant and the heating comes 
back on. They then go on to do other jobs and forget to return to resolve 
the initial problem. It could be days, weeks or months before the problem 
is remembered and resolved. This can lead to other equipment around the 
site being turned off or disconnected, preventing the system from running 
effectively.
Planned maintenance
Planned maintenance is somewhere between PPM and capital replacement. 
Most people see capital as items of equipment or additions/refurbishments 
that add value to the property and are therefore capitalised or written down 
in terms of value at the end of the financial year. This is true to some degree, 
but there are many minor replacements in a system that are not of sufficient 
value to merit capitalisation, such as pumps or drives. Sometimes these 
items are classified as minor capital.
Planned maintenance means replacements, upgrades or refurbishment 
that need to be planned to be replaced ahead of obsolescence. They are not 
large enough to be capitalised or to form part of a maintenance regime or 
PPM. Clearly, replacing pumps before they break is not maintenance, but 
replacement of minor capital. Rarely, however, will you see any manager 
replacing things before they break, and certainly not if, through good 
maintenance, the item continues to work at its optimum performance. It is, 
however, important that a balance is found to provide and account for the 
potential to replace, even if you can avoid it. This is generally done by creating 
a “sinking fund,” which can drip-feed a fund to allow the replacement of 
equipment before it fails. This is more of an art than a science, but a good 
Facilities Manager, with a number of checks and balances, can get it right 
most of the time.

7 Maintenance including new builds and space management
155
What is a sinking fund? On a very simplistic level, a sinking fund is a 
savings account that you regularly put money into in predefined amounts to 
pay for something you wish to replace. However, this invariably becomes more 
complex. Rarely is a regular deposit into your account a random amount; 
it is made up from complex depreciation rates. Depreciation is a financial 
measure by which you write down the value of an asset over a period of time 
to accurately measure the value of your estate.
It is not practical to continually feed into a sinking fund on the off-chance 
that you will need it. This is not good practice and does not make best use 
of the resources of the institution. Your sinking fund should be a predictive 
fund for future pre-failure replacements, while at the same time showing 
sensitivity to budgets, which will please your finance department. It is always 
a good idea to keep on the good side of the finance department, as there 
are times when you will not always be popular, particularly if you get this 
predictive element wrong and need ask for more funding.
You should place a relatively similar amount of money in your sinking 
fund each year. This ensures that it builds each year and allows you to spread 
your cash flow evenly over a period of years. You need to be able to show that 
you are managing this fund correctly and that the amount going out each 
year approximately matches the amount going in.
Planned preventative maintenance
Planned preventative maintenance covers tasks that are carried out at a 
predetermined frequency to maintain the efficiency of a piece of equipment or 
a process. You carry out PPM to stabilise problems or, preferably, to prevent 
problems occurring in the first place. When budgets are cut, PPM is often one 
of the first things to be forgotten or axed.
Organisations sometimes get into the mind-fix of waiting until something 
breaks before mending it. This can be designed out using your internal 
processes and practices. Using quality audits can identify when things are 
starting to go wrong and this can create ownership. Without ownership, no 
one will care if things are not done and your staff will walk past things rather 
than repair them. Because they don’t have ownership, they don’t have pride. 
You should develop the culture of room reports, where items are checked and 
staff held accountable if something is found to be defective. This soon begins 
to build pride and, in the long term, will save money spent on minor repairs. 
Your plumbing or heating engineers can carry out the equivalent of a room 
report in plant rooms by monitoring conditions and creating ownership.
External PPM is undertaken by an external person or company; in other 
words, it is outsourced. These are specialist jobs which require specific 

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
156
skills. These jobs are generally outsourced because they are uneconomic to 
undertake internally. As a department, you cannot afford to recruit staff just 
to deal with a specific area unless you have sufficient volume of work to 
ensure continuity and keep your staff fully engaged. This kind of PPM is more 
difficult to monitor as you can never be sure the contractor is complying with 
requirements. Simple follow-up checks after service can help, such as writing 
the date they were changed on filters.
Internal PPM covers all the regular maintenance undertaken by your own 
staff. This list will be ever-changing as the type of equipment and buildings 
on your site change. This is another area that can suffer from service drift if 
the service changes and the list of regular PPM is not updated.
Your PPM should link into your QMS. Linking to quality gives you the 
ability to review and audit your PPM, which, if done correctly, will identify 
any gaps and provide you with a methodology for updating your list of PPM.
How to establish PPM schedules
You will need a list of all the processes and procedures that will eventually 
form your PPM list. You can extract these from a number of sources.
If your Helpdesk is set up correctly, then information extracted from its 
records and statistics can be a massive aid. Look for patterns. Are there any 
jobs that are carried out on a regular basis? Is there something that is getting 
put onto the Helpdesk at the same time every month? If so, why are the 
Helpdesk team repeatedly entering them? This kind of job should be set up 
and carried out automatically at prescribed intervals. It is then one job less 
for your Helpdesk team to put on the system. Most Helpdesk packages will 
have a PPM module, so make use of it!
Your O & M manual should, if set up correctly, provide you with all the 
information you need about the building and what is contained in it. Extracting 
all the maintenance jobs from this document should be relatively easy, but you 
will need to look closely as sometimes these jobs are embedded within other 
product and machinery information. One way of doing this is to get your build 
team to provide you with all the maintenance processes as a spreadsheet. This 
can be set out so you can upload it directly to your Helpdesk system.
Your staff will be able to tell you about all the jobs that they do on a 
regular basis and the essential information you are likely to need. This will 
also engender buy-in by staff, creating that all-important ownership. Staff 
can provide information about the following aspects.
•	
What. What are the processes and are there any linked or similar 
processes that can be undertaken at the same time?

7 Maintenance including new builds and space management
157
•	
Where. Your staff can tell you exactly where a piece of equipment is. 
Sometimes, even with theoretically up-to-date drawings, it can be 
difficult to identify where pieces of equipment are located and, if you 
don’t document these items and someone leaves, you might find it 
difficult to track them down. Typically these are items such as ducting 
dampers, three-port valves, drain-offs, BMS controllers and sensors.
•	
When. When is the best time of day to undertake the task to avoid 
disruption? Sometimes you 
can be frustrated by a PPM 
being on the system and 
your staff never being able 
to access the job because it 
is in an office where workers 
cannot be disrupted. It is 
far easier to work your PPM 
to suit occupation patterns.
•	
How. Staff can provide 
details about how they do 
the job and give a logical 
process for you to write 
down as a procedure.
You can also use your peers to give you information. Most Facilities Managers 
will deal with the same processes and do not mind sharing best practices. 
Use your networking skills to provide you with a ready-made set of PPMs and 
be prepared to return the favours.
Your PPM can serve purposes other than just maintaining your building 
stock. You can also use PPM to prove what you do as a department. As a 
department, you need to be able to justify yourself; monitored and managed 
PPM can emphasis the volume of work your department undertakes. Rigidly 
followed PPM can prevent litigation in some areas, e.g. staff reporting headaches 
and blaming dirty filters on air-conditioning units. An enforced PPM that 
changes the filters on a regular basis and documents when they are changed 
will save you many hours trying to track down this information. Likewise, if, 
as part of your PPM, you have a room check, you are able to document when 
furniture in a particular room was checked, so if someone traps their finger or 
cuts themselves you can prove due diligence in having checked the furniture 
on a regular basis. This again saves you issues with insurance claims.
Your PPM can have a huge influence on your budgets. If you can incorporate 
and dovetail your planned, minor capital and PPM functions together and 
Note to self
Make sure you have a formal 
specification of works for every PPM 
item that you have on the system. 
That way, you can be sure that they 
are being undertaken in a consistent 
way.
Note to self
Borrow ideas from other Facilities 
Managers; don’t continually reinvent 
the wheel.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
158
apply your PPM processes diligently, you will reduce the amount of breakages 
and repairs you need to undertake and will move the balance of maintenance 
from responsive to planned.
PPM specif ication
It is important to put specifications behind each of these PPM processes. No 
matter how simple the PPM is, e.g. cleaning a foyer window, the work will be 
undertaken differently by each person who carries it out. This does not really 
make a great difference when the PPM is something so simple. However, if the 
PPM is to service aluminium window ironmongery and you want the hinges, 
handle and locking system oiled, it could be that one or more of the elements 
is missed. It is easier to monitor PPM if you can compare the works against a 
specification. If you have a computerised Helpdesk system, your instructions 
can be digitised and included in any work order.
Planned programme and planned survey
You need to know your on-site liabilities and what to plan for in the future. You 
also need to be able to provide quality information to justify your statements. 
The only sure way of achieving this is to have a planned programme and a 
planned survey of your building stock.
What is a planned survey document?
This is a risk assessment of your building stock 
containing detailed information about your stock, 
its current condition, any failed or failing items 
relating to that stock, the anticipated lifespan 
of major elements and costs for rectification of 
failing stock.
Details of the building stock
A building by building overview of your stock, 
set out in a consistent way, helps you to access 
information quickly. You can then compare this 
with other parts of the building stock. There are 
no hard and fast rules about how this should 
be set out. The easiest way is to devise a system 
that works for you, or borrow one from a fellow 
Facilities Manager.

Be sure that you deal 
with your survey in a 
consistent way. Draw up a 
template that fits all your 
requirements and use the 
template on each building 
in the same way. This will 
give a consistent feel to 
your survey results.


7 Maintenance including new builds and space management
159
In general, the details of the 
building stock will contain the 
following 
information: 
basic 
details about the stock, such as 
size and age; ownership and legal 
responsibility, such as rights of way, 
tenancies and repair obligations; an 
overview or statement about issues 
relating to the building stock, such 
as dry rot; the long-term objectives 
for the buildings, e.g. are you planning to replace buildings or are you planning 
a major refurbishment in the future?
Details of current condition
This is easier if each building is broken down into its constituent parts in a 
consistent way across the site. Your breakdown could include the following.
•	
Roofs (pitched): copings; covering type, e.g. natural or concrete slate; 
lead work, valleys and soakers; parapet walls; ridge tiles and hips; 
sarking; structural timberwork; and insulation.
•	
Roofs (flat): covering type, e.g. built-up felt, Kingspan; abutments, 
laps and joints; breathers and other penetration details; drains, 
internal gutters and downspouts; structural slabs; and insulation.
Details of any failed or failing items relating to that stock
For each of the elements of the 
building, it is then necessary to 
collect the following information.
•	
When the element was last 
replaced. This will give you 
some idea about when it will 
need to be replaced again.
•	
What 
condition 
is 
the 
element in now? Do you 
understand how far into 
failure items are and do you 
know when a failing item 
will completely fail?
­Warning
The use of 
consultants to undertake 
your survey can be expensive, 
but sometimes it is worth the 
extra money. Be aware, however, 
that you can sometimes get 
exactly the same service from 
a contractor at a fraction 
of the price.
Note to self
Don’t forget to include all your 
properties in your planned survey. 
Also 
include 
all 
your 
leased 
properties, but be careful to read the 
lease to determine what your repair 
obligations are. Only include these 
items in your survey.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
160
•	
What interdependencies are there, e.g. if one element fails, is another 
likely to fail also?
Details of anticipated lifespan of major elements
It is also necessary to work out the anticipated lifespan of each of the elements 
of the building. This information can be obtained from a number of sources.
If service and repair reports are set up correctly, they should give details 
of the equipment and indicate when an item is coming to the end of its useful 
life. This will warn you about a potential failure or the fact that an item 
of equipment can no longer be serviced as parts are no longer available. It 
makes sense to build this review into all your new contracts, so that in the 
first year of service you receive a full and detailed report on the condition and 
potential failure date of this equipment. This is particularly important where 
your item of equipment is specialised, making it difficult for you to make 
those technical assessments yourself.
You are not a specialist in everything, so call on specialists to provide you 
with information on the condition of specialist areas. Even in non-specialist 
areas you can benefit from having a second pair of eyes. There are two ways 
of doing this.
•	
Commission someone to make a full report of your whole stock or 
elements of it. This is potentially very expensive and most organisations 
do not have the available cash for this kind of survey.
•	
Speak to repair companies, e.g. ask a roofer to make a condition report 
for a roof under the guise that you are going to repair it next year and 
need to know what is wrong with it. Promise to put the company on 
your tender list. A few companies will look on this as an opportunity 
to build a relationship with you for other potential works and may 
carry out the survey for no fee. Caution is needed with this approach 
so that the contractor does not overdo their specification.
Manufacturer’s books or O & M manuals can also help with this issue. 
When a new building is built, the O & M manuals will generally contain 
manufacturer’s details about every element of the construction, including 
manufacturer’s literature and service/maintenance recommendations for 
all the equipment that has been installed in the building. This information 
will usually include the expected lifespan of the equipment or any parts 
which may fail first. This will give you valuable data to put into your survey 
report.

7 Maintenance including new builds and space management
161
Details of rectif ication costs
Your survey is of no use if it does not contain the likely replacement costs of 
failed parts. This information needs to be detailed and consistent to be of use. 
There is no point pricing or estimating half your repairs but not the other half.
Your senior management will be relying on your judgement to develop the 
risk register for the organisation. Your reports on the condition of the stock 
are a fundamental tool on which they can base decisions on the long-term 
viability of the site and its buildings. If your predictions are wrong, then you 
could end up maintaining buildings that would have been more economical 
to pull down and rebuild.
Planned programme
Your planned programme should be the culmination of all the hard work 
you have put into the planned survey and should give details of when you 
anticipate replacing major elements and target dates for doing this. Although 
your planned survey may deal with building elements as far as 10 or 15 years 
in the future, your planned programme will rarely consider more than the 
next two or three years. This is because the priorities of the organisation will 
change and you need to continually re-evaluate your planned survey details 
and update your risk register correspondingly.
However, simply identifying these building risks does not mean that 
there will be provision for you to deal with them at the predicted failure 
times. In the real world, things don’t happen to plan. Your organisation’s 
priorities will change, as will its direction. Funds may not always be made 
available, even though it would be financially sensible to do so. Your job is to 
continually re-evaluate and update the risk register. By all means point out 
the misgivings of underinvestment in your building stock, but never believe 
you have right to all the resources you request. This belief will always lead 
to disappointment and you need to be able to deal with this disappointment 
in a professional way.
Space management
Space management is one of the most difficult issues to handle. The estate 
is usually one of the biggest assets of an organisation. The way in which it 
is managed and allocated must be controlled and, unless you have infinite 
resources, it needs to be divided between its occupants in a logical way. 
Estates cannot be developed and expanded without some form of control: this 
is space management.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
162
An institution will usually have a policy about how space is allocated. 
In an educational environment, where the allocation of space and requests 
from individual curriculum centres can be dogged by internal politics, it is 
essential that some guidelines are provided so that sound judgements can 
be made about allocation. Curriculum centres should be viewed as tenants 
of the buildings, with the college or university as the landlord. Allocation 
and residency must never be seen as permanent, but merely a commitment 
based on economic viability; that is, there is no use providing space to a 
curriculum centre based on current vogue subjects, only to find with a 
change in government policy that particular subject is no longer required. 
Space must be seen as temporary and based on sound economic reasons 
for continued usage. Space allocation must also be closely linked to your 
organisation’s strategic plan.
A useful way to ensure that departments use the space provided is to 
charge for it. Departments are less likely to hold onto underused space if 
it costs them money. Space allocation should be based on a set of fixed 
parameters, e.g. square metres per student or member of staff, and those 
figures should be clearly published so that everyone can see that a fair 
and equitable system of allocation is in place. Educational funders such 
as the Learning Skills Council and Higher Education Funding Council for 
England have set space allocation matrices, which are generally linked to 
capital funding. Space should be seen as finite and department heads should 
realise that to create space, other space generally needs to be released to 
accommodate it. Organisations need to understand that the allocation of 
space needs to be monitored to ensure its effectiveness. This is known as a 
utilisation survey and it provides a notional value for how much a particular 
space is used. It is up to individual organisations to set an acceptable level of 
use and this is generally expressed as a percentage.
The allocation of space should be seen as a centralised function, with 
responsibility for allocation being taken by one individual or one single 
department. This task often falls to the FM department. Space should be 
allocated and monitored for all areas, including office and curriculum space. 
The use and allocation of space must be planned; unplanned moves or 
allocations should be avoided whenever possible.
Allocation must be based on sound financial or strategic reasons and not 
whims. Space, in educational environments in particular, is very costly and to 
have under-utilised space contributes nothing to the organisation and costs 
money best used for other resources. It is important when developing areas 
that space is identified and released before activities start. If this happens the 
other way around, your department could be criticised for its allocation of 

7 Maintenance including new builds and space management
163
space. When developing space, never assume that this will be the final layout. 
Plan to be able to adapt by designing your space to be flexible in its layout.
In retail environments, empty space is lost revenue, so the focus moves 
from ensuring space is charged for to ensuring that space is occupied. Getting 
property and space back into service is far more critical in a retail environment. 
The level of re-letting or “churn” can have a dramatic effect on the core business, 
as empty retail properties are lost revenue. In a Mall, empty units make letting 
other empty space more difficult and this can become a vicious circle. Dealing 
with issues quickly in a retail environment is therefore paramount.
New builds and maintenance
You may be lucky enough to be constructing one building after another and 
thus be able to develop a genuine flair for project management. In this case, 
your estate may consist of perfect examples of newly constructed buildings; 
if so, you have been very lucky indeed!
Generally a new build is fraught with problems from start to finish. 
Sometimes your problems with a new building can last for years, giving you 
many sleepless nights. Very rarely will you end up with a defect-free building, 
and even with the benefit of hindsight problems can still occur. If you are 
aiming for a zero-defect building, this is just not possible! Your client’s agent 
must be chosen carefully. You need someone who has specific experience of 
your sector and who has been recommended by other similar institutions.
Problems will often occur because of the speed in which building 
technology is changing. You will often include new technologies within your 
design and new and sometimes untried materials for fixtures and fittings. 
Don’t be afraid of using new technologies, but be aware they may present 
problems in the future.
As the need for sustainability considerations increases, you may be asked 
to look at renewable technologies in your new building stock. You need to 
embrace this fully, making sure that you future-proof your organisation’s 
power needs by reducing its reliance on electricity from the National Grid. 
Sustainable technologies such as ground-source and air-source heat pumps, 
photovoltaic and solar thermal systems, grey water systems, inverters, 
natural or passive ventilation and voltage optimisation should be considered.
Pre-build
You need to create a good working relationship with your design team. In 
today’s climate, most projects are invariably run on a design and build 

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
164
principle. This can work well, but 
equally can be a nightmare in 
controlling the quality of all the 
elements within the building. Your 
contractor needs to be carefully 
chosen; insist on a contractor/
builder with experience in your 
sector. This can be filtered out 
at the PQQ stage. Equally, your 
client’s agent needs to be completely up to speed with the requirements of 
your type of organisation. With a new build, you only have one opportunity 
to get it right and therefore all your actions need to be measured and 
thought through. It is far easier and cheaper to think things through before 
construction to than wait until the build has started and then try to deal with 
problems that should have been included in the original tender documents 
as client requirements.
Quality assurance (QA) is one area that most building companies will have 
considered carefully and should be very good at. The companies that I have 
had the pleasure of working with have had excellent QA procedures. However, 
I have never had a zero-defect building and I have never been completely 
satisfied with the quality of the product handed over. The builder has no long-
term view of how you want to run the building, unless he or she has a vested 
long-term interest such as with a PFI project. Therefore QA on a new build 
only really relates to how the contractor views the finished product, not to how 
it is likely to be used, and there is a massive gulf between these two views.
Theory and information slot
A Pre-Qualification Questionnaire (PQQ) is a methodology of establishing 
whether a series of contractors/suppliers can achieve a set level of service 
level or compliance. It is commonly used by procurement sections of the 
company as a filter to cut down a long list of suppliers/contractors to 
a more manageable size, knowing after the PQQ that they all achieve a 
specific level of service or compliance.
Note to self
Defect-free buildings are impossible 
to achieve. All you can do is to 
mitigate your risks by covering as 
many of the potential problems as 
possible.
Heating
Heating is an area that invariably creates problems for the FM team at 
handover. Unless you have been lucky enough to be completely incorporated 

7 Maintenance including new builds and space management
165
into the design team and have sufficient skills to judge what is good or bad 
M & E, you are likely to have problems. Unless you have an M & E bias, you 
are likely to struggle in this area. Consider the following issues.
•	
Has the system been designed with the appropriate number of zones 
for heating? Beware of single-pipe systems over which you have no 
local control.
•	
Has the system been balanced properly and are you achieving 
consistent temperatures on each floor?
•	
Are there any rooms at the end of a run that are cooler than others 
on the floor?
•	
Does the BMS control temperatures at an individual level, or does 
it aggregate temperatures and give an average? The danger with the 
latter is that you can have very different temperatures on different 
floors, but the aggregation does not alter the final temperature. This 
leads to complaints from users at either end of the averaged areas; 
one area may be extremely hot and one too cool. This is particularly 
noticeable when the system is not balanced properly.
•	
Is the external temperature sensor in the wrong place, either in full 
sun or in a draughty position?
•	
Are the internal sensors sited wrongly, either near a heat source or in 
an inappropriate position? A classic case is where sensors are placed 
in offices. Individuals come in on particularly cold mornings and 
put local heaters on. This fools the sensor into thinking that it has 
reached the design temperature and it shuts down the entire floor, 
leading to complaints.
•	
Are the inverters and variable speed drives working? You will often see 
a variable speed drive or an inverter running at 100%. This is wasteful 
and, in fact, costs 3% more in electricity usage.
•	
Are all your external pipes lagged effectively against extreme weather? 
Most lagging is only designed down to minus 6°C and this can put 
your system in danger during extreme conditions.
•	
Is your lagging exterior grade? Interior grade insulation is often used 
and this starts to degrade after a short period of time, usually within 
two years.
•	
Is your external lagging protected? If not, birds will peck at it and 
then your rooftop pipe work will freeze and burst during the first 
exceptionally cold winter.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
166
Ventilation and chilling/cooling
Ventilation is extremely difficult to get right in a new build as a result of 
high expectations. People expect their new building to be the most controlled 
environment possible. They expect it to be cool when they want to be cool and 
to have fresh air like a summer’s day in the countryside. The reality is that 
today’s modern buildings are so well insulated that marginal increases in 
temperature can affect the internal environment. New buildings can overheat 
very quickly and sometimes it is difficult to remove this heat from the building. 
When you have a mixture of ventilation types and cooling, people always 
want what their neighbour has. If they leave their own warm environment 
(say, 22°C) and enter a chilled area, they immediately feel that their own area 
was hotter than it should be. Ventilation is often linked to health and safety, 
so it is one area that you need to get right.
You should consider the following points.
•	
Blocked filters. Even marginal blockages on filters can reduce their 
effectiveness and, if you are in an inner city environment, the chances 
are you will frequently need to replace filters. Make sure you have a 
contract in place as soon as possible, preferably well before the end 
of the defects period. In this way your service contractor may be able 
to spot any issues for you to raise as a defect before the contractor 
hands over responsibility.
•	
Changes to layout. Many designs, particularly office designs, cater for 
a specific number of occupants and computers and the ventilation 
system is sized and designed to cope with these numbers. Moving 
additional people or computers into such a space skews the design 
parameters. What was an acceptable volume of air can be changed 
drastically and detrimentally by changing occupancy rates.
•	
Blocked ducting or fallen fire dampers. Sometimes fire dampers 
within air ducts are linked into the fire alarm system and, when 
operated, will drop to prevent smoke and combustion products 
moving through the system. If they are not automated, they will stay 
in the dropped position and your ventilated area suddenly becomes 
hot and stuffy.
•	
Complaints about headaches or feeling tired. This is an indication that 
your ventilation system is not working effectively. This is when you 
need to act, as inactivity could lead the way to claims that you did not 
respond to a health and safety issue.

7 Maintenance including new builds and space management
167
•	
Over-use of VFR units. VRF units are combined heating and chilling 
units and these can be abused by staff. They are often left switched 
on, even when no one is in the room. Sometimes it is possible to 
limit the range at which the units can be used, e.g. setting a band or 
range of temperatures within which the user can alter the controls. 
This helps to reduce over-use and keeps your electricity costs down. 
Sometimes staff come in early on a very cold morning and switch 
all the VRF units on to full heat to take the chill off the room. This 
can affect the sensors for the BMS and turn off other areas, leading 
to complaints from staff. Education of users is the best way to get 
around this issue.
Electricity use and new technologies
One of the many justifications for rebuilding is the need to reduce the 
consumption of gas and electricity. Many consultants will extol the virtues of 
moving from an old building to a new low-carbon building. However, usually 
the opposite is true. Your old building will no doubt be a simple construction 
with plenty of ventilation. Many organisations have old Victorian or mid-1960s 
buildings, which are either of high thermal value or are simple tower blocks. 
Moving to a new building generally means you move from a simple building, 
with little or no technology, to a highly sophisticated building bristling 
with technology. There is always a shock when your utility bills, especially 
your electricity bills, are doubled. Again, this should be dealt with during 
commissioning, but rarely will you find that your building is operating to full 
capacity and efficiency. You will find many things running when they should 
not be. Most new builds now incorporate automated meter reading into the 
BMS package. Check your consumption over the weekend or when no one is 
in the building and you will probably find that this is far more than it should 
be, indicating that some electrical items are still on when they should not be.
New technologies are great, but you have to understand that until they 
become mainstream and tried and trusted, you may have problems with 
them. You may be introducing new maintenance regimes that have never 
been done before, so you need to factor in that things may not go smoothly.
Disputes
Be ready for problems with your new building. You may have to challenge 
things you are told and you need justifications for your queries. You will 
definitely be challenged back that you have not done certain things and have 
exacerbated problems, e.g. not changed filters at the right frequency, not 

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
168
tested and maintained inhibitor levels, or had the wrong settings on the BMS. 
Be ready for everything by ensuring that the recommendations in the O & M 
manuals are followed exactly, at least during the defects period, otherwise 
you will find your builder will have a get-out clause. However, not all builders 
are out to rip you off. A genuine working partnership where all parties are 
honest and open will provide a good new building that you will be proud of, 
but never assume it will happen without you working at it.
Aide Memoire: Maintenance
–
–
Try to avoid buying cheap or inferior equipment: ‘buy cheap, buy 
twice’.
–
–
If you need to cut back on budgets, never arbitrarily cut back 
on PPM without making sure you tell your senior management 
about the likely outcomes in the form of a risk assessment.
–
–
Make sure that your PPM is identified and put into place.
–
–
Undertake planned surveys on all your buildings to ensure you 
have identified all the likely liabilities to the organisation.
–
–
Ensure you work closely with your contractor and client’s agent 
when embarking on new buildings.
–
–
Check your buildings are commissioned correctly.

169
Chapter 8
Sustainability, use of resources  
and sustainable technologies
What is sustainability?
Sustainability is increasingly becoming an integral part of the FM role 
and most Sustainability Managers are now found in the FM or resources 
department. In a larger organisation the Sustainability Manager is often an 
entirely separate role because of the complex issues involved. So what is 
sustainability in the context of a busy FM department?
Sustainability means different things to different people and, as far as a 
busy FM department is concerned, it can become an integral part of everything 
that you do. If you are expected to take the lead on sustainability, you need to 
define what areas you are going to concentrate on, what specialists you need 
to bring in, and how you are going to report your progress back to the senior 
management team.
All FM departments buy in services for the site. Do we ever stop to think 
about the environmental impact of these services and supplies, e.g. the 
amount of carbon that has been 
used in their journey from source, 
through 
manufacture 
to 
your 
doorstep? Do we ever consider 
alternatives or even really consider 
sustainability as a real issue? The 
answer is probably no. As an active 
FM department, we swim in a sea 
of information and sometimes 
more information and responsibility 
seem too much to take on. Should 
Note to self
Do not underestimate how much 
time you are likely to spend on 
sustainability. To do it justice, you 
need to carve out time to do it. Start 
by trying to get a regular time slot on 
your Outlook calendar, even if this is 
only an hour a week, and stick to it 
rigidly. It will pay dividends.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
170
we bother with sustainability, or should we let others deal with this issue? In 
my opinion, we should definitely consider sustainability as part of our role.
The concept of sustainability has become increasingly important in recent 
years as we all try to reduce the resource intensity of our day-to-day lives. 
For hundreds of years we have been plundering the Earth’s resources without 
much concern, but we now know that these resources are finite. Our growing 
population has experienced an explosion of consumerism and our planet’s 
resources have dwindled to the point where, within a few years, we will face 
a catastrophic decline in the availability of fuel and raw materials. Previous 
generations have seen remarkable leaps in technology which have made us 
feel invincible. Many believe we will be able to develop alternative technologies 
to take the place of the traditional oil and gas deposits we have come to rely 
on. Nuclear energy sources, once seen as the answer to generating cheap 
electricity, have been called into question following natural disasters which 
have shown the vulnerability of this technology. The simple truth is that we 
cannot continue in this fashion without reducing our reliance on fossil fuels 
and giving greater consideration to how we can reduce the resource intensity 
of our actions.
How does this then affect individual organisations? Quite simply, we need 
to re-evaluate our systems to make sure we reduce resource consumption 
and, in particular, our use of carbon. This does take time and can be costly 
but, if undertaken correctly, this evaluation could bring the following benefits 
to your department.
•	
Reduce your carbon footprint.
•	
Raise the profile of the FM department.
•	
Save money, as waste is cash intensive.
•	
Give your organisation a marketing advantage over competitors.
•	
Show due diligence.
•	
Reduce your long-term reliance on fossil fuels.
•	
Increase your long-term robustness and reduce vulnerability with 
respect to utilities costs.
•	
Give an edge with key partners in terms of funding. An organisation 
which is seen to be managing its carbon use proactively shows that 
it is managing waste. When applying for grants or capital funding, a 
formulated carbon plan will give you the edge.
Sustainability in any business environment can be a journey of discovery, 
but also sometimes horror when you realise what you are using and what 

8 Sustainability, use of resources and sustainable technologies 
171
impact this is having on the environment. As with any journey, we must first 
establish our baseline so we can plot a course for the future. We must try to 
identify all the areas within the organisation where we use a resource and 
then calculate its impact on the organisation.
Improving the sustainability of your organisation
The logical stages to follow to increase the sustainability of your organisation 
are: identify all the resources used; convert these resources into a carbon figure; 
set a bench-mark figure; set future targets; and report progress and review.
Identif ication of resources used
This can be one of the most difficult areas to define. It will vary between 
organisations and may fall under the remit of more than one department. 
However, as one of the prime users of resources, the FM department should 
take the lead on this if there is no Sustainability Manager in post.
Utilities
The use of gas and electricity in an organisation is likely to be the second 
highest expenditure after staff costs. Increasingly, as sites become more 
sophisticated and acquire more technologies, electricity consumption 
increases as we move from naturally vented low-tech buildings to pressure-
sealed environments that require mechanical cooling and ventilation. This is 
coupled with an increased reliance on computer technology, which adds to the 
cost of your utilities. New buildings, far from reducing your overall electricity 
consumption, may double it. You cannot really avoid this, unfortunately, but 
you can control the efficiency of all of the M & E equipment in the building. 
You also have some control over the proliferation of the other electrical devices 
that will inevitably find their way onto the site. Efficiency of M & E equipment 
is essential and you must try every possible way to reduce consumption 
through control measures implemented to optimise performance. Utilities 
and their procurement are discussed in more detail later in this chapter.
Waste
What waste streams does the organisation create? These could be as follows: 
general waste which cannot be recycled; recyclable waste, e.g. paper, card, 
packaging; plastics and tins; waste electrical equipment (WEE); specialist 
waste, the disposal of which is covered by specific pieces of legislation, such 
as batteries, fluorescent lighting tubes, oil and oil products and asbestos; 
and food waste. Waste is dealt with in detail in Chapter 9.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
172
Transport
Your organisation is likely to have 
its own transport, but you also need 
to look at how staff get to work and 
how schemes such as car sharing 
and cycling to work are promoted. 
In education, modern teaching 
methods mean that education is increasingly 
taken to the students, with off-site training and 
even international travel taking place to promote 
courses around the globe. All these areas need to 
be taken into consideration when calculating how 
transport affects your carbon footprint.
Conversion of resource use into a carbon 
footprint
Converting your resources into a figure for the 
amount of carbon used is a tricky subject. There 
are countless methods to convert your resources 
used into an actual carbon figure (http://
www.carbontrust.com/media/18223/ctl153_
conversion_factors.pdf) Whichever method you 
use, stick with it, as changing the way you 
calculate your carbon use will invalidate your 
data. Using a consistent approach will help you 
to audit your figures more easily and assist your 
successors. Store your formulas on your PC and 
document how these formulas work and how 
they are constructed. There is nothing more 
frustrating than coming back to a spreadsheet 
after a year away and not understanding what 
                            you have done previously.
Setting bench-marks and targets
We need to know where we starting from when we begin our journey to 
reduce our carbon consumption. Discussing with your staff how you want 
to report your data is well worth the time taken and will help to provide 
consistency in reporting. Your data need to cover whole the site, but also 
need to be able to adapt as the site evolves, while still giving figures which 
Note to self
When comparing data, make sure 
it is like-for-like and in a consistent 
form that you can easily understand.

Waste is often a large 
chunk of your expenditure 
in a busy organisation; 
don’t forget to factor in 
your space requirements. 
Space costs money and 
all too often busy FM 
sections do not have the 
luxury of having a lot 
of space to store waste. 
Your solution needs to 
be minimalist while still 
being practical.


8 Sustainability, use of resources and sustainable technologies 
173
can be compared over a number of years. Make sure you are comparing 
like with like. It is no use simply collecting, for example, data on energy 
used for heating each year without including data on outside temperatures 
to allow temperature differences to be factored out. Think in advance about 
what your data needs to represent and what factors could change that data 
and then it will be valid every year. Also decide how you want to visually 
represent your figures. Numerical data are fine, but pictures, graphs and 
pie charts are far more pleasing to the eye. Be careful about how you collect 
your data and make sure that you verify all your figures. If your calculations 
are flawed, then the final data will be too. You do not want to look stupid to 
senior managers, as this will immediately derail your attempts to create a low 
carbon environment. This will affect your credibility and make it less likely 
that you will get assistance in the future.
Setting future targets
You need to have targets to work to. Targets can sometimes be purely 
aspirations; this is an easy trap to fall into. If you set yourself difficult 
targets, you are setting yourself up for failure. You should always under-
promise and over-perform. There is nothing more demoralising than to miss a 
target because you have been unrealistic. Set reasonable targets and exceed 
them if necessary. If you over-promise and under-perform, senior managers 
will be less inclined to believe any future targets you set. Use the SMARTER 
methodology for setting targets.
Reporting progress and reviewing results
You need to report your successes, particularly if they have created a financial 
saving. Use this to your best advantage, as some of your future projects may 
Theory and information slot
SMARTER methodology:
S - Specific, Significant, Stretching
M - Measurable, Meaningful, Motivational
A - Agreed upon, Attainable, Achievable, Acceptable, Action-oriented
R - Realistic, Relevant, Reasonable, Rewarding, Results-oriented
T - Time-based, Timely, Tangible, Trackable
E - Evaluate
R - Re-evaluate

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
174
need capital funding and initial success means you are more likely to receive 
support from the finance director. Your reports should be simple and effective 
to achieve maximum effect. Avoid too much data. Dashboard-type reports 
seem to be the best and most eye-catching reports and these use a ragging 
(red, amber, green) system to report progress. You need to be honest in these 
reports as you can make your data say anything. Keep it simple and under-
report as this then gives you more latitude the following year.
Sustainability: a whole organisation approach
Sustainability is a major topic for the practising Facilities Manager and can have 
a massive impact on your bottom line. If you ignore sustainability, you will suffer 
in the long term and put your organisation at risk. Engaging with the whole 
organisation is extremely important. You cannot have a successful sustainability 
strategy without engaging with staff and, in an education environment, students. 
Sustainability in an educational environment is different from that in any other 
type of organisation as sustainability is often proactively driven by the students 
rather than the organisation.
Staff need to understand some of the basics about sustainability before 
you can truly connect with them and influence their behaviour. The key areas 
include the following.
•	
How much carbon do we create? Staff need 
to understand the amount of carbon the 
organisation uses and how it is used. There 
is no point providing lots of data as this 
will only confuse people and your target 
audience will lose interest. Use simple bar or 
pie charts to show the relationship between 
consumption and carbon.
•	
How much does carbon consumption cost? 
Carbon consumption is a difficult concept 
to understand. We don’t take the carbon 
away in trucks; it just gently floats off into 
the atmosphere as carbon dioxide emissions. 
If you represent your reductions in carbon 
emissions as potential financial savings, staff 
will easily see the connection between money 
and their actions, particularly in times of 
austerity when they can directly equate 
money wasted with potential job losses.

The only way you will 
be successful with your 
sustainability strategy is  
if you get everyone on 
board. The best way to do 
this is to create incentive. 
Competition 
between 
departments with prizes 
works very well.


8 Sustainability, use of resources and sustainable technologies 
175
•	
What effect do carbon emissions have 
on staff? How could the actions of staff 
reduce carbon emissions? It is no use 
asking staff to turn the heating down 
to save money. People all feel levels of 
cold differently and require a warm 
environment to work in; this is specified 
in employment law. Choose instead 
actions that you can influence, such a 
turning lights off, closing windows and 
turning off equipment when not in use. 
These are the simple things that staff 
feel they can contribute to and the areas 
they will, with gentle persuasion, comply 
with.
•	
Risks to the organisation. You should 
inform your staff of the 
long-term 
risk 
to 
the 
organisation of inactivity. 
Sustainability will be one 
of the main drivers in the 
success of organisations in 
the future.
Organisations which grasp the 
concept of sustainability fully 
will have a major competitive advantage and may find that success in this 
is rewarded by substantial gains in terms of funding, reductions in fuel 
consumption and kudos. It is likely that future funding in the education 
sector, in particular, will be biased towards institutions tackling their 
carbon emissions in a proactive way. Increasing fuel costs are almost 
inevitable. Organisations which proactively reduce their fuel consumption 
will reduce their ongoing running costs. Those who invest heavily in 
renewable technologies will see their reliance on the National Grid 
diminish and consequently will also reduce their vulnerability to rises in 
the price of electricity. Local communities often look to the organisations 
in their areas to be good examples of sustainability and this may give a 
competitive edge to organisations when attracting new customers and 
quality new staff.
An example of a sustainability policy is given in the Appendices.
Note to self
The cost of utilities is going to spiral 
upwards over the next few years. 
Any savings you make from reduced 
electricity consumption will offset 
some uncomfortable decisions on 
budget reductions in the future.

One of the easiest ways 
to save money in your 
department is by adopting 
sustainable 
practices. 
Sustainability can pay for 
it self.


A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
176
Determining your carbon footprint
It 
is 
becoming 
increasingly 
important to determine a carbon 
footprint for your organisation; in 
fact, this is a requirement for some 
funding bodies. If used correctly, 
this information could give you a 
competitive edge. It can, however, 
create as many problems as it 
solves if not undertaken in a 
methodical fashion with defined 
outputs. Your carbon footprint 
is the total amount of carbon 
emitted by your organisation and, to be accurate, must be determined from 
current, auditable data. If you are determining your carbon footprint for 
the first time, you should take time to set the parameters for the data and 
decide how you are likely to keep and maintain it. It is more difficult to add 
data to an established system as inputting data to a system you have not 
created could cause problems with verification and accuracy, especially if 
your system for data collection is not clear.
The kinds of data you are likely to need for a typical establishment are 
as follows. You will need to define in advance which of these scopes you 
report; however, most organisations only report and monitor emissions from 
Scopes 1 and 2.
•	
Scope 1 emissions. Gas and fossil fuel emissions and F gas from air 
conditioning.
•	
Scope 2 emissions. Emissions from electricity used and bought-in 
heat.
•	
Scope 3 emissions. Emissions from transport, travel and commuting, 
waste disposal, and procurement. Water usage should also be 
considered.
Scope 1 emissions are your emissions from burning fossil fuels. Along with F 
gas emissions, these are relatively easy to calculate as your utilities suppliers 
should do this for you. Most, if not all, gas suppliers will provide these data 
directly to you, or they can be easily extracted from your fuel bills. If you have 
Note to self
Start with a simple list of all the 
items which you feel will contribute 
to your emissions. Remember you 
can’t do this on your own; you need 
a Carbon Team to assist you. Once 
you have your list, divide it up into 
the various scopes. Try to keep to 
using scopes as this is the industry 
standard.

8 Sustainability, use of resources and sustainable technologies 
177
a procurement consultant, make them earn their commission by finding this 
information for you. The use of sustainable technologies to reduce carbon 
emissions is considered in detail later in this chapter. Scope 2 emissions are 
similarly easy to determine by asking your supplier or broker to do the work. 
Scope 3 emissions need a lot of work to be able to obtain a full and final 
figure. You need to look at the following areas.
Carbon emissions from transport
Business mileage can be broken down into business car mileage, train and 
bus fares, and air travel. You should record all your fleet mileage, vehicle 
by vehicle, so you calculate the carbon dioxide emissions by vehicle size. 
Make sure your system is overlaid onto a spreadsheet so that you can easily 
manipulate the data. For claimed business car mileage, make sure your 
claim forms record the distance travelled and the size of the car used. It will 
then be simpler and more accurate to plot your carbon dioxide emissions. For 
business train fares or buses, again record the distance travelled, not just 
the value of the rail fare. The same method should be used for air travel. For 
these data to be worthwhile, you need to be able to convert back to number 
of miles or kilometres travelled.
In an educational environment, it might be easier to find out the average 
distance travelled by students through a student survey. Make sure you 
break this down into journeys by public transport and those by car. Data 
about distances commuted by staff can also be obtained from staff surveys. If 
you think through how you want your answers returned, then these can do 
most of the work for you.
Carbon emissions from waste disposal
Calculating your carbon emissions from waste disposal will either be very 
easy or very onerous depending on how you currently dispose of your waste. 
To do this accurately you need to break your data down into each of the 
following waste streams.
•	
Waste paper. Is this separated, batched or baled, or does it simply go 
out as dry mixed recycling? Your paper will either be moved out by 
the skip load or by Euro Bin. Ask your collection service for data on 
the typical weights of both your skips/front-end loaders and Euro 
Bins, then simply multiply the number of lifts per year by your typical 

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
178
weight and you will have a good idea of the total weight of waste paper 
leaving the site. Alternatively, you may have a waste removal company 
which weighs your outgoing waste.
•	
Waste cardboard. If you have the storage space and the resource, 
waste cardboard is a saleable commodity and one that is worth 
batching and baling and taking off site for sale. Again, it should be 
relatively easy to calculate your total volume of card going off site.
•	
Waste metal. This is definitely a saleable item, but again requires a 
storage facility large enough to carry a metal skip. The market in 
metals is soaring at the moment, which you will no doubt be aware of 
if lead has gone missing from your roofs.
Water usage
It should be relatively simple to calculate your water usage from your utility 
bills; these will give you the number of cubic metres consumed. Saving water 
is far simpler than is often assumed. Sometimes water waste does not come 
from taps being left on, but from underground leaks that can go unnoticed. 
If your water is metered, and it is highly likely it is, then checking for leaks 
should be paramount in reducing your costs. The simplest way to do this 
is during a weekend close down when you are sure there is no one in the 
buildings. Make sure the systemisers on toilet areas are shut down and any 
water-using activities have stopped. Read the meters and then read them 
again after a couple of days before the building is in use again. If there is 
no difference between the two readings, then you can be relatively sure 
that you do not have a leak. However, if water usage registers, then you 
know that somewhere, probably buried out of sight, you may have a leaking 
pipe. Exploratory works can then usually find the leak. If you leave leaks, 
particularly underground leaks, then these are likely to undermine your 
building after a period of time. Therefore it is important to treat any discovery 
of a leak as a matter of urgency.
Another way to save water is in your toilet systems. Most old water 
systems have much larger toilet cisterns than actually needed. One easy way 
to reduce water consumption is to install a displacement device. There are 
many on the market, but most water boards recommend a product called a 
“buffalo.” This is a simple liquid-filled sack which is dropped into the cistern, 
effectively reducing the amount of water required to flush.
Don’t forget that your grey water should not be included in your carbon 
footprint exercise. From the perspective of sustainability this is free water, 
not water taken from reservoirs. Unfortunately, it cannot be used to offset 

8 Sustainability, use of resources and sustainable technologies 
179
carbon emissions either, unlike electricity generated on site. Remember that 
some aspects of grey water do expend energy; for example, pumping grey 
water around the building. One thing worth remembering is that your on-site 
water bill is split into two: one portion for the metered water coming on to 
the site and one notional cost for waste water going off site. It is assumed by 
the water authority that the same amount of water goes off site as comes on 
so your exported water is based off your imported (metered) consumption. If 
you are using your grey water rather than metered water to flush toilets then 
you are saving metered water and consequently your exported water (or water 
that goes down the drain) costs less.
Carbon emissions and procurement
This is always going to be a difficult area to assess. Unless you have all the 
data available to you in year one, then you may well find that improving your 
data as you go along will result in your overall carbon footprint going up 
rather than down.
Could you start to insist that your suppliers produce your goods with less 
packaging? There is no point in asking them to take packaging back with 
them as this hasn’t stopped the packaging being produced in the first place. 
An audit of incoming goods will probably show just how much packaging 
is coming on to the site. You may find that most this packaging is needless 
anyway. A simple annual survey undertaken to determine what comes on to 
the site in one week will give you some useful figures. Other simple measures 
can be put in place to reduce packaging, such as asking your cleaners to 
reuse or refill trigger sprays rather than throwing them away. You will find 
that most chemical manufacturers provide chemicals in large bottles which 
can be decanted into your trigger sprays.
Do you know where your goods are being produced? Sometimes we buy 
things at the cheapest price without considering where they have been made. 
If you can buy the product more locally at the same price, the carbon footprint 
will be considerably less than a product purchased from the other side of the 
world.
How do you start to quantify the procurement practice accurately and does 
the amount of effort needed to achieve the final figures justify the process? 
This is a contentious issue and divides many people, but I would argue that, 
unless you have limitless resources, it is going to be difficult to come up with 
meaningful data that you can access easily each year.
What is it that we are trying to achieve overall with sustainable procurement? 
I would say generally that it is to reduce the amount of carbon we use and 

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
180
to reduce resource intensity. The 
best way of doing this is to raise 
awareness and try to manipulate 
performance. One good way of 
doing this is simply to request 
information from contractors and 
suppliers on their own performance. 
Most contractors and suppliers 
complete a PQQ when tendering 
for a contract. By adding questions 
about sustainability to the PQQ 
we can judge how well or badly they are doing in terms of sustainability. 
Simply monitoring and mentoring contractors and suppliers to become 
more environmentally friendly can improve your carbon footprint from the 
perspective of your procurement process. Setting up PQQs to give a scoring 
matrix can then indicate an improving sustainability rating and can be used 
on an annual basis to monitor performance.
Your Carbon Team
You cannot achieve this all on your own. You need assistance and your 
Carbon Team should be drawn from across your organisation from various 
disciplines. You should have made a list of where the carbon emissions are 
within the organisation and this should indicate the person most likely to be 
able to assist you. Your team needs specialists; for example, areas such as IT 
are difficult to tackle unless you have someone on board from the IT 
department.
If you are looking at paper usage, then it would be useful to have someone 
with a knowledge of reprographics involved in your discussions; similarly, 
areas such as procurement and catering should be involved. Your team must 
be prepared to put in the time and 
to take responsibility for some 
aspects of the process. You will 
find that lots of people volunteer 
their services, but that they are 
not prepared to undertake any 
work. They may cite issues such 
as pressure of work as their reasons for not continuing. Don’t forget your 
students if you are in an education environment. They are the most likely to 
be able to drive processes forward and many students today know a lot about 
climate change and the effects of using finite resources.
Note to self
Pull together a simple PQQ to send 
out with all tenders. Make sure you 
are able to score your returns in a 
consistent way.
Note to self
When choosing your team members, 
make sure you choose carefully and 
ensure that the person you choose 
has influence in the department or 
is able to make strategic decisions. 
Otherwise you are likely to stall the 
process when prompt decisions are 
required.

8 Sustainability, use of resources and sustainable technologies 
181
You need senior management to buy-in to the process early on. Buy-in by 
senior management will provide the necessary impetus to drive the process 
forward. Let’s face it, some people are keen to get to the top. If they feel that 
senior management approve the process of carbon reduction, they are more 
likely to want to give up their time to gain management approval. There are also 
many members of staff who genuinely want to help with sustainability issues.
Organisational buy-in
Overall organisational buy-in is essential with 
respect to sustainability. Your carbon reduction 
plan needs to be structured so that you can report 
your progress and track your achievements. 
Organisational buy-in “rubber stamps” your 
process and makes it easier to get things done. 
Two key people are required in this process: a 
project sponsor and your finance director.
You will need someone on the executive at 
director level who can drive initiatives forward 
and ensure that you obtain the support you need to move projects forward. 
This project sponsor will also be your route to passing information through 
to the governors, who will be interested in any initiatives you may have. 
Buy-in from your finance director is imperative. Many of the projects you 
come up with will require a capital budget to get off the ground. Many 
projects will have a financial payback, but they will need that initial capital 
budget. If you can convince your finance director of your “spend to save” 
strategy you are more likely to obtain their buy-
in for the whole process.
Recent problems with the economy have meant 
that many organisations are actively reducing their 
budgets and sustainability has a huge part to play 
in this. If you set yourself stringent but achievable 
targets for electricity consumption, using less 
electricity also means costing the organisation 
less. Many sustainability projects will give you 
substantial financial reductions as well.
Your carbon plan
You will inevitably need a route map to your potential success. You cannot 
expect to have measurable success on any of your projects if they are not 
mapped out and formed into some kind of plan to monitor your progress.
­Warning
Don’t set your 
targets too high. 
If you don’t reach 
them, you will 
demoralise the 
team.
­Warning
Don’t have 
too many in the 
team as this could 
bog you down.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
182
The essentials of your carbon plan are as follows.
•	
A statement of the reasons why you are embarking on the road to 
sustainability. These could include: to reduce the resource intensity of 
your organisation; to reduce running costs; to respond to peer pressure 
or pressure from students; to demonstrate your green credentials to 
customers; to comply with the Carbon Reduction Challenge; or simply 
to more effectively manage your carbon emissions.
•	
Bench-mark values. Basically, how have you performed to date? This 
will contain information about your emissions to date, such as the 
amount of electricity and gas used, how much water has been used, 
how much paper and card has been used, how much waste has left 
the site, how staff have travelled to work and what business mileage 
has been covered.
•	
A summary of your targets. For example, what percentage reduction 
have you targeted and how you are going to measure your progress?
•	
A summary of the projects you have identified and how these will 
influence your targets.
•	
The duration of the plan, e.g. when do you hope to reach your goal or 
planned percentage reduction?
Your plan needs to be published 
and time-bound and you need 
both staff and senior management 
buy-in. You need to report your 
progress to your management 
and governors and it is useful to 
have this as an agenda item at all 
management meetings to drive all 
the projects forward effectively.
Sustainable technologies
There are a number of technologies which call themselves “sustainable.” 
Although this term is debatable, the following technologies do deserve 
consideration when you are trying to reduce your carbon usage.
To define sustainable technologies, you first need to define what 
the word sustainable means in the context of an organisation. I would 
define “sustainable” as any item which, in its preparation, execution or 
methodology, reduces the resource intensity of the way it is produced or 
manufactured, the way it is or can be delivered, or the way in which it is used. 
Note to self
Remember to put the ethylene glycol 
replacement 
needed 
for 
ground 
source 
heat 
pumps 
into 
your 
planned programme. This can be an 
expensive item and, if you forget to 
budget for it, can be a nasty surprise.

8 Sustainability, use of resources and sustainable technologies 
183
A sustainable technology is any technology which adopts all of the above 
principles. Sustainability is a rapidly changing area, however, and what is 
sustainable today may be seen as archaic or resource-intense in the future. 
So when someone says a technology is sustainable, it could just be that it is 
marginally more sustainable than its predecessor. Sustainability therefore 
can be anything we choose and many manufacturers are already using and 
abusing the sustainability trend by branding products to suit fashion trends. 
For example, the term “eco” is often misused to represent items which are 
only marginally better for the environment than the previous version. It is 
usually up to the individual to make their own judgement about whether they 
are getting something which is better than the previous product.
Ground source heat pumps
Ground source heat pumps work by extracting solar heat stored in the soil or 
subsoil. The top 3 m of soil or subsoil maintain a near-constant temperature 
of between 10 and 16°C depending on latitude. At depths greater than 
15 m, a constant temperature of 10°C is 
generally maintained. A ground source 
heat pump taps into this ready supply 
of heat in the ground by either laying a 
continuous horizontal trench, usually 
in a field or open area, or by directly 
sinking boreholes up to 100 m vertically 
into the ground. In my opinion, vertical 
boreholes are the better option as you 
don’t need to worry about people digging 
them up. The pipes are generally filled 
with mono propylene glycol (MPG) to 
prevent freezing. These systems can also be used in reverse for cooling, but 
are generally limited to heat only. They are well suited to underfloor heating 
because of the lower temperatures needed.
Care must be taken when specifying heating systems based on ground 
source heat pumps to keep the system as simple as possible. The simpler the 
system, the more effective and easier it is to maintain. As with any heating 
system, annual maintenance will be needed to keep the heat exchangers 
running correctly and to the right temperature; occasionally the system will 
need topping up with ethylene glycol. Every three to eight years, depending 
on use and the temperatures achieved, the ethylene glycol will need to be 
replaced to maintain efficiency.
The advantages of heating systems based on ground source heat pumps 
are as follows.
­Warning
Don’t get talked 
into retrofitting a 
ground source heat 
pump as this is very costly 
unless you have a large 
field or lake to sink the 
boreholes in.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
184
•	
Units can be dual purpose, heating in winter and cooling in summer.
•	
Geothermal heat pumps, although more expensive initially, can offer 
the greatest cost savings in the long term.
•	
They are mostly low maintenance.
•	
They offer the best solution for highly insulated buildings where 
thermal load is not large. They work well with underfloor heating.
•	
They can make a positive contribution to your Energy Performance 
Certificate and subsequent Display Energy Certificate.
•	
The estimated lifespan of the plant is 15 to 20 years.
The disadvantages of these systems are as follows.
•	
The initial installation cost is high, but can be more economical in 
a new build where boreholes can be incorporated into the building 
footprint. Retrofitting an existing building is usually uneconomic.
•	
Controls for the systems are not always user friendly.
•	
The heat pumps run for longer hours than traditional boiler systems.
Air source heat pumps
Air source heat pumps are similar to ground 
source heat pumps in principle, but are generally 
marginally less efficient. Instead of drawing heat 
from relatively warm soil, air source heat pumps 
draw heat from the external air.
Biomass boilers
Biomass is considered to be carbon-neutral as 
it uses a renewable crop rather than burning 
a fossil fuel. It is not just about burning logs; many other fuels are used in 
biomass boilers, such as: energy crops, e.g. Miscanthus; agricultural waste; 
food waste; industrial waste; and woodchips and pellets.  Most people consider 
biomass as an open-fire technology, although the truth is very different. With 
open fires most of the heat goes up the chimney and is lost. Biomass boilers 
convert as much as 70% of the fuel into useful heat. Pellet stoves can be even 
better, converting as much as 90% of the fuel into useful heat. Consideration 
needs to be given to how you store the fuels and their availability.
­Warning
As most large 
organisations are 
urban or semi-urban, 
wind generation 
is not always 
viable.

8 Sustainability, use of resources and sustainable technologies 
185
The advantages of biomass boilers are as follows.
•	
Biomass boilers now have much better controls than previously.
•	
Biomass fuels are considered to be a low carbon technology.
•	
The fuels used are sustainable.
•	
Fuels can be stored locally.
•	
Biomass boilers can reduce disposal costs as some waste can be 
burned in them.
The disadvantages are as follows.
•	
Fuel quality and cost can 
vary.
•	
The 
fuel 
has 
to 
be 
physically moved to the 
building.
•	
The ash produced has to 
be disposed of.
•	
Biomass boilers and fuel 
storage have a much bigger footprint than standard boilers.
•	
The market for this technology is still young and consequently 
sourcing of fuel can sometimes be difficult.
•	
You may fall foul of the Clean Air Act in some areas where the burning 
of smoke-emitting devices is prohibited.
Solar thermal panels
Solar thermal panels are used to heat or 
preheat water to a temperature at which 
it can be used for domestic hand washing, 
or 
boosted 
for 
wider 
applications. 
Often confused with photovoltaic (PV) 
technology, solar thermal panels are 
completely different in that there is no 
generation of electricity. Solar thermal 
systems in the UK are generally “active,” 
requiring pumps and cylinders. Indirect 
­Warning
Although very 
popular, the fuel 
supply for biomass is 
sometimes erratic and 
you may it find difficult 
to source suitable 
quantities of fuel.
Note to self
Take into consideration the size 
of boiler house and storage areas 
needed for biomass boilers. How will 
you obtain the fuel and is it a stable 
supply?

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
186
or closed-loop systems use a heat exchanger that separates the potable water 
from the fluid, known as the heat transfer fluid, which circulates through 
the collectors. The two most common heat transfer fluids are water and 
an antifreeze/water mixture that typically uses non-toxic propylene glycol 
system. The better systems are designed to drain back when the pump 
stops working; this protects the system from frost and prevents excessive 
degradation of the propylene glycol.
Solar thermal panels require more space than PV technology because, 
in addition to a relatively large space on the roof for the collectors, space is 
needed in the plant room for the pump controller and heat exchanger. On a 
large project this can be a significant area. Don’t forget to include the services 
of a structural engineer when you consider solar thermal as some of the 
equipment is heavy. You also need to consider the lifespan of your roof. The 
last thing you want to do is install a solar thermal system, then realise you 
need to replace the roof covering.
As with any heating system, solar thermal systems require annual 
maintenance to keep the heat exchangers running correctly and to the right 
temperature. Occasionally the system will need topping up with propylene 
glycol. The propylene glycol will need to be replaced every three to eight years 
depending on use and temperatures to maintain efficiency. Modern systems 
with drain-back fitted protect the propylene glycol, increasing its lifespan.
The advantages of solar thermal heating systems are as follows.
•	
Solar energy is available to all and free after the initial cost of 
equipment.
•	
A properly designed system can save you as much as 60 to 70% of 
your energy bills for hot water.
•	
Most systems can be made to pay back within ten years with feed-in 
tariffs.
•	
Sometimes grants are available to cover the cost of installation and 
interest free loan can be obtained. 
A good source is “Salix” funding. 
•	
Solar energy has a positive 
effect on the environment and 
is safe to use.
•	
Relatively low maintenance is 
needed.
•	
Pumped 
systems 
minimise 
heat losses in the system.
Note to self
Try 
to 
look 
for 
sustainable 
technologies that have a payback of 
no more than six years. This way you 
can be sure of getting your money 
back over the period of most carbon 
reduction plans.

8 Sustainability, use of resources and sustainable technologies 
187
The disadvantages of solar thermal are as follows.
•	
The high initial cost, although there is a good return after investment 
payback periods.
•	
Performance depends on the weather; on cloudy days performance is 
likely to be low.
•	
It is not suitable for all properties and a south-facing aspect is 
required.
•	
An auxiliary heat source is needed when the system cannot perform 
due to weather conditions.
•	
The panels can adversely affect the appearance of the building.
•	
If the system is not pumped, there is a danger of freezing in winter.
•	
Active systems are more expensive to run than passive.
Photovoltaic panels
Photovoltaic technology has been around for a number of years, but has 
proved to be inefficient, resulting in long payback periods. This has always 
limited their purchase and installation to organisations with very strong 
environmental principles. However, today’s modern panels tied to feed-in 
tariffs from the government have decreased payback periods to as low as nine 
years, although these feed-in tariffs are now being removed or reduced due 
to government cutbacks.
Photovoltaic panels can be fitted on the ground or on the roof of your 
property. They are installed at an angle of 30° from the horizontal and need 
to be south-facing for optimum performance. They require little additional 
equipment, generally just an inverter to convert from DC to AC.
Electricity produced by PV technology reduces the amount of energy used 
from non-renewable resources such as coal, gas, oil and nuclear power. In 
addition, there are significant environmental benefits from reductions in air 
pollution and carbon emissions from burning fossil fuels, reductions in water 
and land use by central generation plants and reductions in the storage of 
waste. Solar technologies produce energy with little noise and few moving 
parts.
There are currently three types of PV panel available and care must be 
taken to choose the right technology.
•	
Monocrystalline. These are manufactured from a single crystal of 
silicon and can be up to 20% efficient.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
188
•	 Polycrystalline. These are made 
from thin slices from a block of 
silicon crystals and can be up 
to 16% efficient.
•	 Thin 
film. 
These 
panels  
    are made from a layer of 
semiconductor on a glass or metal base. They are the poorest 
performing panels at between 10 and 12% efficiency.
The advantages of using PV panels are as follows.
•	
They have no moving parts and no maintenance is required to the 
panels themselves; however, the inverters need to be maintained and 
will probably have a lifespan of between five and ten years.
•	
Electricity generated by solar power is produced without any 
greenhouse gas emissions and is therefore a high yield carbon 
reduction system.
•	
Little space is needed, especially in the plant room.
•	
PV panels are silent in operation.
•	
Solar energy will work in most environments as long as a clear south-
facing aspect is available.
•	
There are many government initiatives available, although these are 
likely to decrease as the technology becomes more readily available. 
As a result, many schemes now have a reasonable payback period of 
between eight and ten years.
•	
Some companies will enter 
into agreements to supply the 
capital cost for installation 
providing they receive the 
feed-in tariff and you buy the 
electricity at a reduced rate.
The disadvantages include the following.
•	
The initial cost of installation and purchase is high compared with 
other technologies.
•	
Electricity production is dependent on the quality and quantity of 
light available.
Note to self
You need to check the structural 
stability of buildings before erecting 
a roof-mounted wind turbine to be 
sure that the building can absorb 
the additional lateral loads created.
Note to self
Use the panel with the highest 
efficiency factor or, at least, do a 
calculation of cost in use.

8 Sustainability, use of resources and sustainable technologies 
189
•	
Electricity is only generated during 
daylight hours, so much less electricity 
is produced during the winter, which 
is the time of peak demand.
•	
The building needs a south-facing 
aspect and sufficient roof space.
•	
Long-term agreements with companies 
providing finance require commitments 
about access to the roof and roof life 
(some demand 25 year agreements).
Wind generation
The areas which benefit most from wind generation are those on exposed 
sites where the wind is of sufficient strength and consistency to justify 
investment in a wind turbine. Small-scale turbines do work, but rarely merit 
the financial outlay needed in terms of electricity generated. In general, wind 
generation only works on a large scale with industrial sized turbines.
There are basically two types of turbine.
•	
Turbines with a two- or three-bladed horizontal axis. These need to 
face the wind to extract power and therefore need to be able to change 
direction with the wind.
•	
Vertical turbines. These do not need to change direction and are 
usually more suited to urban sites.
Voltage optimisation
The electricity which flows into your establishment does not always flow 
evenly. There are a number of factors that can affect the flow of electricity such 
as: harmonics, over-voltage, transients, phase imbalance and power dips.
Voltage optimisation is an electrical energy saving technique installed in 
series with the mains electricity supply to give an optimum supply voltage 
for the site’s equipment. Voltage optimisation improves power quality on the 
system by balancing phase voltages and filtering harmonics and transients 
from the supply. Voltage optimisers are essentially electrical transformers: 
coils of metal that behave like magnets when an electric current is passed 
through them. Optimised supplies can therefore eliminate inconsistencies in 
the supply and remove the power surges that can cause so much aggravation 
and downtime in your IT systems.
­Warning
PV panels are 
not economic and 
will not give you a 
payback on investment 
unless you get a 
feed-in tariff.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
190
Grey water
Grey water is sometimes discussed along 
with other renewable technologies. Grey 
water captures a resource and re-uses 
it to the best effect. Grey water is water 
which has fallen onto a building and 
is captured through the roof drainage 
system and funnelled into holding tanks, 
generally underground. It is filtered, then 
pumped back into the building and held 
in storage tanks inside the building ready 
to be pumped around the building for use 
in flushing toilets. It does not produce 
potable water and therefore cannot be used for drinking water.
This system is sometimes known as rainwater harvesting and needs to 
be considered at the design and build stage. Retrofitting a grey water system 
is possible, but far more expensive. Maintenance is generally completely 
forgotten until the filters block and the system no longer works; it should be 
considered from day one.
Building Management Systems
A BMS is a standalone computer system that can calculate the pre-set 
requirements of the building and control any connected mechanical plant 
to meet the needs of the users of the building. The BMS does this by using 
inputs, such as temperature sensors and outputs, as on/off signals connected 
to controllers around the building. Programmes within these controllers use 
this information to determine the necessary level of control. The controllers 
are linked together and information can be passed from one to another. 
Connecting a modem allows centralised or remote access.
The level of control given via the BMS depends on the information received 
and the quality of information programmed into it. As well as offering a 
precise degree of control of its environment, it can trigger alarms about 
certain conditions and advise when a system is not operating to its maximum 
capacity. The systems are only as good as the people who are operating them 
and the information programmed into them. They need to be managed to 
work correctly and are not generally something that you can fit and forget. 
However, the benefits obtained from a well-run BMS make them a more than 
worthwhile investment. The kinds of systems that will run effectively from a 
BMS are: heating, ventilation, security door access and lighting. In general, 
if a piece of equipment has a mechanical signal, then the BMS can control it.
­Warning
BMS systems 
need to be managed 
and run effectively. They 
do not run themselves and 
need technical back-up 
and servicing; this needs 
to be factored in.

8 Sustainability, use of resources and sustainable technologies 
191
Installing sustainable technologies
When you first start to look at 
sustainable technologies, there 
is a tendency to look at each 
individual project in isolation. 
However, you should adopt a 
coherent strategy for sustainable 
technologies in terms of having 
a plan detailing your intentions 
throughout the site. You should 
have a structure to integrate these 
technologies into existing systems. 
Like all M & E systems, these new technologies need to be maintained and, 
in some circumstances, this maintenance can be onerous. This needs to be 
factored into your long-term maintenance strategy, otherwise you could find 
yourself saddled with considerable liability in the future.
You need to be able to measure the effectiveness of each of the items of 
technology that you install. There is no point installing PV panels if you don’t 
know how much electricity they are generating. Equally, you need to be able 
to demonstrate that the claims you have made in relation to payback have 
been achieved. If you are able to do this effectively, then you are much more 
likely to receive continued funding for other projects. Make sure that these 
technologies are connected to your BMS so that you can readily draw down 
information to prove that the systems are working.
Utilities
One your biggest budget areas will be your electricity and gas consumption. 
Expenditure on electricity is often difficult to control without careful monitoring 
and re-education of your users. Gas consumption usually relates directly to 
heating and, as the amount of heating required depends on the season and 
outside temperatures, you have fewer options about how to make savings. 
However, before discussing methods to control consumption, you need to 
know how you currently use your electricity and what makes up your charges.
Meter readings can tell you how much gas or electricity you are using, but 
cannot tell you when you are using it. If you have any half-hourly meters, 
the data from these will be stored off site by your supplier and these data can 
be obtained on request. This will give you a load profile, i.e. a plotted graph 
indicating how much electricity is used at particular times of the day. This 
graph will indicate whether equipment has been left switched on when not 
required, e.g. in the middle of the night. Equipment commonly left switched 
Note to self
Organise all your staff to carry 
out a base load check one Friday 
afternoon. Log all meter readings, 
then close all systems down. On 
Monday morning, switch everything 
back on and re-read the meters. This 
will give you the base load.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
192
on include pumps on timer switches, boilers, air conditioning, ventilation 
systems and heaters or water heaters with out-of-sync timer switches.
Establishing your base load
The first thing to establish is your base load. Your base load is the minimum 
amount of electricity needed to run your building when it is not in use. You 
cannot turn everything off in a building; computer servers and food freezers, 
for example, need to be on continuously. Pumps also may need to be left on 
and ventilation systems are often left on overnight for free cooling, so you will 
always be using some electricity.
The easiest way to determine your base load is to visit every building on 
a Friday afternoon and systematically turn off every appliance that has been 
left on unnecessarily. Make sure you discuss this with your IT department 
in case they have planned any downloads over the weekend. Turn off clocks, 
heaters, phone chargers and PCs, but make sure you leave any essential 
services on. Read the meters as late in the day as possible and then leave the 
building to work as normal. On Monday morning, read the meters again. This 
will tell you the amount of electricity used over a two-day period. Halve this 
value and you have your base load per day for your site. This seems rather 
simplistic, but it works. You can then establish a percentage reduction to aim 
for from your total consumption minus your base load.
Procurement of electricity
This exercise is usually carried out every two or 
three years. By the time the contract needs to 
be renewed, you have often forgotten everything 
you learnt last time you carried out the exercise. 
There are some essential pieces of information 
you need to gather before starting a procurement 
process.
•	
Collate your sites. Do you have addresses and 
details of each of the buildings on the contract?
•	
Meter type. Do you know the kind of meters 
that are in each building? It is useful to group 
them at this point into non-half-hourly and 
half-hourly meters.
•	
MPANS. Do you have all of your meter point 
reference numbers (MPANs)?

Procurement is a difficult 
area to deal with as it can 
clearly be very confusing. 
Use 
a 
professional 
consultant 
or 
engage 
with a consortium.


8 Sustainability, use of resources and sustainable technologies 
193
Procuring electricity has never been simple. Your electricity never comes directly 
from the generating plant to your doorstep. There are a number of players who 
all charge for their part of the process. These costs include the following.
•	
Using the National Grid. A sophisticated network brings electricity 
from the generating company across the country to your door. You 
sometimes see this described as Transmission Use of System (TUOS) 
and Distribution Use of System (DUOS).
•	
Supplier costs. Your supplier pays the power stations for generating 
the electricity and the National Grid for using their distribution 
system. This is sometimes seen on your bill as NGC or DNO.
•	
Meter readings. The meter operator charges for reading your meters.
•	
Taxes. These include the VAT element and the Climate Change Levy 
(CCL).
Buying and selling electricity is a risky business which depends on many 
factors; the market is extremely volatile at the best of times. The best 
organisations from the perspective of the sellers are those who are well 
organised, with a good understanding of the timing and amount of electricity 
consumption. Predictable usage and good data show that you know what you 
are talking about and you become a far more quantifiable risk. To achieve the 
best outcomes, ask yourself the following questions.
•	
What kind of meters do you have on site? If you have half-hourly 
meters, then you can provide valuable data to your supplier.
•	
Can you provide good consumption data in a format that your supplier 
can understand?
•	
Do you have all the necessary MPANs?
•	
Can you supply additional forecast data, e.g. are you likely to demolish 
a building or construct a new one?
•	
Have you made a choice about how long a contract you are prepared to 
take? One-year contracts 
generally give a better 
rate than a three-year 
contract, as there is more 
risk for the supplier in a 
longer contract.
•	
Have you set a target date 
for going to market and 
Note to self
Pull together all your data from your 
meters and ask a meter specialist to 
give you a quote for AMR. It will pay 
for itself and will help you with both 
your CCL and sustainability targets.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
194
are you flexible with this date? Remember, you do not always have to 
procure your next contract at the end of the current one. If the market 
is good, you can buy in advance at a more favourable rate.
•	
Are you able to aggregate your bills to ease administration? You can 
reduce your costs by putting them together in one bill.
•	
Do you understand what the best tariff for you is? Your may benefit 
from cheaper night-time tariffs?
•	
Can you compare suppliers on a like-for-like basis? If your 
requirements are complex, then this is when employing an energy 
specialist can pay off. If you do opt for an energy specialist, make sure 
that they are not tied into deals with particular suppliers.
Energy procurement is fraught with pitfalls. It can give you many sleepless 
nights, particularly if you are reaching the end of a good deal and the 
procurement process is going to result in a substantial increase in prices. 
This is a no-win situation, because your finance department is going to want 
to know why the utility costs have increased. The greater your understanding 
of the market and how it works, the easier it is to obtain the backing of your 
finance department.
Control of utilities
How do you manage your electricity and gas at the moment? The definition of 
control is the ability to monitor and influence. The first part of this control is to 
have an understanding of where your electricity is being used. In its simplest 
form, this is taking meter readings and using these readings to plot your 
usage on the site building by building. It is far better to use automated meter 
reading (AMR). In this system, pulsed sensors fitted to each meter record the 
electricity used and transfer the data a central point such as a website or 
your PC. Interpretive software uses the raw data from the meters to provide 
management information for your site. The better software provides models 
and interpretive reports which help with your energy analysis. If you have 
multiple sites, then investment in AMR is worthwhile if only because of the 
savings in staff costs from collecting meter readings. AMR is the cornerstone 
of good utilities management. Only when you can accurately measure your 
electricity consumption and carry out a comparative analysis can you truly 
control your use.
A good AMR system can help you with improved data collection and 
increases the performance of this. You avoid reading errors and missed meter 

8 Sustainability, use of resources and sustainable technologies 
195
readings. Reading data automatically also provides increased accuracy of 
data flow between the AMR system and other applications such as finance 
systems. Avoiding manual data entry or collection not only saves staff time, 
but will be far more accurate as you are not tied to collection on set days. 
With AMR you have constant access to real-time data and meter readings are 
available on request. Costs for meter reading will be reduced and therefore the 
total cost of the operation. Your data are stored so that you can manipulate 
them to provide comparative analysis.
The financial benefits of AMR last over the lifetime of the system. Your 
system will pay for itself over four to five years and any savings after that point 
are a bonus. You also save the time it takes for someone to read the meters 
manually. With AMR your utility bills are based on actual consumption. This 
generates a steady cash flow. Billing is based on real-time data and estimated 
bills are no longer necessary. You no longer need an interface between you 
and the utility company, i.e. no one needs to telephone the company with 
meter readings each month. You can also see how much gas and electricity 
individual buildings or departments are using. This helps with cost centres.
If you are aware of what equipment is using electricity and when, you 
can influence its use by turning things off that do not need to be on. You 
may find that, as faults have developed in equipment over the years, certain 
aspects of the system have been put “in hand,” i.e. taken off control and put 
into continuous mode. This happens in most FM departments as it removes 
initial problems prior to repair. Unfortunately, you sometimes find that 
these temporary fixes are forgotten and systems end up being left “in hand” 
permanently; this obviously uses more gas or electricity.
Timed systems can sometimes be set up incorrectly in the first place, with 
assumptions about usage being made and never challenged. A good example 
of this is ventilation systems set to come on a couple of hours before needed 
and then over running by a couple of hours at the end of the day. There 
could be a good reason for this, however, so do not turn things off without 
consultation.
Educating the occupants of buildings
The occupants of buildings need to be trained how to use their facilities. 
Without this basic training they can undermine your attempts to reduce 
consumption through their ignorance. A prime example of this is when staff 
bring portable heaters into work because they feel chilly in the morning rather 
than asking you to turn the heating on earlier. This can have a knock-on 
effect on electricity consumption if widespread. It can also affect the heating 
system if the portable heater is adjacent to a main heating sensor. This can 

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
196
then turn the heating off in large areas because 
it has reached the required temperature in the 
local area. This create a vicious circle in that 
more people then use portable heaters and 
suddenly your building is being heated by 
portable heaters and you can’t understand why 
your heating is not working correctly.
Staff throughout the organisation need to be 
on your side and must be aware of their actions 
in relation to energy use. An energy awareness 
campaign can help you to get the message over. 
Shock tactics work well, e.g. you can provide 
data on how much it costs to leave lights and 
PCs on in an office and how much it costs to boil 
a full kettle compared to boiling only enough for 
a single cup. This will pay dividends. You need 
to be able to check the effectiveness of the campaign, so before you start you 
should undertake a survey to check on staff perceptions about sustainability 
and energy usage. This will enable you to target areas of awareness that are 
clearly not up to scratch. It also saves you time and effort by not working on 
areas where staff knowledge is already high.
You must shout about your successes and publish your failures. This will 
have two effects. Firstly, it keeps the energy saving message alive as people 
can see that you are actually doing something and, secondly, it can shame 
people into action. Publishing your successes can provide support in itself. 
Success breeds success, and people want to be associated with success. You 
will find that the more successful your campaigns become, the more people 
will engage with what you are trying to achieve. Conversely, if you fail to get 
results, people will shy away from helping you as they will not want to be 
associated with failure. It is therefore important to get your staff awareness 
campaign right first time as you will be more likely to gain support and people 
will pay more attention to what you are doing.
If you are able to pull data together by building or, better still, by 
department, you can name and shame poorly performing areas. Setting up 
silly competitions like the “Green Wellie Award” may add a touch of humour 
to your campaign and engage people. No one likes to be seen as a “tree 
hugger,” so the more you can steer away from this image the better. Making 
departments focus on their utilities costs will not only make them realise they 
are actually using electricity, but that they need to control their own usage 
and reduce consumption.

A well-constructed and 
executed staff awareness 
campaign can save as 
much as 10% on your 
utilities costs.


8 Sustainability, use of resources and sustainable technologies 
197
Aide Memoire: Sustainability and carbon management
•	
Try to identify the key elements of sustainability that will affect 
your institution, specially the financial elements.
•	
Make sure that when you buy new equipment or refurbish, you 
look at better quality, more efficient equipment.
•	
Find a consistent way of reporting your carbon data and stick 
with it.
•	
Look at your site with a fresh pair of eyes and try to define which 
sustainable technologies would work for you.
•	
Put together a carbon plan for your organisation.
•	
Look at AMR and AMT for your site to monitor and track your 
electricity and gas usage.
•	
Educate the building users on how best to reduce carbon 
consumption.
Opportunities to reduce energy costs will only arise if you have a 
consistent and long-term strategy on the way in which you engage with staff 
and students. Piecemeal campaigns will only work for short periods and your 
message needs to be forceful and continually visible. “Sustainability Weeks,” 
where the focus is on the reduction of utilities consumption, help to focus 
attention on reduction, but you need to be forceful and you can only do this if 
senior managers are on board with your message. You may need to penalise 
poor performance, e.g. charging centres who leave PCs on in rooms when no 
one is present.

198
Chapter 9
Waste and how to deal with it
What is waste?
The waste generated by even a 
small site can be phenomenal. 
You will need to deal with this 
waste in the most cost-effective, 
the least labour-intensive, and 
the least space-intensive way. 
Waste can be defined as any item 
which is no longer of use to the 
site and needs to be discarded and removed from the site. Whatever strategy 
you decide to use for dealing with waste, your aims should be to
•	
reduce
•	
reuse
•	
recycle
You should track where all your waste has gone. A robust system of waste 
transfer notes, coupled with the use of quality waste removal companies, will 
ensure that you comply with legislation.
Waste can be divided into four main streams: paper, food, specialist waste 
and building waste.
Paper waste
This is probably the most significant waste stream on most sites in terms of 
volume, particularly in office and educational environments. There is usually 
Note to self
Make a list of all possible waste 
streams on site, then compare this 
against measures you have in place 
to deal with the waste.

9 Waste and how to deal with it
199
a considerable traffic of paper going both into and out of the site. You need 
to identify the areas where this waste paper is generated. By showing your 
senior management the costs of both generating and disposing of waste paper, 
you may be able to reduce paper use in your organisation and therefore also 
reduce the costs of waste paper disposal and meet your sustainability targets.
Sources of paper
When we look at most organisations, we see vast amounts of paper being 
generated and, in turn, being turned into waste which needs to be removed 
from site. Although a lot of information is now captured digitally in office 
environments, the old-fashioned paper form seems set to stay with us forever. 
The validation given by a signature on a piece of paper probably means the 
use of paper for forms will never end.
Meetings are one of the great destroyers of our rainforests. How many 
meetings do you attend where vast amounts of paperwork are produced, 
despite the fact that we all know it will never actually be read? It will generally 
sit on someone’s desk until there is no longer room for it and will then be 
binned. We need to question the culture, and indeed the necessity, of printing 
all these documents. Far better to send electronic links for the documents 
and to store them on shared areas where they can be accessed if required. 
Demonstrating the benefits of this way of working to your senior managers 
can be an uphill struggle, but if you can get top-down support for this you 
will make substantial progress in reducing your paper waste.
In an education environment, students’ work produces much of your 
paper waste; sometimes it is unavoidable for notes to be printed. Perhaps we 
should all be living in a paper-free society because secure, safe technology 
is available for digital data management. However, many people have an 
inherent distrust of computers and still believe that it is easier to print 
documents. Some printing will inevitably always be necessary. However, 
advances such as Moodle and other student portals can help to capture and 
use information digitally without the need for printing, and these solutions 
should be encouraged. Many lecturers and teachers still dust off their notes 
each year and spend time before the start of term photocopying dog-eared, 
out-of-date notes instead of capturing them digitally. Many of these notes 
are immediately discarded by the lecturer or student, so you need to tackle 
this area as a priority. These are the people you need to convince to move 
to Moodle by explaining the benefits of the system. This will sometimes be 
an uphill struggle, particularly if your Information Learning Technology (ILT) 
strategy is not fully available across the site.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
200
Cost of paper copies
This is difficult to quantify, but 
when 
considering 
how 
much 
paper you waste, you need to 
factor in a number of costs. The 
first cost to consider is the cost 
of the paper itself. This should be 
easy to find if you have a central 
point for procurement; it could 
be far more difficult if you need 
to consider individual sources of paper bought by resource managers in 
individual departments.
The cost of printing is split into a number of different areas, such as 
the cost of toner cartridges, the actual printers, electricity use and staff 
time. Toner cartridges can cost a phenomenal amount of money, perhaps 
£100,000 per year for even a medium-sized enterprise. If your finance 
department cost-centres toner cartridges, ask them how much is spent; you 
will be surprised.
If you can substantially reduce the amount of printing, it follows that 
you can also reduce the number of printers and the subsequent capital 
replacement of these. This can be tens of thousands of pounds. Printers 
consume electricity each time they are used. They are usually switched on 
early in the morning and remain switched on all day, whether you print 
something or not. We as a society have developed a culture of always wanting 
things ready to go. Printers will be using electricity in standby mode for 
at least the 37 hours per week that the office space is occupied, and more 
likely they are left on and consuming electricity 24 hours a day. You may 
as well just set fire to £10 notes! Even when powered down, but not turned 
off at the mains, they will be consuming electricity through vampire power. 
If networked, they will be consuming electricity through the network card. 
The only sure way to reduce electricity use is to turn equipment off at the 
electrical socket.
Are you able to quantify how much time is spent by staff simply getting 
the piece of paper to the printer? A likely chain of events might be as follows.
•	
Procurement officer purchases the paper. This doesn’t happen 
automatically and the procurement officer’s time has to be factored in.
•	
Receipt of delivery to site. Generally, this will go from the delivery 
point on site into a store, a task usually carried by site supervisors.
Note to self
Try to link sustainability to your 
waste strategy. It can make a 
difference to sustainability targets. 
Recycling is one topic that is brought 
up time and time again by student 
groups.

9 Waste and how to deal with it
201
•	
Reprographics. If the work needed is printed rather than photocopied, 
then your reprographics staff will have a part to play.
•	
Movement from store to local store in each department. Again, this is 
probably carried out by your site supervision team.
•	
Movement from the local store to printer. This will probably be carried 
out by departmental technicians, or another staff member who will 
load the paper into the actual printer.
A similar process occurs with the replacement 
toner cartridges and, indeed, replacement 
printers. Finally, a good proportion of the 
finished article goes straight into the bin! This 
example illustrates that your paper chase is 
likely to cost a considerable amount in staff 
time alone.
Waste paper
Much of your organisation’s paperwork finds its way into the waste bin and 
becomes part of your waste stream. In addition, the volume of waste paper 
that can be produced during the normal course of working from other sources 
is considerable. This can include waste from the following sources.
•	
Paperwork. This may be brought in by staff and customers and then 
discarded.
•	
Periodicals and papers. Your library (in an education environment) 
and reception desks usually receive periodicals and papers every day 
and these will end up in the bin.
•	
Leaflets. Thousands of leaflets arrive on site during normal operations, 
from organisations offering support or information to leaflets from 
local takeaways offering your staff lunch options.
•	
Junk mail. We forget this most of the time, but consider the amount 
of junk mail you get at home. Multiply this by ten and then by the 
number of staff members you have and you will be getting somewhere 
near the total. Add to this the total periodicals from specialist areas 
and you end up with a lot of paper. You yourself will be swamped with 
at least a dozen different free periodicals each week, so it is easy to 
see the effect on your waste stream. Unlike with private residences, 
companies cannot opt out of receiving junk mail.
­Warning
Large 
amounts of paper 
or cardboard near 
buildings can be an 
open invitation to 
arsonists.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
202
Twenty years ago there was a good market for waste paper and you could 
have sold it for a small profit. Unfortunately, the current market for recycled 
paper is non-existent and this is no longer a viable option. You should not 
send waste paper directly to landfill, so you need to consider how you store 
and ultimately dispose of this waste. The cheapest method is to simply load 
all your recyclable material together as dry mixed recycling. The advantage 
of dry mixed recycling is that you do not have several different recycling 
containers around the site.
You may, if you are lucky, find a local removal specialist who is prepared 
to take your paper waste off site without charge. This is the best option from 
a sustainability perspective as clean waste paper is easier to recycle into a 
new product than mixed waste, which needs to be separated. However, to 
make this a viable option you need to have the space to store your paper 
on site without it getting wet. Storing as bales is an option for cardboard 
products, but not for general paper as the bales often become too heavy to 
move. This can create problems with manual handling and it is far better to 
have an enclosed, lockable skip. Care must be taken when deciding where 
to site these containers as placing skips full of dry paper next to buildings 
is an open invitation to arsonists. Space may also be an issue. In today’s 
strict world of space reduction, many organisations have trimmed both their 
internal and external space to reduce costs and maximise the use of their 
premises. This can present you with a logistical nightmare in terms of storage 
of waste, leading you to be far more innovative about how you get rid of 
your waste streams. When balancing your space issues, you may need an 
increased frequency of collection, rather than large banks of receptacles for 
waste.
Food waste
Food waste is becoming increasingly difficult to dispose of. It is becoming less 
favourable to put the waste directly into landfill and farmers no longer accept 
waste food for feeding pigs. There are many companies who will take your 
waste food away, sometimes at zero cost. One of the best ways to dispose of 
this waste is to send it to an anaerobic digester, which converts food waste 
into energy.
Anaerobic digestion is the natural breakdown of organic materials into 
methane, carbon dioxide and a compost residue. This takes place naturally, or 
can be accelerated and controlled in an anaerobic digester. A typical anaerobic 
digester is a sealed vessel, or series of vessels, in which bacteria act without 
oxygen. The organic material needs to be fully mixed and warmed. Mesophilic 

9 Waste and how to deal with it
203
digestion takes place optimally around 30 to 38 C and thermophilic digestion 
takes place optimally around 49 to 57 C.
The mixture of gases formed during the anaerobic digestion of organic 
wastes is called biogas. It can be used in stationary engines to generate 
electricity, but is not suitable as a vehicle fuel. After removing the carbon 
dioxide, the remaining methane is known as renewable natural gas or 
biomethane. Biomethane is virtually identical to natural gas and has many 
uses. It is probably one of the most environmentally friendly sources of gas. 
The solid residues of the process are turned into compost, which can be 
incorporated into soil to improve fertility.
For many years, catering departments used macerators in their kitchens 
to cut down the volume of waste going to landfill. This practice is increasingly 
frowned upon by local environmental health departments as being 
environmentally unsound. Over a period of years, fat deposits will build up in 
pipe work and fat traps, which will clog the drainage pipes in the area. This 
is also becoming a food source for vermin and many urban areas are seeing 
an increase in the rat population due, in part, to this ready food source in the 
drainage system.
Specialist waste
Specialist waste includes batteries, toner cartridges, oils, fluorescent tubes 
and various sources of radiation.
Batteries and toner cartridges
All batteries and battery products should be separated from your general 
waste streams due to the toxic chemicals that they contain. Alkaline batteries 
can be safely disposed of with normal household waste. Never dispose of 
batteries in fire because they could explode. 
It is important not to dispose of large amounts of alkaline batteries in 
a group. Used batteries are often not completely “dead”. Grouping used 
batteries together can bring these “live” batteries into contact with one 
another, creating safety risks. Adapted from http://www.duracell.com/en-
US/battery-care-disposal.jspx 
Toner cartridges similarly contain toxic chemicals and many companies 
now operate collection services for empty toner cartridges and bottles. These 
are usually tied into rebates back to the user or may operate as donations 
to chosen charities. It is sometimes difficult to prove that the charities do 
actually receive the donations, but the principle is good. If your organisation is 
sufficiently large and you have a lot of printers, why not consider standardising 

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
204
all 
your 
printers 
and 
employ 
someone, even in a part-time role, 
to refill the cartridges yourself? In 
a medium-sized organisation your 
annual toner bill could easily be 
more than £100,000, so this is a 
worthwhile objective and could 
give good returns. Standardisation 
of all your printers to a single type 
should easily be achievable across 
the organisation with a five-year time frame, given the speed of replacements 
in IT systems.
Oil waste
You will probably find that, particularly with a motor vehicle department in 
your portfolio, all oil waste products are separated and held in storage to be 
moved off site at regular intervals. It is also important that oil-contaminated 
products, such as oily rags, are collected separately and disposed off site 
in a controlled fashion. Motor vehicle parts 
may contain oil and cleaning fluids hold waste 
residues in solution. These also need to be 
carefully removed from site. Ensure that a full 
waste transfer audit system is in place.
Fluorescent tubes
For 
many 
organisations, 
disposing 
of 
fluorescent tubes and, increasingly, compact 
low energy light bulbs, is seen as an expensive 
problem that is often best delayed. One of 
the good things that came out of the Waste 
Electrical and Electronic Equipment Directive 
(WEEE Directive, 2002/96/EC) Regulations 
was an industry initiative to set up a free 
collection network. A levy of around 15 pence 
per tube is included in the purchase price of 
fluorescent tubes. This levy funds a scheme to 
provide containers and free collection to sites 
where there are likely to be more than 1000 
lamps for disposal every 12 weeks. This scheme 

When undertaking tenders 
or quotes for replacement 
lighting tubes and bulbs, 
make sure you specify 
the WEEE charge as a 
separate item. This way 
you can be sure it has 
been accounted for and 
you can check that you 
are not charged twice for 
the same service.

Note to self
Try to avoid using macerators in 
catering departments. Not only 
is this practice frowned upon by 
environmental health departments, 
but you will also need to set aside 
funds for cleaning fat traps and pipe 
work.

9 Waste and how to deal with it
205
is operated through RECOLIGHT, a WEEE Compliance Scheme, who now 
have a network of disposal points across the country for businesses wanting 
to dispose of small numbers of tubes. Disposal through these points is free 
and, generally, you can just drop them off, although remember that when 
commercial waste lamps are moved from one site to another, there must be 
a consignment note for each movement. Be careful that you do not end up 
paying for your tube collections and remember you have already paid for 
disposal through your levy at purchase.
Radioactive sources
Any material which emits ionising radiation needs to be considered in relation 
to the various regulations. You may encounter the following radioactive sources.
•	
Sealed sources. A number of radionuclides, including radium-226, 
americium-241, strontium-90, cobalt-60 and plutonium-239, are 
used. Sealed sources require testing for leaks every two years.
•	
Radioactive rocks. Natu-
rally occurring radioactive 
minerals, which have not 
been processed in any way, 
are often held by geology 
departments, 
sometimes 
without their radioactive 
properties being known.
•	
Uranium 
and 
thorium 
compounds. These are most often stored in sealed containers or puffer 
bottles and are used for half-life experiments.
•	
Smoke detectors. Radioactive versions contain a small americium-241 
or radium-226 source.
•	
X-ray equipment. Any instrument generating X-rays will contain a 
radioactive source.
•	
Neutron sources. It is very rare for any organisation to own a neutron 
source. Registration with the Environment Agency is required, with 
high levels of supervision and documentation.
Radiation sources need to be managed by a Radiation Protection Advisor. 
IRR99, The Ionising Radiations Regulations 1999 (S.I. 1999/3232), gives 
further guidance on this topic. All these sources need to be disposed of by 
specialist contractors and should never be put into standard waste streams.
Note to self
More information on special wastes 
can be obtained from the Consortium 
of Local Education Authorities for 
the Provision of Science Services 
(CLEAPSS); 
most 
colleges 
and 
schools subscribe to this service.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
206
Building waste
Building waste is probably one of the most bulky items that you need to 
remove from site and will depend on the size of the site and the type of 
building activities taking place. Three streams of building waste are likely.
•	
Building waste. Some departments, such as brickwork, joinery and 
plumbing, do try to reuse a lot of the items used in teaching; however, 
there will still be residual waste from items such as timber. You can 
only cut a piece of wood up so many times before you have to discard it 
and use a new piece. Similarly, brick and block work sometimes start 
to accumulate large quantities of waste. This should not be hidden 
away, but should be visible and integrated into the teaching process as 
an example of how to build sustainably and sympathetically reusing 
materials and disposing of waste appropriately. Suitable storage 
needs to be made available, usually adjacent to the construction area.
•	
Minor works waste from the maintenance department. Small jobs can 
create a vast amount of varied waste, from items such as old door handles 
and door closers to ceiling tiles and plasterboard, and, of course, empty 
paint tins. All this must be classed as building waste and, if possible, 
separated into its constituent parts for removal from site.
•	
Major works or new build waste. This will no doubt be written up in your 
Site Waste Management Plan. Modern building sites are usually set up 
to deal with waste in a cost-effective and environmentally friendly way. 
Buildings are designed to be built economically using standard sizes 
to reduce cut waste. Items containing gypsum, such as plasterboard 
offcuts, are collected and taken back to the gypsum factory for recycling. 
Metal offcuts are also usually separated to be removed off site.
Aide Memoire: Waste and how to deal with it
•	
Try to quantify your waste streams throughout your organisation.
•	
Recycle as much waste as possible.
•	
Make sure you fully document your waste streams in terms of 
removal and ensure you have the correct documentations for 
specialist waste or waste covered by specific legislation.
•	
Look at technology to replace some of the waste streams at 
source, such as Moodle and Papercut to reduce paper usage.

207
Chapter 10
Fleet management
Most FM departments will have a fleet responsibility and with this comes the 
obvious requirements to keep the fleet both maintained and legal. Your fleet 
may consist of just one van for the transport of maintenance materials around 
the site, or it could include a variety of vehicles from vans through to forklift 
trucks.
Whenever an area of your work 
is covered by legislation, it needs 
your full attention. It must be 
managed and documented fully to 
ensure that your liabilities are not 
only met, but are documented and 
can be audited. This links again to 
your QMS in terms of management 
and audit.
Your responsibilities fall into two main areas: the drivers and the vehicles.
Drivers and licences
You should not allow anyone to use your fleet without checking the authority 
and classification on their driving licence to ensure that they can legally drive 
the vehicle. For a standard van this could simply be the provision of a full 
driving licence. However, for a passenger-carrying minibus, a D1 classification 
on the driver’s licence is the minimum requirement. It is, however, becoming 
far rarer to actually see this on a licence, as drivers who took their driving test 
after 1 January 1997 do not automatically get D1 on their licence. It is possible 
to take a D1 test to gain this classification and this involves both a theory 
and practical test and an enhanced medical examination. A D1 classification 
allows the driver to drive a minibus with fixed seating up to a maximum of 
Note to self
Put together a full list of all of your 
drivers and set up a spreadsheet 
or database so you can track when 
your staff details need to be checked.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
208
17 seats (including the driver), but only if this is not for hire or reward, i.e. it 
is on a voluntary basis. Hire or reward generally means any payment in cash 
or kind made by or on behalf of passengers which gives them the right to be 
carried in a vehicle. If you are paid for your role, and most FM staff are, it is 
far more difficult to use this form of licence legitimately.
To drive a minibus with nine or more passenger seats for hire or reward 
you need passenger carrying vehicle (PCV) entitlement. To obtain this, you 
must meet higher medical standards and take a further driving test. If you 
drive a minibus for a college or school under the minibus or community bus 
permit scheme, you do not need to have the higher PCV entitlement, although 
it is always good practice to do so. Minibus permits allow organisations to 
charge for travel in their minibuses without having to comply with the full 
public service vehicle operator licensing requirements and without the need 
for their drivers to have PCV (category D1 or D) entitlement. The service must 
be provided for their own members or for groups of people the organisation 
serves. The service must not be provided to the general public and the 
charges made must be on a non-profit basis. Community Bus Permits are 
issued to bodies who wish to run a local bus service on a voluntary non-
profit basis using unpaid volunteer drivers. In this instance members of the 
general public can be carried in the minibus. It is difficult for an organisation 
to operate within the law using a permit.
It is far better, however, to insist that all staff who drive minibuses are 
fully PCV trained. This enables them to transport people legally and will be 
looked on far more favourably by your insurers. Details of the PCV course 
requirements can be found via your local authority or county council, who 
generally run these courses cheaply and economically.
Your first tasks are to establish the following.
•	
Who drives the minibuses.
•	
The licence status of the drivers, including taking a copy of the licence 
and keeping it on file.
•	
Are the drivers fit enough to drive? You must encourage staff to advise 
you of any medical condition that might affect their ability to drive.
•	
Advise your insurers of the drivers and their details.
You need to update all this information annually, so set up a computer-based 
system which requests it on an annual basis. Or, if your fleet is large, you 
may be able to invest in software to control this process for you. Remember 
the all-important insurance requirements. If you omit or make false claims 
about your drivers you will probably invalidate your insurance.

10 Fleet management
209
Set up some guidelines on how your drivers should use the minibuses. 
A series of user guides or Codes of Practice will be useful to your staff for 
specific scenarios, e.g. what to do if they break down, where they can obtain 
fuel, or guidance in the event of an accident.
Drivers hours
The law on drivers’ hours is complicated and, when dovetailed with 
European law, can become complex in interpretation. Three sources of legal 
information are:
•	
the European Union rules
•	
the Domestic GB rules
•	
the AETR rules (relating to a group of 17 countries outside the EU, 
mainly in southern and eastern Europe)
(European Union, EU Regulation 561/2006. Further information available at:  
http://www.dft.gov.uk/vosa/repository/Rules%20on%20Drivers%20
Hours%20and%20Tachographs%20-%20Goods%20Vehicles%20in%20
GB%20and%20Europe.pdf)
The definition of driving is being at the controls of a vehicle for the purposes 
of controlling its movement with the engine running. This applies whether it 
is moving or stationary. The total amount of time you are permitted to be on 
duty in the same 24-hour period is 11 hours. The Working Time Regulations 
1998 will apply if you drive under the GB rules. These regulations set a 
maximum 48-hour working week, a right to 4.8 weeks of annual leave and a 
right to health checks and adequate rest.
When you are driving in the UK you must adhere to the following rules.
•	
Take a break of at least 30 minutes when you have been driving for 
5.5 hours. Alternatively, within a period of 8.5 hours, breaks must 
add up to at least 45 minutes. This is so that you are not driving for 
more than 7hours 45 minutes. An additional break of 30 minutes at 
the end of this period must be taken to obtain refreshments, unless 
you are finished for the day.
•	
Ensure that in any working day the maximum amount of driving is 
10 hours and that your total day’s work does not exceed 16 hours.
•	
Take a continuous rest of 10 hours between two consecutive working 
days. You can reduce this to 8.5 hours up to three times a week.
•	
Have at least one period of 24 hours off-duty in any two consecutive 
weeks.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
210
Vehicles
Your vehicles need to be fully maintained 
to make sure you comply with your basic 
requirements for safety. Basic things such as 
MOT and service regimes must be fully managed. 
Simple spreadsheets can be compiled for these 
data. These can be linked to Outlook calendar 
reminders to ensure you are compliant with 
legislation and control your fleet adequately. 
Daily or weekly checks of the basics such 
as water and tyre pressures also need to be 
documented. Insurance cover should never be 
taken for granted and your insurers will be keen 
to see that you are covering all the basics in 
terms of management. This may well influence 
you insurance payments.
Key control
It is easy to lose control of your minibus fleet 
by not adequately controlling your keys. If you 
cannot control your keys using a formal booking 
in/booking out procedure, you may be open to abuse from staff taking vehicles 
for personal use. This may lead to invalidation of your insurance policy. 
There are many proprietary systems that can control your keys automatically 
through software and strong box solutions.
Logging journeys
It is sensible and practical to log the 
mileage undertaken by your staff in 
vehicles owned by your institution 
for the following reasons.
•	
To control the use of the 
vehicle. When the mileage 
is logged, you have control. 
Without control, you cannot 
say where the vehicle has 
gone or whether it was on 
official business. This can 
only lead to misuse.

Set up a spreadsheet to 
monitor the mileage of 
your fleet. This is good 
practice, not only from 
the perspective of tracking 
your fleet, but will also 
help you to define usage 
for 
your 
sustainability 
targets.

Note to self
Set up a spreadsheet for all your 
vehicles and enter details such as 
MOT due dates, insurance renewals 
and service dates. Also put the key 
dates into your Outlook diary to 
make sure you don’t miss them. You 
will not look at the spreadsheet every 
day, but you will look at you diary 
daily.

10 Fleet management
211
•	
To help you decide service frequencies and maintenance regimes.
•	
When you have a number of vehicles, it allows you to rotate them to 
obtain consistent use, instead of wearing out one particular vehicle.
•	
To help you to calculate your carbon footprint or make assessments 
of budget provision for future years.
•	
To help you decide which vehicles need to be replaced under your 
capital strategy.
Trackers
Use of a tracker clearly identifies when and where a vehicle is used and is 
a strong deterrent to misuse. Be sure that your tracker is installed in an 
inaccessible place in the vehicle, otherwise it may be disconnected. Larger 
vehicles may have tachographs which monitor vehicle use, shift times and, 
importantly, the break times of the drivers. Driver compliance is paramount 
and legislation around transportation must be followed precisely.
Fuel cards
This depends on the size of your fleet; however, in my opinion, fuel cards 
are essential if you want to control your vehicle usage. Most fuel cards have 
moved from allowing you to fill up at the local petrol station on a daily basis 
to the flexibility of using a fuel card with a major national fuel provider.
Capital purchases
Use the same principles as for your planned maintenance programme and 
apply them to fleet management. In this way you can predict in good time 
when you need to replace your vehicles and you can give an overview to 
senior management of usage against cost.

A Practical Introduction to Facilities Management
212
Aide Memoire: Fleet management
•	
Ensure all your insurance details are up to date.
•	
Ensure all your drivers are eligible to drive the vehicles requested.
•	
Set up spreadsheets to monitor items such as MOTs and service 
regimes.
•	
Set up a fuel card.
•	
Install trackers on your vehicles if you think they are likely to get 
misused.
•	
Check the European and Domestic rules on driving.

xv
Abbreviations used
ACMs	
Asbestos-containing materials
AMR	
Automated meter reading
AOC	
Association of Colleges
BIFM	
British Institute of Facilities Managers
BMS	
Building Management System
CAD	
Computer-aided design
CCL	
Climate Change Levy
CCTV	
Closed-circuit television
CIOB	
Chartered Institute of Building
COSHH	
Control of Substances Hazardous to Health
CPD	
Continuous professional development
CPM	
Critical Path Method
CRB	
Criminal Records Bureau
CTR	
Collective team responsibility
ELI	
Employers liability insurance
EMS	
Environmental Management System
FM	
Facilities Management
M & E	
Mechanical and Electrical
MPAN	
Meter point reference number
O & M	
Operations and Maintenance
PCV	
Passenger carrying vehicle
PDA	
Personal digital assistant (palmtop computer)
PFI	
Private Finance Initiative
PLI	
Public liability insurance
PPM	
Planned preventative maintenance
PQQ	
Pre-qualification questionnaire
QA	
Quality Assurance

Abbreviations used
xvi
QDP	
A national questionnaire on the quality of student perception
QMS	
Quality Management System
SAR	
Service Area Reports
SLA	
Service Level Agreements
TRV	
Thermostatic radiator valve
TUPE	
Transfer of Undertakings and Protection of Employment
VRF	
Variable refrigerant flow
WEE	
Waste Electrical Equipment
To aid you through this book, various key pieces of information will be 
highlighted in the following way.
Note to self
These are action points to draw your 
action to key pieces of text or remind 
you to do something.

These are bright ideas to 
get you thinking about 
quick wins.

­Warning
These are 
warnings of 
key things to 
avoid.
Theory and information slot
Most of the work described in this book is based on practical experience tied 
closely to accepted theories and information about facilities management. 
These slots will detail some of the theories behind my work. Theory and 
practice may not always be identical, but you have the option to compare 
the two side by side. These slots will also contain key pieces of information. 
The information given in relation to the theories will be summaries, not the 
full theory.
The information slots will work in two ways. For the experienced Facilities 
Manager, they will remind him or her of some of the key theories learned as 
a student. For the student, they will point the way to exploring the theories 
in greater depth.

Abbreviations used
xvii
Aide Memoire
The Aide Memoire section at the end of each chapter will summarise the 
key points covered.

xiii
List of theory and information slots
Chapter 1
The future of Facilities Management
Hard and soft services
Gantt charts and the Critical Path Method
Fayol: the six functions of management
PDSA
Chapter 3
Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs
Mary Parker Follet
Herzberg’s Motivational Theory
George Elton Mayo
McGregor: Theory X and Theory Y
Effective management
SWOT analysis
Chapter 4
Using a “dashboard”
Policies and procedures
Risk assessment
The “Golden Thread”
Taylorism
Gilbrath’s time and motion study
Advantages of ISO 9001

List of theory and information slots
xiv
Chapter 5
Single service procurement
Bundled services
Integrated FM
Total FM
Total infrastructure FM
Chapter 7
Prequalification Questionnaires
Chapter 8
SMARTER technology

322
References
Buchanan, D.A. and Huczynski, A.A. (2010) Organizational Behaviour, 7th edn. Pearson 
Education, Harlow.
CIBSE Heating, Ventilating, Air Conditioning and Refrigeration (CIBSE Guide B). Product 
Code GVB.
HSE (2012) Getting to Grips with Manual Handling. A Brief Guide. Leaflet Series INDG 
143 (REV 2), HSE Books.
HSE (1997) Electrical Safety at Places of Entertainment. Series code GGS50, HSE Books.
HSE (1998) Lighting at Work, 2nd edn. Health and Safety Guidance Series HSG38, HSE 
Books.
HSE (1999) Simple Guide to the Lifting Operations and Lifting Equipment Regulations 
1998. Leaflet Series INDG 290t (web only), HSE Books.
HSE (2000a) Legionnaires’ Disease. The Control of Legionella Bacteria in Water Systems. 
Approved Code of Practice and Guidance, 3rd edn. Legal Series L8, HSE Books.
HSE (2000b) Safety in Working with Lift Trucks, 3rd edn. Health and Safety Guidance 
Series HSG6, HSE Books.
HSE (2002) Upper Limb Disorders in the Workplace, 2nd edn. Health and Safety 
Guidance Series HSG60, HSE Books.
HSE (2003a) Electricity at Work. Safe Working Practices, 2nd edn. Health and Safety 
Guidance Series, HSE Books.
HSE (2003b) Manual Handling Assessment Charts. Leaflet Series INDG383, HSE Books.
HSE (2005a) Controlling Noise at Work. The Control of Noise at Work Regulations 2005. 
Guidance on Regulations. Legal Series L108, HSE Books.
HSE (2005b) Noise at Work. Guidance for Employers on the Control of Noise at Work 
Regulations 2005. Leaflet Series INDG362 (REV1), HSE Books.
HSE (2005c) Preventing Slips and Trips at Work. Leaflet Series INDG225 (REV1), HSE 
Books.
HSE (2005d) Workplace Transport Safety: An Employers Guide. Health and Safety 
Guidance Series HSG136, HSE Books.
HSE (2005e) Workplace Transport Safety. An Overview. Leaflet Series INDG 199 (REV1), 
HSE Books.
HSE (2006a) Asbestos. The Licensed Contractor’s Guide. Health and Safety Guidance 
Series HSG 247, HSE Books.

References
323
HSE (2006b) Work with Materials Containing Asbestos. Control of Asbestos Regulations 
2006. Approved Code of Practice and Guidance. Legal Series L143, HSE Books.
HSE (2007a) COSHH Essentials: Easy Steps to Control Chemicals. Control of Substances 
Hazardous to Health Regulations. Health and Safety Guidance Series HSG 193 (web 
only), HSE Books.
HSE (2007b) The Work at Height Regulations (2005) (as amended) A Brief Guide. Leaflet 
Series INDG401, HSE Books.
HSE (2008a) Clearing the Air. A Simple Guide to Buying and Using Local Exhaust 
Ventilation (LEV). Leaflet Series INDG 408, HSE Books.
HSE (2008b) Safe Use of Work Equipment. Provision and Use of Work Equipment 
Regulations. Approved Code of Practice and Guidance, 3rd edn. Legal Series L22, 
HSE Books.
HSE (2008c) Simple Guide to the Provision and Use of Work Equipment Regulations 
1998. Leaflet Series INDG291, HSE Books.
HSE (2008d) Time to Clear the Air! A Worker’s Pocket Guide to Local Exhaust Ventilation 
(LEV). Leaflet Series INDG 409, HSE Books.
HSE (2009a) Working Alone. Health and Safety Guidance on the Risks of Working Alone. 
Leaflet Series INDG73 (REV2), HSE Books.
HSE (2009b) Working with Substances Hazardous to Health. A Brief Guide to COSHH. 
Leaflet Series INDG136 (REV3), HSE Books.
HSE (2011a) Controlling Airborne Contaminants at Work. A Guide to Local Exhaust 
Ventilation. Health and Safety Guidance Series HSG258, HSE Books.
HSE (2011b) Safety in the Installation and Use of Gas Systems and Appliances. The 
Gas Safety (Installations and Use) Regulations 1998. Approved Code of Practice and 
Guidance, 3rd edn. Legal Series L56, HSE Books.
Note: The HSE web site (www.hse.gov.uk) is an invaluable source of information.

213
Appendix 1
Strategic objectives and operational 
targets for a typical college

Appendix 1
214
Appendix 1A  Helpdesk
Strategic objective
Action
Target 1
Target 2
1.  Provide a vibrant learning 
environment to meet the 
needs and expectations of the 
College community
Be first contact to all users of the 
building. Provide frontline security 
to the premises and check all 
visitors, staff and students have 
authority to enter the premises
Undertake a monthly 
customer care report 
personally asking staff, 
students or visitors for 
opinions
Provide rooming reports through 
formal walk rounds and checks
Enter data from the reports 
onto the Helpdesk
Follow up rooming reports in 
terms of progress
Make sure Helpdesk functions 
correctly
Undertake a monthly 
appraisal of current system 
and report back to Helpdesk 
software company on 
rectifications needed
Arrange an annual meeting with 
Helpdesk software company 
discuss problems
Sort all outgoing mail and frank post 
daily
Undertake a monthly report 
on how much post has been 
sent out and how much it 
has cost
Break down postage out by 
curriculum/cost centres
Receive, check and distribute 
incoming goods
Make sure all deliveries 
leave the post room at the 
end of each day on the 
reprographics/parcel run
Provide a quarterly report 
on number of parcels out 
to centres; aim for 95% 
completion rate

 Strategic objectives and operational targets for a typical college
215
2.  Ensure accountability and 
financial stability
Provide telephone assistance to 
clients by receiving Helpdesk work 
requests. Input all required data 
to progress the work requested. 
Provide day-to-day administration 
in support of the Helpdesk. 
Process urgent requests via radio 
and email. Process non-Helpdesk 
tasks such as porterage, waste 
transfer, room setup, cleaning 
requests. Report problems to 
contractors such as lift and fire 
alarm problems on Helpdesk 
issues. Attend disabled toilet and 
lift alarms where required. Liaise 
with the on-site security service
Provide monthly and quarterly 
reports on Helpdesk output
Monitor target completions for 
tasks in the Helpdesk
Track number of jobs placed with 
each discipline within the FM 
department
Provide monthly list of 
number of jobs by trade
Move towards adding in time 
allocation to each job to link 
to trades with the ability to 
show a monthly total of hours 
worked by each team member
Undertake return to work interviews 
for each member of staff in team
Undertake and keep a formal 
record of all staff sickness
Report on a termly basis to 
Facilities Manager
(Continued)

Appendix 1
216
Strategic objective
Action
Target 1
Target 2
3.  Set high expectations to 
promote the consistent 
achievement of aspirational  
learning goals
Secure keys in cabinet. Report 
damage and vandalism both 
internally and externally
Maintain a key book for 
contractors ensuring all 
contractors who come on 
site are logged in
Maintain evel of CPD within 
department
Hold and maintain a full 
record of CPD undertaken. 
using as a prompt for 
organising staff training
4.  Take action to ensure a 
safe environment. Promote 
individual understanding and 
responsibility for safety and 
well-being
During rooming report run check for 
access and egress issues
Place all works onto Helpdesk 
as and when rooming 
reports have been compiled
Recheck following month to 
ensure works have been 
undertaken
5.  Promote equality actively, 
support diversity and 
cohesion and tackle 
discrimination through 
innovative strategies
Provide staff training in customer 
care
Arrange and organise an 
annual update for all staff
Assess effectiveness through 
appraisal process and 
amend as needed to ensure 
effectiveness
Appendix 1A  (Continued)

 Strategic objectives and operational targets for a typical college
217
Provide staff training on new 
Helpdesk software
Arrange and organise an 
annual update for all staff
Assess effectiveness through 
appraisal process and 
amend as needed to ensure 
effectiveness
Provide staff training on manual 
handling
Arrange and organise an 
annual update for all staff
Assess effectiveness through 
appraisal process and 
amend as needed to ensure 
effectiveness
Provide staff training on the franking 
of post
Arrange and organise an 
annual update for all key 
staff
Assess effectiveness through 
appraisal process and 
amend as needed to ensure 
effectiveness
Ensure a full meeting schedule has 
been completed 
Enter all meeting dates on 
Outlook calendar
Publish all dates to ensure 
people are aware of meetings
6.  Develop a clear and open 
communication and 
engagement strategy
Encourage two-way communication 
within the Helpdesk section
Undertake monthly meetings 
which must be minuted; 
all minutes to be sent to 
Facilities Manager
Allow curriculum centres to engage 
with the Helpdesk by inviting 
resource managers into the 
Helpdesk to see how best we can 
serve them
Arrange regular one-to-one 
meetings with all members 
of staff
(Continued)

Appendix 1
218
Strategic objective
Action
Target 1
Target 2
7.  Provide a range of learning 
opportunities and services 
relevant to the needs of 
individuals and employers
Encourage cross department liaisons 
and working arrangements to 
allow crossover of roles
Have an open day when key 
members of curriculum 
centre staff can drop in and 
obtain an understanding 
of how the Helpdesk and 
Postal systems work
8.  Provide a supportive 
environment for all staff 
encouraging personal well-
being and professional 
development
Encourage FM team to work together
Arrange visits and close 
liaison with other FM 
departments to allow 
upskilling and succession 
possibilities
Encourage cross service 
working e.g. buddying up 
for one day per month with 
another section
Encourage team events
Pull together a set of team 
events for the year, e.g. 
team barbeque, liaise with 
other teams to ensure full 
team involvement
Encourage paperless systems of 
working within the department
Encourage the team to look 
at ways of digitising items 
such as surveys
Work with the team to 
collectively work on ‘paperlite’ 
solutions for the department
Appendix 1A  (Continued)

 Strategic objectives and operational targets for a typical college
219
9.  Deliver sustainable 
education; reduce the 
resource intensity of learning 
with the long-term objective 
to have a carbon neutral site
Encourage others not to print 
documents or emails
Aim to reduce paper use 
within Helpdesk area by 
10% year on year
Reduce the amount of electricity 
used in the Helpdesk department
Try to persuade staff not to 
print emails
Help coordinate the college’s 
sustainability message
Encourage the whole 
Helpdesk team to 
completely switch off 
PCs and other post room 
equipment at the end of 
each day
Ask your team to push the 
sustainability message at every 
opportunity
Include a sustainability 
message on customer 
satisfaction surveys

Appendix 1
220
Appendix 1B  Management
Strategic  objective
Action
Target 1
Target 2
2.  Ensure accountability and 
financial stability
Maintain financial stability for the FM 
department
Estates to maintain +/-3% 
leverage on budgets held
Budgets which overspend to be 
micro-managed to reduce to 
the +/-3%
Ensure all contractors using the college 
are sound and that full records are 
maintained for each contractor
All contractors to be written 
to annually to update 
details 
Check all records at month 6 
to ensure compliance
All contracts to be re-tendered every 
three years
Maintain a list of current 
contracts and prepare and 
re-tender each contract on 
schedule
Review specification at each 
re-tender
Undertake return to work interviews for 
each member of staff in team
Undertake and keep a formal 
record of all staff sickness
Work with HR to reduce 
sickness levels
4.  Take action to ensure a 
safe environment. Promote 
individual understanding 
and responsibility for 
safety and well-being
Ensure the site is supplied with full 
CCTV coverage
Maintain the CCTV team 
and ensure at least a 
termly meeting of all 
parties including the 
supplier discuss technical 
difficulties, minuting all 
meetings
Increase the overall coverage of 
CCTV on site by detailing a 
plan giving site coverage

 Strategic objectives and operational targets for a typical college
221
Develop and maintain a lone worker 
system on site
Identify key lone worker 
positions and work with 
health and safety manager 
to complete a strategy
Ensure strategy has been 
followed by undertaking 
sample checks at month 6
Ensure a strategy is in place for heating 
and cooling for the entire site, 
including a BMS strategy
Complete and update the 
BMS and heating strategy 
for the site and publish 
findings
Check with curriculum centres 
at key points of year to 
ensure they are happy with 
temperatures
Ensure a PPM strategy is in place and 
working
Continually update the PPM 
structure to accommodate 
new liabilities
Check effectiveness of the 
completed schedule and 
check completed rates
5.  Promote equality actively, 
support diversity and 
cohesion and tackle 
discrimination through 
innovative strategies
Ensure all contractors are vetted to 
ensure CRB checks are undertaken
All contractors who come 
onto site to be CRB 
checked
Annual update required from 
contractors to ensure all 
staff who come on site are 
fully CRB checked
6.  Develop a clear and open 
communication and 
engagement strategy
Ensure a meeting structure is in place 
to provide effective dissemination of 
information to all staff
Place all meetings on 
Outlook calendar
Provide full set of minutes and 
agendas for full year
Allow curriculum to use all FM facilities 
and resources to provide curriculum, 
e.g. use of boiler house for teaching
Ensure a termly meeting 
is arranged with all 
curriculum centre 
managers
Ensure an annual meeting 
with all resource managers
(Continued)

Appendix 1
222
Strategic  objective
Action
Target 1
Target 2
7.  Provide a range of learning 
opportunities and services 
relevant to the needs of 
individuals and employers
Encourage a wider use of facilities for 
teaching
Work closely with curriculum 
centres to develop the 
use of the site renewable 
technologies for teaching
Ensure risk assessments 
complete for all facilities
8.  Provide a supportive 
environment for all staff 
encouraging personal 
well-being and professional 
development
Provide a development structure for all 
staff to ensure ongoing and updated 
training
Annually review outside the 
appraisal process
Provide a methodology to ensure 
succession within the department
Compile a skills register 
for the entire team and 
encourage staff to take on 
crossover skills
Through appraisal process, 
try to identify areas not 
currently undertaken and 
challenge staff to train for 
these
Ensure regular one-to-one meetings with 
all staff at least twice per year outside 
appraisal process
Encourage all staff to step 
up when opportunity 
arises by developing 
training (unpaid) for any 
team member who wants 
to learn about other areas
Try to enable staff access to managers 
Encourage all managers/
supervisors to keep an 
open door policy for all 
staff
Appendix 1B  (Continued)

 Strategic objectives and operational targets for a typical college
223
9.  Deliver sustainable 
education; reduce the 
resource intensity of 
learning, with the long-
term objective to have a 
carbon neutral Site
Engage with students and staff to 
encourage reduced utilities on site
Attend student meetings 
to obtain feedback on 
sustainability issues
Encourage student 
sustainability groups to 
become involved with the 
college’s Carbon Plan
Ensure all contracts have been through 
the sustainable procurement process
Try to develop a 
communications strategy 
for the FM department 
to take the lead on 
sustainability
Ensure the PQQ for 
sustainability is used for all 
contracts
Maintain a league table of performance 
for each building
Use information from AMR o 
create a league table
Publish the league table each 
term

Appendix 1
224
Appendix 1C  Maintenance
Strategic objective
Action
Target 1
Target 2
1.  Provide a vibrant learning 
environment to meet the 
needs and expectations of 
the college community
Maintain the grounds to provide a 
safe and vibrant environment
All bins to be emptied once 
each week and high use bins 
emptied more frequently
All smoking shelters to be 
cleared on a daily basis
Ensure all areas are painted and 
paint finish is maintained
A monthly dilapidation report 
detailing where touch ups 
are needed on site
Ensure that larger works are 
scheduled taking account of 
curriculum needs
Ensure all internal plant displays 
are maintained and kept in tip-top 
condition
Ensure that all plants are fed 
at least weekly throughout 
the summer
If needed for special functions 
buy-in/rent plant displays
2.  Ensure accountability and 
financial stability
Internal ordering processes to be in 
place for minor materials
All orders to be formally 
generated 
All orders to show due 
diligence and follow financial 
regulations
Encourage internal buying of 
services, e.g. fully priced works 
such as shelves and minor 
improvements
All internal orders to be 
formally costed and paid for 
by curriculum centres
Ensure that internal invoicing 
takes place
Undertake return to work interviews 
for each member of staff in team
Undertake and keep a formal 
record of all staff sickness
Report on a termly basis to 
Facilities Manager

 Strategic objectives and operational targets for a typical college
225
3.  Set high expectations to 
promote the consistent 
achievement of aspirational 
learning goals
Ensure the skills base for the 
department is detailed and training 
is up to date
Create a skills competency 
record for the whole team 
including site supervisors 
and be responsible for 
actioning and coordinating 
training in relation to 
maintenance tasks only
All team to be fully trained by 
end of year 1
Detail how the maintenance 
department works and publicise 
this throughout the FM department
Provide a PowerPoint 
presentation on the 
maintenance setup: what we 
do, how we do it and what 
we stand for
Create a training programme 
for curriculum centres 
during staff development 
week
4.  Take action to ensure a 
safe environment. Promote 
individual understanding 
and responsibility for safety 
and well-being
Ensure all access and egress is 
maintained at all times and 
alternatives are maintained and 
published
Ensure the groundsman is 
detailed with keeping all 
access and egress areas 
clear and that this is 
monitored and documented, 
e.g. a tick list which is date-
stamped
Ensure snow plan is 
maintained and stocks 
are ready for first snowfall 
and that stock levels are 
maintained throughout the 
winter
Maintain an acceptable predefined 
level of lighting on site at night
Undertake a termly check 
on all external lighting, 
carried out and detailed by 
contractor
Ensure any faults found are 
actioned on the Helpdesk
(Continued)

Appendix 1
226
Strategic objective
Action
Target 1
Target 2
5.  Promote equality actively, 
support diversity and 
cohesion and tackle 
discrimination through 
innovative strategies
Allow team to undertake enhanced 
training on safeguarding to counter 
stereotyping
Put together enhanced training 
on safeguarding to dispel 
poor image of construction 
staff
Encourage positive image 
to escape the constructor 
stereotype
Organise awareness sessions on 
equality and diversity
Include at least one annual 
session on equality and 
diversity documented on 
training records
6.  Develop a clear and open 
communication and 
engagement strategy
Complete a full team meeting 
structure for the full year
All meetings to be minuted and 
sent to Facilities Manager
Encourage one-to-one 
meetings at regular intervals 
throughout the year for all 
maintenance staff
Encourage a two-way dialogue 
between curriculum centres and 
maintenance to pick up perceived 
problems before they become an 
issue
Encourage a drop in once per 
term with each curriculum 
centre manager
Undertake annual customer 
satisfaction surveys on 
comfort levels in buildings
7.  Provide a range of learning 
opportunities and services 
relevant to the needs of 
individuals and employers
Provide staff training in specialist 
maintenance trades in the form of 
toolbox talks
Enhance skills throughout 
the department by building 
on the competency listing 
to create an enhanced or 
supplementary skills listing
Appendix 1C  (Continued)

 Strategic objectives and operational targets for a typical college
227
Ensure training on the BMS system 
for key personnel
Arrange full training on the 
BMS system to any new 
plumber
Set targets for new plumber 
on BMS, e.g. reduced failure 
rate of pumps through active 
management
8.  Provide a supportive 
environment for all staff 
encouraging personal 
well-being and professional 
development
Encourage team events
Pull together a set of team 
events for the year, e.g. 
team barbeque, liaise with 
other teams to ensure full 
involvement
Ensure all staff attend occupational 
health monitoring set up for them
Ensure attendance
Ensure any staff concerns are 
raised with occupational 
health team
Ensure that return to work interviews 
are carried out for every member 
of staff
Aim for 100% documented 
return to work interviews with 
a copy held on staff file
9.  Deliver sustainable 
education; reduce the 
resource intensity of learning, 
with the long-term objective 
to have a carbon neutral site
Ensure items are recycled and reused
Maintain a register of all reused 
items for the sustainability 
agenda and assess savings 
made in terms of both money 
and carbon saved
Aim for 50% reuse of old 
materials
Construct and manufacture using 
standard sized items to save on 
offcuts
Buy only appropriately sized 
sheets rather than cutting 
down
Design items with standard 
sheet sizes in mind
Purchase sustainable maintenance 
materials
Ensure that materials are 
sourced locally to improve 
sustainability
Encourage local suppliers to 
provide the right materials

Appendix 1
228
Appendix 1D  Site supervisors
Strategic objective
Action
Department
Target 1
Target 2
1.  Provide a vibrant 
learning environment 
to meet the needs and 
expectations of the 
college community
Provide assistance to curriculum 
centres in terms of setting up and 
removing displays and classroom 
layouts
Provide a termly report on 
how well setups have 
performed over the 
term and seek to find 
better ways to provide 
service
Obtain feedback from 
curriculum centres
Ensure internal windows and foyer 
entrances are cleaned on a regular 
basis
Clean all entrance 
glassware once each 
week
Ensure this is entered on 
Helpdesk as job or PPM
Set up examination rooms in line 
with requests
Ensure close liaison with 
relevant departments 
on setups and report 
back termly on number 
of successful exam 
setups; aim for 100% 
completion rate
2.  Ensure accountability 
and financial stability
Monitor and manage all minor stock 
items such as lighting tubes
Produce a termly updated 
stock list
Ensure procurement is 
undertaken to replenish 
stock
Ensure timesheets are filled in timely 
and accurately
Ensure 100% completion 
of timesheets within 
first two days of each 
month
Aim for 0% errors on 
timesheets

 Strategic objectives and operational targets for a typical college
229
Ensure all Helpdesk jobs are actioned 
on a daily basis and that they are 
closed down accurately and timely
Aim to have at least 90% 
successful completion 
of all jobs
Quality control remaining 
10% to find out why they 
were not completed
Undertake reprographics run on a 
daily basis
Ensure 100% completion 
of run each day
Open and close each building in 
accordance with published opening 
and closing times
Ensure a 100% 
completion on 
buildings opened 
within the first 20 
minutes of opening
Establish back up 
procedures to ensure 
buildings are opened on 
time
Ensure coverage in terms of 
availability of staff
Ensure acceptable level 
of staff at all times 
by monitoring both 
sickness and holidays 
and scheduling 
accordingly
Schedule staff from 
other sections to 
ensure minimum staff 
attendance achieved
Undertake return to work interviews 
for each member of staff in team
Keep a formal record of 
all staff sickness
Report on a termly basis to 
Facilities Manager
3.  Set high expectations 
to promote the 
consistent achievement 
of aspirational learning 
goals
Ensure porterage of materials around 
site is quick and efficient to ensure 
that curriculum staff can operate 
seamlessly
Ensure a 100% target on 
all porterage
Sample quality checks to 
ensure compliance
Set and monitor internal staff training 
and ensure all are undertaken each 
year
Liaise with FM office on 
training schedules 
Ensure 100% on 
mandatory training 
across FM department
(Continued)

Appendix 1
230
Strategic objective
Action
Department
Target 1
Target 2
4.  Take action to ensure 
a safe environment. 
Promote individual 
understanding and 
responsibility for safety 
and well-being
Carry out rooming reports on a 
monthly basis, checking all tables, 
chairs etc.
Ensure all rooming 
reports are passed 
through to the 
Helpdesk for action
Ensure any defective 
equipment/furniture is 
removed from service as 
soon as possible
Undertake regular checks on access 
and egress; monitoring reports to 
be held in central file
Maintain report on access 
and egress with formal 
checklists identifying 
when areas surveyed 
and by whom
Ensure issues are dealt 
with promptly
Undertake a weekly check on external 
lighting when dusk is before 9 p.m.
Maintain a report on 
lighting around site 
detailing when checked 
and by whom
Undertake annual report 
on lighting, taking into 
account feedback from 
curriculum centres after 
open evening.
Remove waste materials on a daily 
basis to the nearest waste disposal 
point
Ensure waste materials 
are where could cause 
or contribute to an 
accident
Provide operational briefs prior to 
holiday periods to allow colleagues 
to undertake works effectively
Ensure that a full list 
of current jobs and 
actions is passed on to 
next in line to ensure 
completion
Provide a hand-back brief 
when person resumes 
duties
Appendix 1D  (Continued)

 Strategic objectives and operational targets for a typical college
231
5.  Promote equality 
actively, support 
diversity and 
cohesion and tackle 
discrimination through 
innovative strategies
Encourage staff to report issues 
through line managers
Operate a 0% tolerance of 
equality and diversity 
issues
6.  Develop a clear and 
open communication 
and engagement 
strategy
Ensure a monthly meeting is 
undertaken and that the meeting is 
minuted
Book in a formal monthly 
minuted meeting
Circulate all minutes
Ensure staff can talk on a one-to-one 
basis with their line manager
Ensure that a termly 
individual chat is 
undertaken with all 
staff and any issues 
raised brought to team 
meetings
Ensure issues raised are 
linked into appraisal
Ensure all feedback on Helpdesk jobs 
is thorough and conclusive
Ensure recording of 
Helpdesk jobs on the 
software package
7.  Provide a range of 
learning opportunities 
and services relevant 
to the needs of 
individuals and 
employers
Ensure current skills in relation 
to Evac chair is up to date and 
that all site supervisors are fully 
conversant with their requirements 
in the event of a fire or bomb threat
Ensure this goes on the 
competency record
Ensure this training is also 
linked into a Personal 
Emergency Evacuation 
Plan (PEEPs)
(Continued)

Appendix 1
232
Strategic objective
Action
Department
Target 1
Target 2
8.  Provide a supportive 
environment for all 
staff encouraging 
personal well-being 
and professional 
development
Monitor staff to identify skills 
shortfalls and encourage staff to 
undertake relevant training to 
upgrade skills
Ensure all staff fill in 
the competency sheets 
identifying skills 
levels and work with 
the Helpdesk team 
to ensure all staff are 
upskilled
Ensure 100% completion 
of competency skills and 
that no staff member 
operates in areas that 
they have not been 
trained in
Encourage team events
Pull together a set 
of team events for 
the year, e.g. team 
barbeque, liaise with 
other teams to ensure 
full involvement
Request ideas for an 
inclusive team event
9.  Deliver sustainable 
education; reduce the 
resource intensity of 
learning, with the long-
term objective to have 
a carbon neutral site
Ensure all waste is taken to the 
appropriate waste disposal point 
and is placed in appropriate waste 
streams, attempting to recycle as 
much as is practical
Collect daily all waste 
from around the 
site and deliver to 
appropriate waste 
disposal points, 
separating waste when 
possible
Appendix 1D  (Continued)

 Strategic objectives and operational targets for a typical college
233
Turn off lights in rooms on night shift 
as early as possible
Turn all lights off as the 
evening shutdown 
progresses
Turn off computers in unused rooms 
during close down period at night
Adopt a ‘turn it off if there 
is no one in the room’ 
mentality
Ensure the college van is filled with 
biodiesel
Aim to use at least 80% 
biodiesel as the year 
progresses

Appendix 1
234
Appendix 1E  Environmental issues
Strategic objective
Action
Department
Target 1
Target 2
1.  Provide a vibrant 
learning environment 
to meet the needs and 
expectations of the 
college community
Provide waste information to 
college community
Provide termly records of 
waste moved off site
Feed in targets to the carbon 
plan
Ensure the waste strategy is 
capable of moving waste away 
from learning areas quickly to 
promote a clean environment
Review as necessary to 
ensure compliance
Ensure that recycle stations are set 
up in each major office area to 
allow active recycling
Aim to have full recycling 
stations set up by end of 
year when new building 
comes on stream
Promote positive recycling 
with the curriculum 
centres
2.  Ensure accountability 
and financial stability
Control college’s EMS ensuring ISO 
9001 and 14001 compliance
Ongoing 
Control stock levels in domestic 
stores
Ensure that stock levels 
are maintained by 
periodic checks against 
stock. Feed back stock 
level replenishment to 
administration
Ensure stock is procured in 
a sustainable way
Log out all WEEE and keep details 
of all equipment scrapped
Keep records of all disposal 
of electrical equipment
Look to positively repair 
WEEE rather than scrap
Undertake return to work 
interviews for each member of 
staff in team
Undertake and keep a 
formal record of all staff 
sickness
Report on a termly basis to 
Facilities Manager

 Strategic objectives and operational targets for a typical college
235
3.  Set high expectations 
to promote 
the consistent 
achievement of 
aspirational learning 
goals
Ensure ongoing training for all 
environmental staff to keep skill 
levels up to date
Update annually
Identify any further CPD required 
for the environmental section
Update annually
4.  Take action to ensure 
a safe environment. 
Promote individual 
understanding and 
responsibility for 
safety and well-being
Ensure PAT testing is undertaken
Provide a monthly update 
on progress and identify 
slides in programme
Ensure any slides in 
programme are filled by 
external contractors
Undertake fire extinguisher checks
Undertake on a termly 
basis for each building
Undertake fire alarm tests
Undertake on a weekly 
basis in all areas
Feed results back into 
annual statistics on 
compliance
Provide access and egress reports
Provide termly report on 
progress
Feed results back into 
annual statistics on 
compliance
Ensure all failed PAT test items are 
removed from circulation and 
are either repaired or removed to 
WEEE store
Remove all redundant or 
failed items to WEE store
Feed results back into 
annual statistics on 
compliance
(Continued)

Appendix 1
236
Strategic objective
Action
Department
Target 1
Target 2
Identify in advance trends for 
equipment failure and report 
these to curriculum managers
Report back any trends 
in failure to centre 
manager, e.g. if a 
number of hairdryers 
have failed, this could 
indicate the whole batch 
is about to fail and 
would allow planning of 
budget for replacement
Encourage staff to use the FM 
services for disposal of all 
redundant waste and COSHH 
related items
Periodically inform all staff 
of the need to dispose of 
chemicals safely through 
the FM department
Encourage participation in the 
weekly fire drills and termly 
evacuations by working with the 
health and Safety Manager to 
provide guidance notes
Monitor and formally log 
all fire alarm tests and 
fire evacuations and hold 
records on a building by 
building basis
Feed results back into 
annual statistics on 
compliance
Interface with the maintenance 
team to log the shower head 
cleansing on the EMS
Ensure full PPM on 
showerhead cleaning is 
completed
Ensure that results are fed 
back into a compliance 
register
Appendix 1E  (Continued)

 Strategic objectives and operational targets for a typical college
237
5.  Promote equality 
actively, support 
diversity and 
cohesion and tackle 
discrimination 
through innovative 
strategies
Report on contractor vetting, CRB 
checks, etc. via the EMS link
Log on EMS system
6.  Develop a clear and 
open communication 
and engagement 
strategy
Ensure the needs of the 
department are clearly 
demonstrated to the staff 
through staff meetings
Undertake at least one 
monthly meeting
Ensure that all environmental staff 
get at least a termly one-to-one 
meeting
Meeting once per term
7.  Provide a range of 
learning opportunities 
and services relevant 
to the needs of 
individuals and 
employers
Create an EMS link to the training 
records
Ensure that all training 
is monitored, especially 
compliance training, via 
EMS 
Provide information relating to 
recycling for the use of students 
Attend termly student 
meetings to pass on 
recycling progress
(Continued)

Appendix 1
238
Strategic objective
Action
Department
Target 1
Target 2
8.  Provide a supportive 
environment for all 
staff encouraging 
personal well-being 
and professional 
development
Provide an end of term report to 
be issued to all staff on progress 
made by department
Ensure that progress is 
fully reported to the 
whole team
Encourage team events
Pull together a set of team 
events for the year, e.g. 
team barbeque, liaise 
with other teams to 
ensure full involvement
Try to make the team event 
something to do with 
recycling
9.  Deliver sustainable 
education; reduce the 
resource intensity 
of learning, with the 
long-term objective to 
have a carbon neutral 
site
Ensure a maximum recycling 
strategy 
Report on a monthly basis 
via service provider 
on totals of waste and 
recycled material on site
Make reporting implicit in 
any new contracts
Move towards goal of paperless 
EMS
Have all EMS forms as live 
versions by end of year 
Ensure that a diverse range of 
recycling facilities is made 
available to the college and all 
staff
Formal review needed each 
year
Try new recycling techniques
Publish data and details of 
recycling strategy
Publish details of all 
recycling activities once 
per year
Appendix 1E  (Continued)

 Strategic objectives and operational targets for a typical college
239
Appendix 1F  Cleaning
Strategic objective
Action
Target 1
Target 2
1.  Provide a vibrant 
learning environment 
to meet the needs and 
expectations of the 
college community
Ensure all areas are maintained clean 
and serviceable
Undertake a monthly customer 
care report, personally 
visiting four customers per 
month
Achieve a 90% success rate on 
customer care reports
2.  Ensure accountability 
and financial stability
Cleaning section to undertake internal 
audits of all cleaning functions and 
report to Facilities Manager
Ensure that all cleaning 
activities are reported and a 
league table of acceptability 
is drawn up as competition 
for each building
Create a prize for the staff of 
individual buildings who 
perform the best by the end of 
the year
Undertake return to work interviews 
for each member of staff in team
Undertake and keep a formal 
record of all staff sickness
Report on a termly basis to 
Facilities Manager
4.  Take action to ensure 
a safe environment. 
Promote individual 
understanding and 
responsibility for safety 
and well-being
Ensure all toilets/shower areas and 
places of rest and relaxation are 
maintained clean and in a condition 
conducive to good health
Create a schedule of checks 
detailing cleaning regimes 
which should feed into the 
EMS 
Ensure all cleaning tasks are 
undertaken in a safe fashion and 
that records are maintained
Periodic checks on safety 
must be undertaken by the 
cleaning supervisors. These 
must be noted and details 
provided during monthly FM 
meetings
(Continued)

Appendix 1
240
Strategic objective
Action
Target 1
Target 2
5.  Promote equality 
actively, support 
diversity and 
cohesion and tackle 
discrimination through 
innovative strategies
Ensure all contractors are vetted to 
ensure CRB checks are undertaken
Ensure all staff are fully CRB 
checked in year 1 of contract
6.  Develop a clear and open 
communication and 
engagement strategy
Ensure a meeting structure is in place 
to provide effective dissemination of 
information to all staff
Detail and publish a list of 
cleaning meetings. These 
should be Cleaning Manager 
with Supervisors, and 
Supervisors with operations 
staff
7.  Provide a range of 
learning opportunities 
and services relevant to 
the needs of individuals 
and employers
Provide staff training in specialist 
cleaning in the form of toolbox talks
Annual talks on safety and 
process should take place 
and these need to be detailed
Encourage full participation
Allow succession by encouraging non-
paid supervisors
Encourage succession through 
appraisal to find staff who 
would like to trade up when 
supervisors are ill or on 
holiday
Appendix 1F  (Continued)

 Strategic objectives and operational targets for a typical college
241
8.  Provide a supportive 
environment for all 
staff encouraging 
personal well-being and 
professional development
Set up training records for all staff
Set up a competency record for 
all staff in year 1
Provide a non-intimidating, customer-
facing service
Cleaning Manager to set 
up meeting with resource 
managers in each centre on 
a termly basis and feedback 
the results of those meetings 
to the FM meetings
9.  Deliver sustainable 
education; reduce the 
resource intensity of 
learning, with the long-
term objective to have a 
carbon neutral site
Ensure that all staff use the correct 
bags for recycling and other waste 
streams
Termly talks needed to all 
cleaning staff to ensure the 
correct bags are used for 
recycling
Set targets for cleaning staff for 
recycling
Ensure a maximum recycling strategy 
for the college
Periodically reinforce the 
message on dry mixed 
recycling with all staff during 
staff meetings
Cleaning section to assist in 
sustainability by turning off lights 
and PCs
All staff to be told to make sure 
windows are closed, PCs are 
turned off and thermostats 
are in mid-positions
Reinforce monthly message 
about turning PCs off

Appendix 1
242
Appendix 1G  Security
Strategic objective
Action
Target 1
Target 2
1.  Provide a vibrant 
learning environment 
to meet the needs and 
expectations of the 
college community
Provide talks to student groups 
explaining the role of Security 
Annual talks given to students 
as part of induction process
Obtain feedback from students on 
security issues
2.  Ensure accountability 
and financial stability
Ensure timesheets are accurate and 
that all additional hours claimed 
are ratified by the Facilities 
Manager before deployment
Ensure timesheet accuracy 
before submission to Head 
Office
Ensure full complement of staff is 
maintained
Advise FM office of holidays and 
ensure full staff requirements
Ensure only trained replacement 
staff present on site
Security team to ensure full and 
timely reports are maintained 
and followed up with appropriate 
members of staff
Ensure all incidents are reported 
Produce statistics on incidents on 
a monthly basis
Undertake return to work interviews 
for each member of staff in team
Undertake and keep a formal 
record of all staff sickness
Report on a termly basis to 
Facilities Manager
3.  Set high expectations to 
promote the consistent 
achievement of 
aspirational learning 
goals
Ensure support to curriculum 
centres to maintain a safe and 
non- intimidating level of service is 
maintained
Discuss with the resource 
managers on a termly basis 
the requirements of individual 
centres, and bring these 
requests back to the FM 
meetings

 Strategic objectives and operational targets for a typical college
243
4.  Take action to ensure 
a safe environment. 
Promote individual 
understanding and 
responsibility for safety 
and well-being
Support cash-taking activities on 
site and provide assistance in 
movement of cash
Provide patrols to ensure 
security of cash movements
Support duty heads during each 
evening
Provide a sign-on/sign-off facility 
for duty heads along with a 
periodic check on status as 
evening progresses
Gauge effectiveness of service 
through customer satisfaction 
surveys
Undertaken by patrols for 
safeguarding and security
Ensure red, amber, green patrols 
are undertaken on a daily 
basis
Log each patrol and provide 
statistics on success
5.  Promote equality 
actively, support 
diversity and 
cohesion and tackle 
discrimination through 
innovative strategies
Ensure patrols are in place to make 
site feel safer
Report any issues in relation to 
safeguarding
Provide friendly customer-facing 
service
Undertake reports to indicate 
safeguarding initiatives are 
working
Provide statistics each month 
at the security meeting to 
indicate trends
Compare statistics against 
previous years
6.  Develop a clear and 
open communication 
and engagement 
strategy
A full engagement strategy should 
be put in place, monitored against 
targets and reported back through 
appropriate channels
Discuss with individual 
curriculum centres the need 
for attendance at student 
meetings; draw up a full list 
and report back through 
security meetings
(Continued)

Appendix 1
244
Strategic objective
Action
Target 1
Target 2
7.  Provide a range of 
learning opportunities 
and services relevant to 
the needs of individuals 
and employers
Assist curriculum centres in the 
provision of security services
See how the security team can 
assist via termly meetings with 
resource managers
8.  Provide a supportive 
environment for all 
staff encouraging 
personal well-being 
and professional 
development
Provide a customer-facing service in 
a non-intimating way
Ensure the service is friendly 
in its presentation and that 
periodic customer service 
surveys are undertaken at 
least once per year
9.  Deliver sustainable 
education; reduce the 
resource intensity of 
learning, with the long-
term objective to have a 
carbon neutral site
Provide and maintain the eco-secure 
initiative to check and patrol 
which buildings are over-using 
utility resources
The eco-secure system should be 
reported back to the Facilities 
Manager at each security 
meeting and global statistics 
produced on an annual  
basis indicating where the 
hotspots are 
Security to report any lights left on
Appendix 1G  (Continued)

This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation. 
INDEX 
Index Terms 
Links 
A 
ACMs  
79 
80 
81 
action  
12 
52 
adaptability 
52 
administrative flow 
66 
administration structure 
16 
air source heat pumps 
184 
aims and objectives 
5 
Albert S. Humphrey 
58 
AMR (automated meter reading) 
9 
194 
223 
answering phones 
52 
AoC (Association of Colleges) 
18 
asbestos 
78–81 
261 
audit  
8 
136 
 
reports 
8 
B 
benchmark sustainability 
172 
benchmarking 
75 
BIFM (British Institute of Facilities 
 
 
Management) 
18 
36 
biomass boilers 
184 
 
 

Index Terms 
Links 
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation. 
BMS (building management systems) 
 
 
 
15 
62 
165
 
 
 
190 
221 
245 
boiler plant 
94 
bomb threats 
269–72 
building maintenance 
92 
building plans 
93 
building waste 
206 
bundled services 
121 
business mileage 
177 
C 
CAD (computer aided design) 
15 
22 
23 
carbon and procurement 
179 
carbon footprint 
172 
176 
carbon plan 
181 
268 
carbon team 
180 
Carbon Trust 
172 
CCTV  
149 
220 
certifications 
98 
CHAS  
115 
chat 
 
32 
CIOB (Chartered Institute of Building) 
18 
36 
cleaning team 
142 
239 
291 
cleaning specification 
291 
306 
cleanmail 
141 
CLEAPPS 
205 
Climate Change Levy 
193 
closed tenders 
100 
competition 
35 

Index Terms 
Links 
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation. 
compliance 
72 
77 
complaints 
53 
computer systems 
15 
communication 
30 
Condition B 
95 
condition survey 
10 
consumables 
146 
contracting in/out 
128 
contractor files 
120 
contractors 
20 
21 
114
 
 
 
220 
256 
cooling and ventilation 
250 
251 
core times for service 
133 
143 
COSHH 
97 
260 
cost 
 
128 
CPD (continuing professional development) 
1 
35 
36
 
 
 
58 
CPM (critical path method) 
11 
12 
creating a good impression 
50 
CTR (collective team responsibility) 
117 
customer feedback reports 
8 
customer service 
50 
51 
55
 
 
 
136 
 
cards 
58 
D 
D1 (driving licence classification) 
207 
dashboards 
65 
data collection 
93 
DBS (disclosure barring service) 
115 

Index Terms 
Links 
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation. 
dead legs 
83 
deliverables 
74 
deliveries 
140 
depreciation 
155 
display energy certificates 
184 
Douglas McGregor Theory X 
46 
126 
drivers and licences 
207 
drugs and alcohol 
148 
E 
electrical testing 
81 
84 
electricity base load 
192 
electricity procurement 
192 
electricity use 
167 
emails  
19 
esteem needs 
33 
evaluation 
6 
F 
facilities management, definition 
1–2 
fair and equal pay 
49 
falls from height 
85 
financial management 
99 
financial risks 
99 
fire alarm tests 
89 
fire curtains 
89 
fire extinguisher 
25 
fire legislation 
88 
fire procedures 
132 
261 

Index Terms 
Links 
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation. 
fire risk assessment 
89 
five steps to risk assessment 
90 
fleet management 
207 
food waste 
202 
forms  
66 
fraud  
101 
Frederick Winslow Taylor 
75 
friendly service 
134 
faults  
90 
G 
Gantt charts 
11 
gas and electricity 
171 
gas systems 
86 
George Elton Mayo 
40 
41 
getting started 
14 
GIA (gross internal area) 
22 
gifts 
 
00 
glycol  
186 
Golden Thread 
75 
grey water 
178 
190 
ground source heat pump 
94 
183 
grounds maintenance 
 
 
specification 
307–15 
guidance notes 
65 
H 
hard and soft services 
3 
25 
hazardous substances 
85 

Index Terms 
Links 
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation. 
health & safety 
119 
255 
health & safety questionnaire 
316–21 
heating 
25 
87 
164
 
 
 
248 
helpdesk 
9 
134 
215
 
 
 
283–86 
 
software 
137 
138 
Henry Fayol 
11 
Hertzberg 
35 
38 
hub 
 
135 
HVCA  
115 
hygiene factors 
38 
I 
IEE wiring regulations 
84 
installing sustainable technologies 
191 
integrated FM 
122 
integration 
131 
internal department reports 
7 
internal PPMs 
139 
internal quality reports 
8 
Interview techniques 
29 
intruders 
148 
ISO 9001 
60 
76 
77 
J 
job description 
28 
 

Index Terms 
Links 
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation. 
K 
key control 
210 
key points of a strategy 
62–3 
L 
layers in CAD 
23 
learner experience 
104 
113 
learner journey 
58 
Legionella 
81 
Legionella 
82 
legislation 
45 
59 
85 
legislative requirements 
45 
letterheads 
19 
LEV (local exhaust ventilation) 
86 
liability 
77 
lifespan 
160 
lift service 
25 
logging journeys 
210 
lone working 
85 
love and belonging needs 
33 
M 
M & E (mechanical and electrical) 
22 
23 
165 
maintenance team 
124 
225 
maintenance records 
93 
making mistakes 
101 
managing 
67 
Mary Parker Follett 
36 

Index Terms 
Links 
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation. 
Maslow 
33 
34 
meetings 
30 
32 
231 
mobile phones 
16 
monitoring 
67 
98 
 
performance 
127 
monocrystalline (PV panel) 
187 
MOT  
210 
motivation factors 
38 
MPAN 
193 
musculoskeletal disorders 
85 
N 
networking 
18 
newbie 
19 
new builds 
163 
 
pre build 
164 
NIA (notional internal area) 
22 
noise  
85 
O 
O & M (operation and maintenance) 
24 
44 
93
 
 
 
160 
287 
oil waste 
204 
organisation buy in sustainability 
181 
outlook calendar 
69 
outsourcing 
102 
106 
108 
P 
paper waste 
198 

Index Terms 
Links 
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation. 
partners 
20 
parameters of service 
147 
PAT test 
25 
patrols  
149 
pay back periods 
96 
PC (personal computer) 
15 
PCV  
208 
PDSA (plan, do, study, act) 
14 
performance 
127 
 
specifications 
111 
permit to work 
259 
personal compliance 
98 
PFI (private finance initiative) 
7 
phones  
16 
photovoltaic panels 
87 
187 
physical assets 
22 
physiological needs 
33 
plan 
 
10 
Plan-Do-Review-Revise 
2 
planned maintenance 
93 
154 
planned programme 
95 
158 
161 
planning 
10 
police  
20 
policies 
59 
67 
polycrystalline 
188 
porterage 
25 
portfolio 
21 
post 
 
140 
post parcels and deliveries 
141 

Index Terms 
Links 
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation. 
PPM (planned preventative maintenance) 
23 
62 
88
 
 
 
92 
130 
139
 
 
 
155–8 
249 
253 
PQQ (pre-qualification questionnaire) 
119 
164 
180
 
 
 
223 
practise what you preach 
55 
praise  
35 
pre build 
163 
preliminary particulars 
110 
273–82 
prescriptive specification 
111 
printing cost 
200 
probationary periods 
29 
procedures 
64 
67 
procurement routes for FM 
120 
progression 
43 
promises 
53 
Q 
QDP (questionnaire data processing) 
8 
57 
114 
QMS (quality management system) 
37 
76 
118 
quality  
72 
116 
281 
quality assurance 
164 
quality management 
71 
73 
 
systems 
13 
quick fix 
20 
quotations 
100 
R 
radioactive sources 
205 

Index Terms 
Links 
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation. 
reactive maintenance 
152 
recycling 
103 
238 
241 
reporting structure 
10 
reprographics 
201 
resourcing 
132 
responsibility 
35 
rewarding progress 
46 
review  
13 
37 
60
 
 
 
96 
risk 
 
77 
112 
 
assessments 
9 
 
liability 
77 
risks to property 
91 
role model 
52 
S 
S curve 
38 
safeguarding 
147 
safety and security 
132 
safety needs 
33 
SAR (service area reports) 
8 
56–8 
scientific management 
75 
security 
25 
 
team 
146 
243 
244 
security (cleaners) 
146 
security patrols 
149 
self-actualization 
33 
service drift 
104 
setting targets 
173 
Scope 1 2 and 3 (emissions) 
176 

Index Terms 
Links 
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation. 
shutdown procedures 
247 
signage 
19 
simple policies 
60 
single service procurement 
121 
site supervision 
129 
SLA (service level agreements) 
55–8 
73–4 
110
 
 
 
144 
slips trips and falls 
85 
SMARTER methodology 
173 
soft services 
3 
solar thermal panels 
185 
space management 
161 
specialisms 
125 
specialist waste 
203 
 
batteries 
203 
 
fluorescent tubes 
204 
 
oil  
204 
 
radioactive sources 
205 
 
toner cartridges 
203 
specification 
107 
109 
stability 
44 
staff 
 
27 
97 
 
training 
42 
97 
statistics (security) 
150 
statutory requirements 
78 
strategic management 
65 
strategic objectives 
12 
213 
244 
strategies 
61 
103 
students 
57 
succession 
44 

Index Terms 
Links 
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation. 
suggestion boxes 
32 
supervision 
144 
support structures 
39 
survey  
82 
sustainability 
145 
169 
174
 
 
 
219 
266 
sustainable technologies 
182 
SWOT  
58 
T 
teamwork 
40 
temperatures 
246 
247 
tenders 
100 
274 
TFM (total facilities Management) 
122 
The Golden Thread 
40 
75 
Theory X Theory Y persons 
46 
the S curve 
37 
TIFM (total infrastructure FM) 
123 
time bound strategies 
61 
timing of service 
131 
toner cartridges 
203 
tracker  
211 
trainee  
4 
training 
39 
45 
47
 
 
 
60 
98 
216
 
 
 
217 
226 
 
matrix 
44 
47 
transport 
172 
 
carbon emissions 
177 
 
drivers 
207 

Index Terms 
Links 
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation. 
transport (Cont.) 
 
drivers’ hours 
209 
 
PCV 
208 
TUPE  
112 
U 
utilities 
171 
191 
194 
V 
value people 
52 
VAT  
108 
vehicles 
210 
 
fuel cards 
211 
 
key control 
210 
 
logging journeys 
210 
 
trackers 
211 
ventilation 
166 
voltage optimisation 
189 
VRF  
62 
167 
W 
waste  
118 
171 
198
 
 
 
232 
234 
259 
waste, 
 
building 
206 
 
specialist 
203 
waste carbon emissions 
177 
waste food 
202 
waste paper 
198 
201 

Index Terms 
Links 
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation. 
Waste paper costs 
200 
waste, specialist 
203 
 
batteries 
203 
 
fluorescent tubes 
204 
 
oil  
204 
 
radioactive sources 
205 
 
toner cartridges 
203 
water usage 
178 
WEEE directive 
204 
wind generation 
189 
work equipment 
85 
workload 
125 
workplace transport 
86 
Z 
zero defects 
87 

