

Practical Enterprise
Risk Management
A Business Process Approach
GREGORY H. DUCKERT
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Copyright # 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the
1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the
Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978)
750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the Web at www.copyright.com. Requests to
the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201)
748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used
their best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties
with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and speciﬁcally
disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or ﬁtness for a particular purpose. No
warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials.
The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You
should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author
shall be liable for any loss of proﬁt or any other commercial damages, including but not
limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support,
please contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800)
762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that
appears in print may not be available in electronic books. For more information about
Wiley products, visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Duckert, Gregory H., 1949-
Practical enterprise risk management : a business process approach /
Gregory H. Duckert.
p. cm.
Includes index.
ISBN 978-0-470-55985-7 (cloth); 978-0-470-89251-0 (ebk);
978-0-470-89252-7 (ebk); 978-0-470-89253-4 (ebk)
1.
Risk management.
I. Title.
HD61.D85 2010
658.15
0
5—dc22
2010016278
Printed in the United States of America
10
9
8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

To Dina,
my best friend,
my soul mate,
my heart mate,
my wife,
my everything.


Contents
Preface
vii
Acknowledgments
xi
Chapter 1: Corporate Governance: A Gut Check
1
Chapter 2: What ERM Is and What It Is Not
23
Chapter 3: Understanding What the Business Is
38
Chapter 4: Deﬁning What True Business Risk Is
59
Chapter 5: Objectively Deﬁning Risk
80
Chapter 6: Building a Fluid/Dynamic Risk Model
92
Chapter 7: Top-Down Risk Assessment: Evolving the Fluid ERM
Environment—A Step-by-Step Approach
122
Chapter 8: The Future Evolution of the Model
203
Chapter 9: Related Topics and Special Risk Situations
221
Chapter 10: Maximizing Impact—Minimizing Exposure
260
About the Author
269
Index
271
v


Preface
T
HIS BOOK IS INTENDED to be a handbook of how to establish a
highly effective enterprise risk management (ERM) environment that is
actually a business tool that yields real business value. This book is a
deﬁnitive guide for members of the Boards of Directors, the C Suite, Chief Risk
Ofﬁcers (CROs), and those charged with ERM, as well as all levels of manage-
ment. In addition, this book is a must have for any shareholder who owns stock
in any publicly listed corporation and should be read cover to cover to
understand why she should be concerned. This is a how-to, hands-on guide,
not a generic framework scenario.
With the advent of corporate business catastrophes such as Enron,
WorldCom, Lehman Bros., General Motors, and so on it behooves corporate
executives to get better connected with their businesses. In addition, the
government has now initiated a number of regulatory activities, including
Sarbanes-Oxley, which further complicate the lives of the auditors and the
corporate executives. The only way to be truly in compliance with Sarbanes-
Oxley is to be well aware of what is going on in your corporation, virtually
daily. To accomplish this, it is necessary for corporations to establish a highly
effective information-centric risk assessment methodology. Without such a
methodology intricately woven into the fabric of the organization, it is virtually
impossible to guarantee any type of compliance in a realistic fashion.
Enterprise-wide risk assessment is much more than simply a catchy phrase
or the latest in a string of failed corporate initiatives. If properly constructed,
it can be a highly effective governance and oversight tool, which becomes
almost irreplaceable in the arsenal of tools necessary for progressive organiza-
tions today.
Of interest is that the Chairman Emeritus of the Committee of Sponsoring
Organizations (COSO), Larry Rittenberg, PhD., CPA, CIA attended the session I
presented for the Madison, Wisconsin, chapter of the IIA on Enterprise-Wide
Risk Assessment in 2001. The entire discussion was focused on the concept of
vii

using data to evaluate risk throughout an organization. In the presentation,
real-time triggers, key process indicators, key risk indicators, Metric Oversight
Monitoring Systems (MOMS), and numerous other concepts were discussed for
consideration by the participants. I have used these and other similar tools
during 30 years of data-centric risk assessment. These tools and methodology
will be discussed in this book.
Dave Coderre, a very talented ACL practitioner and author, published the
GTAG (Global Technology Audit Guide) on Continuous Auditing in which he
presented a very convincing argument for the necessity of continuous audit
tools, continuous monitoring, and continuous risk assessment. All of these
advanced methods, of course, revolve around the utilization of data. I had the
great pleasure of having Dave Coderre as a participant in one of my risk
assessment sessions discussing the use of data-driven risk assessment a number
of years ago. It is excellent to see that the subject matter is ﬁnally getting some
serious discussion at these levels.
This book is meant to be a reference point for all organizations that are
engaged in or will be engaged in the exercise of establishing an enterprise-wide
risk assessment and management oversight system for their organization. It
presents an alternative approach to the models that are most commonly seen.
In keeping with the underlying thought process of this book, it is straightfor-
ward and to the point. This book is not an exercise in overcomplicating a
straightforward issue. There are many people who believe that complexity adds
value to a process or a methodology. I am not one of them. The whole premise
of the book is that complexity in most cases adds nothing to a business process
but complexity.
A risk model is no exception. The reality of the matter is that when a risk
model becomes overly complex it also becomes unusable. Therefore, as we
proceed from this point forward, everything will be clearly expressed and
understandable. There will be no complex theories to entangle endlessly what
is actually a very commonsense subject matter. Under no circumstances will
there be any abstract theories or unattainable methodologies employed.
The approach to risk assessment undertaken in this book is based upon
fact, common sense, and practical methodologies for implementation. The
model also eliminates subjectivity and guesswork as much as possible. The
model presented parallels the normal operation of the business, be able to be
effectively utilized at all levels of the business, and can be truly used to create an
all-encompassing risk model.
In Chapter 1 I discuss the subject of corporate governance and what is
wrong with it in its current format. In addition, I call attention to one of the
viii
n
Preface

major shortcomings of most corporations and one of its biggest risk areas,
which is systems implementation.
In Chapter 2 I address what I believe to be a signiﬁcant misunderstanding
relative to the subject of risk and risk management. Essentially every model that
is out there to perform any type of enterprise risk management is based upon
the premise of subjective scoring to arrive at a conclusion. Subjective models
are always time and space dependent, and therefore inconsistent. In other
words, the same exact situation will always be viewed differently by the exact
same person on a different day in a different environment or on a different hour
in the same environment.
In addition, when dealing with the subject of risk, you must be prepared to
estimate probability and impact or exposure; these models attempt to deal with
the subject matter via scoring and unexplainable calculations. Anybody that is
the least bit familiar with risk or risk management knows that probability and
impact can only be calculated using cold hard facts and data.
Chapter 3 is centered on the business, which is what risk assessment and
risk management is all about. I discuss how to go about this and how to create
pictures of the enterprise to ensure that effective risk management is put in
place and becomes a must-have business tool.
In Chapter 4 I discuss what true business risk is, how it can be categorized,
the fact that risk is not a one-off occurrence, and how to establish a risk
universe for evaluating all risk.
In Chapter 5 I talk about one of the most critical issues in risk manage-
ment—the ability to do it objectively not subjectively. I talk about utilizing a
data-centric approach, why it is necessary, and why doing risk assessment and
management any other way really does not track logically.
In Chapter 6 I begin the discussion of how to build a ﬂuid dynamic risk
model that is designed to ﬂow with the movements of the enterprise and to keep
pace with changes as they occur. I also discuss options that can be utilized to
drive the model.
Chapter 7 is an extensive discussion of how to actually build a model with
all of the various components included. It talks about how to construct an ERM
environment that is absolutely centered on the organization in its day-to-day
operations. There are extensive examples given throughout the chapter rela-
tive to the concept of enterprise risk management and key risk indicators
(KRIs). There are examples for the administrative areas of the organization as
well as operational areas.
Chapter 8 discusses the future evolution of the ERM model and why this is
absolutely essential to keep the ERM environment vibrant and connected with
Preface
n
ix

the business. Also, the subject of how to make systems self-monitoring from a
risk perspective, utilizing advanced tooling, is discussed.
In Chapter 9 I raise the issue of special risk situations and related topics
that presents signiﬁcant exposure to the organization. The two key topics that
are discussed in this regard are outsourcing and mergers and acquisitions. In
addition, I discuss signiﬁcantly reducing external audit fees through the
utilization of twenty-ﬁrst-century approaches.
Chapter 10 is the last chapter of this book, and we talk about ownership of
risk, extending the impact of the ERM environment, and summarize how to
build an automated environment to handle all of your governance concerns.
Another subject that is addressed in this book is the prioritization of risk
and risk management relative to internal controls. Internal controls can exist
separately and distinctly from the business; however, business risk and the
business are inseparably intertwined.
I have ﬁnally tired of listening to a bunch of supposed experts pontiﬁcate on
what they believe enterprise risk management to be, while clearly demon-
strating they have not the slightest notion of how it should be done in a manner
that yields real business value. This approach actually evaluates and manages
risk truly on an enterprise basis, and provides a highly effective business tool as
well, while many of the others are ﬁnancial or administration-centric.
Therefore, do not be surprised or alarmed when I take issue with common
practices that have been espoused by very large and well-recognized organiza-
tions. I am not trying to be hypercritical nor implying that they are not
competent nor unethical. I am simply trying to speak the truth regarding those
situations that I believe to be counterintuitive or in some cases unacceptable
business practice and a poor use of business resources.
Also, be prepared as the approach used here is different from the norm and
as such you will have to expand your thought process and allow yourself to
accept something other than the same old recycled ideas, not that recycling is
bad, but in this case it is. Keep an open mind and shift your thought parameters
and I believe you will ﬁnd a much better approach to ERM at the end of the day.
I now undertake the task of clarifying once and for all what a common-
sense, logically structured, ERM environment should look like and why if
implemented properly, it will create a singular, highly effective overriding
governance infrastructure.
Thank you for coming along on this journey!
x
n
Preface

Acknowledgments
I
N CREATING THE METHODOLOGIES that underlie this book, even
though they are my concepts, I have been fortunate to have the support of
some key people. The ﬁrst person I would like to acknowledge is Joel Kramer
of MIS Training Institute, who believed in my talents and my thought processes
and never once wavered in his support of me as I worked at honing my skills in
the seminar business. This helped me greatly in expanding the tools in my
arsenal of risk assessment/management and gave me the opportunity to attain
the success I have worked very hard to achieve.
Another is Dave Coderre of Canada who had the vision and courage to take
my concepts, implement them, expand on them, and standardize them in his
professional career. In addition, he also is an author in his own right and gave
me the encouragement I needed to undertake this challenge.
I would also like to extend my sincere thanks to Phillip J. Hatch the
president of Ventoro who generously gave of his time to talk with me and his
permission to use his data often cited in this work from his in-depth study of
offshoring and offshore outsourcing.
Most importantly, my beautiful wife Dina and my children Andrey and
Vera who are absolutely critical to my success in every way; I could not do
what I do without them and their undying support.
Last, but not least, I want to thank Stacey Rivera of John Wiley & Sons for
all of her patience and help in bringing this book to reality.
xi


1
CHAPTER ONE
Corporate
Governance: A
Gut Check
THE GREAT SOX FALLACY
One of the key corporate undertakings that undermined and will continue to
undermine the success of enterprise risk management (ERM) is Sarbanes-Oxley
(SOX). The most amazing thing about the SOX effort was how few of the so-
called knowledgeable practitioners that were giving guidance on the subject
matter actually understood the salient issues relative to why SOX evolved in the
ﬁrst place. I authored and taught an auditor training class entitled ‘‘Sarbanes-
Oxley: A Road Map to Compliance.’’ It was astounding to see how misguided
the compliance efforts were that were being sold to these client companies as
the panacea for all of their problems. It was even more astounding to hear
how little people really understood about what the act was intended to do and
how their whole focus in life was on Sections 302 and 404 of the act. Some of
the key points I tried to explain to the seminar participants were the following:
n
The problems that gave rise to SOX in the ﬁrst place did not start nor would
they end in ﬁnance.
1

n
The real issues were centered on ineffective operations and the inability to
generate a proﬁt.
n
When the risks that were present in operations that undermined their
ability to operate effectively were not mitigated, then the risk of ﬁnancial
ineptness was imminent.
n
This would leave the ﬁnancial people with no other alternative but to
manipulate the numbers to meet analysts’ expectations.
n
Implementing an overabundance of controls in ﬁnance for ﬁnancial
reporting would not solve the problem.
n
There were many more sections to the act than just Sections 302 and 404,
such as Section 409 on real-time disclosure.
n
The gathering up of a bunch of control information and then trying to test
them inadequately with archaic methods was going to be of little or no use.
n
The preferred method of compliance (a top-down risk assessment approach
that would be data driven and holistic to the enterprise) was the only
effective way to deal with these problems.
n
When the risks were identiﬁed, the root causal events had to be addressed,
and that would be the ﬁrst step for resolving these issues.
n
I also informed them at that time that they had just seen the tip of the
iceberg and that there was much more to follow.
The top-down risk-based approach was supported by the pronouncements
from the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Public Company
Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) in 2005 when they too observed that
the ‘‘check the box mentality’’ of the compliance approach used by virtually all
of the large consulting houses had missed the mark of satisfying the require-
ments of the act.
The subsequent gigantic meltdown of the banking industry brought on by
signiﬁcantly undermanaged risk in the real estate markets speaks volumes
about the ineffectiveness of the act and gives us a glimpse of another piece of the
iceberg starting to surface.
Sarbanes-Oxley was a noble effort in its intent to protect shareholders’
interest; however, the message was lost on the practitioners in their zeal to
generate quick proﬁts in catastrophic conditions, which they had had a great
hand in creating. The ﬁrst catastrophic mistake was to embrace the Committee
of Sponsoring Organizations (COSO) model as the framework for compliance—
not because COSO is a bad framework; but since it is internal control-focused,
it is clearly audit centric. What was required was a business model, not an audit
model. Instead of performing a knee-jerk reaction to the circumstances, cooler
2
n
Corporate Governance: A Gut Check

heads should have prevailed and waited for the COSO ERM model (completed
approximately two years later), which would have yielded a much more
beneﬁcial governance structure.
Unfortunately, so much money, time, and effort was put into the Sarbanes-
Oxley exercise, with mixed or less than satisfactory results, that it soured senior
management in many organizations from taking on any other major corporate
initiatives, which would have included ERM, of course. So now there is great
resistance to adopting another environment that appears to be an add-on to the
already fractionalized compliance efforts of the organization. Therein lies the
tale of woe for ERM and the signiﬁcant reluctance to embrace it.
THE VISION-CHALLENGED LEADING THE
EVEN-MORE-VISION-CHALLENGED
Absent the few independent practitioners (like myself) who are crying out in
the wilderness against the multiheaded monsters of the world who keep
espousing the same old tune, you don’t see many fresh ideas coming out of
the large-scale consulting groups. It is the same old process for evaluating risks
that has literally been around for years. The process is based upon scoring
methodologies, such as one-through-ﬁve, or zero-through-three or some other
convoluted number combination that is applied to risks, control effectiveness,
impact, and other such subject matter.
At the end of these exercises, some type of generic ‘‘risk-based’’ conclusion
is inevitably reached, which is normally comprised of a band of green, a massive
band of yellow, and a band of red. This is normally followed by some other
gyration for reﬁning the process, which involves discarding the high and low
scorers, tweaking this, and tweaking that in order to justify an already
preordained conclusion. Worse yet, the whole exercise must be repeated every
time risk needs to be evaluated on an enterprise basis. This will, of course, be
necessary because unlike these static models, risk is not static at all. Talk about
the application of AI (artiﬁcial intelligence)—these exercises are a classic
example, in a very different sense of the phrase.
Why in the world do we have all of this massive computing power, gen-
erating terabytes of data that supposedly drives everything in our organization
and yet not one of the supposed visionaries from these large consulting con-
sortiums has ever thought, You know what, maybe we should use data as the
basis for risk assessment? What are they thinking? Or even a more puzzling conun-
drum is that maybe they’re not thinking, and therefore where is their vision?
The Vision-Challenged Leading the Even-More-Vision-Challenged
n
3

I cannot possibly imagine a bigger risk than spending millions or billions of
dollars being led by supposed visionaries who have no vision.
GOING BACK TO THE FUTURE? HOW NOT TO RUN IT
One of the greatest risks plaguing organizations in the past, today, and certainly
into the future will be the inability to implement successfully progressive,
highly advanced risk-centric systems. The following observations are meant to
highlight some of the key areas of concern. I originally conceived ‘‘The Dirty
Dozen Critical Shortcomings of Application Systems Implementation’’ as an
article for publication. These observations came into existence after years of my
own audit experience and reveriﬁcation of its accuracy with thousands of my
audit constituents.
I discussed it with Professor Larry Rittenberg, the current COSO Chairman
Emeritus, and we tossed it back and forth with modiﬁcations. With all due
respect to Larry, who is an extremely busy person, since the results of our
discussions were never published, I have reverted back to my original content
for the purposes of this book.
In the continuing environment of voracious systems implementation, it is
perhaps time to step back and learn some lessons from history. Many of these
are not new lessons, but neither have they been learned. In the following
sections I will visit some critical shortcomings that continue to hinder our
progress in real utilization of the vast systems capabilities that our organiza-
tions possess.
SYSTEMIC FAILURE: CRITICAL SHORTCOMINGS
OF APPLICATION SYSTEMS IMPLEMENTATION
The ‘‘dirty dozen’’ shortcomings are listed and expanded upon in the following
pages. They represent my views of signiﬁcant risks and areas of failure that are
all too proliﬁc in this discipline.
1. Moving to a New Application Platform: What’s the Business Reason?
2. Inaccuracy of the Financial Projections and Committed Costs of the System
(OOPS!)
3. Failure to Establish a Realistic Timeline That Incorporates All Critical
Aspects of Implementation
4
n
Corporate Governance: A Gut Check

4. The Phase 2 Syndrome—Never Happens!
5. Failure to Do a Total Systems/Personnel Impact Analysis
6. Implementing a Platform Contrary to the Established Design Criteria
7. Back to the Future
8. ACE (The Awful Consultant Experience)
9. Data, Data Everywhere, but I Can’t Answer Your Question
10. SCORE (System-Centric Oversight and Risk Evaluation) AWOL
11. The Dog and Pony Show
12. Getting Cooked by the Boilerplate Contract
Moving to a New Application Platform: What’s the
Business Reason?
One thing that will guarantee failure to achieve the original objective of a
project is when no original objective was established. One of the key questions
that the system sponsor should be able to address is the primary business reason
for the change.
It is not appropriate to change system platforms just for the sake of change
or because everybody’s doing it. Each organization is unique in its needs and
requirements. As a result, because our primary competitors are moving to a
client/server platform does not necessarily mean that the client/server platform
is appropriate for us. If a ﬁnancially viable business reason that necessitates the
change cannot be speciﬁcally identiﬁed and justiﬁed, there is no reason to
change environments.
The business reason must be critical to the overall success of the organi-
zation. It must be clearly justiﬁed by returns on investment that warrant the
capital expenditures, and it must be vital to meeting the needs of our customers,
or carving out a larger share of the marketplace, to name only a few.
Migrating to new systems for no apparent reason is a consummate
example of following the crowd no matter where the crowd is going. If the
crowd is rushing into a burning building, should we all follow along? A new
system is not the panacea for all business ills. In fact, it is probably dealing with
a symptom instead of the real cause.
Inaccuracy of the Financial Projections and Committed
Costs of the System
If you have ever seen the acquisition and implementation of a large-scale
system from start to ﬁnish you have almost assuredly seen OOPS, the Over-
spending Our Project Scenario. This can occur in different forms, some of which
Systemic Failure: Critical Shortcomings
n
5

are detailed in the following list. The always popular ‘‘let’s soft sell the original
ﬁnancial estimates to justify the project to senior management or the board.’’
Simply stated, all of the costs are not included that will be required to make the
system a reality. Factors that will be ‘‘overlooked’’ include:
n
Long-term technical support
n
Specialized consultants or contractors required
n
Ancillary hardware that becomes necessary due to primary platform
inadequacies
n
Additional software that will be purchased by the users to plug the ‘‘gaps’’
in the system (real or perceived)
n
Future technological upgrades required, which are inherent to the soft-
ware (turnkey environment—hardware and software)
n
Moving beyond Vanilla when it really needs to be a 40 scoop 30 topping
banana split to deliver the baseline requirements of the users
n
The real life cycle of the system before it requires signiﬁcant changes to keep
pace with business changes
n
The business interruption that occurs when new releases of the software
are installed and the associated costs
n
The hidden costs never accounted for when the users are so dissatisﬁed
with the system that is delivered that they have to buy computers and
software to build workarounds that have the desired functionality
n
The cost of application support when the ﬂood of user requests for
modiﬁcations materializes because the system misses the mark so badly
n
The cost estimate is simply wholly inadequate and poorly prepared, and
fails miserably in contemplating all of the cost that will be necessary
Think about it. When was last time you saw a system of any magnitude
come in under its original ﬁnancial and time projections?
Failure to Establish a Realistic Timeline That Incorporates
All Critical Aspects of a System
Where do these implementation dates come from, anyway? It appears that they
are rarely in touch with reality and what is required for the system to be fully
operational and functioning as originally envisioned. Every implementation
date should be grounded in some legal or regulatory issue, or in a deﬁned and
justiﬁed business requirement.
If the required date is known and cannot be achieved—when exploding the
timeline backwards given the resources available or essential lead times
6
n
Corporate Governance: A Gut Check

required—another course of action should be explored. The common practice
of pulling an implementation date ‘‘out of the air’’ and then tying the CIO’s and
other related party’s bonus compensation package to it runs totally contrary to
sound business logic.
The objective of the exercise is not to see how fast the system can be
implemented, but how well it meets business needs. Half-baked implementations
tied to timelines that have no basis in reason or logic always fail to achieve the key
objectives: increased productivity, lower operating costs, better information, and
ease of use. In fact, in most instances productivity takes giant strides backwards
resulting in more hidden cost to the company or organization.
The Phase 2 Syndrome—Never Happens!
Doesn’t it seem that the key features that the business requires or that were
critical to the overall satisfaction of user community are never in Phase 1? Why
is that? It doesn’t really do any good to purchase the most powerful and feature-
packed system available, and then fail to implement its primary functionality.
The standard phrase that is normally heard when the users ask about the
features is ‘‘It will be implemented in Phase 2.’’
Unfortunately, as many disgruntled users and overoptimistic senior exec-
utives have learned, Phase 2 is a ﬁgment of IT’s imagination. By the time this
event is raised as an issue, new releases of the base software are out, and the
hamsters are trapped on the same hamster wheel for all eternity. If the original
intent of purchasing the system was to implement minimal functionality, then
save a lot of money, buy a cheaper system with far fewer features, or better yet
do nothing—it will be a lot less risky.
Failure to Do a Total Systems/Personnel Impact Analysis
Prior to implementing any system, there should be a total inventory performed
of all of the systems and personnel that will be impacted by the new environ-
ment. This says by deﬁnition that IS/IT is only part of the landscape. The users
should, of course, be the primary drivers of the system, though IT normally
dominates the project, even though it’s a staff function and not a line function
(another failure point), and as such the analysis should identify all afﬁliated and
peripheral users of the system.
Failure to perform the appropriate impact analysis on both systems and
personnel will virtually guarantee a technological or human rejection of the
system once implemented. When the project is ﬁrst anticipated, it should be
mandatory that a thorough and complete impact analysis be performed.
Systemic Failure: Critical Shortcomings
n
7

Communication and feedback loops should be established to ensure that vital
information is available as necessary to everyone who will experience the
impact or, more likely than not, suffer the negative fallout of the project.
Implementing a Platform Contrary to the Established
Design Criteria
As we have progressed across the spectrum of systems implementation theory,
today we’ve achieved 180 degrees of separation from traditional viewpoints.
The problem is that contemporary theory is rarely, if ever, followed in its purest
state, therefore issues arise on a postimplementation basis.
The traditional theory of systems implementation was essentially that the
organization would purchase a system that most closely approximated its
operations and then modify the system to ﬁt the business. As we know
contemporary theory—as advanced by Systems, Applications & Products in
Data Processing (SAP) and other similar platforms—is to reengineer the
business to ﬁt the software. The unfortunate reality is that most organizations
want to embrace the new technology but not the new implementation theory.
As such, new platforms are implemented with old theory. Today’s systems
are self-contained, highly integrated information ﬂow systems, and they are
meant to be implemented in their entirety, a pure state of existence. However,
in practice only portions of the new platforms are implemented, instead of in
their entirety. And then these partial systems are interfaced to other existing
systems in the business. Some of the negative results of mixing the two
competing theories include the following:
n
Potential loss of data integrity and mistrust of the resulting information
that is generated by the system
n
Excessive maintenance costs on interfacing
n
Customization cost to the original software, assuming it can be performed
n
The necessity to update the customized environment at great expense each
time a new release of the software is brought out
n
Potential need for conversion tables or other intermediate steps to convert
the data for use, which are subject to error and extremely expensive to
maintain
Back to the Future
How many people do you know who would acquire a brand-new $300,000
house with four bedrooms, three baths, and a two-car garage, and then rip
8
n
Corporate Governance: A Gut Check

out one bedroom, two baths, and tear down one side of the garage? Perhaps
they would do this so it looked like the house they grew up in as a kid—an
example of the ‘‘comfort zone theory.’’ Obviously, no one in a sane state of
mind would do this. However, how many times have you seen organizations
buy brand-new systems and then modify the reporting, functionality, and
overall design of the system to make it look like the system that was in
existence before?
Why is this done—simply because it makes people feel more comfortable?
Clearly what has occurred here is a horrendous waste of organizational
resources, and instead of positioning ourselves for the future, we have slipped
neatly and quietly into the past. When was the last time that someone actually
reviewed the outcome of a system implementation to ensure that it met
the fundamental criterion of ﬁnancial return or efﬁciency gains relative to
the original assumptions? Every system that is implemented should move the
organization forward, not backwards. We have got to run the organizations
that we have today and will have in the future—not the ones we had yesterday.
No enlightened executives should be encouraging the ‘‘chase yourself around
the block theory’’ because you always end up at the same old house, only
unfortunately much poorer.
ACE (The Awful Consultant Experience)
Normally when you hear the expression ‘‘ace in the hole’’ it is a positive thing
that creates a competitive advantage. A more accurate interpretation of ACE as
it is used in the context here is that an awful consulting experience can put you
far in the hole ﬁnancially and technologically. The awful consulting experience
can occur in a variety of ways:
n
You pay a lot of money for highly skilled consultants but end up training a
number of recent graduates to be better at their next job.
n
There is a lack of stability in the consulting team, where the consultants
are going out of your business as fast as the revolving door can turn and
moving on for bigger and better money.
n
The consultant tries to do too much and simply is not equipped to handle it
and doesn’t have other resources to draw on.
n
The consultant holds you hostage and becomes such an integral part of
your business that you can’t live without him; therefore you hire him at
exorbitant cost.
Systemic Failure: Critical Shortcomings
n
9

n
No knowledge transfer takes place between the consultant and your
personnel, and therefore you are never allowed to own your system
(the ransom event).
n
Numerous other instances that due to lack of time and space I will not
mention.
Data, Data Everywhere, but I Can’t Answer Your Question
Let’s think back to what seems to be centuries-old logic. Recalling one of the
fundamental principles of why databases were created in the ﬁrst place would
bring to mind the issue of data redundancy. One of the driving forces behind the
creation of databases was to eliminate all of the extraneous data that seem to be
in divergent locations around the organization. Well, looks like they have come
full circle. Now in many major organizations there must be thousands of
versions of relatively the same data in the form of spreadsheets, databases, and
miscellaneous ﬁles to name a few.
We seem to have all types and kinds ofdata out there, but it does not appearto
be structured in any logical fashion that makes it accessible. In literally thousands
of situations where I have asked people (auditors primarily) how they would
objectivelyassessriskintheirrespectiveorganizations,theanswernormallycomes
back as ‘‘I would love to do it’’ or ‘‘That would be great if the data was there.’’
It seems almost incomprehensible that in the twenty-ﬁrst century,
with computers having existed for decades, people would still advance that
argument—except that it’s true more often than not. We have had data
scattered among several systems and databases for years, and now we want it
to take up residence in data warehouses or data farms. That is a noble exercise
that should yield tremendous beneﬁts, assuming data integrity to the source
system can be assured.
The issue of concern is this—is it data for data’s sake or data for informa-
tion’s sake? The point being made is that in system development on very rare
occasions is a targeted data analysis performed that will allow the organization
to consistently oversee the critical aspects of its business with virtually little or
no effort. In most organizations, we are nowhere near attaining that type of
instantaneous feedback on the pulse of daily activities that drive our existence.
The fundamentals aren’t even in place; an example would be a credit
memorandum where the reason codes are not accurate. Therefore, the organiza-
tion cannot even address the problem that caused the customer’s dissatisfaction.
There is an old axiom that still holds true: ‘‘You can’t ﬁx a problem you don’t
know you have.’’ In this day and age, if you can’t measure it, you don’t know you
10
n
Corporate Governance: A Gut Check

have it. Therefore, by deﬁnition you cannotsolve it and make it go away.There are
all kinds of data out there, but there is a real dearth of valuable information to run
the business. This is commonly referred to as the DRIP theory (data rich,
information poor).
SCORE (System-Centric Oversight and
Risk Evaluation) AWOL
By this time in the systems evolutionary cycle it should be an accepted fact that
every system has the ability to utilize tools and methodologies that provide for
consistent and accurate oversight of the organization on a continuous basis.
The fundamental problem is that although systems can perform these tasks, the
systems implementers choose not to let them. System-centric tools should
be standard in every system created and should utilize the data that runs the
organization to provide a continuous feedback oversight mechanism.
Such tools and methodologies would allow management to have a conti-
nuous view of the world they are responsible for. They should be able to evaluate
their risk on a daily or even hourly or minute-by-minute basis if they so desire,
whichwouldallowthemtoreacttobusinesshotspotsassoonastheyoccur.These
tools and techniques should be incorporated into the system and be keyed to
the users, so that they will be able to fulﬁll their primary management responsi-
bilities quickly and without having to go through signiﬁcant data analysis.
As the title of this section implies, these types of tools are AWOL (absent
without leave) or essentially nonexistent. The failure is that the data is for the
most part there, the tools should be, and we are signiﬁcantly underutilizing our
IT resources, which we have spent billions of dollars to acquire. This is a classic
case of mismanagement of resources. Unless systems implementation strategies
change in the foreseeable future, this huge waste of organizational resources is
destined to continue.
The Dog and Pony Show
Everyone that has been involved in a systems implementation has been to the
dog and pony show. The dog and pony show comes in different varieties, two of
which are:
1. The software demonstration
2. The visit to customers of the software vendor to see an actual installation
The software demonstration is a bit of the dog and pony show in that it
normally occurs in the vendor evaluation and selection stage. By that time the
Systemic Failure: Critical Shortcomings
n
11

vendor has responded to the Request for Proposal (RFP) and stated with
certainty that they can meet all of the requirements that your organization is
looking for in a system. Conveniently when we see the demo, sure enough, all
of the features are there.
At some point it would be prudent for the organization to verify that in fact
they have seen a real-live system and not a vaporware version of how it would
appear if the vendor got the job. Learning that the system is not all that it
appeared to be in the demo is disastrous—especially if the problem isn’t
recognized before the postcontract phase.
The second show, the customer visit, should never be limited to the
primary suggestions of the vendor. Clearly, vendors would select those suc-
cessful implementations that would present their product in a favorable light.
What needs to be determined is what is not so favorable. So the key is to
determine how to get in contact with the primary regional and national user
groups of the software you intend to buy, so that you can have in-depth
discussions regarding the key issues they have with the software and vendor.
This is not to say that vendor-arranged site visits are worthless, but some
very speciﬁc things need to be determined at the site visit. For instance, is this
organization similar to ours; are they of comparable size; do they have the
same business structure, same number of locations, and same transaction
intensity—to name a few? Getting to the real gutsy issues with the system is the
most critical thing that can be done prior to making any commitment with the
vendor. Once you sign the contract, they have just become a partner in your
business. For more on contracts, see the next section.
Getting Cooked by the Boilerplate Contract
Without adoubt oneofthe worst thingsan organizationcandoissign aboilerplate
contract with the software vendor. Prior to signing any contract, the organization
should have a trusted and knowledgeable representative in-house—or hired—
that will visit the vendor’s site before the contractual commitmentsare signed. The
representative has to check for a number of things that may negatively impact the
organization, some of which are the following:
n
The ability of the vendor to technically support the system
n
The ﬁnancial viability of the vendor and their likelihood to continue to
support the product
n
The necessity of software source code escrow to protect the organization in
the event of vendor failure
12
n
Corporate Governance: A Gut Check

n
The depth of knowledge regarding the product throughout the vendor’s
staff
n
The operations of the vendor (to develop a sense of their strengths and
weaknesses)
n
Any discrepancy between demonstrated software and existing code
n
The potential existence of multiple software vendors who have written
individual portions of the system being purchased
In addition to this list, this person should receive in-depth training on the
system to enable him to understand all of its key attributes and nuances.
Without any type of contract protection for the organization, which can only
come about if the representative thoroughly understands the system, the
organization will have no protection, or it will only be obtained by costly
litigation. In that case there are only losers.
These dirty dozen failures in systems implementation have only scratched
the surface of the signiﬁcant amount of waste that goes on continually in
systems implementation. This is a huge continuing risk to the organization. It is
imperative that some signiﬁcant changes be made in software implementation
before we go through another round of predestined failures. The future depends
on IT—the time for change is now!
WHAT IS GRC ANYWAY?
It always astounds me when I look at how certain terminology and/or ‘‘new’’
initiatives emerge. Take for instance Total Quality Management (TQM). That
original science, fostered by such greats as Deming, Juran, and Crosby back in
the 1940s, brought to business practice some extremely practical and useful
tools for modifying and improving process. In addition, they championed the
utilization of metrics and measurements to make a business better one process
at a time. Most of their tools could be employed today in major corporations to
solve many of the problems in their operating areas that have forced companies
to seek the solution of outsourcing as their only way out.
Yet anyone who has read the ‘‘Ventoro Offshore 2005 Research Prelimi-
nary Findings and Conclusions,’’ which can be located at Ventoro.com, will
clearly see from the statistics presented that the largest cost savings coming out
of outsourcing efforts by major corporations are from process improvements,
not from salary and wages as is popularly believed. This subject is discussed in
Chapter 9 in the context of risk.
What Is GRC Anyway?
n
13

All of that aside, TQM was not good enough. To give things just a little
different twist, Reengineering was conceived, and Six Sigma made common
ordinary individuals into black belts. (Karate anyone?)
Now we have people talking about GRC. So let’s break it down and see
what this means. G is obviously governance, which I believe everybody in this
country would say we need a little more of. R stands for risk management, a
nice concept but poorly done in many large, medium, and small organizations
alike. And C is the dreaded compliance, which has been traditionally overseen
by regulators of course, but some would ask how effectively.
The acronym implies that these are separate and distinct areas of concern,
which they clearly are not. They are all interlocking and inseparable when
viewed using any type of common sense. The key point being missed here is
that all of these should be part of logical but interrelated subsets of ERM. That is,
ERM should be the overarching umbrella under which each and every one of
these fall. The classic mistake made by most corporations today is that they are
treating these as separate and distinct areas of concern and in some cases like
SOX compliance, creating a separate and distinct unit to oversee it.
There’s no reason for any of this, as these areas should all be subsets of the
larger ERM environment, which would unite them into one uniﬁed effort.
Corporate governance will be fulﬁlled by a highly effective, well-structured,
properly automated ERM environment.
Remember, the E stands for enterprise, which means that everything, by
deﬁnition, would be governed highly effectively bya centralized methodology.R is
the effective identiﬁcation of and determination of risk and is inherent in ERM.
Last, but not least, M stands for management of all risks. Compliance is just
anothersubsetthathastobeeffectivelymanagedasacriticalriskoftheenterprise.
My vote would be to get away from acronyms such as GRC that imply fractional-
ized corporate structures that are highly duplicative and cost-inefﬁcient.
ARE YOU CUBIN’?
What I’m alluding to here is this: are you familiar with the two cubes brought
to us by the good folks of COSO?
The cubes are, of course, the COSO framework and the COSO ERM frame-
work. I think we are all painfully familiar with the origination of the COSO
framework,whichwasbroughtaboutasaresultofthesavingsandloanfailuresin
this country. At that time COSO was working with the Treadway Commission in
an attempt to keep the federal government from regulating the audit industry.
14
n
Corporate Governance: A Gut Check

The audit industry was a subject of great scrutiny at that time as a result of
the failure of approximately 600 different savings and loans scattered around
this country. In essence, what we had was a total failure of the second tier of the
banking system.
This was brought about by such inﬂated property values that everybody
hung out a shingle in front of his house thinking he was a real estate appraiser.
These ‘‘appraisers’’ supplied inﬂated values to the savings and loans, which
then lent money on these inﬂated values to unsuspecting clients. Does this
sound at all familiar? If you did nothing more than change the sign from
property appraiser to mortgage broker out in front of the same quack’s house,
you would replicate a key factor in the massive ﬁnancial meltdown we just
went through. We just never learn, do we?
Yes, this has happened before, and it is actually what gave rise to COSO as an
entity. COSO’s goal was to keep the federal government out of the audit industry,
which they successfully did. The argument was that they would create the COSO
model or internal control framework, and this would ﬁx everything.
The intention was to have all organizations embrace the model, and raise
management awareness of the importance of internal control. The model and
its framework were intended to lead to a higher degree of corporate governance
and ethics resulting in the elimination of misstatement and malfeasance in the
corporate boardrooms. Noble intent, that is for sure, but the question still
remains: has the effort worked? I don’t believe that you have to cogitate too
hard to determine if it has or has not—clearly not.
Even more mystifying is that it became the standard of compliance for
Sarbanes-Oxley when it was embraced in 2002. I will not speculate any further
on this subject matter. I believe by applying a little common sense you can arrive
at your own conclusions as to whether the outcome satisﬁed the mission.
All that discussion aside, in the fall of 2004 COSO created the COSO/ERM
framework, and quite honestly I believe that COSO did an exceptional job in
putting together guidance for embracing risk. As I mentioned before, Professor
Larry Rittenberg attended a presentation I gave in 2001 on enterprise-wide risk
assessment (EWRA), asI called it then, which addressed a lot ofthe subject matter
that later came out in this framework. To his credit I feel that Professor Rittenberg
has done an exceptional job in furthering risk as a key corporate initiative, which
is personally very pleasing to me, and he should be commended for that work.
Figures1.1 and 1.2 are thetwo cubesthatarethe productsofCOSO.Theyare
presented here to make a comparison at least in the context of how I view them. I
willnot grind through eachandevery attribute ofthese models, butitisimportant
to understand some of the key criteria that are being presented by them. It is
Are You Cubin’?
n
15

important that corporate executives and board members understand what is
being exempliﬁed by these models and the subtle, but very important, differences
between the two. Shown in Figures 1.1, 1.2, and 1.3 are the COSO cubes.
Three key questions need to be asked in reviewing the cubes:
1. How do they differ?
2. Why do they differ?
3. What is the implication of this?
My take on these questions is as follows. In viewing the cubes side by side
what you start to notice are some fundamental differences in the contents, but
the implications of these may not be clear-cut. On both of the cubes across the
top are areas of corporate strategic concern. The thought process is that the ﬁve
bands or eight bands below those levels, if properly included in the corporate
governance structure, will ensure the accomplishment of the strategic objec-
tives. A noticeable difference between the two cubes when you look at the
strategic objectives level is the presence of four objectives on the COSO/ERM
cube versus three on the COSO cube.
On the COSO/ERM, cube you can see a category of Strategic has been added.
That is a very important category in that it can take into account such critical
FIGURE 1.1
The COSO Cube
Source: COSO.
16
n
Corporate Governance: A Gut Check

FIGURE 1.2
The COSO/ERM Cube
Source: COSO.
FIGURE 1.3
Side-by-Side Comparison of the Cubes
Source: COSO.
Are You Cubin’?
n
17

corporate initiatives as outsourcing and mergers and acquisitions. Both of these
areas are, of course, fraught with risk, a subject matter that will be discussed in
Chapter 9. The other notable difference at that level is that ‘‘Reporting’’ has
replaced ‘‘Financial Reporting,’’ creating a much more business enterprise ﬂavor
as opposed to accounting ﬂavor.
When you look at the COSO cube and its ﬁve original bands, it is clearly
emphasized that controls are the main focus of that environment and that risk
plays a very minor role. If you look deeper at the framework, you can see that
control environment forms the foundation of the cube. Just as in a house, it is
the supporting infrastructure that makes everything work.
You can also see that risk assessment is actually following, or appears to be
an afterthought in relationship to control activities, as you come down from the
top of the model. The implication is clear that controls precede risk assessment.
Think about that for a moment, and you’ll probably start asking the same
question that I did when I saw the model back when it was ﬁrst issued. How can
controls possibly precede risk in any type of thought process? That makes
absolutely no sense from a logical perspective. If you don’t know where your
risk is or what it is, how do you know what to control and how to control it?
For example, what if I told you that one room on one ﬂoor of the 40-story
hotel was ﬁlled with gold and all of the rest of the 600 rooms were standard
hotel rooms. Then I said that I wanted you to design a control plan for the
premises. You could do whatever you wanted in order to bring the hotel into an
appropriate controlled state of existence.
What would you do ﬁrst? Start running around and installing big steel
doors on every room in the building, stationing armed guards at the front door
of the hotel, screening all customers as they came in the door, and searching
them? Clearly not, you would ﬁrst take a tour of the hotel, locate the room
where the gold is in fact located, the point of maximum risk, and secure that
area appropriately.
That would be logical, that would be common sense! However, if you were
to talk with any high-ranking auditor in most of the large auditing houses in
2010 they would tell you they are deﬁnitely looking at risk. In practice that is
simply not true. They are only concerned about how many controls they
should test and how big a sample they should take to justify their opinion. Risk
assessment could not be any farther away from the process. They are still
following the precedent expressed in the original COSO model, which is to put
controls ﬁrst, with risk assessment as an afterthought.
When you look at the COSO/ERM model, you start to see an entirely different
picture. As has already been highlighted, right from the strategic level of the
model there are distinct differences in the approach. The most important
18
n
Corporate Governance: A Gut Check

difference is the business feel as opposed to ﬁnance feel that the model starts to
communicate. What am I saying? It is been my contention all along that the
COSO model, as noble an effort as it was when it was created, was way too bean-
counter–oriented to be of any value to a major business enterprise or large-scale
organization of any type.
The eight bands on the COSO/ERM model are much more logically
oriented toward business as opposed to ﬁnance and accounting. The order
of precedence itself coming down from the top of the model is far superior to its
predecessor and makes much more sense logically.
Some key differences are that you can see that ‘‘Control Environment,’’ the
foundation of the COSO model, was changed to ‘‘Internal Environment,’’ giving
it amuch moreenterprise feel.‘‘ObjectiveSetting’’wasinjectedasa newbandfor
the purposes of establishing operating objectives that will help to attain the
strategic objectives identiﬁed across the top of the cube. The next three bands
(‘‘Event Identiﬁcation,’’ ‘‘Risk Assessment,’’ and ‘‘Risk Response’’) are all
directly related to the mission of risk assessment and management. We’ll discuss
some of these components in a little more detailed fashion in this chapter.
The other key observations are the order of precedence and the foundation.
You can clearly see where all three of the risk-related bands precede control
activities. For the ﬁrst time in history, somebody has gotten the logical thought
process in the correct order. It is always risk before controls! Regarding the
foundation of the COSO/ERM cube, you can see that monitoring has now
become the point of focus. Just preceding monitoring, you see the band
‘‘Information and Communication.’’ This has a logical and businesslike ﬂow
that is totally absent in the original COSO model.
The implication here is that the information and communication gener-
ated by the entity or enterprise can be utilized to evaluate the risk and the
operations of the enterprise on an ongoing basis. This would be fed to the
monitoring infrastructure in place in the enterprise to act as a feedback
mechanism. The data and information gathered would be recycled back up
to the top of the model to reset operating objectives and make necessary
corrections where unacceptable risks are in evidence.
This would be in keeping with the logic that risk factors, organizational
information, and data can be utilized on an ongoing basis to monitor not only
risk and controls but also operational performance of the enterprise. This can be
accomplished by implementing the data-centric ERM strategy detailed in
Chapters 6, 7, and 8.
Illustrated in Figure 1.4 are the eight bands of the COSO/ERM model along
with their detailed contents. I will not belabor the discussion. However there
are some items worthy of note.
Are You Cubin’?
n
19

To put in plain terms, the COSO model for auditors, and the COSO/ERM
model is for business people. This makes all the difference in the world in how
the frameworks will be perceived and whether they will be embraced or not. As
important as ﬁnance may be to some people, it does not create one product or
get one service out the door to be sold to a customer. This has been the rub all
along. Easily 90 percent of corporate executive and operations management
have nothing to do with bean counting. Don’t care, may want to know.
The unfortunate reality of what has occurred is this. In a knee-jerk reaction
to try and placate the American public and shareholders in general, the federal
government jumped the gun. For political expediency and gain, they allowed a
couple of politicians to create a law of the land prematurely, which was then
thrust upon corporate America in a totally bizarre fashion. Without getting
into all the sordid details, let’s just consider a few fundamental and egregious
errors that occurred as a result.
Internal Environment
Risk Management Philosophy – Risk Culture – Board of Directors–
Integrity and Ethical Values – Commitment to Competence – Management’s Philosophy and
Operating Style – Risk Appetite – Organizational Structure – Assignment of Authority and
Responsibility – Human Resource Policies and Praetices
Objective Setting
Event Identification
Events – Factors Influencing Strategy and Objectives – Methodologies and Techniques–
Event Interdependencies – Event Categories – Risks and Opporiunities
Risk Assessment
Inherent and Residual Risk – Likelihood and Impact – Methodologies and Techniques–Correlation
Risk Response
Identify Risk Responses – Evaluate Possible Risk Responses – Select Responses–Portfolio View
Control Activities
Integration with Risk Response – Types of Control Activities – General Controls –
Application Controls – Entity - Specific
Information and Communication
Information – Strategic and Integrated Systems – Communication
Monitoring
Separate Evaluations – Ongoing Evaluations
Strategic Objectives – Related Objectives – Selected Objectives – Risk Appetite–
Risk Tolerance
FIGURE 1.4
The Eight Bands of COSO/ERM
20
n
Corporate Governance: A Gut Check

First of all, the supposed ﬁx for all of the ills that was in fact supported
by all the large accounting ﬁrms and consulting houses was to strengthen
ﬁnancial reporting controls. As observed earlier, that is not where the
problem started and did not solve the problem. I am not Monday-morning
quarterbacking here. I stated categorically back when the act was ﬁrst
passed that this approach was wrong in my seminar ‘‘Sarbanes-Oxley: A
Road Map to Compliance,’’ and I stick by that conclusion today. When I was
critical of the approach and how many of the prime players who caused
the events in the ﬁrst place were now reaping billions while not properly
ﬁxing the situation, many people walked out. Could not stand the truth,
I guess.
The second critical error is that the original COSO model was utilized as the
compliance methodology for the act. Why would anybody do this when it had
not stopped anything at all up to that point in time? I can only speculate, but
one theory would be since COSO was never really embraced, all the tools that
were created by the large ﬁrms and consulting houses for that purpose were
never utilized. What better way to recoup your investment and make a massive
proﬁt than to lobby to make it the preferred compliance framework? It was
actually mentioned in the Sarbanes-Oxley Act itself, and the big ﬁrms were off
to the bank with the armored cars full of money.
Yet in 2005 the SEC and the PCAOB held a roundtable on the results of the
initial compliance efforts. ‘‘Round’’ is the operative word here because the
corporate executives all roundly lambasted the ineffectiveness and the cost of
the effort. In fact, if you look at the actual language that came out of the
session, the following observation was made:
The feedback indicated that one reason why too many controls and
processes were identiﬁed, documented and tested was that in many
cases neither a top-down nor a risk-based approach was effectively
used. Rather, the assessment became a mechanistic, check-the-box
exercise. This was not the goal of the Section 404 rules, and a better
way to view the exercise emphasizes the particular risks of individual
companies. Indeed, an assessment of internal control that is too
formulaic and/or so detailed as to not allow for a focus on risk
may not fulﬁll the underlying purpose of the requirements. The desired
approach should devote resources to the areas of greatest risk and
avoid giving all signiﬁcant accounts and related controls equal atten-
tion without regard to risk.
(Source: Division of Corporation Finance, Ofﬁce of the Chief Accountant, U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission, May 16, 2005)
Are You Cubin’?
n
21

Gee whiz, would that be a politically correct way of saying those wizards of
the accounting world missed the point entirely, again? Yes, that is exactly what
it is saying. The following observation to that, of course, was to direct that all
efforts should be done on a top-down risk-based approach. That sounds very
familiar, since that’s what I was advocating back in 2002 and is what I am
discussing now in this book. And yet today again they go down the road of
controls irrespective of risk.
The other major fallout of this was that the billions of dollars that were
‘‘wasted’’ on the ill-gotten compliance techniques have now stymied the effort
to install ERM in organizations today. What should have occurred is that no
compliance should’ve been thrust upon corporate entities until the COSO/ERM
model was completed in 2004. At that point, they could have implemented
ERM as an all-encompassing governance tool as well as a business tool to run
the entire enterprise. If this had been done, we would not be in the position we
are today with fragmented corporate compliance—the SOX group here, the
ERM group there, the compliance ofﬁcer someplace else, and at the end of it all a
convoluted, costly, and highly inefﬁcient mess.
By invoking ERM early on, we could have set a pathway to corporate
success by creating tools and methodologies that would have actually yielded a
deﬁned return on the investment for the business itself. Instead, what we have
is a somewhat dysfunctional structure prevalent across virtually all corporate
landscapes that only bring additional cost to overhead with no beneﬁt to either
the business or the shareholder. Is that what we had in mind when this act was
originally brought into focus, or was it the protection of the shareholder and
enhancement of value?
The upshot of this is that Sarbanes-Oxley consumed all corporate re-
sources, and in tough economic times corporations simply cannot justify any
type of large-scale expenditures to implement ERM. Unfortunately, if you were
privy to a lot of boardroom conversations you would see that there is mass
confusion relative to the subject matter itself. This stems again from a lot of
misguided pseudo-knowledge on the part of large consulting houses who
really do not understand the subject matter at all.
The only effective way to accomplish corporate governance is to design
an ERM environment that is all-encompassing and not an accumulation of
disjointed special-interest subsets of compliance. In Chapter 2, we will begin
the discussion of what an effectively designed ERM environment should
look like.
22
n
Corporate Governance: A Gut Check

2
CHAPTER TWO
What ERM Is and
What It Is Not
DON’T BE MISLED: WHAT ERM IS NOT
Before we can begin to design a successful enterprise-wide risk assessment
model of a slightly different nature, we really have to understand clearly what a
risk model of this nature is not.
There are a number of organizations today that are promoting their theory
of what one of these risk models should be. In many instances the models that
are being promoted are nothing more than extensions of what could be
considered classical ﬁnancial thought processes. In many cases the models
are based upon ﬁnancial internal control theory that has been applied or
misapplied, as the case may be, to organizations for many years with mixed or
no success. The reality of the matter is that ‘‘Financial’’ as a risk category is
only one of numerous risk categories that need to be considered to build a truly
business-focused risk model.
Unfortunately, a number of these organizations believe they can simply
take the ﬁnancial approach that has been used for years to establish internal
controls for the business and transform it into an all-encompassing risk
assessment model. This is, of course, not valid as a primary assumption,
and it should be challenged as invalid on its surface as a method of assessing
risk in the complex organizations that we have today.
23

The thought process that a risk model that is essentially ﬁnancial in nature
will accurately assess and/or manage all the risks in a business is fundamen-
tally ﬂawed. Anyone who looks at a business and thinks about it logically
knows that the ﬁnancial statements and the controls that relate to those
ﬁnancial statements deal with the business in a historical context.
What appears in the ﬁnancial statements is simply the result of what has
already occurred in the operations. It is viewing the problem backwards to
assume that you are going to manage and/or mitigate risk at the ﬁnancial
statement level. By that time, the risk has occurred, and the exposure has been
realized. The only thing that can be done at that point is to determine how big of
a check is going to be written or to what account and for how much the journal
entry should be made. This is not to say, however, that the ﬁnancial statements
cannot be effective tools in analyzing risk in a historical context. This concept
will be explored in much more detail in Chapter 7.
Another interesting but certainly speculative feature of a number of these
risk models is that they are based on subjectivity. There are a number of concepts
that are subjective in nature and have regularly been applied to the practice of
risk assessment. A theory that has been applied to risk assessment on a regular
basis is that the model should be based upon weighting and scoring methods to
somehow rank the risks in order of importance. The weakness in this thought
process isthat thescoring andweighting isbasedupon some individual’s thought
process at the time that these ‘‘risk exercises’’ are performed.
The problem in this is that any subjective-based model is time and space
dependent. That is to say that if the same individual was asked to weight and
score the very same situation at a different time, say the next day, the results of
the risk assessment would be different. The reason for this obviously is that
people’s judgment is swayed by time and feelings unless it is done on a fact-
anchored basis. As a result the very same person will arrive at a different
conclusion absent speciﬁc data, information, or facts as a guide.
Another issue that comes into play relative to subjectivity is the terminology
that is applied to risk assessment on a consistent basis. Examples of the terms
would be the concepts of ‘‘low,’’ ‘‘medium,’’ and ‘‘high’’ relative to risk. In many
cases, these terms are used freely and in combination with other interesting
terminology such as ‘‘heat mapping,’’ which sounds strangely military in nature.
The interesting thing about this thought process is there are a number of catchy
phrases associated with ‘‘low,’’ ‘‘medium,’’ and ‘‘high’’ with really no effort to
deﬁne what ‘‘low,’’ ‘‘medium,’’ or ‘‘high’’ means.
The reality of the matter is that if pursued, a number of the proponents of
this methodology would be hard pressed to distinguish the difference. In most
24
n
What ERM Is and What It Is Not

cases absent any knowledge to the contrary, ‘‘low’’ would be deﬁned as a little
less than ‘‘medium,’’ ‘‘medium’’ would be deﬁned as a little less than ‘‘high,’’
and ‘‘high’’ would be deﬁned as little higher than ‘‘medium.’’ The reason for
this is the absence of an operational deﬁnition of each of these related to a
speciﬁc risk circumstance. Absent valid and reliable information and data, no
other conclusion can really be arrived at.
The third notion that comes into play is not related directly to subjectivity,
but due to lack of speciﬁcity, it clearly implies subjectivity is the thought process
that ‘‘one size ﬁts all.’’ The unfounded concept that a universal risk model can be
applied to all circumstances, all companies, or all organizations borders on the
ridiculous. This is notsaying that similar risks do not impact a number of different
organizations—they do. However, they have to be considered differently based
upon the speciﬁc circumstances in effect at a particular organization.
A particular risk will not manifest itself the same in every circumstance,
and the exposure will clearly be different based upon a particular fact situation
in which the risk occurs. It is inappropriate at best to roll out a boilerplate
approach to risk assessment for a number of organizations especially if the risk
model is subjectivity based.
A fourth concept that gets a lot of attention is that of benchmarking.
Benchmarking is a useful thought process if in fact it can be veriﬁed as a
legitimate point for comparison. The theory of benchmarking is well and good;
the problem is in the execution and validity of what is determined by employing
the theory. The idea is to compare the organization to a valid baseline or to a
similar circumstance. However, there are a number of questions that need to be
asked relative to the basis for comparison, for instance:
n
If comparing with the industry standards, is a straightforward and uniform
method of information gathering enforced and adhered to? If not, then the
obvious risk is that you are going to compare apples and oranges.
n
How do you validate the data and/or information to which you are
comparing yourself? There are numerous ways in which data can be
presented by different parties lacking speciﬁc guidelines to the contrary and
the enforcement of it. In addition, how do you protect yourself against
pufﬁng the numbers, overoptimism, or outright misrepresentation?
n
How do you ensure that the results and/or basis of comparison are not
combined in an incorrect way, duplicated, or in some other way lack
integrity in the data?
n
What is the assurance that the companies that you are being compared to
have the exact same management team as your company?
Don’t Be Misled: What ERM Is Not
n
25

n
What is the assurance that the companies that you are being compared to
have the exact same data or information systems?
n
What is the assurance that all those that you are being compared to have
the exact same business model, are centralized or decentralized, and so on?
n
What is the assurance that the geographic locations and marketplaces for
those organizations being compared to are exactly the same as yours?
n
Finally, how do you ensure that your interpretation of the facts and/or
information is correct? The same set of facts or data can be misinter-
preted differently without speciﬁc guidance. For instance, data can
easily be interpreted totally incorrectly if the type of data being reviewed
is not known. The two primary types of data being referred to here are
raw and blended data. This concept will be discussed in more detail in
Chapter 6.
There is a great tendency today in business for organizations to compare
themselves to their peers. Unfortunately, in many instances the comparisons
are not made between true peers. In most instances if organizations were to
look seriously at those to which they are comparing themselves, they would see
the seriousness of their mistake. Different organizations operate under different
management structures, policies and procedures, business models, and simple
day-to-day operations abnormalities.
To make major decisions based upon the results without ﬁrst legitimizing
the comparison by answering the questions set forth could be a monumental
mistake. It would be very similar to assuming that there are great synergies to
be gained by combining two organizations in a merger only to ﬁnd out that the
synergies are never realized because they do not exist.
To summarize what an enterprise-wide risk assessment is not, it is not
subjective, it is not one size ﬁts all, it is not universally determined, and it is not
the result of benchmarking on a generic basis things that cannot be validated.
Possessing large generic benchmarking data sets is wonderful if your objective
is to collect a lot of manure for the data farm (warehouse).
However, to utilize data and information derived in this fashion as the basis
for assessing risk in your organization is a major risk in itself. The data must be
reﬁned and be speciﬁc to your business subset. As an alternative to the models
presented, for the remainder of this book we will discuss how to build a data-
centric globally integrated risk assessment model. This model is a business-
oriented fact-based alternative to the speculative models that have been
discussed earlier. The intent is to equip the organization with a tool that
can be utilized today and carried forward into the future.
26
n
What ERM Is and What It Is Not

KEY QUALITIES OF AN EFFECTIVE ERM
The key qualities of an effective ERM environment are numerous and varied,
and they must be strategically aligned with the organization in order to be
highly effective. ERM must have all of the key fundamental components in
place and functional if it is to be effective. These components are discussed in
the following sections.
High-Level Corporate Sponsorship
One component that is essential for an effective ERM environment is for the
board of directors and senior executives to take it extremely seriously. That
means that support for the initiative must be consistent and unﬂappable. All too
often, these initiatives lack strategic thought process and are poorly imple-
mented from the start. As such, they cannot maintain longstanding support
from the critical levels of management and board.
An essential element is the presence of a strong and highly knowledgeable
Chief Risk Ofﬁcer (CRO). This person must be a visionary who is not locked into
the antiquated practices of the current predominant thought processes. The
CRO must take day-to-day responsibility for informing the senior executives,
the Board of Directors disclosure committee, and all other interested persons on
the status of risk throughout the organization. This position must have a direct
reporting relationship to the disclosure/risk committee and the board to ensure
that the position is not compromised from doing its job by corporate politics and
improper structure.
Well-Deﬁned Risk Structure for Evaluating
the Entire Enterprise
The ERM environment must be created around a well-deﬁned structure for
evaluating risk across all elements of the organization. This must include a
thorough and complete mapping of the entire enterprise, physically depicting
all key operating elements of the organization. One of the maps would include
all of the operating subsets of the enterprise. A second map would include all of
the administrative or cross-functional types of support mechanisms. The reason
for this is to not overcomplicate the physical mapping exercise and to solidify
the notion that the risks of the various parts of the enterprise are quite different
and they need to be evaluated separately and distinctly from each other. I will
provide examples of such maps in Chapter 3, as these are essential to effective
risk management on an enterprise basis.
Key Qualities of an Effective ERM
n
27

Properly Determined Risk Appetite
Management must determine a proper risk appetite: in other words, how much
risk can we take long before it is too much? This risk appetite must be in place
for any and all events that may occur throughout the enterprise. This implies
by deﬁnition that members of the organization must be involved to provide
input to management on these key issues at every level of the organization. It is
imperative that once the risk appetite is established, namely the amount of risk
that management is comfortable with, the risk limit must be strictly adhered to.
We have seen recently in the banking industry where the risk appetites were
either not well established or were blatantly ignored.
One thing that is tricky about determining the risk appetite is the variety of
risks that have to be taken into account. Normally we hear that the risk
appetites in the mainline businesses are clearly established. However, this is a
very, very small part of the entire risk picture of an organization. When
establishing a risk appetite on a portfolio basis we must be sure to include all
types of business risks, as well as specialty areas of physical and logical risk.
Developing a portfolio of risk is no small task, but it is absolutely necessary to
properly install any type of risk management methodology in an organization.
Well-Deﬁned Risk Language Used throughout the Enterprise
A risk language must also be developed that details terminologies and method-
ologies that will be employed universally in the organization. This risk language
should be communicated to all persons in the organization and then utilized
continuously to build an understanding of its meaning and content. If necessary,
risk terminology should be published and distributed across the enterprise to
ensure uniformity of employment. Once determined and understood, this termi-
nology should be used consistently in all communications and become a part of
mainstream dialogue.
An example of something that would be part of the risk language of the
organization would be the risk categorization scheme that is employed. We will
present some alternative schemes in Chapter 4; however, it should be noted
that some type of categorization is necessary.
Clearly Deﬁned Risk Culture
Every organization that is going to effectively employee ERM must have deﬁned a
risk culture that they want to prevail within the organization. The risk culture
can be highly conservative, highly aggressive, or essentially neutral. As we all
28
n
What ERM Is and What It Is Not

realize in our own daily lives, any culture spawns subcultures; the risk culture is
no different. For example, there may be very speciﬁc understandings of how the
organization is going to deal with operational risk on a consistent basis.
What inevitably occurs is that an organization such as sales and marketing
in their zeal to market and sell products makes promises that the organization
cannot fulﬁll operationally. At that point, the sales and marketing organization
has become a risk subculture. They create a situation in which promises are
made, legal obligations are undertaken, and expectations are set. However,
when we do not satisfy those obligations operationally, then we create a
situation of great dissatisfaction for our customers.
These situations can be avoided if sales and marketing acts within the
criteria of the risk culture that has been established. In other words, they will
adhere to the established guidelines for promise dates and lead times. When-
ever they depart from this pattern of behavior, they create a risk subculture that
is unacceptable. When the risk culture is clearly established, everyone lives by
the same rules, and no exceptions should be allowed.
Highly Automated and Data-Centric Reporting Protocol
This protocol of reporting risk by utilizing systems and basing virtually all risk
management in the context of data will establish any ERM organization as ‘‘top
of game’’ (or whatever clever terminology you would like to use). As will be
discussed in Chapter 6, the only effective risk management methodology that
should be established must be data/fact based. Using data or facts will lead to
rapid and accurate evaluation of risk and timeliness of reporting that cannot be
achieved by any other means. A model of this type can provide for virtually
instantaneous feedback depending upon the degree of automation employed in
the organization for this purpose.
If you sit on the Board of Directors, the audit committee, the disclosure
committee, in the CEO’s chair, the CFO’s chair, or the CIO’s chair, or own their
stock, wouldn’t you want this type of information accurate and timely? This is
the type of reporting methodology that every competent CRO should be
building within her organization.
Well-Deﬁned Inventory of Key Risk Indicators
Key Risk Indicators (KRIs) are critical to the successful implementation of any
type of near-time or real-time ERM environment. You may ask yourself, So why
do I need this? The reason is that your business is changing literally every
minute that it operates. The more current your information, the more ability
Key Qualities of an Effective ERM
n
29

you have to effectively govern the organization and prevent unwanted results
from compromising your success. KRIs should not be confused with Key
Process Indicators (KPIs), as in most cases they are not at all alike.
In some instances, they can actually be polar opposites. We will discuss the
differences in Chapter 4, but be aware that a data-centric approach to ERM
using well-deﬁned KRIs is the only sensible way to establish it in the twenty-
ﬁrst century. Any other methodology will have little or no residual value as a
business tool and, in fact, will be cost-intensive and cumbersome to maintain.
Straightforward and Highly Usable System of Analytics
When employing data, it is imperative to use an effective set of analytics
because data is only as good as your ability to use and interpret it. A lot of the
large consulting houses believe that complexity contributes value, but in fact
the only value it creates is value for them. It is not necessary, nor advisable, to
develop analytics that are too complex (algorithms and logarithms and the like)
to get a ﬁx on fundamental business risk.
If you cannot explain the analytic, literally, it is too complex. Of course,
that plays into the plans of consulting groups who like to take their clients
hostage and charge them large ransoms, oh pardon my petulance, fees. We will
talk about a number of straightforward, highly functional analytics that
anyone can understand and interpret quickly and easily without the need
for the great all-knowing consulting group. The best practice is of course the old
KISS theory, Keep It Simple, Stupid.
Effective but Uncomplicated Categorization of Risk Scheme
The categorization of risk is extremely helpful because it may help you see
concentrations of risk. When utilizing risk categories, it is helpful to keep in
mind a couple of fundamental concepts and facts.
n
Risk cannot be neatly categorized. Risk is not something that can
be neatly pigeonholed into nice and uniform little segments. Risk will
virtually always ﬂop over categories no matter what kind of scheme is
employed. This realization will serve you well in understanding that perfect
categorization of risk is not going to be possible.
n
More is not necessarily better. In Chapter 4, I will present alternative
categorizations of risk that are fairly straightforward. A much more
complicated scheme with numerous subclassiﬁcation schemes is contained
in the COSO/ERM model.
30
n
What ERM Is and What It Is Not

The question that has to be asked is whether the complexity adds
anything valuable to the exercise or simply increase the complexity of the
exercise. When the scheme is too complex, it tends to drive the discussion
off of the subject matter at hand. In other words, the discussion descends
into a debate about the right category and subcategory instead of focusing
on the risk and how it is going to be managed day to day.
A categorization schema should only be used for sanity checks and making
sure we haven’t forgotten something critical. Remember, it is the risk and the
management of it that is the object of the exercise, not a perfect categorization
scheme.
Strategic Plan for Constantly Improving
the Risk Management System
Complacency about enterprise risk management is the death knell for an
organization. Even if you have created the greatest enterprise risk management
environment to ever exist, you cannot rest on your laurels and hope that it’s
going to be sufﬁcient for the future. As we are all well aware, risk is a dynamic
process and never ceases to change.
When change is eminent in the area for which you are responsible, it
dictates a requirement to stay ahead of the change and to constantly be
improving the format of how you conduct your business. All ERM environ-
ments should have a strategic plan for constant migration of the risk manage-
ment system to the highest plateau of performance. The strategic plan should
constantly be re-evaluated to ensure that it is keeping pace with the movement
of the business, the market, the technology, and the world.
The strategic plan for every ERM environment should include as much
automation as possible. It should also be synchronized directly with the IT
strategic plan of the organization for which it performs its functionality. As will
be discussed in Chapter 8, there is no room for turf wars and corporate politics
interfering with a strategic alliance like this. It is absolutely imperative that
ERM and IT be very closely aligned as both of their futures really depend on
each other.
Ability to Eventually Migrate the Methodology
to Facilitate Predicting the Future
The ultimate objective of any ERM environment is the ability to see the future
before the future arrives and undermines the organization. It does absolutely no
Key Qualities of an Effective ERM
n
31

good to constantly be in a state of looking backward when you are trying to run a
progressive organization. You must be in a position to stop undesirable conse-
quences before they become consequences. In other words, see them coming.
This is what I will allude to later in this book as the concept of looking out
the windshield instead of in the rearview mirror. The organization needs
somebody to look into the future and start to take an inventory of those types
of undesirable events that may be lurking in the darkness beyond. At the same
time, executives should be trying to identify opportunities that may be present
so that the organization may avail itself of these positive events.
An example would be an abrupt change in the marketplace in the offering
that presents a risk to your competitors. However, since you recognize it early,
it is actually an opportunity for you to gain a competitive advantage or perhaps
dominate the marketplace. There have been a number of these that have taken
place in recent history. One such example would be the signiﬁcant impact on
the newspaper industry of the Internet and its diversion of advertising dollars
and loss of readership. Recognizing earlier on that there was an imminent shift
in the technological savvy of the consumer, the tastes of the consumer, and the
form of consumption would have bode well for the organizations still running
the printing presses.
PRIMARY COMPONENTS OF RISK ASSESSMENT
Regarding traditional ‘‘risk assessment’’ that is performed using subjective-
based judgment, it is important to note that risk assessment cannot truly be
done without data. To truly perform risk assessment, you must be able to
address the following three conditions:
1. Identify the risk
2. Calculate the probability of occurrence
3. Determine the impact/exposure
It is clear that the second and third conditions cannot be satisﬁed without
utilization of data. There is absolutely no way to determine probability
accurately or estimate impact without using data. That is why all traditional
‘‘risk assessment’’ methodology that is subjectively based is not truly risk
assessment. It is simply a listing of risks with some type of subjectivity applied to
it. It is imperative that all risk assessment be objectively based to ensure that an
accurate risk assessment is performed.
32
n
What ERM Is and What It Is Not

NEED FOR A BRAIN (BUSINESS RISK ASSESSMENT
INFORMATION NETWORK)
There are a number of issues that need to be considered and dealt with
effectively to ensure the success of any risk assessment/management model.
One of the issues is to be able to evaluate risk as effectively as possible. A
primary rule that should be followed is to remember that you are managing
your risk and not the risk of another organization. What that means then is the
maximum beneﬁt is gained by measuring your organizational risk utilizing
your own data. By looking for points of comparison within your own organi-
zation, you will much more accurately reﬂect the risk picture, which you are
charged with managing.
There is really no logical business reason to be looking at other people’s risk
pictures, through benchmarking, to understand the risks that are present in
your organization. It makes much more sense to take an inward look, based
upon known facts and data of the organization to determine where the real risk
resides and what is the best way to manage it or mitigate it.
Many times organizations feel compelled to build primary business tools in
the shortest period of time, instead of ensuring the quality of the tool. This issue
is proven consistently in the area of implementing new information systems in
organizations. In most of these situations, an implementation date for the
system is determined from some mystic vision of when it has to be done. The
fact of the matter, though, is that there is often no mandatory or regulatory
requirement relative to that date. The result in virtually all of these situations is
that a system is delivered that nobody wants, people are forced to use, and is
actually contrary to productivity as opposed to enhancing it.
It would be ill advised to shortcut the process in building any risk model
that you intend to be valid. It would be risky in and of itself to build a risk model
that is ineffective. This should not be interpreted to mean that you must make
the model complex to make it good. Great care should be taken to structure the
model to maximize the beneﬁts, which should be accompanied by a minimiza-
tion of effort. As a result, a model that is multi-task–oriented must be built that
not only accommodates risk assessment today but also facilitates a more
efﬁcient risk assessment in future.
The primary consideration in building an enterprise-wide risk assessment
model is to make the model usable at all levels of the organization. It is
inappropriate to make a model that can only be utilized at the higher levels of
the organization, since most risk occurs at the baseline point of conducting
business. The more utilitarian the model, the more effective it is. When deﬁning
Need for a BRAIN (Business Risk Assessment Information Network)
n
33

the risk assessment model at the baseline of business, it is imperative to
remember that simplicity will maximize the utility.
If the model is overly complex, it will simply not be employed on an effective
and continuous basis. In order to fully appreciate and manage the risk, the
model must be operational at the point where the risk occurs. If risk is to be
properly mitigated, the responsibility for managing the risk must be distributed
throughout the organization. In deﬁning a risk assessment model within the
context of this book, a number of clear rules will be adhered to:
n
Any risk assessment model that would be built has got to be speciﬁcally
designed for the business that is to be risk assessed.
n
The model must parallel the structure of the business and its operation.
n
The model must be logically organized and easily explained and utilized if it
is to be effective.
n
The minimization and elimination of subjectivity must be the primary rule
governing the model.
As shown in Figure 2.1, the Business Risk Assessment Information Net-
work (BRAIN) acts as the central clearinghouse of information for the
FIGURE 2.1
The BRAIN
34
n
What ERM Is and What It Is Not

organization and establishes the connection point between the operating units
and the CRO functionality.
PROCESS OF CREATING A BRAIN
Before any type of risk assessment model is undertaken, it is critical to
determine what the business is. The question that you must be able to answer
here is: ‘‘What is the business?’’ The essence of the question is to make sure that
when assessing risk we understand all the primary parameters of the business
that inﬂuence its success or failure.
For example, a large bank that issues credit cards may make the mistake of
assuming that their business is totally comprised of lending money and
therefore is centered in credit risk. The reality is that the primary success or
failure of their business will be determined by customer service, as would be
true in many other businesses. Failure to realize this could lead the bank to
invalid assumptions relative to what is necessary to mitigate or eliminate risk in
its business operations.
One of the major indicators of risk for such organizations would be the
churning of its customer base and the loss of those customers to competitors.
The key then would be for the bank to not only focus on the ﬁnancial aspects
of credit risk in lending but also to prominently include in its risk model
measurements of customer dissatisfaction, which is the primary precursor to
churning of the customer base. A method of deﬁning and understanding
the business, to set the basis for the risk model, will be discussed in detail in
Chapter 3.
The next key issue that needs to be addressed is to understand what real
business risk is. The key to determining what real business risk is means to
understand the various sources of risk and exposure that confront the organi-
zation. In order to do this, the business must be analyzed from the highest to the
lowest level and in reverse. One of the mistakes that cannot be made is to
equate all business risk with ﬁnancial risk at the onset.
Only risks that are poorly managed or not mitigated will eventually
become what are commonly mistaken as ﬁnancial risks—at that point they
are really exposures. There are some classic risks that start as ﬁnancial and end
as ﬁnancial; however, they are only a small portion of the total risk picture that
confronts businesses today. In discussing risk in this context, it is imperative
that the organization consider all the various sources of risk that present
themselves on a daily basis.
Process of Creating a BRAIN
n
35

The sources of risk can be categorized very simply as everything. They are
commonly caused by the economic environment, political/governmental envi-
ronment, your customers, your vendors, your employees, your management,
and the organization itself. The types of risk that need to be thought about and
considered can be determined at the discretion of each individual organization
and/or group. In building a risk model, we must be sure that we incorporate the
appropriate types of risk and that these types are all-encompassing.
The model should be capable of incorporating all of the potential risks that
could be experienced by the organization. In Chapter 4, some suggested risk
types or categories will be put forth for consideration. Examples of each type of
risk will be presented to get insight into how risk could be classiﬁed.
The third key step in building the BRAIN is to determine how to minimize
subjectivity and maximize fact-based risk analysis. In Chapter 5, we will discuss
how to use objective data and substantive information in maximizing the
evaluation of risk in the organization.
The objective data that should be employed in analyzing risk would be the
data created by the organization itself. The ﬁnancial and operational data that
it uses to operate on a daily basis should be the primary elements in the risk
assessment model. Substantive information is a set of facts that can only be
gathered from independently veriﬁable and reliable sources normally outside of
the organization.
Examples of substantive information would be such things as information
from outside legal counsel or from outside regulatory agencies that is deemed to
be expert opinion or can be independently veriﬁed. A good example of this
would be the latest critical interpretations of the HIPAA regulations as applied
to the medical industry. This has now evolved into a major concern relative to
the privacy of medical information especially in the area of electronic claims.
This is a source of extreme risk and cost to medical organizations. The
interesting part about this initiative is that the impact of it will not be conﬁned
only to the medical industry in the future, but will impact privacy concerns for
personal information in all industries.
Being unaware of some of the intimate details on these regulations can pose
a very serious risk to the organization. The critical functionality of protecting all
information that is conﬁdential is a key ﬁduciary duty, as well as challenging
risk, for every organization. It must always be done well, without exception.
The last major concern for the risk model will be making it a ﬂuid dynamic
risk model. This will facilitate the movement from reactive to proactive, or
virtually proactive, risk assessment and management. The reason that this is
critical is related to the dynamic nature of the business world as we know it
36
n
What ERM Is and What It Is Not

today and as it will evolve in the future. The fundamental philosophy to live by
in business today is that the organization with the highest quality product,
selling at the lowest price, possessing the best information wins.
This implies that the operating processes must be operating near perfec-
tion, costs must be tightly controlled, and your information systems and
technology must form the critical underpinnings of the organization. The
problem in most organizations even today is that their information systems are
in such disarray and so poorly focused on the critical data they need that they
cannot effectively analyze their operations and react in a timely manner. A
strategy for rectifying this situation in existing systems and for preventing the
same types of occurrence in new systems will be discussed in Chapter 8.
Process of Creating a BRAIN
n
37

3
CHAPTER THREE
Understanding What
the Business Is
DEFINING THE BUSINESS
Before any type of risk assessment exercise is undertaken, the primary exercise
that needs to be completed is to deﬁne what the business is. That may appear on
the surface to be an overly simplistic question to ask, but it is truly critical. It is
interesting to analyze what a lot of businesses perceive to be their primary
functionality; however, what really drives their cash ﬂow and therefore their
longevity may be something entirely different.
A BANKING EXAMPLE
The bank in this example is performing a risk assessment, and it is heavily
committed to consumer lending. In particular, let us consider credit cards as
the primary business line. If you asked most of these bankers what their
primary business risk was, they would say that it is credit risk, because they
believe that they are in the lending business. As a result they might tend to
micro-focus their risk assessment on credit scoring and underwriting.
38

Looking at it logically, the risk that is inherent in their underwriting
operation is blatantly obvious by their concentration of nonperforming loans
and write-offs in their portfolio. It says, by deﬁnition, that the underwriting
process is deﬁcient; it is just a matter of degrees at that point. The other key
component of credit risk is interest rates. Where is the risk there? The spread
between the bank’s cost of money and the ﬁnancing charges and fees assessed
to their customers is so massive that the risk is virtually nonexistent. In reality,
any increase in the prime rate on most cards is simply a pass-through to the
customer and simply requires an update of the system parameters that
calculate the bills monthly. Making sure that this function is performed timely
and accurately is actually the largest risk they have going, as regards to credit
risk outside of the underwriting criteria.
If we were to analyze the business logically, we would quickly determine
that a risk analysis of this nature is addressing only a part of a complex risk
picture. We would likely determine that their primary business is not lending; it
is customer attraction, servicing, and retention. Underwriting and/or credit
scoring is only one element of risk in the grand scheme of their risk picture,
which would then be incorrectly focused in most respects.
If you were to ask average consumers who use credit cards on a regular
basis and possess two or more cards what lending institution’s name is on the
top of their cards, they might not even know. Actually why would they really
care? The status, if any, is really associated with the type of card (regular, gold,
platinum, titanium, liquid nitrogen). In many respects it has nothing to do with
the name on the card. A primary concern of cardholders is that the card be
accepted when they give it to a merchant. Another is that they be billed
accurately and timely. Expectations also include the accurate and timely
application of payments to their accounts and that purchasing capabilities
not be impeded by errors in this process.
The ﬁnal and most important concern is that when they have a problem,
the card issuer reacts quickly and decisively on behalf of the cardholder and
brings about a satisfactory resolution. It stands to reason that these are the
major issues that are going to impact the customers and therefore the business.
If the organization does not reach the same point of logic, the risk assessment
will be ﬂawed.
Therefore a much more effective method of assessing risk would be to
concentrate on those indicators that are focused on customer satisfaction. The
logical format of the risk assessment would then proceed on that basis. Credit
risk will evolve as a natural component of the risk associated with maintaining
a stable, quality-oriented customer base.
A Banking Example
n
39

ANSWERING THE KEY QUESTION: WHAT IS
THE BUSINESS?
The key question that needs to be answered is this: What is the business?
First of all, segment the business into its primary functionality. What is its
main purpose for existence? What does it do to generate cash? What must it do
well to remain viable? This varies obviously between industries and business
models, with each organization having its own unique characteristics. That is
what requires that the risk model be speciﬁc to each and every situation
and facet of the business. Without knowing what the business is, it is virtually
impossible to assess risk. It is clear that no two businesses are identical. In fact,
divisions or subsidiaries of a company that create essentially identical products
or services are not going to be totally comparable; therefore they cannot be risk
assessed in the exact same fashion.
In designing a risk model, we have to ensure that the basis for the risk
model is in tune with the business. It is predestined that any attempt to assess
risk without due consideration of the intricacies of the business is destined to
fail. When determining what the business is we have to address the funda-
mental question of what it does and how well it does it. When we know what it
does, we must determine what are the essential things required to do what it
does. Once we have determined what it does and what is essential, then the
fundamental questions of risk can be addressed:
n
Is the business successful at what it does for a living, that is, its key
outcomes?
n
Does it efﬁciently employ the essential resources that support it?
DETERMINING THE CORE BUSINESS PROCESSES
Core business processes are what the organization does to meet the demands of
its critical stakeholders on a daily basis as it operates. The core business
processes must be executed with extreme precision and attention to detail
to meet the expectations of those customers, stakeholders, other key parts of the
organization, outside vendors, and so on that rely on it every day to deliver.
Core business processes are those parts of the organization that are
responsible for the generation of cash and/or the efﬁcient utilization of cash.
If the core processes of the organization are not operating effectively and
efﬁciently, with minimized risks, the entire organization can be compromised.
40
n
Understanding What the Business Is

Every organization that is going to employ ERM has to analyze its corporate
structure thoroughly and what makes it successful. Without analyzing and
determining where the key processes of the business are positively or negatively
impacting the primary stakeholders on a daily basis, there can be no hope of
minimizing or mitigating risk.
When analyzing core processes, it is imperative to understand what are the
primary types of business risk that take place in the process, and who is going to
own those business risks from a management perspective. A simple illustration
of how an organization can be viewed is shown in Figure 3.1.
In Figure 3.1, you can see that the structure is divided into three circles.
The outer circle is labeled the periphery. The periphery consists of all of those
functionalities that exist and owe their very existence to the fact that a core
business is fully functional and operational. Examples of these functions would
be human resources, ﬁnance, tax, legal, and so on. In other words, it is a very
simple formula: no core business, no need for peripheral functionality. Granted,
it is imperative to have all those types of functionality when you have a well-
established core business, but lacking this there is absolutely no necessity for
these functions at all.
The CSUs are the critical support units that are absolutely essential to the
functionality of the core business processes. The types of operations that would
be included in this category would be IT, research and development,
CORE
    CSU 
PERIPHERY
FIGURE 3.1
Three Levels of Business Structure
Determining the Core Business Processes
n
41

engineering, supply chain management, underwriting, actuarial, and so on. It
is obvious to anyone who is familiar with fundamental business process models
that to run the organization without these functions running at peak efﬁciency
would be virtually impossible. Some of the most critical business risks that exist
in the organization are those that could undermine these parts of the corporate
structure.
Without properly mitigating or limiting risk in this category of functional-
ity, the entire future of the core structure and/or business is in question. This
will be discussed in Chapter 9 as one of the key problematic conditions of
outsourcing many of these functionalities in any major organization.
The core obviously constitutes the center of the universe for any organi-
zation. The central issue here is that you cannot compromise the core in any
way, shape, or form—or you undermine the entire enterprise. Should they not
be mitigated properly within the context of good corporate oversight, the
business risks in the operational sectors of the core can create problems that
will ﬂow from the lowest levels of the enterprise all the way to the boardroom.
The fundamental maxim that must be remembered here is this: if you
compromise the core, you compromise everything.
In recent as well as in not so recent history, we have all seen ample
instances where major corporations have compromised the core business and
have paid the ultimate price, by going out of existence.
SETTING THE STRUCTURE: CREATING A PHYSICAL MAP
One of the critical features of enterprise risk management is to understand each
and every part of the enterprise. This sounds extremely elementary, but
without creating a physical map of the organization you cannot recognize
the entire risk picture that you are confronted with as an organization.
It takes a high degree of discipline to spend the time necessary to create an
accurate mapping of the organization, but without the mapping it is impossible
to understand what types of risk exist, and where they exist. The discipline of
creating a physical map will bring a number of advantages to the table such as
the ability to create logical data pathways (LDPs) for tracking risks to their root
cause, as well as the ability to determine the location of the risk of a global scale
with pinpoint accuracy if properly established.
A mapping of the enterprise should not be confused in any way with an
organizational chart. Mapping is the discipline of isolating each and every area
of primary business risk and being able to address it systematically and
42
n
Understanding What the Business Is

methodically on a continuous basis. With properly automated processes,
organizations of any size can be physically mapped using the appropriate level
of discipline to allow for the evaluation of risk virtually in real time.
Of course, organizations with thousands of operations will not depict each
and every one unless they can be strategically organized on some kind of global
scale. There are many ways in which this mapping can be performed. It can be
laid out in a simple hierarchical format, or if greater precision is required, it can
be laid out physically in a global depiction and precisely accessed by location in
the world. I will use examples from numerous industries throughout the book
to explain the concept of risk assessment and the importance of the mapping
exercise.
A MEDICAL EXAMPLE: A HEALTHCARE SYSTEM
Even those that are not in the healthcare business will interact with or become
intimately familiar with a healthcare system. A healthcare system consists of a
number of individual components that provide a seamless pattern of care for
their clients or patients. One of the key components of a healthcare system is a
hospital, and the hospital in turn has a number of key core processes that make
it successful or make it fail. This being the case, we will use a healthcare system,
and in particular a hospital, as a key example of how risk assessment can be
conducted throughout the entire organization.
Even if you are not in the healthcare business, a straightforward, common-
sense 30-second review of the facts would clearly demonstrate the risk intensity
of these facilities. Healthcare facilities are not just businesses in the classic sense
of the word in that they have to raise capital, provide goods or services for
money, and maintain ﬁnancial viability. They also have many other risk
dimensions to consider that standard commercial ventures do not.
Examples include the intensity of the regulatory inﬂuence in the areas of
patient care and ﬁnancial stability. A speciﬁc example is having to provide
patient care in spite of the patient’s ability to pay. Tax-exempt institutions are
by deﬁnition charitable institutions and mandated to provide such care. Care to
be provided by the institution is not elective. Therefore this introduces a key and
unavoidable ﬁnancial risk experienced by those types of healthcare institutions.
However, even though this is signiﬁcant, it is only one small portion of the total
risk picture that needs to be considered in the healthcare arena.
The healthcare business is all about delivering high-quality patient care in
the most effective manner possible. The primary core processes of the healthcare
A Medical Example: A Healthcare System
n
43

business are admitting the patient, performing diagnostic routines, delivering a
pattern of care, facilitating or increasing the quality of life for the patient, and
being ﬁnancially rewarded for those efforts. In order to risk-assess a healthcare
system, it is essential to understand its primary functionality. Once we have
deﬁned that, then we can begin to risk assess the situation but not before.
Determining the Core Business Processes
There are a number of core processes that constitute the delivery of quality
healthcare. No one part of the system can deliver all of the requirements of the
patients and therefore must work as part of a uniﬁed interrelated set of
processes. It is the same for any business of any type. Any business or
organization is nothing more than a set of interrelated processes that must
work together to deliver a deﬁned product or service.
If we look at the issue of risk assessment logically, there are strong
arguments as to why we would want to use the organizational structure as
the means of performing it. As a result, before risk assessment can be effectively
performed, we need to understand the business structure. The best way is to
perform a core structure analysis as follows.
Extending the logic to a healthcare model, it would be critical that a similar
analysis be performed. This would then allow us to logically and systematically
assess the risk to the organization. A similar, but limited in scope, hierarchy-
based core business analysis of a healthcare organization might appear as
shown in Figure 3.2.
Understanding a Core Process: The Laboratory
We must bear in mind that depending upon how you are analyzing the business
there can be many structures within structures. For example, within the
laboratory there will be core processes that support its overall functionality.
Each one ofthosecoreprocesseswillhaveasetofsubprocessesthatsupportthem.
In this discussion we’ll be treating the laboratory as a core process of a hospital.
The hospital will be treated as a core business unit of a healthcare system.
This is the exact same logic that will be applied whenever we discuss risk as
it relates to business. All healthcare systems, and of course hospitals, have a
laboratory as the key focal point of their diagnostic capabilities. The lab may be
captive, or it may be an independent. Whatever the situation, the intensity of
the risk directly related to the lab activities and indirectly extended to the
healthcare system should never be underestimated. It is imperative that when
we talk about a core process, we realize that the business cannot function
44
n
Understanding What the Business Is

Healthcare System
Hierarchy
Healthcare System HC
Physician Practice
Groups
Physical Therapy
Core Process
Security
Core Process
Admissions
Core Process
Laboratory
Core Process
Engineering
Core Process
Outpatient Surgery
Core Process
Housekeeping
Core Process
Biomed
Core Process
Cafeteria / Food
Service
Core Process
Radiology
Core Process
Operating Rooms
Core Process
Foundations
Visiting Nurse
Services
Extended Care
Commercial Labs
HMOs
PPOs
Hospital
Home Healthcare
FIGURE 3.2
Healthcare Hierarchy Core Structure Mapping
45

without it. Core processes are those parts of the business structure that are
absolutely essential to its existence.
The laboratory, as is any other business, is also comprised of a set of
interrelated core processes. The laboratory has four primary processes:
1. The physician’s order must be obtained, which constitutes the authoriza-
tion to test.
2. The gathering of the sample that is necessary for analysis and testing.
3. The testing of the sample is performed as required to arrive at the correct
diagnosis.
4. The processing of a timely and accurate result is required for the physician
to make the appropriate diagnosis in determining the pattern of care.
It could be argued at this point that there is a ﬁfth process, which is the
billing of the patient or the business ofﬁce process as it is commonly known.
This process is the one that normally gets the most attention even though it is
not core to the primary functionality of the business. This is and should always
be considered a peripheral functionality of the business, not a core function. It
results from the fact that the laboratory exists and performs its core processes
successfully and accurately. Lacking that, there would be no need for a billing
and/or business ofﬁce function. In Figure 3.3 the core processes of a reference
laboratory are illustrated.
Once we understand the primary core processes of the laboratory, we can
then develop an appreciation for the subprocesses, which directly support the
core processes. If any of the primary subprocesses fail in any way, there will be a
detrimental impact on the core process. Therefore, it is implicit in any analysis
of risk that the risk assessment must be taken to the lowest level of activity in
the organization being reviewed. Failing to do that will lead to unsubstantiated
evaluations of the organization’s risk proﬁle. It is inherent in any risk assess-
ment that the risk be able to be analyzed at the lowest potential point of failure.
When we analyze risk, we must bear in mind that minor failures and/or
minuscule events can result in catastrophic consequences. Therefore, it is always
inappropriate to perform a risk assessment at too high of a level and expect to
achieve any type of meaningful result. To provide an illustration of this thought
process we will now consider risk assessment in a multi-level analysis.
Multi-level Risk Assessment Based on Business Structure
If we were to consider risk assessment based upon the business structure of a
laboratory, we would have to analyze all of the primary functionality contained
46
n
Understanding What the Business Is

Healthcare System HC
Hospital
Healthcare System
HC
Diagnostic
Laboratory
Hospital
Drug Screening
Diagnostic
Laboratory
Testing
Chemistry
Sample Collection
Chemistry
Physician’s Orders
Chemistry
Resulting
Chemistry
Chemistry
Diagnostic
Laboratory
Hemotology
Diagnostic
Laboratory
Special Chemistry
Diagnostic
Laboratory
Histology
Diagnostic
Laboratory
Microbiology
Diagnostic
Laboratory
Patient Records
Laboratory
Laboratory
FIGURE 3.3
Laboratory Core Processes Mapping
47

within the core processes. To illustrate the example, let us consider the ultimate
risk in a laboratory setting. The ultimate risk is the delivery of an inaccurate
result to a critical test that has been ordered.
For example, let us talk about a bad reading on a histology test, a pap
smear, for instance, required to determine if the patient has cancer or is cancer
free. Obviously, the basic risks that confront the laboratory are its reputation
and its failure to execute its primary functionality. However, there is a much
bigger risk in the ofﬁng. When a histology test of this nature is performed, in
many cases the life of the patient is the ultimate risk.
The failure to recognize fundamental operating process failures and the
risks of same are what eventually lead to the ultimate risk becoming a reality
and transforming itself into an exposure. Let us now review a set of events that
can result in the ultimate exposure. If the risks are clearly not eradicated at the
point of occurrence and they continue to corrupt the business process, then
ultimately the risk picture of the organization escalates rapidly.
To illustrate this situation let’s look at a simple example that provides insight
into how inadvertent actions translate into risks that eventually corrupt the
fundamental business process. We will ﬁrst present a limited diagram of a core
structure analysis for a laboratory (see Figure 3.4). The diagram will not
incorporate all of the critical steps that are necessary to completely illustrate
the total functionality of the day-to-day operations. However, it will provide a
FIGURE 3.4
Laboratory Core Processes Mapping Related Risks
48
n
Understanding What the Business Is

baseline to illustrate the upper progression of risk that takes place in an organiza-
tion’s environment when it is not mitigated on the front lines where it occurs.
A laboratory scenario will be presented, an event will be depicted, and the
potential outcomes discussed. All of the outcomes will be expressed in terms of
speciﬁc business risks that will be incurred as a result of the actions caused by
the event. The central focal point of the discussion will be that risk normally
evolves to a higher and higher degree of intensity the farther it goes up the
organizational structure.
Take note that the precursor of risk, if not mitigated, gives rise to multiple
interrelated risks (associated/allied risks) and ultimate exposures. The outcome
of a singular event, if not mitigated, triggers a chain reaction of interrelated
events, which accelerate the intensity of the exposure as they unfold.
Unfortunately, in most risk models a risk is thought of as a singular event
with a related outcome. The reality is that in virtually all real-life business
scenarios that is not true at all. Risks, if unmitigated, can lead to catastrophic
outcomes (exposures) even if they have humble beginnings. As such risks must
be dealt with effectively at their lowest potential level of occurrence. The
sequence of events that follows describes a phenomenon I describe as risk
chaining and demonstrates how the intensity of risk development triggered off
of a set of speciﬁc actions taken.
Event 1: Due to the intense demands on the time of the physician, the
physician does not take the required time to isolate exactly the test that needs to
be performed on a sample taken from the patient. Instead the physician orders a
complete panel of tests (multiple test formats) that will cover all the possibilities,
but 80 percent of the tests are not necessary. These types of ordering patterns
have become commonplace among the physicians practicing at the healthcare
institution and are now an acceptable part of the daily routine. Why? The
reason is to save time on hospital rounds and get back to the ofﬁce to generate
income by seeing patients with appointments.
n
Direct risk 1. The laboratory technicians, who are already understaffed,
come under more intense pressure due to the excess demands put upon
them by the unnecessary tests. In an effort to maintain an acceptable level
of turnaround time, the lab technicians work faster, but unfortunately
inaccuracy in the test readings starts to occur due to the shortened time
frames.
The volume of tests continues to accelerate, the stafﬁng levels do not
keep pace due to ﬁscal constraints, and the degree of inaccuracies becomes
more intense. Eventually, a critical call on a cancer test is missed.
A Medical Example: A Healthcare System
n
49

n
Allied risk 1. Employee dissatisfaction starts to build, and turnover rates
increase rapidly. Loss of experienced personnel results in higher recruit-
ment fees, increased inefﬁciency, and further degradation in turnaround
time.
n
Direct risk 2. The tests the physicians are ordering appear on the
patient’s bills and are being challenged by insurance companies or other
payers. Therefore, the laboratory is not only overburdened, but the medical
institution, or laboratory that bills the patient, is also penalized because
they have incurred the cost and are then subsequently denied the revenue.
n
Allied risk 2. Because of the ordering patterns of the physicians, the
turnaround time is negatively impacted. As a result, the physicians begin
to order all tests stat, or for immediate resulting, normally in a life or death
situation. Confusion starts to dominate the environment because no one
can sort out what is stat and what is not truly stat.
n
Allied risk 2a. Because practicing physicians are now utilizing stat tests
as a primary method of reducing turnaround time, confusion can result
potentially jeopardizing the life of an ER patient in a trauma situation
because no one can establish priorities on the lab technician’s testing table.
n
Direct risk 3. Because the test was misread and the patient was not
diagnosed correctly, the patient suffers adverse circumstances and ulti-
mately dies. This results in a cause of action for wrongful death and/or
malpractice. Litigation expenses become excessive, the liquidated damages
are oppressive, and the focus of the institution and laboratory are mis-
directed during that time frame.
n
Allied risk 3. As a result of the multitude of stat tests and the inability of
the lab personnel to determine what is truly priority, a patient in the ER
who requires immediate results is delayed. The patient in the ER subse-
quently dies because of the physician’s inability to determine required
treatment. Another wrongful death action is imminent.
n
Direct risk 4. The corporate image and reputation of the laboratory and
the medical system are irreparably damaged.
n
Allied risk 4. The reputation of the laboratory stafﬁng and the manage-
ment of the lab are irreparably damaged.
As shown in Figure 3.5, you can plot your risk across the enterprise by
employing a technique called Multi-level Risk Ownership (MRO). In each and
every one of the locations, determination of the risk at every level of that
location can be determined by establishing ownership of risk by subprocess,
process, and organization.
50
n
Understanding What the Business Is

Big Manufacturing Co.
INDUSTRIAL
PRODUCTS
BIG Manufactring Co.
WESTERN EUROPE
CONSUMER
PRODUCTS
ASIA
CONSUMER
PRODUCTS
EASTERN EUROPE
CONSUMER
PRODUCTS
SOUTH AMERICA
CONSUMER
PRODUCTS
Atlanta
NORTH AMERICA
Los Angeles
NORTH AMERICA
Chicago
NORTH AMERICA
Denver
NORTH AMERICA
Plant #2
Chicago
Plant #1
Chicago
Shop Floor Manuf.
Plant #1
Inventory Control
Plant #1
Engineering
Plant #1
Supply Chain Mgmt
Plant #1
Machine Ctr. #436
Shop Floor Manuf.
NORTH AMERICA
CONSUMER
PRODUCTS
GOVERNMENTAL
BIG
Manufacturing Co.
CONSUMER
PRODUCTS
BIG
Manufacturing Co.
FIGURE 3.5
Global Enterprise Mapping—Manufacturing
51

Once those are determined, they can be input to a database or spreadsheet
to establish risk inventories, which can then be matched to associated metrics
so they can be measured real time or near time. Those results can be available
as fast as the data can be processed and reported, virtually instantaneously if
required.
In Figure 3.5, I have used the example of a manufacturing organization
with locations scattered across the globe. At each one of the locations, an
inventory of risks is created; they are evaluated objectively and reported
onward to the corporate headquarters. This model corresponds directly to
the ERM environment that I advocate in this book. A model such as this allows
an organization to validate its risk on a continuous basis across the entire
enterprise. As we go through other discussions in this book this capability will
be a continued point of reference, as well as this diagram.
IMPACT ANALYSIS
Another critical factor in enterprise risk management is impact analysis. As
discussed in Chapter 2, it is imperative to understand not only the probability of
a risk but also its impact on the organization. Impact analysis becomes a critical
part of determining what types of actions will be taken to mitigate or eliminate
risk and at what cost.
As is discussed in Chapters 5 through 7 the presence of data will be
essential in the determination of impact and eventually on what bearing it will
have on the risks to be managed. Just as with probability, impact becomes a
critical part of the whole risk management formula in making any kind of risk
management plan realistic.
TREC and MORE
The phenomena that result from situations such as the laboratory example
presented earlier are the interrelationship of risks that must be evaluated
anytime a risk assessment is performed. An area of risk analysis that is virtually
always ignored in many types of ERM methodologies is the area of true impact
analysis. Impact analysis must be an integral part of any professionally
performed risk assessment. The interrelationship between risks, which begin
as insigniﬁcant events, and their ultimate signiﬁcant exposures is the basis for
the discussion of risk impact analysis.
Once a risk manifests itself into an exposure, it spawns numerous sets of
interrelated events, which must be measured and evaluated to understand the
52
n
Understanding What the Business Is

true exposure that a risk can present to the organization. The two primary
aspects of impact analysis that must be understood are The Risk Evolution
Chain (TREC) and the Multiplied Organizational Risk Effect (MORE), each
having its own unique characteristics.
The concept of TREC is the realization that a set of related and interrelated
risks will evolve from even insigniﬁcant events. A risk, which represents even a
minimal exposure at a lower level of the organization, usually travels up the
organizational structure, and with every new evolution its intensity and impact
multiplies exponentially.
In other words, most risks are in no way simple isolated events. The fact is
that they evolve in chains, which are logically and systematically related to the
original source of the risk. If a risk is not mitigated at or close to its source and
there is no method of containment to minimize the exposure, a higher level and
usually more complex form of the risk tends to evolve with much greater
exposure attached to it.
The necessity to recognize even minor risks at their point of origination
therefore becomes imperative. Failing to do so simply allows the seriousness of
the risk to increase exponentially as the fallout from it continues to unfold.
TREC is one of the most formidable outcomes resulting from ineffective risk
mitigation. The impact of TREC can essentially be unlimited, in that, unchecked
it could in fact consume the entire organization.
A blast from the past example of this type of occurrence is the John
Mansville Corp., which was dependent upon asbestos-based building products
for a large part of its revenue stream. When the risks attendant to asbestos were
discovered, which should have been known much earlier by Mansville, the
entire organization was essentially consumed in litigation and eventually had
to declare bankruptcy. It later emerged, but as a shadow of its former self.
Of course, more modern-day examples would be Lehman Bros. and Enron.
Their failure to address their relative risk positions in the areas of subprime
loans, exotic investments, and energy trading eventually led to their total
undoing. When these practices originated within these two organizations, they
all started out very small relatively, but failing to manage the risk associated
with these ideas became fatal.
MORE represents the realization that risks rarely if ever manifest themselves
as singular events. They virtually always breed an extensive set of interrelated or
allied risks that other parts of the organization may inherit and have to manage
through no fault of their own. In other words, as a result of the original risk
havingmanifesteditselfwithintheorganization,asetofalliedrisksandexposures
are created within related organizations and even unrelated operations or
Impact Analysis
n
53

functions. Once the risk has been initiated by some event, the ripple effect of the
allied risks and associated exposures generated cannot be escaped.
The risks simply build one upon the other, and the undesired outcomes
proliferate to all parts of the organization. The risks and related exposures
spread out in numerous directions from a central event impacting numerous
areas of the organization, which appear to be, or actually are, unrelated
operationally to the original source of the risk. These seemingly unrelated
corporate or organizational functions are directly or indirectly impacted,
therefore taking on a set of their own risks and/or related exposures.
It is imperative to understand this point if you are going to correctly assess the
ultimate exposure that is associated with any risk that takes place in the organiza-
tion; you must understand these multidimensional aspects of business risk.
To illustrate the concepts of TREC and MORE, let’s use the example of a
missed maintenance step on a piece of machinery in a mining/quarry operation
and review the risk and subsequent ripple effect of this seemingly minor event.
The situation is as follows: the maintenance person at the facility is to
check all components of the brake system on the large truck haulers that
transport rock from the pit to the jaw crushers. The jaw crushers then reduce
the rock to a usable and marketable product. To reach the jaw crushers, the
truck must travel up a steep incline known as the wall.
During the maintenance process, the mechanic failed to review the brake
line for damage. Since the last maintenance checkup the truck has encoun-
tered some loose rock on the roadway, which has damaged the line but has not
as yet caused a leak. The damage is not detected in the current maintenance
session, and the truck is released to operations. The truck hauls 100 tons of
rock per load in a normal run. On the third load of the day, the truck is heading
up the wall, but is forced to stop midway up because of trafﬁc on the road. As
the driver applies pressure to the brakes, the damaged brake line yields, and the
brakes fail. The truck then begins to roll backwards down the wall and
eventually falls over the edge killing the driver.
TREC
The effect of TREC in this illustration would be as follows. The initial risk of failing
to do the required maintenance steps on the brake line of the truck appears to
be totally insigniﬁcant. Unfortunately, for the driver of the truck it ultimately
becomes his most signiﬁcant risk. The risk chain is then created as follows:
n
The ﬁrst link in the risk chain is a routine preventative maintenance risk.
The mandated maintenance steps and safety review are not performed on
54
n
Understanding What the Business Is

the truck as required. The related exposure of failing to mitigate this risk at
ﬁrst is essentially not even considered or recognized.
n
The second link in the risk chain is an operations risk—the ability of the
equipment to be operated safely in performing its routine tasks. The related
exposure of failing to mitigate this risk is unknown, but certainly more
complex and much larger and much harder to contain.
n
The third link in the risk chain is also an operations/regulatory compliance
risk—that the operator of the vehicle will in fact be injured or killed as a
result of the equipment not being in a safe, operable condition. The related
exposure of the injury (or in this case death) of the operator when it occurs
is extremely signiﬁcant with the ultimate impact unknown at the time of
occurrence.
n
The fourth link in the risk chain is the legal liability risk. It is the wrongful
death suit that will certainly be ﬁled as soon as a lawyer can contact the
family. At that point, the determining factor of how large the exposure
becomes is simply a matter of the amount of money the organization has
and the effectiveness of their legal counsel. However, it is almost certain
that the impact will multiply the original cost to perform the mundane
maintenance task by thousands or, in fact, millions of times.
At this point the normal rule that prevails is the bigger they are the harder
they fall or translated more correctly, the more they pay in damages.
Let us assume for purposes of this example that the death beneﬁt, which
constitutes the exposure related to this risk, paid over and above the insured
amount is $2 million.
MORE
The MORE phenomenon is directly related to and is an extension of the TREC
concept discussed earlier. The effect is essentially that a risk starts out in one
part of the organization and spreads allied or interrelated risks and exposures to
numerous other parts of the organization.
What then happens is the other parts of the organization incur signiﬁ-
cant expense and effort to deal with a situation that is totally unrelated to
any actions initiated by them and that originally was totally out of their
control. Unfortunately due to the MORE impact the outcomes are virtually
inescapable. The only way to avoid this effect would have been to eradicate
the risk at its source. The sequence of events detailed next is indicative of
how a risk begins as a minimal event or failure to take appropriate care
Impact Analysis
n
55

and evolves into a catastrophic occurrence with signiﬁcant organizational
impact.
n
Original source of the risk (risk bearer): Engineering/Maintenance
Department
n
Risk: Maintenance inspection of brake line not performed
n
Mitigation cost ¼ cost of mitigating risk by inspecting properly: $1.00
(¼ 3 minutes inspection time @ $20/hour)
n
Allied risk No. 1: Damage requiring repairs incurred by other
vehicles when brakes fail on the rock hauler, very high-cost specialized
equipment
n
Risk bearer: Production/Operations
n
Exposure ¼ cost to repair specialized equipment: $50,000
n
Allied risk No. 2: Downtime suffered by operations when accident occurs
and operations cease
n
Risk bearer: Production/Operations
n
Exposure ¼ idle time by other workers: $125,000
n
Allied risk No. 3: Lost production
n
Risk bearer: Production/Operations
n
Exposure ¼ lost shipments due to downtime: $250,000
n
Allied risk No. 4: Termination and hiring activities for maintenance
personnel
n
Risk bearer: Production/Operations
n
Exposure ¼ cost to take all necessary steps: $15,000
n
Allied risk No. 5: Recruiting and processing expenses to replace person-
nel in maintenance
n
Risk bearer: Human Resources
n
Exposure ¼ cost to take all necessary steps: $15,000
n
Allied risk No. 6: Equipment rental to replace equipment in for repair
n
Risk bearer: Production/Operations
n
Exposure ¼ cost to take all necessary steps: $50,000
n
Allied risk No. 7: Dealing with OSHA and MSHA regulators and on-site
inspectors regarding additional reviews, ﬁnes, and penalties
n
Risk bearer: Risk Manager/Production/Operations
n
Exposure ¼ cost to take all necessary steps: $75,000
n
Allied risk No. 8: The necessity to perform additional safety training by
the corporate safety ofﬁcer with travel expenses
n
Risk bearer: Corporate Safety/Production/Operations
n
Exposure ¼ cost to take all necessary steps: $30,000
56
n
Understanding What the Business Is

n
Allied risk No. 9: Preventing signiﬁcant fallout and damage to the
corporate image within the community with all expenses related to public
relations
n
Risk bearer: Corporate Public Relations
n
Exposure ¼ cost to take all necessary steps: $35,000
n
Allied risk No. 10: Acquiring bids, selecting vendors, and purchasing
new equipment to replace that destroyed in the accident after insurance
payments adjusted for depreciation
n
Risk bearer: Corporate Purchasing/Operations
n
Exposure ¼ cost to take all necessary steps: $120,000
n
Allied risk No. 11: Increase in insurance premiums across the board for
liability, workers compensation, and other umbrella policies as a result of
negative impact on experience ratings
n
Risk bearer: Corporate Risk Management/Operations
n
Exposure ¼ cost to take all necessary steps: $200,000
n
Allied risk No. 12: Gather all the facts to prepare for litigation, engage
outside counsel, offer settlements, meetings, ﬁlings, and so on
n
Risk bearer: General Counsel/Legal Counsel
n
Exposure ¼ cost to take all necessary steps: $100,000
I will terminate the example here, as you can clearly see I could take the
allied risks that result from this accident and continue the cost buildup for a
very, very long time. This is just the tip of the iceberg, and the numbers are
clearly presented for illustrative purposes only. Not even pricing the internal
costs of TREC and adding in the $2 million wrongful death award, the costs
here are in the $3 to $3.2 million range. Not really a fair exchange for $1 in
maintenance effort, with parts added, maybe $50. Those are scary impacts for
what may have been perceived as a minimal risk event.
Like every other risk that takes place in an organization, there are so many
hidden and insidious costs associated with the manifestation of a risk into
exposure that their intensity is rarely fully realized. That does not mean,
however, that the costs are not incurred; they just are not recognized and
related back to the original risk.
Even in this truncated example, with regard to the allied risks and their
relatedexposures,ifyoudosomefastmathematics,theexposurecoststothispoint
represent a ratio of 3,000,000 to 1 relative to the original labor cost to mitigate
the primary risk in the maintenance department. The impacts of the allied and
interrelated risks and their attendant exposures should never be underestimated
in estimating the potential outcome of any identiﬁed business risk.
Impact Analysis
n
57

Aligned Risk Impact Linkages
Shown in Figure 3.6 are the impact linkages that occur when a risk takes place.
This is one of the critical reasons why ERMs must be top of game in their
approach to managing risk. Without the most progressive approach being
utilized to prevent risks from occurring, the organization is victimized not only
by the original risk but the aligned risks, which in many cases may be far more
serious and bring about a much larger impact.
Now that we should be comfortable with the concept of what the business
is and risks as they relate to process, we will explore other subject matter. It is
imperative that we explore a number of related issues such as business risk
categorization, outcomes as a critical component of risk assessment, and other
key concepts to be presented in Chapter 4.
Maintenance
Department
Failure
Primary Risk
HR
Recruiting
Allied Risk 5
Production /
Operations
Allied Risk 4
Production /
Operations
Allied Risk 1
Production /
Operations
Allied Risk 6
Production /
Operations
Allied Risk 7
Production /
Operations
Allied Risk 8
Production /
Operations
Allied Risk 3
Production /
Operations
Allied Risk 2
Corporate
Purchasing /
Operations
Allied Risk 10
Corporate
Legal Dept.
Allied Risk 12
Board of
Directors ––
Total
Exposure
Corporate
Public
Relations
Allied Risk 9
FIGURE 3.6
Aligned Risk Impact Linkages—Quarry Operations
58
n
Understanding What the Business Is

4
CHAPTER FOUR
Deﬁning What True
Business Risk Is
IT’S ABOUT THE OUTCOME, STUPID!
An essential thing to understand about risk management, and also risk
assessment, is that the practice must be anchored in the recognition of
what is really critical to the organization. If you go into any organization
today, both large and small, you’ll ﬁnd that things that are measured and
supposedly managed are focused on entirely the wrong scenario. Virtually all
processes are measured utilizing what are called KPIs. The problem emanates
from the fact that virtually all KPIs are determined based on outputs, which are
quite useless in the measurement of risks.
There are two critical attributes that can be measured as a result of any
process. These two attributes are output and outcome. The difference between
the words may seem inconsequential, but it is extremely important in the
context of evaluating and managing risk. Outputs are simply an expression of a
volume of activity that has taken place within a process. Outcome deﬁnes the
success or failure of the process itself in accomplishing its key objective. In
evaluating risk, the most signiﬁcant question is whether the process is
accomplishing its critical outcomes.
59

To illustrate the difference between output and outcome, here is a real-life
scenario.
At the age of 56, I took on one of the biggest risks in my life, I became a dad.
My wife and I adopted two children from Russia. Now let’s say I took my two
children to a private school and was sitting down interviewing the headmaster.
I ask, ‘‘Why should I have the privilege of paying you $5,000 per child to put
my two children in your institution of learning?’’
Suppose the headmaster looks back at me and says, ‘‘Mr. Duckert, you
should pay me $5,000 per child because we graduate 100 percent of our
students.’’ What should be my response?
Well, my response would be, ‘‘That is not my question, sir. My question to
you is what will I get for my money, and what will my children get for their
education? In other words, when they leave this institution, will they be
prepared to do whatever they would like to make their life better and happier?
Will they be able to go to college, for instance, engage in a ﬁeld of study, be
successful at it, and make themselves comfortable during their lifetime? Or
perhaps, go to a technical college to learn how to be plumbers but be the best
plumbers they can possibly be and be happy doing it. Or even, in fact, I do not
care if they go to California and surf their brains out for the rest of their life but
they must be good at it and be extremely happy doing it. The question to you,
sir, is will you give them a well-rounded education, teach them how to be good
people and respectful of others, and also to be good citizens and fulﬁll their civic
responsibilities? I will instill these same values at home, but will you do the
same here?’’ A well-educated, well-rounded, socially responsible person, of
course, represents the desired outcome.
‘‘Or as the alternative, will you simply shove the piece of paper in their
hands and say, ‘You have now graduated. Have a good life?’ ’’ This un-
fortunately represents the most common alternative, which is that children
are shoved through a system, given a piece of paper, and left unequipped to deal
with what life has to offer. But some school administrator somewhere shows it
as a successful statistic in the graduation roles.
This clearly represents a situation where the education system is generat-
ing large amounts of outputs but not the same amount of outcomes. This is not
the point and is a useless measure for the success of the education system.
Education means education. If an education is not provided, the outcome has
not been achieved, and the process has failed. In the context of this work, the
process is risky.
Here are some other examples from the business world. Every business
process can be reduced to a set of desired outcomes. If you look at something as
60
n
Deﬁning What True Business Risk Is

commonplace, but very critical, like Payroll, it can be deﬁned quite easily in the
context of desired outcomes. The key outcomes of the Payroll process are:
n
Pay the right person
n
The right amount
n
At the right time
n
At the right place
Those are the key outcomes that will make payroll either highly successful
or unsuccessful. If the payroll process fails to fulﬁll any of those requirements, or
outcomes, it is risky. This is what deﬁnes it as a valued part of the Enterprise;
therefore failing to do these primary things with a high degree of accuracy is
simply unacceptable.
Another example would be Purchasing or supply chain management. The
key outcomes would be deﬁned as follows:
n
They must purchase the right thing
n
At the right time
n
For the right place
n
In the right quantity
n
Of the right quality
n
For the right price
Again the key here is that relevant parts of the organization do all of these
things to the highest degree of their abilities and if they fail to do these things
well, then by deﬁnition the process is at risk. Just as in the payroll example, all of
these things can be measured to yield an objective-based or data-centric risk
model. This will be discussed in greater detail in Chapters 6 and 7, but here is an
example of the way in which these would be measured for the purposes of risk
assessment and management.
Risk Metrics to evaluate the procurement process include:
n
Purchasing the right thing:
Risk Metrics: Rejects at inspection for failure to meet specs, and returns to
vendor
n
Right time:
Risk Metrics: Shutdowns due to lack of material, 0 quantities in critical
items
n
Right place:
It’s About the Outcome, Stupid!
n
61

Risk Metrics: Out-of-stock conditions at required site, overstock at other
sites, added transportation costs to relocate stock
n
Right quantity:
Risk Metrics: Overstock, obsolete and slow moving inventory, out-of-stock
conditions
n
Right quality:
Risk Metrics: Rejected for quality issues at receiving; scrap out in produc-
tion; failure in product use by customer
n
Right price:
Risk Metrics: Purchase Price Variance; Average unit price
If you look at the impact of measuring outcome versus output in an
organization, there is no better way to evaluate risk on a continuous basis. You
can equate outcomes to business objectives if you prefer that as a terminology.
The most important thing is to realize that by measuring the actual outcome of
the process, you can determine risk quite easily. This will be explored more in
Chapter 6.
RISK NEVER LIVES ALONE
The concept that risk never lives alone is one of the things that everybody who
deals with risk should understand but may not immediately realize. A risk event
is like tossing a pebble into a pool of water and watching the ripples spread out
from the center. The one fact that is inescapable is that when risks take place
they simply trigger other risks in their wake.
When reviewing the enterprise risk management program of an organi-
zation, one of the key attributes must be that the risk management program
take into account all related/aligned risks as part of the overall picture of risk
evaluation and assessment. It is not sufﬁcient to simply have a situation where
risk is viewed in isolation and action is only taken on that particular risk event.
Let’s take a simple example to illustrate the point. Human Resources does
not perform an appropriate deep background check on Ivan Madeoffwithit. He
was a person hired to ﬁll a highly sensitive asset management position. They did
not discover that this person is a convicted felon with numerous fraud charges
in his background. The person is hired and given responsibility for a critical
portfolio of a key customer in the organization. The person manages the
portfolio ﬁne for a period of time and then begins to pilfer the account and steal
the customer’s assets.
62
n
Deﬁning What True Business Risk Is

The customer detects the problem in his account and launches an inquiry
with the State Attorney General. The Attorney General comes in, investi-
gates, and determines that a signiﬁcant fraud has taken place within the
customer’s account. What other related risks then develop as a result of
HR’s failure to perform an adequate background check on this individual? Let
us list them:
n
We now have a problem employee whom we must deal with. Even though
this person may be convicted eventually of a felony, the victims are likely to
sue us for some type of failure on our part to detect his background and
protect the organization.
n
The customer will remove his account from our organization and tell every
one of his close associates of our failure to fulﬁll our ﬁduciary duties and
protect his assets.
n
The event will most likely make the newspapers and tarnish our corporate
image as a safe place to invest people’s money.
n
This will lead to loss of customer base and conﬁdence in us as an
organization.
n
The legal department will have to be involved to handle any subsequent
litigation, which is certain to be forthcoming.
n
Our insurer will be raising our rates as a result of our inability to control
our employees in a suitable manner. The fraud event will certainly increase
our experience rating and cost us more in premiums.
n
We now have to go out and try to collect the headhunter’s premium that
we paid to recruit that employee in the ﬁrst place, or engage in other
litigation to determine who was at fault.
n
We have to go through the recruitment process again to ﬁnd another
qualiﬁed candidate to ﬁll the position.
n
In the interim, we begin to overextend our other employees to take up the
slack for the lost position, which potentially leads to higher rates of the
error and/or employee dissatisfaction.
It is imperative that we stop all risks at their source. Therefore the
necessity to map out the entire organization to the lowest level possible is
absolutely essential to an effective enterprise risk management program. The
failure to do this is going to leave a number of gaping holes in the entire risk
management process. These holes will only undermine the structure of the
organization and impede its effectiveness. This should never be our intent or
the outcome.
Risk Never Lives Alone
n
63

DEFINING BASELINE CATEGORIES OF BUSINESS RISK
Deﬁning baseline categories of business risk is one of the most important
exercises to be conducted when building a risk model. Everyone has his own
version of risk categories and in many cases has developed them to coincide
primarily with his line of business instead of being cognizant of a much broader
base of risk. For example, the banking industry in virtually all cases uses the
nine categories of risk as developed by the OCC:
1. Compliance
2. Credit
3. Foreign Exchange
4. Interest Rate
5. Liquidity
6. Price
7. Reputation
8. Strategy
9. Transaction
These nine categories of risk developed by the OCC are deemed appropriate
for the banking industry as a whole. When you analyze the categories, however,
you can see that there is an overriding ﬁnancial inﬂuence on the categories.
‘‘Credit,’’‘‘ForeignExchange,’’‘‘Interest Rate,’’ ‘‘Liquidity,’’‘‘Price,’’ and ‘‘Trans-
action,’’ are all ﬁnancially related. The ﬁrst category (‘‘Compliance’’) will be
ﬁnancially inﬂuenced in that theprimary compliance issues would be ﬁnancialin
nature relative to reporting and ﬁnancial positioning of the organization. The
only two remaining categories are ‘‘Strategic’’ and ‘‘Reputation.’’
‘‘Strategic’’ in its broadest sense may incorporate such things as product
development, mergers and acquisitions, and market positioning. Another
category, ‘‘Reputation,’’ could encompass a number of things and is actually
one of the most critical of all the nine categories. However, when standing on
its own amid all the overriding ﬁnancially inﬂuenced categories, it seems to get
lost and appears relatively insigniﬁcant.
What is interesting about these nine categories is that there is no speciﬁc
referencing of common operational risks that normally will be the source of the
majority of your exposure. In addition, there appears to be absolutely no mention
of any type of information systems and/or information technology concerns.
There are numerous areas of risk that can occur within these categories that can
be seriously detrimental to the overall organization and its relationship with its
customer base.
64
n
Deﬁning What True Business Risk Is

When you consider risk assessment categories it is imperative that you
bear in mind that the risk assessment categories should be all-encompassing,
covering virtually every facet of the business. The risk is not limited to the
balance sheet in the accounting department as we discussed earlier, it occurs in
each and every part of the business.
Therefore the categories used should facilitate these types of discussions.
However, what you should not do is try to make so many categories that the
exercise becomes one of futility. What is required is a general set of categories
that embrace all of the risks that a business can experience, without over-
burdening the thought process.
As a baseline for developing a meaningful set of categories for your own
organization, the following are ten categories of business risk that I consider
critical. These are categories of business risk I have used myself for evaluating
potential areas of risk for a number of years now. This is not to say that these
are the only categories of risk that can or should be used, but they do
encompass virtually all types of business risk that can be experienced:
1. Financial
2. Legal liability
3. Regulatory compliance
4. Corporate image
5. Industry speciﬁc
6. Data integrity and reliability
7. Conﬁdentiality of data
8. Safeguarding proprietary data
9. Disaster recovery/contingency planning
10. Operations
We are striving to make sure that every type of risk receives equal
treatment and consideration. Within the categories key consideration is given
to information systems and information technology concerns. This is part and
parcel of a thought process that essentially says nothing that we do of
importance today in businesses or any type of organization is done without
a computer. Bearing this in mind, we must consider all types of risk relative to
these environments in any type of evaluation process.
Financial
The riskcategoriesarenotlistedintheorderofimportanceorprioritization.Ifthey
were, ‘‘Financial’’ would probably be last on the list of critical risks. The reason for
Deﬁning Baseline Categories of Business Risk
n
65

this is that very few, if any, risks within an organization arise out of something
that is purely ﬁnancial. The fact is such things as a fraud both management and
employee initiated, such as the Enron debacle, is a type of risk that would be
ﬁnancial in nature. It arises from a personal decision that is made by someone in a
position of authority to perpetrate a fraud of signiﬁcant proportion.
It is a situation where the persons empowered take advantage of an
opportunity to circumvent what is known to be an acceptable business practice.
A similar situation of ﬁnancial risk, so-called smoothing of the ﬁnancial state-
ments, is another situation where a personal decision is made and actions taken.
In both of these occurrences it is done for personal proﬁt or gain.
But if you think about what constitutes a purely ﬁnancial risk, you will
quickly arrive at the same conclusion that I did, which is that few, if any, risks
really arise within the ﬁnancial area. There are some risks that are very ﬁnancial
in nature which in many cases are out of the control of the organization. These
would be such things as adverse economic conditions, and others such as
signiﬁcant shifts in interest rates and foreign exchange ﬂuctuation. However,
these types of risk must be mitigated and/or eliminated by operational strategic
initiatives within the organization itself.
The remaining things that appear within the ﬁnancial realm of risk are not
really risks but are the exposures resulting from other types of business risk. It is
interesting that for years, if not decades, auditors of all types have focused very,
very intently on the ﬁnancial area in regard to what controls were in place and
how well they were being executed. That is certainly a valid concern and
justiﬁed. However, the ﬁnancial area is not where the majority of the risk
resides in most organizations, and as such ‘‘Financial’’ would be last on the list
of key risk areas to be visited.
Legal Liability
‘‘Legal Liability’’ is a category that constitutes a very large part of the risk picture
for companies and organizations as a whole. This is especially true in the United
States where litigation is a national pastime when it comes to any high-proﬁle
corporation or organization. Legal liability includes virtually anything that you
can be sued for. This, of course, means product liability, regulatory violations,
contract noncompliance, and so on. Corporations and/or organizations can be
sued by their vendors, their customers, their employees, and regulators as well as
many other subsets of the same.
Any known or unknown deﬁciency within the organization is going to
force a corporate decision to either ﬁght or to pay. Neither of these outcomes is
66
n
Deﬁning What True Business Risk Is

desirable, in that it drains corporate assets and energy and distracts the
organization from its primary focal point of doing business. In many cases,
management simply resigns itself to the lesser of two evils. Anything that can
shelter the organization from litigation in any form is an extremely valuable
exercise in risk mitigation.
Regulatory Compliance
‘‘Regulatory Compliance’’ is another area of risk that can become a bottomless
pit of wasted time, energy, and money. As Microsoft experienced in its go-
around with the regulators, even if you win you lose. You lose time, talent,
energy, momentum, money, and face. What is tragic about the situation is
once you go around with the regulators in the United States, then the European
regulators jump on board riding the same train. It is a never-ending seesaw of
ups and downs. There are so many exposure points in the area of regulatory
compliance that risk in this category is rampant. We are seeing numerous
instances over recent history of situations where regulatory compliance can
bring very large corporations and organizations to their knees.
The public exposure can be humbling, and the negative reﬂection on the
corporate management and board of directors is nothing short of horrendous.
When you look at the spectrum of risk that can occur within the area of
regulatory compliance, you can travel the gamut from environmental protec-
tion to child labor laws. Employees and the regulatory issues surrounding the
employment base constitute a large majority of the risk to the organization.
Discriminatory practices, harassment, wage and hour, contract labor, beneﬁts
law—the list goes on and on.
I think in this category it becomes increasingly clear that you cannot
manage risk from the boardroom on all fronts. The risk must be managed at the
front lines of the organization each and every day that you open the doors for
business. Failure to manage these risks is an invitation to a regulatory action
and without question subsequent litigation of a signiﬁcant nature.
Corporate Image
‘‘Corporate Image’’ as a risk category that embraces a number of topics. One of
the biggest risks in this category is not having a plan to deal with undesirable
events when they occur. The inability to manage such occurrences shows an
extremely vulnerable side of the corporation or organization, and therefore a
weak point that can be exploited. Corporate image risk is probably one of the
most expensive ones from which the organization has to recover.
Deﬁning Baseline Categories of Business Risk
n
67

Any type of long-term damage to the corporation’s reputation puts the
organization as a whole in jeopardy. It may signiﬁcantly weaken the company’s
position in the marketplace or undermine any type of strategic initiatives, such
as mergers and acquisitions or other types of major undertakings. What is
interesting about corporate image risk is that depending upon the industry in
which the company or organization operates, corporate image can be com-
promised easily, and the results can be catastrophic. The reason for this is that
there are numerous suitable substitutes to which the marketplace can migrate
if the reputation of a particular organization becomes tarnished.
A good example of this would be the banking industry. Within the banking
industry, it is hard to build customer loyalty and to retain a constant customer
base. Yet it is extremely easy to drive customers away from the organization
through nothing more serious than lack of good and consistent customer
service in their primary product lines. Some examples of corporate image risks
would be consistent downtime on their ATMs or other electronic banking
facilities; poor customer service at the teller line or other personal contact areas
such as telephone call centers; and slow turnaround time on loan or mortgage
commitments, where in many cases time is of the essence to avoid interest rate
shifts or to insure exact property availability.
The fact is that there is another bank at the end of the block that can take
away the customer at a moment’s notice. In addition, there are numerous
ﬁnancial institutions that are now offering services via the Internet. If a certain
banking institution does a poor job of designing their Internet site or reacting
slowly to any major business shift, then the customer will simply surf a little
farther down the Net.
These are basic examples of risks that occur every day that the bank opens
its doors and at every second when their Internet site is alive—or dead. These
are quite indicative of the types of risks that occur; however, they can cost a
banking institution millions of dollars or more in business a year. There are
certainly catastrophic occurrences that wreaked far more havoc and are much
more widely known such as the Exxon Valdez oil spill, the Union Carbide
poisonous gas incident, and the giant Arthur Andersen exodus, to mention
only a few of hundreds of examples that still rank high on the scale of things you
would not want your corporation known for.
Industry-Speciﬁc
‘‘Industry-Speciﬁc’’ is any type of risk that can be incurred by an organization
that relates speciﬁcally to their ability to compete and to manage their market
68
n
Deﬁning What True Business Risk Is

share effectively. In addition, it deals with any particular risks that are inherent
in the industry itself. Examples of these types of risk would be the following:
obsolescence in the high-tech industry, liability for smoking-related deaths in
the tobacco industry, liability for personal injury and death beneﬁts for crashes
in the airline industry, and malpractice claims within the healthcare industry.
By the nature of business that is conducted in these industries the risk is
inescapable.Industry-speciﬁcisanall-encompassingcategorythatdealswiththe
many hazards of doing business in a speciﬁc sector of the economy. Some of the
competitive pressures that are brought to bear on companies or organizations
can be some of the most intense risks that the organization can experience in this
category. There are many facets to the risks that are included here, and as such
organizations must be very cognizant of the exposures that they are subject to.
Each company must decide which risks it is going to manage and which they are
going to mitigate to arrive at a workable plan within this category.
Data Integrity and Reliability
‘‘Data Integrity and Reliability’’ is a category of risk that has far-reaching
implications within any organization. It impacts information services and tech-
nology, everyday decision making within the business, the investing public’s
conﬁdence in its ﬁnancial reporting, and numerous other aspects of the organi-
zation.Itisimperativethatdataintegrityandreliabilitybeabovereproachtobuild
conﬁdence in organizations. Data integrity enters into virtually everything that is
done within the organization. The importance of this cannot be stressed enough
because organizations are totally dependent upon the computer systems and the
datathattheygenerate. Ifthe datadoesnot haveintegrity orlacks reliability,then
every business decision that is made is suspect. In certain instances, lack of data
integrity can have catastrophic or extremely expensive consequences.
One such example would be the failed NASA attempt to land a $125
million explorer on the planet Mars. The ‘‘rocket scientists’’ involved in the
operation failed to verify units of measure for critical operations that were
created at separate locations. The ‘‘scientists’’ were unclear as to whether the
instruction set called for meters or feet and made the wrong uneducated guess.
The result, we littered the surface of Mars with $125 million of taxpayer’s
money instead of exploring it and expanding our knowledge base.
Conﬁdentiality of Data
‘‘Conﬁdentiality of Data’’ has become the cause of the day—ﬁnally after many
embarrassing mishaps and disclosures that have taken place in the distant and
Deﬁning Baseline Categories of Business Risk
n
69

recent past. This risk is one of the most liquid and volatile of all of the risks that
are in play. The risk and related exposures multiply exponentially for many
reasons:
n
The amount of data being created and gathered on a minute-by-minute
basis is staggering.
n
The proliferation of computers and computing power being extended to
virtually everyone with the money to acquire one have made the ability to
access and manipulate data second nature.
n
The expansion of data storage capability and devices that make vast
quantities of data highly transportable has accelerated the exposure curve.
n
The advent of the Internet and its related environs has made available
limitless information on every subject, every person, and every event.
n
There is an increasing desire and need for personal privacy in all aspects of
daily life, and when a violation occurs, there is requisite and costly litigation.
n
The continuing evolution, slow as it may be, of legislation in this area is
increasing the accountability of all organizations. The HIPAA regulations in
the healthcare industry aimed at maintaining the conﬁdentiality of elec-
tronic medical records are a good example. The issue that I am struggling
with is that I thought they were alwayssupposed to be conﬁdential. Why are
medical institutions scrambling now to put this security in place when it
should have been there all along?
n
The still mystifying lack of urgency to use computer systems’ access and
security measures, even though they are readily available undermines any
efforts at conﬁdentiality.
n
The reluctance on the part of large organizations to make the necessary
expenditures in some instances to maximize the effectiveness of access
security when new systems that are installed openly expose the data.
n
Even in the light of the legislation mentioned, there are frighteningly
contradictory situations in existence. For example, the Medical Informa-
tion Bureau is an organization that maintains or accesses volumes of
conﬁdential information on people, which is then made available to its
membership for review. The key is to have someone’s social security
number, and the information can be obtained. This is one-stop shopping
for a person’s medical records, driving records, criminal records, and credit
records. It was established as an underwriting resource for a number of
large insurers and has mushroomed from there. Yes, it is correct that your
medical records along with everything else are readily available. Fright-
ening prospect isn’t it, when you consider that the systems are maintained
70
n
Deﬁning What True Business Risk Is

with the same diligence as the credit bureaus? See data integrity risk
previously discussed.
One of the other signiﬁcant sources of information disclosure is the sale
or trade in of laptops and desktop computers without correctly scrubbing
the hard drives by degaussing, overwriting with zeroes, total reformatting,
and taking other effective means—or smashing them with a hammer. The
amount of conﬁdential information that has the potential to fall into
outside hands is mind blowing.
If you ever want to get some idea of how proliﬁc this problem of
conﬁdential information disclosure is, just search the Internet for conﬁ-
dential data breaches and you will see a laundry list of who’s who that
have disclosed everything from conﬁdential personal and ﬁnancial infor-
mation to detailed medical records. I am sure that none of us would want
our medical records no matter how mundane or uninteresting in the public
domain. The amount of damage that could be done to certain unfortunate
individuals challenges the imagination. As can be logically deduced these
types of disclosures have the ability to create life-altering events, most of
them negative in nature.
Safeguarding Proprietary Data
‘‘Safeguarding Proprietary Data’’ covers the protection from disclosure of such
things as formulas, designs, patent secrets, merger and acquisition information,
strategic initiatives, customer lists, product cost structure, research and
development, military tactics and maneuvers, and so on. Clearly this informa-
tion governs the current and future success of the organization in all of its
signiﬁcant initiatives. All organizations of every type have some version of
proprietary information. Where this information resides, how this information
is protected, and how widely distributed the information may be are good
estimators of the degree of risk that is in the offering.
A very good, but different, example of the types of risk that can be incurred
would be in the area of new systems development. New systems are developed
and/or acquired by many different means. One of the more obscure ways is
where the system is actually developed by an employee and introduced into the
organization, eventually becoming a critical part of its operations. However,
here are the facts and circumstances regarding the system.
The system is not covered by any type of formal agreement, which deﬁnes
ownership of the intellectual property. The employee develops the system on
her own initiative and creates the majority of the system on her own time and
Deﬁning Baseline Categories of Business Risk
n
71

machine. As a service to the employer, she makes it part of a key process that is
critical to the overall functionality of the organization to the extent that the
organization literally cannot run without the system. The system as designed
would also be commercially marketable and extremely useful to your competi-
tors. It becomes necessary to reduce operating expenses, and the employee who
created the system is laid off.
The following potential risks will now become exposures:
n
There will be no backup for the system or any ability to run it in the
absence of the employee.
n
The employee will remove all versions of the code from the premises
including any backups.
n
The organization’s operations will come to a screeching halt until the gap
created by the system can be ﬁlled.
n
This will negatively impact your ability to deliver product to your custom-
ers and cause them to seek other alternatives.
n
The employee will transport the system to a competitor or make it
commercially available thus undercutting your prior advantages.
n
A circumstance like this occurred when an engineer in a smaller organiza-
tion did this very thing, and then was retired early by the organization to
make way for younger, less-expensive workers. The company literally shut
down for 15 months until a new system could be created and installed,
narrowly escaping failing entirely. The consequences of not knowing which
systems constituted nonowned proprietary information were devastating.
Disaster Recovery/Contingency Planning
‘‘Disaster Recovery/Contingency Planning’’ takes into account any type of
occurrence in which the organization as a whole cannot function. For instance,
a September 11th situation, a critical part of the organization is taken ofﬂine,
some external force like a power outage precludes operations, or something as
straightforward as ‘‘the system going down.’’
The incident or catastrophe can be temporary or permanent in nature. It
can occur incrementally or totally stop operations immediately. This risk
category has to be recognized as a major exposure point for most organizations
today. The unfortunate reality of the world today is that we must be prepared to
deal with any and all undesirable circumstances. This includes, but is certainly
not limited to, any type of business interruption and/or other type of cata-
strophic occurrence.
72
n
Deﬁning What True Business Risk Is

Strategies for mitigating this type of risk take numerous forms and range
from a manual fallback position to totally redundant data centers for IS/IT
concerns. This has always been one of the most ignored areas of risk. It has
always been the position of many corporate executives that ‘‘it will never
happen here.’’ That position, of course, is no longer valid and as a result cannot
be the answer when a discussion of this type of risk is brought to the table.
Hopefully, corporate America, the government, educational institutions, and
all other major organizations have learned a lesson from the events of the past,
especially the recent past. The importance of this category of risk cannot be
underestimated nor ignored. Anyone who makes that type of uninformed
decision is seriously undermining his credibility as a leader or is simply ignoring
his ﬁduciary responsibilities and reality.
Operations
‘‘Operations’’ risk is most easily deﬁned as any risk that prevents a business or
organization from delivering high quality products and services to its customers
in a timely and cost-efﬁcient manner. There are numerous types of operations
risk that take place on a daily basis within any organization.
A major risk that takes place in this category, however, is one that in many
cases is the least recognizable. The reason for this is that such risks tend to be
the small costs or excess expenses that accumulate day after day and build up
over time. These are the small process changes that are introduced to the
business model daily by design or inadvertently just from the way that people
do their jobs. The overall costs that are associated with these types of problems
can be massive over time. In addition, they can lead to signiﬁcant declines in
productivity and customer service. In effect, these types of risks impact all of the
major areas of operations and ability to service clients.
There are also numerous signiﬁcant risks that are categorized within the
area of operations. An example would be worker safety, which also has a
related component in the area of regulatory compliance. Other types of
operational risk include equipment downtime, out of stock conditions in
inventory, unavailability of a skilled labor force, and so on.
Operations risk in virtually all instances is one of the major categories of
concern when it comes to overall risk evaluation. Lacking the ability to be able
to deliver our product and/or services to clients literally cuts off the ability to
generate revenue or to sustain cash ﬂow. In addition, any time that we have a
material or serious impact on any members of our workforce, the outcome has
the potential for being catastrophic.
Deﬁning Baseline Categories of Business Risk
n
73

There are not many organizations of any type that can sustain a long-term
withdrawal from their customer or client relationship. It is essential for any
type of organization to be deemed a going concern that is able to produce and
sell a product to the satisfaction of their customers on a continuous basis. Any
organization that fails to manage and/or mitigate signiﬁcantly deep-rooted
operational risks is in peril; there should be no mistake made about that. Enron
proved this point very eloquently and succeeded in taking a once powerful and
inﬂuential organization and literally gutting it due to their inability to manage
their operational problems. The answer they believed lay in the magic of the
pen relative to their accounting records, but you can only mask so much in the
art of accounting.
It is important to bear in mind that no matter which types of risk categories
you may use, it always comes back to one fundamental thing. The key to
success lies in the ability to recognize the risks for what they are and to not fail
to take the necessary actions to mitigate the risks or manage them effectively.
You may classify the risks in any way that you may feel is appropriate, but the
real issue is what you are doing about them!
EVALUATING ALL OF THE POSSIBILITIES:
THE RISK UNIVERSE
Every organization has to deﬁne its own risk universe. This is not an exercise
that can be done generically across a number of organizations. Every organi-
zation has a unique and distinct business model under which it functions. The
uniqueness of the business model is what necessitates the custom nature of the
risk assessment that is performed. Without a custom-based approach to the risk
assessment exercise, any accuracy relative to the risk assessment will be
suspect. When we talk about the risk universe of any organization, we are
discussing all of the logical business subsets that could and do encounter risk. In
addition, deﬁning the risk universe means that we must take an inventory of all
of the potential risks each of these logical business subsets can encounter.
When doing this, a great degree of caution must be exercised. It is easy to
theorize that the number of risks a logical business subset could be subjected to
is limitless. In other words, you could adopt the Chicken Little theory that the
sky is falling and utter catastrophe is imminent. However, this quickly becomes
a meaningless exercise, since 90 percent or more of all of the catastrophic
things that could happen have absolutely no chance of occurring. There is no
beneﬁt in analyzing or evaluating risks that will never occur. The key to risk
74
n
Deﬁning What True Business Risk Is

assessment is to focus on the business risks that are most likely to impact the
business under consideration.
There is no merit in identifying the risks, evaluating their probabilities,
spending other valuable resources predicting their outcome if it is impossible
for them to occur within the normal course of events. Therefore, the exercise of
evaluating the audit universe for an organization would include in the risk
inventory only the most relevant risks. It is imperative that we understand the
business that we are trying to risk-assess to preclude the possibility of intro-
ducing irrelevancy into the analysis.
One of the best ways to analyze an organization and divide it into its logical
business subsets is to follow the corporate or organizational structure or
primary functionality. The reason for this is to ensure that there is a clear
understanding of what the business or organization is composed of in order to
determine the best way to evaluate the risk picture in its entirety.
There are a number of ways to do this. You can divide it up into
geographic regions, legal entities, product lines, key responsibilities, or on
a process basis. The important thing is to use a methodology that most clearly
reﬂects the underlying way in which the business or the organization
performs its primary tasks and accomplishes its primary goals. In virtually
all instances it will be easily recognized that the most effective way to
subdivide the organization for risk purposes and to ensure consistency in
the analysis is to use a process-based approach. The reason is that every
business or organization is nothing more than a set of interrelated or mutually
dependent processes. Process-based analysis lends itself to an organized
structural approach, and easily facilitates the analysis of risks throughout
the business at any desired level.
The key reason to employ process-based analysis is to ensure that there are
neither gaps in the logic nor omissions of signiﬁcant parts of the risk assess-
ment. Once the processes and logical business subsets are determined, an
inventory of the relevant risks can be arrived at in the means of evaluating their
probability and impact decided upon.
What should always be maintained within any risk analysis is a logical
approach and thought process. In this way, you can mitigate any type of
confusion and/or misunderstanding. In addition, the method of arriving at the
risk assessment will always be easily explained and defended. There is no merit
in creating a risk-based analysis that you cannot explain or defend. The
inability to defend the risk analysis immediately goes to the heart of its
credibility. Espousing a risk analysis that lacks credibility is a very risky venture
in and of itself. It is much more prudent to develop a sound basis for assessing
Evaluating All of the Possibilities: The Risk Universe
n
75

the risk that can be defended no matter how it may be challenged and that it is
easily communicated and explained.
In the next section I will discuss an example of driving the risk off of the
business structure. The structure as presented will be simple and understand-
able. However, it is representative of virtually every type of organizational
hierarchy, which means that in virtually all cases it can be universally applied.
The importance of this is that it can be easily adjusted to meet any and all
criteria for risk analysis.
USING THE BUSINESS STRUCTURE TO DRIVE THE RISKS
When approached logically, it is obvious that the best way to structure any risk
assessment is to follow the same pathway in which the risks are generated.
That pathway is the logical business structure that is used to operate the
organization on a daily basis. The reason for this is that the risk is generated in
all parts of the business. This is why the business structure is the most logical
method for evaluating risk.
When you look at where risks are generated, it becomes pretty clear that
even though all parts of the organization create risks, the majority of them are
generated at the front-line operations. No matter what business you are in, the
place where your product or service is created or delivered to the customer is
the focal point of utmost risk.
There are certain risks that are limited to speciﬁc parts of the business, such
as strategic decision making. Those would normally be limited to the executive
ofﬁces or the boardroom and would be very large but isolated in nature. The
most common risks originate from the day-to-day operations of the organiza-
tion, are numerous in nature, and vary signiﬁcantly in size. By utilizing the
business structure to determine the risk assessment, you can literally trace the
risk to its very source of creation. In addition, you can follow the pathway that
is created when it branches out into other risk conditions.
By looking at the business structure, you can see how the risks travel
well-deﬁned pathways; this also quite conveniently provides two very pow-
erful tools for risk assessment. The ﬁrst tool is data analysis, which can be
utilized to isolate the risk and the related exposure as well as the probability of
occurrence.
The second tool is root cause analysis, which allows the organization to
determine the primary cause of the risk and mitigate it or eliminate it. The
structure of the business facilitates following the data pathway to the risk, and
76
n
Deﬁning What True Business Risk Is

then provides the ability to mitigate or eliminate the risk through root cause
analysis. By looking at the abbreviated corporate structure and the risk
example provided in Figure 4.1, you can see clearly how beneﬁcial this type
of analysis can be.
The logical data pathway (LDP) in Figure 4.1 illustrates the risk that is
occurring in the organization as the result of lost-time injuries. It demonstrates
that by following the logical data pathway you can literally follow the risk back
to its source, or root cause. The importance is to ensure that a resolution of the
risk root cause is brought about to eliminate it as a cause of concern in the
future.
It is also a critical exercise in the determination of data integrity. If the data
terminates or cannot be logically pursued down the LDP, then there is clearly a
question in regard to its integrity and accuracy, which raises a number of
governance risks and concerns.
DISTRIBUTED RISK ASSESSMENT
AND MANAGEMENT (DRAM)
Another advantage of following the business structure in performing a risk
assessment is to facilitate what I call Distributed Risk Assessment and Man-
agement (DRAM). The logic behind this is to distribute responsibility for being
aware of and managing the risk to the level of the organization where the risk
most commonly occurs. By doing so the organization has a much better chance
of managing and controlling its risk because responsibility has been dissemi-
nated. This goes back to the point made in the preface that complying with
Sarbanes-Oxley can only really be accomplished on an ongoing basis by
distributing the responsibility for risks and controls across the organization.
Each and every executive, departmental manager, and their subordi-
nates must be responsible for the risks that normally occur within their
respective areas of responsibility. It is impossible for an executive sitting at the
top of a very large organization to really have the pulse of that organization
on an ongoing basis—daily. Without disseminating the responsibility for risk
management and assessment across the organization, there is absolutely no
way that an executive can attest to the fact that the organization is in control
and risk-free.
By making everyone in the organization responsible for their own individ-
ual risk areas, it is possible that an ongoing basis risk could be detected early
and mitigated immediately. As you can imagine, however, this cannot be done
Distributed Risk Assessment and Management (DRAM)
n
77

INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS
BIG Manufacturing Co.
14%
WESTERN EUROPE
CONSUMER PRODUCTS
5%
ASIA
CONSUMER PRODUCTS
11%
EASTERN EUROPE
CONSUMER PRODUCTS
12%
Atlanta
NORTH AMERICA
8%
Los Angeles
NORTH AMERICA
11%
Chicago
NORTH AMERICA
75%
Denver
NORTH AMERICA
6%
Plant #2
Chicago
21%
Plant #1
Chicago
79%
Shop Floor Manuf.
Plant #1
95%
Inventory Control
Plant #1
3%
Machine Ctr. #436
Shop Floor Manuf.
58%
Engineering
Plant #1
1%
Supply Chain Mgmt
Plant #1
1%
SOUTH AMERICA
CONSUMER PRODUCTS
3%
NORTH AMERICA
CONSUMER PRODUCTS
69%
GOVERNMENTAL
BIG Manufacturing Co.
11%
CONSUMER PRODUCTS
BIG Manufacturing Co.
75%
BIG Manufacturing Co.
10,000 LTI
100%
LOGICAL DATA PATHWAY––
LOST TIME INJURIES –– %
HIERARCHY ANALYSIS
FIGURE 4.1
Logical Data Pathway
78

manually: this creates the obvious need for the task to become data-centric.
This implies by deﬁnition that systems must be created with great care and with
the primary focus being on risk and the mitigation of risk.
When such systems are properly implemented, there is virtually no risk
that cannot be timely detected and dealt with immediately. Implementing such
a methodology obviously lessens any type of negative impact to a very
signiﬁcant degree, clearly leading to a stronger ﬁnancial and operational
position for the organization. The natural result of this is a better-run
organization, a more cost-effective organization, and then by deﬁnition, a
more market-competitive organization. All of these things will eventually lead
to market dominance for any organization practicing these principles on an
ongoing basis.
The various risks that can be experienced by an organization are numer-
ous, but the key to the success of ERM is determining a highly effective way of
evaluating and managing risk. The discussion of utilizing data and analytics as
the baseline for ERM will be undertaken in Chapter 5.
Distributed Risk Assessment and Management (DRAM)
n
79

5
CHAPTER FIVE
Objectively Deﬁning
Risk
DEFINING RISK IN THE CONTEXT OF THE BUSINESS
When we talk about deﬁning risk in the context of the business, we mean that
risk must somehow be systematically related to how the business runs.
Universally, every organization is measured ﬁnancially and operationally,
utilizing data. It stands to reason then that if you are going to measure risk
in the context of the organization you must use business terms and conditions
to express that risk—because every organization is a business because they all
take in money and they all disperse money. So it does not really matter whether
the organization is a governmental body, or a nontaxable or taxable corpora-
tion. Each of these is a business and prepares measurements of their success or
failure just like any other business.
The best vehicle to accomplish the measurement of risk would then be to
use the data that the organization generates. Data is the universal language of
management and of business. It provides a common vehicle of understanding,
so that virtually anybody who understands the numbers or measures can easily
interpret the results in relation to risk. Armed with some limited knowledge of
the business and some factual measures of the organization, the determination
of risk within a speciﬁc business segment can be systematically evaluated. Once
determined, the behavior pattern of the data quickly paints a picture of risk, or
no risk, in virtually every situation where it is correctly targeted.
80

It is also very important to note that only then can the risk be recognized—
and its impact estimated and its probability calculated. Data is critical to all of
these primary functionalities, and without the data any kind of risk assessment,
if it could be called that, is pure speculation. The business generates data on an
ongoing basis, which allows for dynamic data collection and as such the ability
to evaluate risk continuously.
USING THE BUSINESS-DEFINED DATA STRUCTURE
If we are going to successfully evaluate risk in any business situation, we are
going to have to use the parameters that are most closely associated with
the subject matter. It is no secret that every business and organizational
structure is unique in their own special ways. Therefore the data that is used to
measure the risk will vary by organization, process, and functionality. In
essentially every situation, when measuring risk the best point of reference is
measuring yourself against yourself. One of the great mistakes made in decision
making is to benchmark against what can be the unknown.
It is unwise to employ benchmarking unless you have deﬁnitive knowledge
about the methods used to gather the benchmarking information, the integrity
of the gathering process, and the one-to-one correlation to your speciﬁc
situation. As with people, it would be a virtual impossibility that two organiza-
tions would be exactly the same in all aspects or even signiﬁcantly similar.
Therefore, it would stand to reason that the chances you would end up matching
at least a section of an orange with the core of an apple is a very high probability.
The issues that complicate benchmarking businesses are the following:
n
No two businesses have the same management structure.
n
No two businesses have the same systems.
n
No two businesses have the same business model.
n
No two businesses have the exact same geographic location.
n
No two businesses have the exact same infrastructure.
n
No two businesses have the exact same customer base.
WHY USE DATA TO DEFINE RISK? THE
THREE ATTRIBUTES
It is important to realize that risk assessment has three critical attributes that
must be satisﬁed. When utilizing traditional ‘‘risk assessment’’ that is performed
Why Use Data to Deﬁne Risk? The Three Attributes
n
81

using subjective-based judgment, it is important to note that risk assessment
cannot truly be accomplished. As mentioned in Chapter 2, to truly perform risk
assessment you must employ the following three attributes:
1. Identify the risk
2. Calculate the probability of occurrence
3. Determine the impact/exposure
Identifying the risk event is one of the most critical disciplines of the entire
exercise. It is amazing in many cases how people cannot distinguish between
risk events and exposures, which are often confused with one another.
Exposures or impacts are the aftermath or result of a risk event taking place.
For example, you walk across the street with a blindfold on without taking
any precautions. Being hit by a car or other vehicle is the potential risk event
that could take place. The probability of being hit and injured by a vehicle is
directly related to the time of day and volume of trafﬁc on the street, as well as
the attentiveness of the drivers. You could safely make it to the other side, or be
struck by a vehicle, risk event occurs, sustaining minor or major injuries or in
fact you could die. These are your potential exposures.
Risk events are those things that could occur that would have an adverse
impact on the organization and/or person and in most cases would be highly
undesirable. Identifying risk events is an extremely important exercise in that
there are numerous risk events that take place on a daily basis. The critical
discipline that must be employed is the identiﬁcation of those risks that are
really signiﬁcant to the business.
This should not be an exercise in trying to list as many things as possible
that can go wrong in any given time period just for the sake of building a
massive risk register. Building a risk register for an enterprise risk management
environment should not be an exercise in quantity but an exercise in quality.
The most critical aspect of this is to make sure that each and every person
understands that when risk is identiﬁed it is a key risk to the organization that
must be addressed with some type of appropriate risk response.
There should be well-disciplined roles put into place for people to follow,
and they should not be disregarded. If we have a lack of discipline in the process,
it will simply lead to an accumulation of risk events that may be important in
some aspects, but are not critical to the organization as a whole. For that
reason, before embarking on any exercise of building a risk register for an
organization, there must be very explicit procedures and methodologies set out,
and they must be followed on a consistent basis.
82
n
Objectively Deﬁning Risk

The calculation of the probability of occurrence must employ the use of
data as a critical part of the methodology. The probability of occurrence is one
of the two critical aspects that determines whether a risk is worthy of
management, or control, or not. An example of how probability should not
be used would be the following. I once saw a risk assessment that was created at
a very high cost by a large consulting ﬁrm that had as one of the risks in the risk
register the possibility of a direct meteor strike on the corporate headquarters. I
immediately laughed out loud at the idiocy of this type of observation. What is
the point of making this type of risk part of the enterprise risk management
schema?
First of all, it would not take a direct strike on the corporate headquarters to
bring about impending disaster. Second, what exactly will you do about it as a
risk response: build a large protective bubble over corporate headquarters for
the purpose of deﬂecting the meteor as it speeds toward earth? But the most
important question to ask is, ‘‘What is the probability of occurrence?’’ It is
clearly very small, or virtually nonexistent. Therefore by deﬁnition this type of
risk and its related probability should be taken off of the radar screen of risks to
be considered in any realistic enterprise risk management scenario.
What we want to see is the realistic determination of probability for those
risks that are likely to impact the business in some unfavorable fashion. We do
not want to go off the deep end to consider all possibilities, even those with
clearly no relationship to probability. For every key risk that is identiﬁed to the
organization, there must be a corresponding accurate probability that is
determined by the enterprise risk management personnel.
This probability must be determined based upon some type of relevant
factual information, however. In subjective-based models, people try and score
the probability of risk events and the fact that they may occur, based on their
predetermined views of the world. But what is the relevance and what is the
accuracy of such practices? The one key thing that will always undermine this
type of practice is lack of consistency. As we all know, every person that sits
down to perform any task will always do it differently from another person
tasked with the exact same exercise. In addition, it is also true that the very
same person will perform the same exercise differently given a different time
and different space scenario. You know as well as I do you will not do the exact
same thing in a given situation from one day to the next.
For example, you will not write a report exactly the same on Friday as you
would write it on Monday. The reason is the version on Friday will tend to be
much more optimistic based on the upcoming weekend and your intent to go
out and have a good time. The one on Monday will be much more, shall we say
Why Use Data to Deﬁne Risk? The Three Attributes
n
83

downbeat, due to the fact that the good times are now over. Also any subjective
parts of the report will in fact be inﬂuenced by space and time and your attitude
at that very moment.
The one thing, however, that will remain unchanged is the data in the
report because the data will always be the data as it existed at the point at
which it was gathered. Therefore if probability is based on data and the data is
accepted as accurate and reliable, the estimate of probability will be a much
truer reﬂection of the situation. Virtually all things can be measured in the
world with the high degree of technology and competence we have today, and
so why would we guess at probability when it can be calculated or evaluated
using facts? As an oversimpliﬁed example, if you are trying to determine the risk
of getting wet and whether you should take an umbrella, wouldn’t it make
more sense to look out of a window, instead of sitting in a closed room and
guessing?
Consider Figure 5.1. The graph represents a summarization of ﬁve key
business risks calculated using mean dispersion analysis, or distance from the
mean as a criteria. The bars on the graph are the summarization of the key
operational risks that occurred at each one of the locations relative to their key
outcomes. The key operational outcomes were deﬁned as follows:
1. Maximization of extraction of materials by tons
2. Maximization of materials at the lowest cost per ton
3. Maximization of the selling price per ton
4. Maintaining a safe work environment
5. Maximizing the up time on the equipment utilized for extraction
The key risks then are the inverse of these outcomes and are measured by
the relevant metrics associated with each of these outcomes. When the
outcomes are not achieved, measured by the most relevant key risk indicators
(KRIs), the process and, by association, the business are at risk.
Each of these KRIs was extracted from information that is already readily
reported to the organization as a whole. The cost factors can be extracted from
the Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system, the production amounts can
be extracted from operational statistics, the safety data was extracted from the
safety database, and the maintenance information was extracted from the
maintenance database.
By looking at the graphical depiction, it becomes clear which locations are
incurring the maximum risks. These business risks were utilized because they
are the key business risks of these types of operations. Based on the information
84
n
Objectively Deﬁning Risk

presented if you are an operations manager in charge of these areas, and/or an
auditor who was responsible for reviewing the riskiest parts of the enterprise,
which locations would you choose to devote your valuable resources toward in
addressing these risks?
I would hope that nobody would want to debate as to whether it’s clear or
not clear in this scenario. If the same exercise was conducted subjectively, you
would get many various opinions relative to where the risk was, how important
it was, and whether it should be addressed. The facts make it perfectly clear as
to where the risks exist, whether the probability of occurrence is high, and
where precisely the risk is centered. Now, some people may argue that in these
cases the risk has already occurred, which could or could not be true, in that
FIGURE 5.1
Mining Key Outcomes—Risk Indicators
Why Use Data to Deﬁne Risk? The Three Attributes
n
85

the events may be still in the ofﬁng as a result of the data measured and the
timing. The key lessons to be learned in this scenario are that in a data-based
model of risk assessment the ﬁrst versions of the models will be reactive by
nature.
It goes back to the old adage that you must look backward to look forward.
In other words, you must know your baseline in history to predict the future.
Therein lies the key as to why data-based analysis of risk is so valuable. The ﬁrst
models are reactive by nature, but once the pattern has been established and
you have drawn the line in the sand, all future models become predictive from
that point forward.
In regard to impact analysis, there is absolutely no way to calculate impact
of any accuracy without using data and facts. Every risk must have a
calculation or evaluation of the impact that it may have on the organization.
As discussed in the previous section, impact analysis is critical to understanding
the true importance to be placed on the risk in the enterprise risk management
(ERM) environment. You not only have to consider the impact of the immedi-
ate risk event, but also the impact of the aligned risks that have occurred as a
result of the original risk event taking place. Knowing this helps enterprise risk
management to start to place increased emphasis on those risk events that
have the potential to bring about large-scale detrimental impacts both primary
and aligned to the organization.
It is clear that conditions 2 and 3 cannot be satisﬁed without the utilization
of data. There is absolutely no possibility of calculating probability or determin-
ing real impact without using data. That is why all traditional ‘‘risk assess-
ment’’ methodology that is subjectively based is not truly risk assessment. It is
simply a listing of risks with someone’s best guess applied to it. That raises
another very interesting question. If you went to a medical laboratory for a test
to determine whether you were fatally ill with cancer, what would you want
the lab technicians to do? Simply guess, or would you like them to use the
factual information derived from the sample and the testing process to deter-
mine your condition?
If we live in a world where all information is delivered virtually immedi-
ately by some kind of factual representation of the events, why would we
want to resort to archaic methods of evaluating risk when real information is
readily available? These issues are critical to the effectiveness of risk man-
agement for each and every organization. I do not think that you would want
to trust such a valuable endeavor to guesswork. It is imperative that all risk
assessment be objective/fact-based to ensure that an accurate risk assess-
ment is performed.
86
n
Objectively Deﬁning Risk

DATA-CENTRIC ERM (DCERM)
Data-centric ERM (DCERM) is a concept that is ﬁnally getting some much-
needed attention. It is becoming eminently clear that data-centric risk assess-
ment is the preferable method of establishing a real-world view of the risks of an
organization. All one has to do is look around business as we know it today to
determine the importance of data in its everyday operation. We spend hun-
dreds of billions of dollars a year implementing new systems in organizations
around the world. Why is this done? Clearly, the obvious conclusion is for the
generation and creation of data to better run the organization. To put it in
perspective I asked myself three questions many, many years ago to try and get
focused on where my energies as an auditor should be concentrated:
1. What of any importance takes place on a daily basis in any organization
that does not touch a computer?
2. What is the most valuable asset an organization has that does not appear
in its ﬁnancial statements?
3. How long would an organization last if it lost all of its critical data?
The answer to the ﬁrst question, of course, is virtually nothing. In most
organizations to effect good perimeter security, you cannot even walk into the
building without going through the badge-in process. What does that mean? It
means that immediately upon entry you have created a data footprint that says
you are entitled to be on the premises or you are not. Utilizing that data, the
organization can immediately evaluate the risk of an interloper on the premises
if, for instance, you must be signed onto an information system to be
performing your job. A simple comparison of the persons who have badged-
in with the persons who are signed on can yield instantaneously an increased
risk on the premises of someone who does not belong there.
The answer to the second question is data. Some people may respond with
the answer that it is people; however, if you were to place a value on all of the
data of the organization it would have to be equal to the net value of the
organization. It is virtually impossible today to run any size organization
whatsoever without its critical data. The ultimate risk to most organizations
today would be a loss of and/or the inability to utilize their critical data.
The answer to the third question is perhaps days, hours, minutes, and in
some instances, seconds. It wasn’t that many years ago when an organization
could in fact revert back to manual procedures to run their business success-
fully. Today this is a virtual impossibility.
Data-Centric ERM (DCERM)
n
87

So having answered the three questions, what is the signiﬁcance of what
we have determined? The determination is that data is the only common
element that welds an organization together. It is also the only universal
element that everybody in the world understands. In other words, when I
travel around the world to discuss risk I do not have to speak each and every
language of every location when addressing that subject matter. If I present an
example discussing risk that contains data and I show a trend analysis or data
pattern, everybody sees the same thing I do. They see the risk manifesting itself
in the objective data and factual information; it does not need to be explained
and in many instances does not even need to be addressed in minute detail. The
risk is clear, and everybody understands it.
The COSO/ERM Model with its extensive emphasis on risk assessment was a
very signiﬁcant step forward. If you look at the individual components of the
framework in detail, you will ﬁnd numerous references to the use of data as it
relates to the practice of risk assessment. You’ll see references to key process
indicators, or KPIs (a concept that will be discussed in the next section),
threshold triggers, and other key measures that can be utilized for the objective
assessment of risk. This is a signiﬁcant step forward in that it comes from one of
the most signiﬁcant inﬂuences on today’s business environment, namely the
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations (COSO). The model ﬁnally issued in
October 2004 presents a framework for how all organizations should assess risk.
Even though it advocates data to only a limited extent, it still presents the
concept, and that is an extremely important step forward in getting people to
understand that data is a critical part of an ERM environment that will be
effective and efﬁcient.
MULTI-DIMENSIONAL RISK ASSESSMENT
Multi-Dimensional Risk Assessment can be thought of in a number of different
ways. It can be the evaluation of the intensity of risks that occur at various
levels of the organization when allied or associated risks are triggered by a
singular risk event, the Multiplied Organizational Risk Effect (MORE) and The
Risk Evolution Chain (TREC) concepts discussed in Chapter 3. It can also be the
process of evaluating a number of different risks using a singular risk indicator
or set of indicators. The key objective in evaluating risk using data is to try to
minimize the data and maximize the risk assessment. In other words, you want
to evaluate as many risks and/or risk events as possible using the exact same
data elements.
88
n
Objectively Deﬁning Risk

For instance, evaluating risk across an enterprise can be accomplished
many times by using the exact same indicators for similar operations, processes,
systems, and so on. It should never be the objective to maximize the number of
key risk indicators; this is usually a situation in which more is not necessarily
better. To accomplish this, you could use universal risk indicators that have the
ability to evaluate more than one risk and also to evaluate the same risk across
similar situations.
The best way to accomplish this is to set up what are known as universal risk
proﬁles. Universal risk proﬁles can be employed to look at risk across many
different aspects of the enterprise for the purpose of consistency, efﬁciency, and
effectiveness in the enterprise risk management methodology. To illustrate, let us
use a couple of examples: one IT example and a soft skill management example.
The IT example is the most straightforward way to evaluate the risk of
failure and processing accuracy within application systems. In developing
metrics for evaluating the stability of an application system my BADSYS, or bad
system proﬁle, could be employed:
n
Downtime
n
Help desk incidents volume
n
User change request volume
n
Abends (abnormal termination of job stream)/with emergency ﬁx
procedures-volume
n
Suspense ﬁle volume
n
Maintenance expenses volume
n
Number of signiﬁcant recovery events
An example in banking environments of a universal risk indicator that
could be applied across the bank would be the following. Every bank experi-
ences the situation of having abandoned property where the client has died or
lost track of the property itself. This abandoned property must be maintained
for a period of time within the control of the bank by law, and then it is
escheated to the appropriate state authority at the end of that time frame.
Obviously, it poses a signiﬁcant risk if the property is lost, stolen, or otherwise
compromised while in the possession of the bank. A universal indicator that
could be utilized throughout the banking system to evaluate these types of risk
would be the number of accesses granted to dormant accounts, and/or the
number of attempted accesses to the dormant accounts.
The management soft skills example is interesting in that most people
would maintain that you cannot evaluate the risk of soft skills. This is totally
Multi-Dimensional Risk Assessment
n
89

untrue as you can evaluate the risk of soft skills with hard facts and data. For
example, if you are trying to isolate a bad manager you could use my BADMAN,
or bad manager proﬁle, as follows:
n
Employee turnover statistics
n
Number of requests for transfer
n
Complaints to human resources
n
Maximizing the use of vacation days
n
Maximizing the use of sick days
n
Maximizing the use of personal time off
n
Refusal to work overtime
n
High number of unexcused absences
If you apply these indicators to a population of employees all under the
control of the single manager and found that the statistics were universally
moving in a negative direction it would be extremely clear that a bad manager
is in evidence. The following are some of the potential risks associated with this
situation:
n
Highly talented employees could be driven out of the organization by a
person like this.
n
Turnover expenses will be extremely high as well as new recruitment
efforts/costs.
n
The entire organization’s image as a place to work could be negatively
impacted.
n
Productivity will be minimal.
n
The chances of being litigated as a result of this person’s activities are
extremely high.
The whole idea is to maximize the ability to evaluate risk objectively while
minimizing the amount of input and/or data or information that would be
required. Developing a set of universal risk indicators that can be employed
across the enterprise will allow you to dynamically assess risk on a continuous
basis with minimal effort once the system is established. By developing a set of
universal risk indicators, you will minimize maintenance and maximize
outcome.
If an enterprise risk management environment is going to function
successfully, it must be based upon a good foundation. The best and most
solid foundation for enterprise risk management is the utilization of a well-
90
n
Objectively Deﬁning Risk

deﬁned, well-organized set of risk events supported by an effective set of risk
indicators. The KRIs can then be used to calculate probability and also to
estimate impact if properly designed.
Building an effective ERM environment should never be viewed as a short-
term business objective, but rather a strategic initiative for the long-term well-
being of the organization.
Now that we have introduced the concept of supporting risk assessment
and management with metrics and data, we will now expand the conversation
to analytics and specialized types of risk indicators. This will set the basis for
the conversation about how a data-centric ERM environment can and should
be built.
Multi-Dimensional Risk Assessment
n
91

6
CHAPTER SIX
Building a Fluid/
Dynamic Risk Model
THE MODEL AND WHY IT IS NECESSARY
It willrequiredisciplineandpatienceto buildaﬂuid/dynamic ERMenvironment;
however, the rewards of doing it will yield a highly effective universal gov-
ernance model that will be unsurpassed by anybody in your industry. Building a
risk model of this nature is a strategic initiative that every CEO and board of
directors should have an active interest in pursuing. Again invoking the mantra
of how we live in this day and age, valuing the immediacy of information, why
would you not want a data-centric ERM environment evaluating your organi-
zation? Organizations today are extremely complex, and they are overwhelming
to oversee physically. However, with the appropriately designed ERM environ-
ment logical oversight would become the mode of operation.
It has now become impossible in most instances to oversee any of these
organizations physically with a high degree of effectiveness. All Boards of
Directors and key executives should be mandating the building of a model like
this. Providing the ability to oversee things logically is the only way in which
effective governance can be achieved. We have long passed the time where we
can rely on reactionary measures, or simply not knowing, if we want to be
leaders in our particular industries.
92

The assumption that these organizations could be leaders of their indus-
tries is premised on the fact that when these models are built people will pay
attention to them. Why would I say this? It seems almost impossible for me to
believe that sophisticated organizations like Lehman Brothers, Merrill Lynch,
and so on did not have risk models screaming at them that they were
overcommitted to dangerous investments in subprime mortgages. I wouldn’t
think for a moment that big red ﬂags were not waving in front of the key
executives of these organizations on a regular basis. If they weren’t, then I
stand corrected.
However, this would imply by deﬁnition that they did not have advanced
data-driven risk models to be utilized in running these organizations. That
would simply enforce my position that it is absolutely essential that these
models be built and utilized on a day-to-day basis to manage our large-scale
enterprises effectively.
These models can be as simple or as complicated as you would like to make
them. Using a commonsense approach, I would opt for as simple as can be
tolerated. When more sophistication is required, however, it should certainly
be built into the model, as that will yield the maximum beneﬁt to the
organization.
Every organization is unique; that is why all risk assessment must be
custom built to the organization itself. There is no such thing as a one-size-ﬁts-
all risk assessment and management model. The model must be built with an
eye toward the present and the future, and should never be shortsighted in how
it is designed, or it will cease to be effective as you move forward, and you will
suffer for it as an organization.
We will now discuss some of the key attributes of a ﬂuid/dynamic
risk model that need to be taken into account should you undertake this
journey.
MOVING FROM REACTIVE TO PROACTIVE
RISK MANAGEMENT
As mentioned previously any time you set about trying to evaluate risk
assessment using data, you must establish a realistic link with the past.
What that means is that you must become grounded in history in order to
predict the future in most instances. By the very nature of how all these models
are built, you will be utilizing data in a historical context to determine the most
effective way to evaluate risk in the future.
Moving from Reactive to Proactive Risk Management
n
93

As a result, the ﬁrst few models will be reactive by deﬁnition. However, once
you establish the baseline in data to be able to evaluate risk looking forward,
you’ll be accomplishing the entire purpose of risk assessment in the ﬁrst place.
That iswhat must beaccomplished eventually,namelythe ability to predict, with
a high degree of accuracy, the risk before it occurs. That is the one key advantage
that a data-driven risk model can yield that a subjective-based model can never
accomplish, predicting the future with a certain degree of accuracy.
To reduce this to a very simple illustration, a risk model that is capable of
predicting risk is like driving an automobile looking through the windshield and
being able to see someone in the road before you run over him. Doing the risk
assessment subjectively and reacting to risks that were not in fact predicted will
always make you reactive. This is the equivalent of driving an automobile
down the road looking only in the rearview mirror and never out of the
windshield. The long-term result of driving an automobile that way is quite
predictable, eventually you will crash and burn and kill numerous other
innocent bystanders along the way.
It is essential that every model that is to be effectively employed in
managing risk today has the required features necessary to predict risk
tomorrow, next week, next year, in the next decade, and eventually in the
next century.
OUTCOME/RAW (OR) DATA AND WHY IT IS CRITICAL
When building an objectively based risk model, you cannot simply use any type
of data. The data must have speciﬁc qualities. Some data lends itself to doing
risk analysis; other data does not. That may sound unusual; however, when we
review the key aspects of data that is effective for risk assessment, you will
understand the difference.
There are two key qualities that data should have to be used most
effectively in building an objectively based risk model. If data possesses both
of these key qualities it is called OR (Outcome/Raw) data. The ﬁrst quality of
data is that it is outcome-focused data. As discussed in Chapter 5, it is imperative
that when you perform risk assessment you concentrate on what are the
critical outcomes of the business. These can be designated as business objec-
tives, goals, or outcomes.
Why is this important? It is important because every key business subset (a
process, an operation, a program, etc.) should have a set of desired outcomes
that are to be achieved by that logical business subset. In performing risk
94
n
Building a Fluid/Dynamic Risk Model

management, one of the easiest ways to think about it is to simply take what
are the key outcomes of the business, and then determine the risk, which by
logical deduction is the inverse of the outcome. In other words, if the outcome
has not been achieved then the process, operation, or whatever is at risk.
Therefore, if we have already identiﬁed the key outcomes of the business,
by deﬁnition anytime the outcome has not been achieved that part of the
business is at risk. The key thing that we want to identify once we know the
outcome is the measure that will in fact correctly reﬂect whether the outcome
has been achieved or that the outcome has failed to be achieved. When we can
isolate that particular measure, then we can successfully evaluate risk on a
total logical basis using automation and systems. In later sections of this
chapter, we will give examples of the types of data that you would utilize to
evaluate outcomes. In Chapter 5 we referred to the BADMAN and BADSYS
proﬁles as indicators of the failure to achieve the desired outcomes. The desired
outcomes in these situations were effective management and a stable system
environment.
The second quality of data that is highly effective in determining risk is raw
data. Raw data is necessary to effectively evaluate risk throughout the
organization. What is raw data? Raw data is any data element that stands
on its own and has meaning on its own. In other words, when you see the raw
data element or raw data elements trending in a particular direction, you can
decipher quite easily what the risks are and whether your risk position is
increasing or decreasing.
There are two basic types of data, raw and blended. Blended data is the
combination of one or more raw data elements to form a new data element.
However, the problem with blended data is that in many cases it is not clear
what it means. When it changes it is not known by just looking at it what is
causing it to change. It could be one of the underlying values, subsets of data, or
components that is causing it to change, but the question is which one.
Therefore by logical extension, blended data is virtually useless in the analysis
of risk and should never be used as a Key Risk Indicator (KRI).
An excellent example to illustrate the difference in the usefulness of raw
data and blended data for decision making and risk analysis is a stoplight.
When you see a red light, nothing else needs to be known; you must stop. The
red light is the raw data element, and it conveys a message that is crystal clear
for everybody to understand. The same can be said for the green light: when
you see the green light, it indicates you can go. You do not need to know
anything else at that point, except of course if some crazy idiot is running a red
light. But that is all part of risk assessment.
Outcome/Raw (OR) Data and Why It Is Critical
n
95

The thing that gets confusing on a stoplight is yellow. Yellow could be used
to illustrate the concept of a blended data element. The problem when you
encounter a blended data element is that you do not know exactly what the
data element is telling you. Therefore, you may react in a number of different
ways, or you may interpret the data element incorrectly. For instance, on a
yellow light some people may take that as a cue to go faster and get through the
light, while others would take that as a cue to slow down and stop because the
red light is coming.
The problem is you never quite know what a person is going to do because
they have a decision to make, because their options are not clear. A good
example of this type of data and one that is commonly used in ﬁnancial circles is
called revenue. Revenue is frequently used to discuss the success or failure of an
organization; however, as an indicator of risk it is actually quite useless. The
problem with revenue is that it is clearly a blended data element. As discussed
previously, a blended data element is of little or no value whatsoever in the
evaluation of risk. The burning question that will be raised by the following
example is why do people utilize revenue at all in the determination of risk, yet
it is done all the time?
Figure 6.1 is a graphic depiction of revenue and its two base-state data
elements. Revenue can be any number of combinations of things, depending
upon how it is represented in a set of ﬁnancial statements. However, in its base
state of existence it is the combination of two raw data elements: volume and
price. As can be seen in Figure 6.1, the revenue curve appears to be ﬁne, does
not indicate risk, and would not cause alarm. In other words, it is not risky.
FIGURE 6.1
Revenue Curve—Blended Data
96
n
Building a Fluid/Dynamic Risk Model

Now before we discuss the second two graphs, let us defray some of the
economics arguments. In this example it is assumed that this is a highly
competitive industry where price elasticity dominates. Therefore by deﬁnition
this is a marketplace where the customer will always exit for best price. These
products here are not Porsches or Ferraris.
When you look at Figures 6.2 and 6.3, volume ﬁrst and then price, it
becomes painfully obvious that the organization that is represented by these
graphs is in very bad shape. By looking at the volumes it is clear that its
products are in the maturity and decline stage of their life cycles. This would
FIGURE 6.2
Unit Sales Volume—Raw Data
FIGURE 6.3
Pricing Trend—Raw Data
Outcome/Raw (OR) Data and Why It Is Critical
n
97

indicate by deﬁnition that there had better be some extremely well-focused
research and development (R&D) going on in the organization, or the long-
term prognosis of this situation is extremely bad.
In addition, by deﬁnition the rapid acceleration of the price curve is not a
sustainable strategy in this marketplace/industry. If the company is to sustain
any type of volumes whatsoever, it is going to have to reverse this pricing
tendency and take a much more conservative pricing approach. If there are not
viable products coming out of R&D and in fact the prices do decline, then you
are going to start seeing a rapid turndown in the revenue curve of this
organization. This of course will spell doom in the long term.
The point of this illustration is to indicate just how badly you can interpret
a situation if the wrong type of data is utilized for risk assessment. Therefore it is
absolutely essential that when utilizing data for any type of risk assessment you
must employ a very fundamental philosophy. All data must be outcome-focused
and raw (OR) data by deﬁnition. The worst mistake you can make in performing
any type of risk assessment objectively is to select the wrong type of data
elements and therefore interpret the risk incorrectly. However, if you employ a
very simple commonsense approach and stick to these fundamental types of
data, you should be quite successful in evaluating your risk logically.
KRIs NOT KPIs
Distinguishing between key risk indicators (KRIs) and key process indicators
(KPIs) is quite straightforward. Key risk indicators have the characteristics that
we just discussed in the previous sections. In other words, those data elements
that would be KRIs would be outcome-focused and raw data elements.
Quite honestly, what is wrong with most corporations and organizations is
that they measure KPIs that are output-focused. The reason for this, un-
fortunately, is that KPIs are easy to manipulate since they are, in fact, output-
focused. The measurement of outputs, however, does virtually nothing for you
in the context of recognizing risk that may be present or potentially going to
impact the organization negatively.
For instance, what makes the most sense to measure in the following
scenario? Is it more important that General Motors measure that they built
10,000 automobiles in a day or that the cars can be started and driven to the
appropriate shipping points at the end of the assembly line? If they manufacture
10,000 cars in a day but 9,000 of them cannot be driven away from the end of
the assembly line in a condition of high quality, then what was really
98
n
Building a Fluid/Dynamic Risk Model

accomplished? Obviously very little, or nothing has actually been accomplished
at all. With a 90 percent failure rate from a quality perspective, then the risk
that a good sound automobile cannot be built on that assembly line is
extremely high and certainly unacceptably high.
Therefore, one of the ﬁrst steps that should be undertaken to move in the
direction of a logically based, objectively driven risk model is to redeﬁne the way
we measure success or failure in our organizations. Any executive and/or Board
of Directors that is truly intent on managing risk in an organization must clearly
controlthewaythatthingsaremeasuredifeffectivegovernanceistobeachieved.
Building an effective set of KRIs requires a certain degree of talent and
expertise. One of the reasons you do not see inventories of KRIs is that people
have not really undertaken the challenge of building effective risk indicators
that are objectively based. This results from the fact that virtually all risk
models built up until this point in time, with the exception of certain models in
the banking industry, have always been subjective in nature.
I believe that this is going to be a science that people are going to become
actively engaged in. I would envision that this practice will become a highly
sought-after profession. By deﬁnition those that are proﬁcient at it will become
valued members, if not the leaders, of most enterprise risk management groups
in the future.
KRIs provide the basis and foundation for a sound, objectively based risk
management environment. It is worth taking the time to ensure that we do it
right and that KRIs that are derived are accurate and reliable. All of this rests on
the premise that the data in the organization has integrity. Therefore, by
deﬁnition, we must be sure that our systems are yielding accurate and reliable
information on a consistent basis and that we are not being deluged with
inaccurate information.
As discussed in Chapter 1, we can have data, data everywhere, and still not
have any information. One thing to be cautious of, if we use data from a data
warehouse and/or data farm, whichever terminology you prefer, we must be
absolutely positively sure that the data has integrity back to its sourcing
system. If the data integrity in the data warehouse has not been proven back to
the source system, it should never be used for evaluating risk in any context, let
alone reporting key results.
I will present numerous examples of KRIs throughout various parts of the
administrative and operational sections of the organization in Chapter 7. These
can serve as examples of the types of indicators that should be sought out in
building a logically based model for risk management. It is imperative to build a
highly effective yet limited set of risk indicators so that they are manageable in
KRIs Not KPIs
n
99

the context of day-to-day operations of the risk management environment.
Again, remember the exercise here is not quantity but quality. Quality should
be the dominant factor in all efforts to build a logic-based risk environment.
OPTIONS ON HOW TO DRIVE THE MODEL
There are many ways in which a logic-based risk model can be driven. You can
start with a very simple and direct method of building a model to serve as a
foundation, and expand the model as your level of sophistication and ability to
automate grows in the future. Detailed in the following sections are various
options that could be pursued based upon your particular business model, mode
of operation, and degree of sophistication.
Cost Concentration
One of the most basic types of objective-based models can be set up around the
whole concept of cost concentration. In the past years of corporate evolution, it
has clearly become a point of vital concern to control costs. As regional markets
have given way to national markets and national markets have given way to
world markets, it has become increasingly obvious that the only way to be
successful in the world market today is to be cost-effective. Therefore, if the best
source of information you have is only your cost of operation, you can still build
an objective-based risk model that can be focused on one of the most critical
aspects of your organization’s survival. You can take any number of cost factors
as your primary point of risk emphasis. For example, some of the following may
be in order.
On a macro costs level these types of things could be thought about:
n
Research and development costs directly related to product development
tracked by product. These development costs should then be tracked
directly to the performance of the product in the marketplace. Where
the development costs are very high when compared to the performance of
the product in the marketplace, this may be indicative of poor and/or
ineffective research and development efforts within the organization.
n
Another example would be the cost of an advertising campaign to launch a
new product. The cost of the campaign should be tracked and matched
against the proﬁts realized from subsequent sales. If the proﬁts realized and
subsequent sales are not a very high multiple of the cost of the campaign,
some very serious risk may be in play within the advertising area such as
100
n
Building a Fluid/Dynamic Risk Model

the focus groups used to determine the market for the products were
inaccurate or the medium used to reach the target market was in-
appropriate: for example, utilizing newspapers to reach a 20- and 30-
something marketplace, where clearly the Internet with its numerous
social networking environments offers much better options.
On a micro cost level these types of things could be considered:
n
Material cost per unit sold—if the material cost for units sold is rising at a
rather escalated pace, it may be indicative of ineffective purchasing. It can
also be indicative of highly competitive conditions in the marketplace,
which means perhaps an alternative material should be employed in the
design of your product.
n
Labor cost per unit sold—if the labor cost per unit sold is extremely high, for
example, in a retail operation, it may be indicative of overstafﬁng and/or
perhaps not matching the level of stafﬁng to the customer ﬂow or trafﬁc
pattern at any point in time. However, you must be mindful of the fact that
minimal stafﬁng must be maintained to facilitate customer service should
the demand rapidly appear.
These are simple examples of the types of things that could be looked
at. However, if you desire, you can look at cost concentration on a much
broader scale to do a very straightforward type of risk assessment. For
instance, if you are evaluating the movie industry, you could look at
the cost concentration in the movie industry, which is predominantly
front-end loaded. In other words, if you are trying to minimize risk and
maximize reward in shooting the movie, you must keep your production
costs in line.
Unless there is unlimited potential in the marketplace for the ability to
generate proﬁts from ticket sales, a movie company must be cognizant of
the front-end cost factors of bringing the movie to the marketplace itself. If the
acceptability of the movie in the marketplace has been miscalculated, or the
costs are not within some degree of control, the risk of having an extremely
unsuccessful movie, or a ﬂop, is very high.
Process-Based Analysis
Process-based analysis is probably the most straightforward of any type of
enterprise risk management modeling. The reason is that all organizations, no
matter what types of operations they have, are nothing more than a set of
Options on How to Drive the Model
n
101

interrelated processes. The key question to concentrate on is this: What are the
processes that make this organization run, and how do we effectively evaluate
them from a risk perspective?
If you take a fundamental ﬁnancial process such as accounts receivable, it
is all based on some very straightforward concepts. The key outcomes of the
processes related to accounts receivable are as follows:
n
Invoice timely
n
Invoice accurately
n
Send the invoice to the right customer at the right location
n
Collect the cash
n
Accurately post all transaction activity
There is nothing mysterious about this in evaluating risk within this
process. One of the ways in which this can be done is to employ simple ratio
analysis. When the days in accounts receivable are rising this is indicative of some
fundamental risks, which could be any one of or more than one of the
following:
n
Bad economic times are strapping our customers’ cash ﬂow.
n
We have overextended customers by giving them too high credit limits
which they cannot now pay off.
n
Customers are dissatisﬁed with something that we have done and not
resolved, and are refusing to pay. Therefore it may be a service or product
quality issue.
n
It is a fraud situation, and there really is no customer at the other end of the
transaction.
n
We have invoiced customers inaccurately, and they are not going to pay
until the invoice is properly presented.
Another aspect of process-based analysis of risk is that in some processes
the risk is built-in and has become part of the process, or how the game is played
so to speak. Let’s look at something as fundamental as the budget process. The
budget process should be a critical process that is highly disciplined and highly
effective when operating within the context of any organization.
One of the most disappointing parts of most budget processes is that they
are more gamesmanship than fact. The reason for this is because the games
have become part of the process, and therefore by deﬁnition the risk is built into
the process and has become virtually inescapable. Let’s discuss a couple of
examples to illustrate the point being made.
102
n
Building a Fluid/Dynamic Risk Model

Take the revenue budget, for example. One of the key strategies of the sales
and marketing area is to soft sell the revenue line. In other words, they
understate what they know they can sell to ensure that they will be able to
make their sales targets and thereby earn their bonuses as has been the
tradition for a number of years.
That may be all well and good, but the problem that it creates is the
following. When, in fact, the revenue targets are understated in a normal
budget process, the capital budget (the money that is going to be used to build
the infrastructure of the organization) is tied to the revenue budget. What
then happens is clearly predictable and is a risk of great signiﬁcance to the
organization as a whole.
The revenue number is oversold by the sales people, thus achieving their
goals and earning their bonuses, which looks ﬁne on the surface. But let’s say
that they do this for ﬁve years in a row, and the amount that they oversell the
revenue line is 20 percent on average every year. What is the impact? It looks
great on paper, but they have created a very signiﬁcant capacity risk for the
organization by utilizing this practice.
As was mentioned, the capital budget is normally tied to the revenue
budget, but as the revenue budget is consistently oversold what happens is that
the infrastructure and the capital required to support the sales are constrained
artiﬁcially by the budget process. Eventually, a capacity problem develops, and
the customer’s needs can no longer be met utilizing the existing capabilities.
Therefore what eventually will happen is the inability to supply the customer
with the product and/or services, resulting in a loss of sales and customer base.
What is the data indicator that would reveal this problem? It would be a
highly favorable variance on the revenue line of the organization. The future
shortfall in capacity can be predicted by the excess on the revenue line and the
corresponding shortfall of capacity to support it.
Another favorite budget game is padding the expense lines by 50 percent to
make sure that when the budget is sent upstairs for the ceremonial 30 percent
chopping by the executives, there will still be a 20 percent cushion within the
expense areas. The same rules apply everywhere; just tell me what the game is,
and let’s play.
What is the data indicator here, and what is the risk? The data indicator is
favorable variances on all of the expense lines, which some people could
interpret as stellar performance and conservatism on the part of the individual
budgeted departments. This, of course, is totally untrue. What has really
happened is that they have artiﬁcially captured working capital within these
respective areas. The unfortunate consequence is that this gamesmanship has
Options on How to Drive the Model
n
103

deprived other areas of the organization of much-needed working capital,
which in this day and age may be hard to come by.
The resulting impact is that gamesmanship has constrained the growth
possibilities and perhaps forgone a needed critical expansion of the customer
base for the future of the organization.
We could go through numerous examples of these situations, but sufﬁce it
to say that budgeting is one of the most troublesome of all processes in the
context of the rest of the organization. It is meant to be a primary control
mechanism of the organization but ceases to do that in the common context of
how it is used.
As mentioned previously, the key is to concentrate on what the outcomes
of the deﬁned processes are that we are attempting to risk assess. Since all
organizations are made up of a number of interrelated processes, what we try to
determine is what the key outcome of each and every process is and how we
can then use that to evaluate the risk of the process.
One of the key reference points for this exercise should be the process
owner who, by deﬁnition, should be the most knowledgeable, and would be the
point person on trying to determine what the key outcomes of the process are.
It would be extremely frightening if we were to consult with the process owner
and he or she was unaware of what the key outcomes are. As an enterprise risk
management organization, we would not want to see that the process owners
are unfamiliar with their key outcomes and then are only able to discuss
outputs semi-intelligently.
When we look at the organization as a whole, we can take the corporate or
organizational mapping, which we discussed earlier and will visit in more detail
later, and then dissect the corporation or organizational structure process by
process. Every core part of the business, every critical support unit and
peripheral functionality of the organization are made up of key processes
that must function successfully every day.
The secret to determining effective enterprise risk management is to
decipher what these key processes do every day for a living and how we
would then evaluate that in the context of risk. Once we can determine what
the key risks of each and every process are, then the next logical step and logical
leap would be to ﬁgure out how we can measure them objectively and turn
those types of measurements into an objective-based risk model.
So in the context of how we would approach this, it would be a step-by-step
progression of looking at the business logically and then applying a logical data-
based methodology in evaluating the risk of the enterprise.
Every process should be evaluated in the context of its daily functionality;
for instance, the primary outcomes of the tax department are to make sure to
104
n
Building a Fluid/Dynamic Risk Model

pay any and all taxes that are due to the appropriate government authorities on
a timely basis—but also not to overpay taxes. So the key objective here would
be determined if this is being done and if not, why not. We can measure a
number of things that would indicate whether this is being accomplished in a
satisfactory manner.
For instance, we can look at ﬁling dates and determine how many days
prior to or subsequent to the ﬁling date the appropriate forms are ﬁled. If the
timeliness of ﬁling is delinquent on a continuous basis, it is pretty clear that the
tax department is not fulﬁlling one of its primary obligations to the organiza-
tion. In addition, we could look at a number of other things such as Private
Letter Rulings from the IRS. If the taxing authorities take exception to most of
the positions that our tax department have taken, we may want to evaluate the
risk of how aggressively we are being in our positioning.
In addition, we can review the organization’s expense accounts for ﬁnes
and penalties, and determine the amount of ﬁnes and penalties that taxing
authorities have been levying against the organization. This may indicate
that our tax department has been lax in its execution of its responsibilities.
However, if we do not see any type of Private Letter Rulings or we do not see
any type of aggressive tax positioning being undertaken by the tax department,
it may also indicate that we have a risk that they are not exploring important
opportunities.
Another example of areas of risk within the tax department would be the
payment of real estate and personal property taxes. One of the things that
should be in evidence is that real estate assessed valuations that have been
assigned to our properties are fair. If we were to see a signiﬁcant increase in our
real estate tax base and ultimate payment of taxes as a data indicator, then the
question should be raised as to whether this represents fair valuations of our
properties. We would expect that the tax department is aggressively pursuing
these types of questions with the tax assessor and ensuring that we are getting
a fair valuation of our properties and therefore our tax liabilities.
Another key data indicator would be a constant upward progression in the
payments made on personal property taxes in relation to our ﬁxed asset base. If
the ﬁxed asset base is shrinking and moreover our capital position has been
restrained in recent history, we would not expect to see signiﬁcant increases in
personal property taxes. In addition, if we have had a signiﬁcant number of
transfers and/or asset sales, we would also expect that the basis of the personal
property taxes would be reduced in those particular taxable jurisdictions where
the reductions in basis have taken place.
These are just some examples of the types of things that could be explored
on a process basis within the administration areas. We will discuss many more
Options on How to Drive the Model
n
105

of these types of situations as we get further into the process mapping of the
organization scenario.
Process Chaining
Process chaining is another method in which you can do both macro-level and
micro-level analysis of risk. Take, for example, the following situation in which
the macro-level analysis of a major risk indicator is then coupled with micro-
level analysis via process chaining. For example, I will take a high-level risk
indicator, or a macro-level indicator, for an organization in the manufacturing
industry. The scenario would be as follows.
Inventory turnover (ITO) is decreasing within the organization as a whole.
This is a rather signiﬁcant risk to the organization in that it ties up excessive
amounts of capital and is indicative of poor management on a number of fronts.
The most logical way in which this could then be analyzed from a risk
perspective would be to ﬁrst utilize the logical data pathway, or LDP, created
by the data. As it is reported upward from the process level to the corporate
enterprise level, you can pursue all those locations where the inventory
turnover has slowed the most. This is a concept that will be explored in
more detail in the mapping discussion.
Once the organizational units that are showing the greatest slowdown in
inventory turnover have been isolated, then the microanalysis of risk can take
over to determine where the root cause of the problem lies. The process would
be conducted as follows.
First, the process chain would be identiﬁed that would be utilized as the key
for pursuing the root cause of the inventory turnover problem.
The process chain to be used would be:
1. Sales forecasting
2. Order entry
3. Engineering
4. Production planning and control
5. Purchasing
6. Inventory control
7. Manufacturing
8. Pick, pack, and stage
9. Shipping
Once we have determined this process chain, then we can begin to analyze
logically where the root cause of the risk actually exists. This would be done by
106
n
Building a Fluid/Dynamic Risk Model

logically going through each link in this process chain and determining
objectively where the risk is resident and if that is a weak link in the chain.
In other words, the analysis is clearly a methodology of identifying the weak
links that are indicative of potential root causes of the problem. As can also be
seen, this is a very logical stepwise progression to analyze a situation. This will
be indicative of each and every tool that is utilized in this book.
The analysis would be pursued as follows, for each and every link in the
chain there would be an identiﬁed set of individual risk indicators that would be
utilized for the purposes of isolating potential root causal events. For the links in
the chain identiﬁed in this example, the following would be the key indicators
that would be pursued.
Sales Forecasting
For sales forecasting, the key data element to evaluate risk would be the
difference between the actual shipments and the sales forecast by product line.
If the sales forecast is actually the weak link in the chain, what you would
expect to see is a signiﬁcant gap between these two ﬁgures. What that implies
then by deﬁnition is that the sales forecast is driving the other functionalities
further down the chain to either build inventory that is not required and worse
additionally to have to build inventory that is selling, but not forecast.
Therefore, by deﬁnition, a very risky position is to have a sales forecast that
is radically different or even signiﬁcantly different from the actual sales being
experienced. In that case, the sales forecasting process would have to have an
extensive review to determine where the error conditions are creeping in. Is it
the result of outside events in the marketplace that were unusual and
unanticipated, and if so, why was this development not foreseen? Or is it
the result of an internal failure of the process itself?
Order Entry
Regarding order entry, if orders are received via the telephone, and/or are input
via the Internet, a number of undesirable risks can take place. For instance, if
the person taking the order via the telephone does not verify with a customer
the exact quantity that is being ordered, the person keying in the order could
input the quantity 10,000 by hitting one extra zero, or an additional keystroke,
when the customer in fact only desired 1,000. Without reveriﬁcation of the
quantity the risk becomes obvious. The same situation could occur on the
Internet if the customer goes to a screen and inputs the quantity for their order.
If there are no edit checks that force a customer to reverify the input quantity,
Options on How to Drive the Model
n
107

he too could input 10,000 by mistake when in fact he intended to order only
1,000. In both situations, the impact is as follows: 9,000 more units of the
product are shipped than are required by the customer.
The aligned risks that start to take place are as follows. We ship out an
excess of 9,000 units to one customer at the same time that other customers
are demanding those units; we then build and/or buy more of the units to meet
that demand. We are, of course, unaware at that time that there are 9,000
units that are pending return. What happens then is that we start to build
excess inventories when the 9,000 units return, which were unintended
shipments. The data indicator that can be utilized to isolate this type of problem
would be credit memoranda for units returned. When credit memoranda for
units returned are in evidence, they can only be the result of three other areas
of the identiﬁed process chain: order entry; pick, pack, and stage; and/or
shipping, if not the result of order entry. If these are in evidence, start to look in
order entry and work your way down.
Engineering
In the area of engineering, there are a number of things that can occur that will
lead to a signiﬁcant uptick in the inventory levels. The most common occur-
rence would be a change in the bill of materials (BOM). When engineering
makes changes to the bills of material in isolation, they may discontinue the use
of particular parts or subassemblies. The problem occurs when they do this
without consulting with inventory control to determine the number of the
items that are in physical inventory; with a keystroke they can deactivate
hundreds of thousands of units of inventory. This leads to inventory builds and
unacceptably high levels of inventories in such items.
The data indicators that would be indicative of this type of problem would
be obsolete and/or slow-moving inventories. Whenever this problem is in
evidence, a critical review of the process of making changes to the bills of
material must be undertaken.
Production Planning and Control
Production planning and control is another key player in the area of potential
inventory builds. How may they cause this problem, you might ask? It may be
traceable back to their compensation scheme. If by design they are compen-
sated for getting the productivity up in the facility, they may manufacture a
number of items that are called ‘‘bunnies’’ or ‘‘easy builds.’’ They do this to get
their productivity ratios higher. This creates an excess of nonsalable
108
n
Building a Fluid/Dynamic Risk Model

merchandise, which then must be inventoried. Once this occurs, your inven-
tories start to build, and inventory turnovers slow down as evidenced by the
decrease in the inventory turnover ratio.
The easiest way to isolate the risk in this area is as follows. If the sales
forecast is equal to or near equal to the actual shipments, its accuracy has
been proven. Therefore, production planning and control should be issuing
a production plan that is equal to the forecast of the organization. If this is
not being done, here lies part of the problem with inventory turnover
management.
Purchasing
Purchasing is the next in line. Just like production planning and control,
purchasing should be intricately linked to the sales forecast. In other words, if
the sales forecast is accurate, and the production plan is linked to the forecast,
then the next logical conclusion can only be that purchasing should be linked
to the production plan. If the data indicates that purchasing is buying in
quantities that are varying from the production plan, then purchasing is part of
the problem. Why would they do this? In the end, it may revert back to their
compensation scheme. They may be compensated to reduce the unit cost of
every item they purchase to the lowest possible level. The problem is that this
works against the best interests of the organization.
What will happen is the following. They will buy in large quantities to
maximize the quantity discounts from their vendors. The quantities will be far
in excess of what is required by the organization to meet its demands in the
production plan. What will eventually happen is that we will start to build
inventories that will be excessive and slow moving. We will write off more in
lost inventories or unusable inventory than we would have ever gained by the
savings in the original volume discounts. Therefore, one of the key data
indicators is excess and slow-moving inventories within our critical product
lines, but also you should take a good look at the compensation scheme of the
purchasing personnel.
Inventory Control
What in the world could inventory control possibly do to build inventories?
Also, why would they do that if it is not in their best interest? Not so fast. Key
activities that inventory control undertakes on a regular basis are called ‘‘cycle
counts.’’ These are done to compare the physical existence of the inventories to
the inventory stock status reports.
Options on How to Drive the Model
n
109

What may occur is that they will do a cycle count and detect a physical
overage of items relative to the stock status. However, there is a great
disincentive to having any type of inventory shortfall during the annual
year-end physical count. This again may go back to their compensation
scheme. As a result, they are unlikely to book the overages unless required
or mandated to do so.
Why, you might ask? Because they will then have a cushion going into
their year-end count and as a result are much more likely to have a physical
inventory gain as opposed to an undesirable shrink in inventories. The key data
indicators that could be reviewed in this situation to see if this risk is present is
to look at the recorded adjustments to the stock status after cycle counts have
been conducted.
If only negative adjustments are in evidence, that may indicate that
positive adjustments are not being made. This also raises the specter of another
undesirable risk: that is, that the stock status is signiﬁcantly in error on an
ongoing basis and as a result cannot be trusted regarding physical presence of
the items in inventories.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing may also have an incentive that requires them to keep up
efﬁciency on the shop ﬂoor as part of their compensation scheme. As a result
they may also have a tendency to manufacture items that are not required
within the context of the forecast simply to get their efﬁciency ratings up on the
shop ﬂoor.
One of the key things that can be looked at to determine if this problem is
present is to look for a departure from those items required on the production
plan. If items that are not called for on the plan are being manufactured on the
shop ﬂoor and added to inventories, part of the problem may lie here. Therefore,
one of the key data indicators of risk is to investigate any orders on the shop
ﬂoor for items that are being produced and are not included in the production
plan. Another thought is to check items that are not part of the production plan
but are being added to the inventory balances on a daily basis.
Pick, Pack, and Stage
Pick, pack, and stage is an area where inventoried buildup problems become
fairly obvious. The key issue here is the incorrect assembling of the orders and
the overshipment of items to the customer. This error creates the exact same
type of problem that was indicated in the order entry section. The customer
110
n
Building a Fluid/Dynamic Risk Model

ends up with more items than needed and will return those items to the
organization. If these items are unknown, then the organization will produce
and/or acquire the goods to meet current demand, not knowing that the other
items will be returned in the future. This also gives rise to a number of other
problems as you may imagine.
One of the key aligned risks in this situation is the cost of freight. In every
situation where additional items that are not required by the customer are sent,
or wrong items are shipped, our freight expense doubles, or triples, or worse. It
is absolutely critical that these types of events not occur on a regular basis;
otherwise, freight expenses can be extremely high, and with the cost of fuel
these days freight expenses will become a bigger part of expense problems.
Marked increases in freight expenses is also a key risk indicator in these
situations.
Shipping
As you would anticipate, the problems in shipping that would arise would be
exactly the same as in pick, pack, and stage. When they ship the wrong items or
overship items, both inventory problems and freight expense occur. These are
unacceptable in a well-organized business.
DASHBOARD INDICATORS
Dashboard indicators are concepts that have been around for a period of time
now. They are extremely useful and should be employed on a continuous basis
by the key executives of all organizations. Dashboard indicators should,
however, be tied to the key risks of the organization, these being the failures
to accomplish critical business outcomes. What this means is that these must
be very strategically determined, and they must be speciﬁcally aligned with the
risks of the organization.
For dashboard indicators to be of any use, they must give a constant read
on how the key risks of the organization are faring on a daily, if not continuous
basis. In other words, these should be more than simple high-level ﬁnancial
indicators of what is going on but rather all-encompassing indicators of risks
that can be used to govern the enterprise as a whole more effectively. They
must be structured appropriately for the visionaries at the high levels of the
corporation to be able to grasp their meaning and take necessary action
virtually instantaneously.
Dashboard Indicators
n
111

Therefore, by deﬁnition, the indicators must be extremely well targeted to
the risk, they must be aligned with very signiﬁcant risks, and they must be able
to be visually consumed. That means that any type of dashboard indicator must
be presented with maximum emphasis on presentation. That means everything
visible, with little or no audio noise, a.k.a. excessive wordiness.
It is a well known fact that people that reside at the top of the organization
and also on the Board of Directors of most companies or organizations are
visionaries; they are not audiophiles. To present any type of dashboard risk-
based environments, you must have an extremely good grasp of how to
summarize key risks of the organization in some type of visual format. This
constitutes one of the great challenges but also one of the great opportunities
for the enterprise risk management group. The key obligations of the enterprise
risk management environment are to timely and logically present their
concerns to those at the highest levels of the organization.
By building a data-based risk management environment that is
highly automated, and is visually oriented in its presentation, they can
demonstrate a prowess in the area of risk management that will be un-
equaled. Therefore all types of dashboard indicator environments should be
limited to the most critical risks of the organization and be effectively
presented on a continuous basis.
The dashboard indicator environment should be the central location of all
critical risks that must be monitored on an ongoing basis. This should present
at a glance the complete key risk picture of the enterprise in all aspects, ranging
from strategic to critical operational, to regulatory, to ﬁnancial, and beyond.
The dashboard should be logically structured and compartmentalized so
that it can be viewed by the key executives as well as the Board of Directors in
some kind of selective fashion. One way in which they could be compartmen-
talized would be to follow the FORT (ﬁnancial, operational, regulatory, and
technological) criteria.
In each one of these areas, there could be subsets of logical as well as
physical risk. In addition to these compartments of risk, there could also be an
area dedicated solely to strategic risks in and of themselves. Such an area of
strategic risk would include:
n
Key outsourcing arrangements
n
Critical acquisitions
n
Major divestitures
n
Major organizational realignments such as decentralization
n
Major information systems restructuring
112
n
Building a Fluid/Dynamic Risk Model

In each of these areas, key risk indicators should have been developed and
should be monitored on an ongoing basis to determine how successfully or how
poorly each of these environments is performing on a day-to-day basis. These
risk indicators should have been determined at the outset of the events in
concert with the key corporate sponsor of that strategic initiative. These could
then be entered into the dashboard and be a subject of review for all senior
executives who have a vested interest in the success and/or great concerns
about the failure of these key strategic areas. These could also be reported
regularly to the Board of Directors so that they can monitor ongoing success or
failure in key strategic areas.
In general, dashboard indicators are going to vary signiﬁcantly from
organization to organization. The reason for this is that no two organizations
are exactly the same and as a result are interested in monitoring much different
items on a day-to-day basis to achieve ideal corporate governance. It is like
anything else in risk assessment and management; dashboard indicators as
well as enterprise risk management must be customized precisely to the
organization to which they pertain. One-size-ﬁts-all dashboard indicators
would be no more be valid than one-size-ﬁts-all enterprise risk management.
Dashboard indicators should constitute a critical part of the enterprise risk
management environment. Therefore, they should be extremely well done
with virtually no room for misinterpretation of the facts. Examples of metrics
that could be used for dashboard indicators will be presented in the following
sections, but they should be selected on a customized basis for your particular
organization. Figure 6.4 illustrates conceptually how dashboard indicators
could be presented for the oversight of the organization.
KEY EARLY WARNING INDICATORS
Key early warning indicators (KEWIs) can be a subset of dashboard indicators
or can stand on their own as major indications of the necessity for immediacy of
action. These types of indicators should be speciﬁcally related to major areas of
risk concern where they can be seen well in advance of a risk event taking
place. This makes it possible to take appropriate actions as necessary. Obvi-
ously, this could encompass a number of items within a very large corporation
and/or organization; however, you want to be selective with those that are
employed speciﬁcally as KEWIs.
These types of indicators should be built to recognize patterns that predict
an unacceptable risk that may take place in the future. Some examples would
Key Early Warning Indicators
n
113

FIGURE 6.4
Dashboard Indicators
114

be building employee turnover rates in the area of research and development,
signiﬁcant downturns in unit sales with a key distributor of our products in
China, or extremely high turnover in critical software design engineers work-
ing on one of our proprietary information systems projects in Mumbai. Each
and every one of these is a major precursor to a loss of signiﬁcant intellectual
property and would certainly mandate quick intervention to protect our vital
interests.
There are numerous types of KEWIs that can be employed in an organi-
zation. These should be focused on the critical risk areas of the organization
that would suffer signiﬁcant adverse impacts should the risks manifest them-
selves as signiﬁcant exposures. KEWIs should be reserved for those areas of the
organization that are essential to our organizational mission or survival from
an enterprise perspective.
Selectivity and sense of purpose are the key criteria for establishing these
types of warning indicators. When integrated with the dashboard indicators,
they can be a powerful tool in the overall governance structure of the
organization. If the establishment of these key early warning indicators is
not undertaken, critical risks of the organization can remain below the radar
screen until eventually they undermine the organization, piece by piece,
slowly but surely, day in and day out.
In recent history we have seen ample evidence of these types of occur-
rences, and we have discussed some in this book. Key early warning indicators,
just like dashboard indicators and enterprise risk management, are also
customized to the organization. Those indicators that ﬁt the bank across
the street are not the indicators you should use in your bank. Those indicators
that work in a hospital down the road are not the ones that you should use in
your hospital. Risk assessment is very institution-speciﬁc and must be treated
accordingly. This does not mean that there will not be common indicators, but
they may be measured differently and evaluated differently even if they are the
exact same indicators from organization to organization.
DETERMINING THE KEY RISK INDICATORS
As you would expect, KRIs must be determined differently from organization to
organization, from process to process, from system to system, from business
subset to business subset. KRIs and their determination should be the primary
responsibility of each of the individual risk owners throughout the organiza-
tion. Therefore, the engineers should have their own set of KRIs as should the
Determining the Key Risk Indicators
n
115

accountants, lawyers, inventory control specialists, security analysts, bond
traders, and so on. The KRIs should be very speciﬁc to each and every aspect of
the organization across the enterprise. No one should be more knowledgeable
about what KRIs should be in place than the process owners themselves.
However, as we mentioned earlier, unfortunately many process owners
view themselves in the context of outputs instead of outcomes. As was
illustrated in the areas of purchasing and payroll, there are many KRIs that
should be established throughout the enterprise. Each and every critical
process should have a set of KRIs, and those should be evaluated on a
continuous basis by the risk owners. Let’s present another scenario of the
types of KRIs that should be developed. This time we will consider investment
management within an organization.
Those that are responsible for managing the investments of the organiza-
tion should have KRIs that are properly aligned with their desired outcomes.
The desired outcomes of investment managers would normally be:
n
Maximization of return
n
Minimization of risk
n
Investing within the guidelines as required
Therefore, by deﬁnition, the key risk indicators that would be aligned with
each of these objectives would be as follows:
n
Maximization of return. The KRI is normal return in the marketplace
given portfolio concentration guidelines. If the returns being earned are far
above normal, then the risk clearly indicated is that the portfolio is way too
risky or the returns being stated are actually fraudulent. If returns are way
below normal, it may indicate too conservative of positioning on behalf of
the investment management group, and as a result their prowess as
investment gurus should be in question.
n
Minimization of risk. The KRI here is the same as stated in maximiza-
tion of return. If the returns are too high, the chances are excellent that the
portfolio undertaken as investments is far too risky. Therefore, intervention
to correct the situation should be undertaken to ensure that excessive
losses will not be incurred, as soon as this trend is detected.
n
Investing within the guidelines as required. Prescribed guidelines
should be mandatory. These guidelines could be those issued by the Board
of Directors regarding investments. By deﬁnition, investment managers
should be operating within those guidelines. The KRIs in this situation
116
n
Building a Fluid/Dynamic Risk Model

would be an inventory of the active investment portfolio. In other words,
you can evaluate their investments by categorization and compare it to the
approved investment guidelines of the Board. The percentage of the
portfolio to be devoted to ﬁxed income could be compared to the ﬁxed
income investments under management, and so on.
KRIs are a critical part of the overall enterprise risk management process.
The key risk indicators must be developed with vision and foresight. The best
skills should be involved in determining what the right KRIs are for all the
various parts of the enterprise. To put it another way, this should not be an
exercise taken on in a haphazard fashion by people with no knowledge of how
that business or logical business subset actually operates. We will identify a
number of KRIs that can be employed in the following section, but they will
only serve as points of reference. The actual KRIs that you must develop for
your own organizations, as we all know by now, must be customized.
UNIVERSAL RISK INDICATORS
In some of the previous sections, you may have been scratching your head and
wondering, Oh my goodness, will I have to develop risk indicators for each and every
part of the enterprise? It depends on how extensively you want to deploy risk
management, but it also depends upon the amount of automation and
sophistication your organization is capable of. It is important that you make
some very key decisions in developing KRIs to ensure that what you create can
be managed on some kind of palatable basis.
Therefore, only employ what you are capable of managing effectively. Do
not overextend yourself by trying to develop the world’s largest inventory of
risk indicators. If you pursue too large a population, you may subvert the
notion of key, which is the important operative word in this scenario.
In developing an inventory of key risk indicators, due consideration should
be given to the possibility of employing universal risk indicators whenever
possible. Universal risk indicators are those that can be employed across
numerous locations and business subsets of the enterprise with the intent of
minimizing the number of indicators that must be managed on a day-to-day
basis. These types of universal indicators will result from similarity of operations
and also from similarity of purpose in these related business units.
These business subsets do not have to be the exact same size, because when
you employ universal risk indicators you would normally use some type of ratio
Universal Risk Indicators
n
117

analysis, which would common-size and/or equalize the units under consider-
ation. For example, in a mining operation in which the enterprise is a collection
of six different types of businesses, you may want to employ universal risk
indicators in those parts of the business that are similar. Such a scenario would
be as follows.
One of the business subsets of the mining organization is an operation
known as an open pit limestone quarry. In its most simple terms, this operation
digs limestone out of the earth, crushes it to various sizes and/or speciﬁcations,
and then sells it in the open marketplace or on contract.
If you want to establish a scheme of risk indicators for this type of
operation, you would have to concentrate on what are the most critical
outcomes that this type of a business should accomplish on a daily basis.
These are:
n
Maximizing the tonnage of limestone produced
n
Minimizing the cost per ton of limestone produced
n
Maximizing the sales value per ton of limestone sold
n
Keeping people safe
n
Keeping the machinery maintained; maximizing up time
Even if you don’t know anything about mining I think all would agree that
these are the critical outcomes of this type of an operation. In trying to establish
a set of universal indicators for risk, always begin the exercise by identifying
what are the critical outcomes of the business.
Once you know the critical outcomes of the business, many times they
start to dictate what the critical risk indicators or KRIs are that should be
utilized. For instance, in accordance with the previous key outcomes, these
would be the risk indicators that would be measured for this type of operation.
n
Average tons produced by quarry over a speciﬁc timeframe
n
Average cost per ton produced over a speciﬁc time
n
Sale price per ton over a speciﬁc time
n
Lost-time injuries and workers’ compensation claims per 100 hours
worked
n
Machinery downtime, preventive maintenance cost, unanticipated re-
placement or repair costs
These types of measurements could be applied to each and every one of the
numerous limestone quarries across this enterprise. Once these metrics have
118
n
Building a Fluid/Dynamic Risk Model

been established, then they can be compared by quarry, within district, within
region, within division, and across the enterprise as desired. These would then
be considered universal risk indicators for this type of business.
When establishing universal indicators, the most important thing to
remember is that you must tie it to the direct functionality of the business.
You can make universal risk indicators as high-level or low-level as you like; it
all depends on what the objective of the exercise is.
An example of a universal risk indicator in a manufacturing setting for
instance would be stock outs. Stock outs would be the result of the following
risks and would result in the following impacts.
Risks that could give rise to the problem
n
Inaccurate sales forecasting
n
Poor production planning
n
Ineffective purchasing function
n
Poor material management and inventory control
n
Shipping errors (over-ships)
Impacts that may result from the issue
n
Lost sales
n
Customer dissatisfaction
n
Disruption in production planning
These are only a few of the risks and a few of the impacts that could occur.
But, it would obviously be in the best interests of the organization to discover
the root cause of the stock-out problem as soon as possible to ensure that it does
not have undesirable impacts.
One of the most simple and pattern-sensitive of all universal risk indicators
are credit memos issued to correct deﬁciencies in performance by the organi-
zation. If you ever want to know what is going wrong in operations, do an
analysis of credit memos. If properly coded and classiﬁed, they are extremely
good clues and insights into the many key risks that you have in play.
The operative word here is if they are properly coded and classiﬁed. One of
the greatest risks that most organizations run is that the data they collect is
crap. One of the key indicators of this is doing stratiﬁcation analysis of the codes
for credit memos issued. If you see that 70 percent plus of the codes are
‘‘miscellaneous and other,’’ you have big-time problems. It goes back to the old
adage: You can’t solve a problem you don’t know you have; you don’t know
Universal Risk Indicators
n
119

you have it if you don’t measure it; if you don’t measure it, you can’t solve it.
Nothing is a bigger risk in an organization than the gathering of bad data.
In the case of reason codes for credit memos, performing simple stratiﬁca-
tion analysis on well-coded data can point out quite quickly the undesirable
patterns of operations risk that are taking place. Being an auditor by trade, I
was always confused by a lot of things that were and are still done in the
auditing profession. For instance, auditors will come in, select a sample of credit
memos, tick tie, and foot them to make sure they are accurate. They will then
trace them to Accounts Receivable to see that they are properly applied and
then check the signature to make sure they are properly approved.
The question I have always asked is why are the credit memos there in the
ﬁrst place? Those are key indicators of operational failure; they should not
be there. Unless we are running a charitable organization, why should we be
giving our money away? The causal events of the credit memos should be
actively investigated by operations and done away with by ﬁxing the root
cause.
FINANCIAL, OPERATIONAL, REGULATORY,
AND TECHNOLOGICAL KRIs
FORT (ﬁnancial, operational, regulatory, and technological) is an acronym for
the key areas where risk indicators are normally determined for most organi-
zations. They tend to represent the most common areas of risks throughout the
enterprise and as a result can be utilized to evaluate risk objectively in a highly
efﬁcient and effective manner.
Chapter 7 will present an inventory of various types of key risk indicators in
the format of the risk event and the key risk indicator. The indicators that can
be utilized can be kept at a very high level or can be taken down to the lowest
level of the operational area. In Chapter 7 there will be numerous examples of
how you can take these indicators to very low levels. If you are capable of
measuring the data at these levels, you can get a tremendously good idea
of your risk picture, utilizing nothing but metrics. Following that illustration
will be a set of high-level risk indicators for each category within the FORT
classiﬁcation.
You can go on endlessly with indicators of risk. That is why whenever you
are initiating a Data-Centric ERM you must be very conscious of the fact that
there may be limitations on the amount of data that can be utilized. This may be
the result of available automation capabilities. Even though this could possibly
120
n
Building a Fluid/Dynamic Risk Model

be a constraint at the beginning of creating an ERM that is objectively based, it
should never be a long-term problem condition. Any organization that is intent
upon being highly successful in the area of enterprise risk management is going
to have to come to terms with the fact that their future lies in automation.
Chapter 8 discusses more about the issue of automation within the ERM
environment. It is deﬁnitely something that should be considered strategically
from day one. In building an objective-based risk environment, tomorrow is not
soon enough to start planning for automation. It is imperative that every
organization think seriously about these requirements and plan accordingly.
The future lies in the ability to maximize the utilization of data for
managing the enterprise from a risk perspective.
Financial, Operational, Regulatory, and Technological KRIs
n
121

7
CHAPTER SEVEN
Top-Down Risk
Assessment: Evolving
the Fluid ERM
Environment—A
Step-by-Step
Approach
BUILDING ERM ONE STEP AT A TIME
To effectively implement an enterprise risk management environment it would
be very helpful in all instances to have some type of speciﬁc guidance on how
one of these models could be evolved. In this chapter, how to build one of these
models in step-by-step sequence is discussed. The very ﬁrst thing that must be
remembered is that when you are going to build one of these models you must
have a strategic objective in mind. Therefore, you must sit down and logically
think out what would you like to accomplish with the model and how you are
going to go about doing that. The sequence that we are going to follow for
discussion in this particular chapter is set out next.
122

The key subject matter that is discussed in the subsequent sections will be
as follows:
n
An example will be presented of how to lay out the physical structure of
your organization and create a physical map of same.
n
How to determine key business risks based on critical outcomes of those
subsets of the organization.
n
How to build a risk register and what should be in it.
n
How risk registers and other valuable riskinformation can be embedded in the
physical mapping created for the enterprise risk management environment.
n
A discussion of utilizing logical data pathways (LDPs) to understand how
risk can be analyzed at all levels of the organization starting from the top
and moving to the bottom will be undertaken. In other words, a classic top-
down, risk-based approach.
MAPPING THE PHYSICAL STRUCTURE
OF THE ENTERPRISE
The only way to take an inventory of the entire enterprise is to physically map it
out by location, groups of similar subsets of the organization, or some other
methodology that best presents a complete picture of the organization. It is best
if you can geographically map it in those instances where the following factors
would be of signiﬁcance in how risk would be evaluated. Examples of these
types of risk considerations would be: geography, culture, cost of operation of
being physically dispersed, or where geopolitical considerations play a large
role in the risk evaluation and management landscape.
Mapping the Physical Structure of the Administrative Areas
An effective way of building an enterprise risk management structure that is
clearly delineated and easily understandable is to separate those types of
centralized functions from normal operations. The reason is that when creating
a physical map of the organization it will become way too confusing if you try
and incorporate centralized functions and how they relate to each one of the
operating units. So the very ﬁrst thing I will do is talk about how to build a
physical map of your administrative or centralized areas.
Figure 7.1 is an illustration of a physical mapping of an administrative
scheme that represents a fairly normal situation for most organizations or
corporations. The critical administrative processes are as follows:
Mapping the Physical Structure of the Enterprise
n
123

Board of Directors
CEO
Board of Directors
CMO
CEO
Sales and Marketing
CMO
IT
CIO
Business Planning
COO
HR
COO
Purchasing
COO
Legal
CLO
Treasury
CFO
Tax
CFO
Finance
CFO
CIO
CEO
COO
CEO
CLO
CEO
CFO
CEO
FIGURE 7.1
Physical Map Administration
124

n
Finance
n
Accounting
n
Treasury
n
Tax
n
Legal
n
Human Resources (HR)
n
IT
n
Business Planning
n
Purchasing
n
Sales and Marketing
These functionalities are illustrated as subsets of the organization itself. The
top of the organization is assumed to be the executive ofﬁcers and those types of
administrative functions. The critical outcomes and corresponding risk metrics
(KRIs) for each will be presented. As a prelude to that discussion we will discuss
a special area of risk relative to IT.
IT
The key functionality of IT is to provide accurate and timely information and
safeguard the critical information for the organization. They are also responsi-
ble for deploying the latest and best technology to serve the needs of the
organization as required. Later in this chapter we will discuss the risk indicators
to measure the primary outcomes of IT. However, another category of risk that
must be taken into account is that of physical risks. This is why mapping the
physical structure of the Enterprise is just as critical, if not more so, in the
area of IT.
It is a common misconception that the most critical risks in IT are logical in
nature. In reality, some of the primary risks that take place are physical. Let’s
explore some of these and determinate whether this is true. I will present two
different scenarios in which I believe the risks of losing information in IT are
much more signiﬁcant physically than logically.
Scenario number one would be the following. If I wanted to steal your
information physically from you and you were a publicly listed corporation,
I would invoke the following strategy. I would buy one share of your stock
and then contact your shareholder relations department. I would ask them
to forward to me a copy of your annual report for my review. In that report
will be all the smiling faces and all the glossy pictures of the ofﬁcers and the
Board of Directors. I would then select the person of that group who would
Mapping the Physical Structure of the Enterprise
n
125

most likely possess all the corporate critical information that I would like
to steal.
Once that had been determined, I would then take up a position some-
where within observation distance of the corporate headquarters and com-
mence to follow her when she emerges carrying her laptop. The chances are
excellent that she will have all of that critical information on the laptop, and the
chances are even better it is not properly protected or encrypted. At that point it
is simply a matter of following her until she makes the inevitable mistake: to set
the case containing the laptop down at some opportune time or place, and then
turn her back.
Scenario two is somewhat more complex but may well be worth the effort.
This would involve the ‘‘let’s get inside’’ strategy. That strategy would start
with my forming a number of small companies each performing a necessary
function for your organization. The six companies that I would start would be
the following:
1. Janitorial
2. Security guards
3. Maintenance and installation all types
4. Paper recycling
5. PC recycling
6. Courier service for backups to hot site
Let’s explore the possibilities that establishing these ‘‘businesses’’ would
present for me to accomplish my underlying hidden agenda of usurping your
data. In each of these scenarios, I would present pricing and special incentives
to your purchasing people that would be virtually irresistible to them. Better
yet, I would play right into the easiest of all avenues, the unabated thirst to
outsource everything in sight, for the sake of the short-term vision of ‘‘cost
savings.’’ As a result I would secure all of the contracts in these areas either at
your facility or those of your outsourcers.
Janitorial
The key here is that these people have more or less free roaming capabilities on
the premises with little or no oversight. If I were to hire a highly skilled group of
software engineers, hackers, or someone of similar capabilities, present them as
janitors and introduce them to your premises, how would you really know?
These highly talented individuals would then have open season on your
126
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

systems and ‘‘secure’’ environments with little or no risk of detection, unless
these environments are monitored constantly.
However, sad but true, we know they are not, in fact. In most instances, the
security logs are deactivated—why, too much overhead on the IT environment?
Oh please, tell me we are not still buying that old smoke and mirrors story.
No names will be mentioned, but what organization was it that had this
exact circumstance in play? As a result it was victimized by a denial of service
attack on all of their Internet connection points, which kept their customers
from accessing them for a period of 24 hours.
Security Guards
This is one of my favorite of all strategies. Make the protectors the worst enemy
you can possibly have on the premises. In most instances, the security service is
actually mandated to enter all of the areas of the premises to ensure that they
are secure. What sweet irony that would be to ﬁnd out that the security people
who are supposed to preserve security are actually undermining it. It brings to
mind an instance that a colleague of mine brought to my attention. This
occurred outside of the United States in an organization that was part of the
national government structure.
A security outsourcer had been retained to bring personnel onto the
grounds of the organization that was storing some very critical and expensive
technology components. There had been some minor theft, and they were
concerned that this might escalate. It was not long after the new security
organization took control that the frequency and quantity of thefts actually
increased signiﬁcantly. This went on for a period of time with numerous
explanations of why it was not being prevented coming from the outsourcer. It
was not until the governmental body actually hired another contractor to do
surveillance that they detected it was the security company stealing the
components.
Again the strategy remains the same: put highly talented technicians on
the premises to masquerade as security and then steal the data. Nothing
complicated—but it will work, that is for sure.
Maintenance and Installation
Every organization has maintenance needs, whether they own the property or
do not. Equipment and property of all types need repair. Cables need to be run,
physical conﬁgurations of work space need to take place, and many other tasks
have to be completed. The key is to not interfere with the workday, however, as
Mapping the Physical Structure of the Enterprise
n
127

you may negatively impact productivity. Therefore, my maintenance service
would guarantee that we would perform all maintenance tasks after business
hours with minimal impact on productivity. We are always looking out for
your best interest, and we are all about excellent customer service. Same old,
same old—highly skilled technicians make excellent maintenance persons for
my kind of company. Give excellent service and rock bottom prices, who would
complain?
Paper Recycling
I have nothing against going green. In fact I think it is a critical strategy for the
future of the environment. But in business risk terms, this presents a golden
opportunity for information to be compromised, by design and by sheer
happenstance. In my case, I cannot wait to get my hands on all of that
information residing in those recycling bins. There is so much valuable
information contained there, both for the organization itself and its clients.
If this information remains in its native state until I pick it up, it is as good as
gone. Thank you very much. One of the ways in which we cut costs to give you
the lowest prices possible is not to have any expensive paper pulverization
equipment on our trucks. But don’t you worry, we will tend to that back at the
recycling center.
Hug a tree, give away your secrets, Oh! by all means please do. Clearly, a
better strategy is to not have so much paper and not print out all of these things
in the ﬁrst place and save the added cost. That way, it is easier for my hackers in
these scenarios to steal it and transport it in digitized form; paper is way too
bulky and bothersome to reconvert.
PC Recycling
One of the great things that does help me out here in stealing your information
is the fact that PCs (both desktop and laptop) are becoming so cheap they are
basically throwaways at this point. That is excellent. If I come in and offer you
exceptional trade-in prices on your existing machines, when you buy new ones
from my PC distributor, the trap is nicely set. What is even more beautiful is
that the hard drives and the amount of data on them are massive.
Another of the areas of data security, which is sorely overlooked, is how
data is dealt with that resides on all those large-capacity hard drives in those
machines. Back not too many years ago, we used to have to be concerned with
kilobytes of data, but now we have gigs of data on these drives, which provides
much more information to folks like me. Organizations are hopefully becoming
128
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

more sophisticated in how they are dealing with data removal on old technol-
ogy, but in many cases not so.
There are of course a number of options that can be employed to solve this
problem. Overwrite the drives with 0s, reformat the drives a number of times,
smash them with a hammer, shred them with newer devices designed for that
purpose, and use wiping software—to name a few. Even those, however, may
not be adequate to the task. Also, I may have to severely downgrade your trade-
in value if the drives are destroyed or rendered inoperable in any way. You do
understand, of course? A wealth of information is available in the recycling
business if you apply yourself.
I believe that we have all heard the horror stories of information lost in this
manner. Let’s see what government agency was it that traded away super-
conﬁdential information because they failed to properly remove the informa-
tion and used the . delete command instead? (We will omit the agency and
the event in this book.)
Courier Service for Backups to Hot Site
To obtain data on a larger scale, it is a much nicer setup that I just come
every day and pick it up in total in the form of backups. Since I will have
everything in one convenient grouping, it will save me a lot of unnecessary
running around. The ability to obtain the information in bulk will facilitate the
speed with which I can evaluate it and disseminate it for my purposes.
Oh heck, let’s just make this easier. Why don’t I just set up an electronic
archival company located somewhere in a cave. That should provide better
security for your critical data, shouldn’t it? Then you can just transmit it to me
electronically, and that way I don’t have the bother or the expense of coming to
get it. Yes, in fact, that will work better for me; let’s do it that way.
Each and every one of these services has the potential of stealing massive
amounts of information from your organization at any time. The key thing here
is the ability to gain physical access, which then provides the ability to
compromise the information with the appropriate skill sets in some instances
and in others with little or no special skills. In fact, another physical risk factor
working in my favor in many of these instances is this. Some security folks in
their zeal to heighten security in their organizations actually accomplish the
opposite.
For example, one of the ‘‘brilliant’’ ways to supposedly enhance security is
to make the passwords that people use for access more complex in format. You
have probably seen these in your own organizations. They would be in a form
Mapping the Physical Structure of the Enterprise
n
129

that utilizes combinations of capital and small letters as well as digits, and they
are lengthy to add to the complexity.
For example: ThIS26CHArACterPWdOeS0GOod
The problem is that no one can remember a complex conglomeration
such as this, so they write it down. They then put it in convenient places for
my hackers to ﬁnd, like in their desk, taped to the terminal, or under their
chair. Thank you, thank you, and thank you, O great security gurus, for this
concept.
Regarding risk metrics on the activities described in these scenarios,
Table 7.1 shows some that could be considered for review and/or trending.
Other types of physical risks also come into play in the context of things
that should be monitored in IT. Table 7.2 shows some examples of risks that the
organization may want to take a look at.
These are just a few examples of the types of issues that highly effective
oversight in the context of evaluating and managing physical risks would
certainly take into account.
TABLE 7.1
Physical Risks with Metrics—IT
Key Risk
Risk Metric
Unauthorized access
after hours
Monitoring of accesses to critical data sets for abnormalities
Unknown persons on
the premises
Mandatory deep background checks on all persons with
unsupervised after-hours/critical data access versus access
Loss of data on portable
devices
Number of devices without mandatory encryption/secure
wireless links as percentage of all devices
Loss of conﬁdential data
Number of servers/repositories of conﬁdential data in the
organization
TABLE 7.2
Additional Physical Risks with Metrics—IT
Key Risk
Risk Metric
Unsupervised access by employees
Entrance and exit times of employees if badge
entry
Failure of UPS devices
Periodic testing or self-testing and monitoring
failures
Vandalism, ﬁre, physical threats
Incident monitoring, frequency of police/ﬁre calls
Outside unintentional threats
Number of inspections of proximity to rail lines/
airports/pipelines and results/number of incidents
that have taken place
130
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

Mapping the Physical Structure of the Operational Areas
The exact same exercise can be completed for the operational side of the house.
In Figure 7.2 the mapping exercise illustrated takes into account all of the key
operational areas of a manufacturing concern.
As an introduction to operations, we will have a discussion of the receiving
area and how an insigniﬁcant area with what appear to be nonrisky activities
can actually spawn massive organizational risks when proper care is not taken
to do things right.
Receiving
From an operations perspective, this function is the gatekeeper that can either
minimize your costs of operation or expand them greatly. Among the many
critical functions they perform are the receipt of goods on a daily basis,
veriﬁcation that the goods are as ordered and meet the speciﬁcations required,
that quantities are correct, and that the goods are not damaged in any way.
The number and variety of risks that can be introduced into the Enterprise
as the result of an ineffective receiving department can range from minimal
to catastrophic. The reason is that they are the ﬁrst line of defense to stop
problems from entering the premises. If they fail to detect problems, the
undesirable attributes are then introduced into the inventories and eventually
into the products themselves. Let me see, time for another example to illustrate
the point I am trying to develop.
Close your eyes and imagine yourself standing in a tropical forest in
Southeast Asia outside of a small manufacturing plant. The company that
owns this plant performs contract manufacturing for large organizations
around the world. See anything risky yet?
You are observing the loading dock where goods and materials are
received, which are to be used in manufacturing. You see a truck pull up
to the dock; a forklift comes out and unloads a pallet of materials off of the truck
bed and onto the dock. See anything risky yet?
You continue to observe as the person from the receiving department
comes out with a clipboard and starts to verify the receipt of goods against a
purchase order, and you can see that the materials are large metal drums of
paint. See anything risky yet?
At that point, the truck leaves, and the forklift driver takes the pallet of paint
inside the building as you follow along. You then see the forklift driver deliver the
painttotheinventorycontrolareathattakespossessionofit,andchecksitin,and
adds it to the inventory stock status on the system. See anything risky yet?
Mapping the Physical Structure of the Enterprise
n
131

CEO
COO
Receiving
Shipping and
Logistics
Quality Assurance
Pick, Pack, and
Stage
Production,
Planning, and
Control
Inventory Control
Manufacturing
Engineering
Dept 1367
Specialty Machining
Dept 349
Vertical Boring
Mills
Dept 789
Welding
Dept 548
Stamping
Machining Center
2
VBM 5-8
Machining Center 1
VBM 1-4
Machining Center 3
VBM 9-12
VBM 7
FIGURE 7.2
Physical Map Operations
132

A few moments later a person from production comes to the inventory
control area, requests a drum of the paint just received, and has a fork
lift driver move it the manufacturing line and properly mount it in the
appropriate spot to be attached to the painting system. See anything
risky yet?
The drum is then properly attached and the paint starts ﬂowing into the
appropriate application tools, and the run of products to be painted are started
down the production line. See anything risky yet?
As the dolls start making their way down the line, the beautifully colored
lead-based paint is meticulously applied to each and every doll with great care
and diligence. See anything risky yet?
When they reach the end of the line, the dolls are carefully placed in the
brightly colored boxes with the name and logo of one of the world’s best-
known toy companies boldly emblazoned on the outside. The dolls are then
boxed and loaded into shipping containers. They now begin their long trip to
stores in the United States and other key markets around the world. See
anything risky yet?
Right about now, the C-suite of that toy manufacturer can see that risk
from half a world away, and in not too many days the same C-suite members
are going to be seeing that risk splashed all over the evening news. Then the
C-suite as well as the members of the Board of Directors will be seeing red from
the boardroom to the bottom line as the individuals responsible for governance
and oversight realize that they will have to spend millions on damage control.
Do you see the pattern of aligned risks that are starting to fan out across the
enterprise? Do you see anything risky now?
This rather extended example is indicative of one of the key challenges
that the enterprise risk management group is confronted with every day: the
ability to truly know, predict, and manage your risks across the globe both
within your own organization and in outsourced situations as well.
DEFINING THE BUSINESS RISKS OF THE ENTERPRISE:
UTILIZING KEY OUTCOMES
Throughout the previous sections of this book, I have interspersed examples
of this concept of centering ERM on the key outcomes deﬁned by process or
subset of the organization. The primary purpose for utilizing this philosophy is
to utilize risk indicators that are key to the organization as well as keep the
number of metrics reasonable.
Deﬁning the Business Risks of the Enterprise: Utilizing Key Outcomes
n
133

The KRIs utilized to evaluate key outcomes should be thought of as high-
level or global indicators of risk within the respective business subsets. In
Chapter 6, I introduced risk metrics that can be employed on a much more
detailed basis when a high degree of automation and data sophistication are
gained. Utilizing a deﬁned set of key outcomes, usually ranging from ﬁve to
seven items, and the associated key risk indicators (KRIs), we can keep the
analysis meaningful and manageable with limited automation and data
sophistication.
Each of the following areas will have the key outcomes identiﬁed for each
of the enterprise subsets identiﬁed. You may identify these slightly differently
for your own organization, but I think you will ﬁnd that they are quite
representative of what should be looked at and monitored. We will look ﬁrst
at the administrative areas and how they might be risk evaluated.
Administration
The Administration area of the organization, even though it does not directly
generate revenue and consumes more cash than it provides, is the glue that
normally binds everything together and has its own set of unique risks.
Finance
As noted in the previous section, Finance, even though it is a peripheral
function of the organization, is extremely important in sustaining it on a daily
basis. The key is the accuracy and integrity of the information provided.
Nothing will undermine the organization faster than ﬁnancial statement
manipulation, because the inevitable result is eventually to not know what
is going on in the real business at all. Too much gaming of the numbers will
distort reality to the point of losing the ability to run the business and the ability
to determine who is on ﬁrst and what is on second.
Numerous large organizations have succumbed to the sirens of ‘‘pleasing
the analysts’’ at whatever cost, only to end up as another carcass of a once
great ocean liner shipwrecked on the shore of reality. Every time that I watch
the quarterly or annual ﬁnancial reports on CNBC or other ﬁnancial outlets, I
cannot help but wonder when I hear the following phrases: ‘‘They just beat the
analyst’s expectations by a penny’’ or ‘‘They met the analyst’s expectations
exactly.’’ Are those grey things breaking the surface rocks ahead? Or even more
troubling than that is this question: Do the people running these companies
have rocks in their heads?
134
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

Accounting
The critical outcomes of Accounting are timely generation and accuracy of the
ﬁnancial statements. The accounting function is what in many ways and in
particular with many people creates the ‘‘public face’’ of the enterprise. The key
or critical outcomes of accounting are the following:
n
Timeliness of ﬁnancial information
n
Accuracy of ﬁnancial information
n
Accurate costing of products
n
Accurate ﬁlings and reporting of information
Treasury
The following are some of the key outcomes of Treasury, clearly emphasizing
their key functionality of keeping the enterprise solvent and in possession of
adequate low-cost working capital:
n
Manage cash effectively
n
Maximize return on cash
n
Minimize cash management costs
n
Minimize banking and relationship fees
n
Minimize cost of borrowing
Tax
Tax must be sure to attain their key outcomes to minimize signiﬁcant adverse
impacts on the organization. The importance of monitoring the areas of risk in
Tax is that many of the areas of risk in taxation are quite subtle in nature and
nearly impossible to decipher for most people. Therefore, a lot of risk can go
undetected and then, by deﬁnition, unmanaged. Key outcomes in Tax include
the following:
n
Minimize income tax impact
n
Minimize personal property taxes
n
Aggressively pursue tax positions
n
Successfully defend tax positions
n
Minimize real estate taxes
Legal
The legal eagles of the organization have an intricate knowledge of the subject
matter of risk. They literally manage nothing but risk on a daily basis. In
Deﬁning the Business Risks of the Enterprise: Utilizing Key Outcomes
n
135

addition, if there were one major collection point for aligned risks, it would be
the ofﬁce of in-house counsel. They are the repository of all things done wrong
by the other parts of the enterprise. The key in this area from an ERM
perspective is to make sure that the linkages are preserved between the source
of the problem and the litigation issue. In other words, great diligence should be
applied to cross-referencing the source of the risk to the eventual outcome of
the litigation. Why? From an ERM perspective it is to key in on the patterning
that is taking place, if any, with the causal events of the litigation.
For instance, an extremely large retailer was experiencing a horrendous
inﬂux of personal injury litigation for people falling and injuring themselves in
the retailer’s stores. The original position was to treat them essentially as a
nuisance situation and pay the claims off with a ceremonious amount to make
the issue go away. When the volumes ﬁnally became so large (key risk indicator
of unchallenged legal initiatives), they began to contest the claims in court.
When they began researching the patterns, they were extremely alarmed
to see that a number of the claimants were the same individuals in different
parts of the country. Upon further research, they were able to conclude that
there appeared to be bands of people making a living by traveling around the
country, faking their injuries and ﬁling an action anticipating the easy
settlement. Using the data patterning clearly indicating the risk, they then
formulated the strategy to ﬁght the claims. In a relatively short period of time,
the claims volumes dropped dramatically. Some key outcomes that should be
achieved by legal are the following:
n
Minimize legal expense
n
Discourage litigation
n
Effectively manage costs-litigating
n
Minimize legal losses
n
Demonstrate litigation prowess
n
Highly effective selection of outside counsel
n
Highly effective management of outside counsel
HR
Nothing against the ﬁne people of HR—but this area is a landmine of risk. First,
they are the gatekeepers of one of our key assets—the employees. The need to
hire highly qualiﬁed individuals at a cost-effective rate in a highly mobile
society is no small challenge. A recent survey just released within the last
couple of days cited that 45 percent of all employees were dissatisﬁed with their
136
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

current positions. This should not be unexpected, in that the employee/
employer relationship has changed dramatically in the years that have passed
since I exited the campus life.
For instance, when I graduated it was not unusual that if you went to work
for a prestigious employer like say, IBM, you would stay there for life. In fact,
my cousin’s husband has worked for that ﬁne organization for his entire career.
He has been with them since he graduated in the late 1960s with an Electrical
Engineering degree from Wisconsin. That is not only commendable; it is
something to truly be admired. The problem is that those days are long
gone and far away. Today, there is little, if any, loyalty between an employer
and its employee—and vice versa. This gives rise to a tremendous amount of
risk when you are running a revolving door employment policy. The following
are some of the risks/impacts that are brought about by this type of operating
condition:
n
Risk: Instability in the workforce is the rule of operation. This leads to
ever-decreasing productivity as skill sets are never really fully developed
and training is a constant state of operation.
n
Impact: Costs of operations rise at an exponential rate.
n
Risk: It will be inevitable that there will be a signiﬁcant loss of intellectual
property and knowledge base.
n
Impact: Excessive costs will be incurred during the process of re-creating
same as well as the competitive exposure that is brought to bear on the
organization.
n
Risk: Inability to establish a meaningful and highly functional succession
plan, where deﬁnitive replacements for key individuals have been identiﬁed
and groomed to take over.
n
Impact: This will result in a loss of expertise and leadership that may
result in the necessity to outsource the functionality for lack of knowl-
edgeable resources. The other alternative is to bring in outsiders and then
try to bring them up to speed. Higher operational costs are incurred.
These are just a few examples and actually just touch the tip of the iceberg
of the risks that could be explored, but hopefully they cast some light on how
serious the talent bleed is in the context of risk. If you were to analyze HR from a
key risk standpoint the following key outcomes could be utilized:
n
Minimize loss of talent
n
Provide good work environment
Deﬁning the Business Risks of the Enterprise: Utilizing Key Outcomes
n
137

n
Adhere to all key regulations
n
Perform effective recruiting
n
Perform background checks
n
Effective compensation program
n
Provide good beneﬁts
n
Provide cost-effective beneﬁts
IT
The key functionality of IT is to provide accurate and timely information, and
safeguard the critical information for the organization. IT is also responsible for
deploying the latest and best technology to serve the needs of the organization
as required. Later we will show the risk indicators to measure the primary
outcomes of IT. If you were to analyze IT from a key risk standpoint, the
following key outcomes could be utilized:
n
Delivering timely information
n
Providing accurate information
n
Safeguarding of data
n
Effectively deploying technology
n
Effectively utilizing technology
n
Ensuring processing completeness
n
Ensuring processing integrity
n
Deploying new technology to maximize efﬁciency
Business Planning
The key functionality of Business Planning is to provide the strategic course
going forward for the organization. They are also responsible for analyzing all
future actions with a high degree of accuracy and presenting their best recom-
mendations to the senior executives and the Board of Directors. If you were
to analyze business planning from a key risk standpoint, the following key
outcomes would be some of the most critical to bear in mind:
n
Identify potential acquisitions
n
Identify synergies to be gained
n
Evaluate success of acquisition
n
Maximize return on investment
n
Ensure due diligence is proper
n
Proper valuation of acquisitions
138
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

n
Proper valuation of dispositions
n
ID highly successful organizations
Purchasing
The key functionality of Purchasing is to ensure that whatever is required to
run the enterprise on a daily basis is properly acquired within the appropriate
time and value constraints. If you were to analyze purchasing from a key
outcome standpoint, the following are the key outcomes they must accomplish
every day that they operate to be successful:
n
Acquire the right item
n
Within the right time frame
n
To the correct location
n
With the right quality
n
Acquire the right quantity
n
Pay the right price
n
Right speciﬁcations
Sales and Marketing
Sales and Marketing are charged with key functionality of establishing our
position within the given marketplace. It is no small task to gain brand
recognition when there are so many competing environments and a worldwide
market. If you were to evaluate sales and marketing from a key risk standpoint,
the following key outcomes should be high on the list of things to be considered:
n
Provide exceptional customer service
n
Sell products at the right price
n
Maintain customer base and expand it
n
Preserve company’s rights
n
Accurately reporting sales performance for bonus purposes
n
Maximize advertising money
n
Establish products as brands
Operations
We will now turn our attention to the operational areas of our example. As
mentioned previously, it is the operations that drive the success or failure of
virtually any organization. It makes no difference if it is a publicly listed
Deﬁning the Business Risks of the Enterprise: Utilizing Key Outcomes
n
139

corporation or a renowned institution of higher education: it is all about the
operations. For instance, colleges that are held in high regard and are known
worldwide have achieved that status as the result of their operating units, not
in most cases as the result of the administration areas, no disrespect intended.
In other words, it is the research departments and the quality of their
research that determines the ﬂow of grant money to the institution. This also
identiﬁes them as institutions of a high degree of accomplishment in the area
of research and thereby raises the prestige of the institution. The same can be said
of the investment ofﬁcers who manage the endowments. Their expertise con-
tributes greatly to the reputation of the institution. But of most importance is the
faculty; without a highly regarded faculty to deliver a high-caliber education
there would be no students walking the hallowed halls of the institution. Thus, it
does not make any difference what type of organization it is; operations is the
driver, a characteristic often overlooked in the grand scheme of things.
The operational areas of a manufacturing concern and the key outcomes
that can be considered are described in the following sections.
Production Planning and Control (PP&C)
The process to be used here is the same logically as has been employed thus far.
We should think always in the context of functionality and deﬁnitive purpose to
ﬁnd our points of maximum risk. In PP&C it is all about timing and coordina-
tion, and so we could use the following as key outcomes for the purpose of
evaluating risk:
n
Maximize production capabilities
n
Complete production on schedule
n
Maximize efﬁciency in scheduling
n
Maximize coordination of schedule
n
Release jobs to the shop ﬂoor timely
n
Accommodate schedule changes
Engineering
Many of the base functionalities of any manufacturing concern owe their
existence to the engineers. However, one of the risks that creeps into organi-
zations and severely undermines their ability to operate efﬁciently and effec-
tively is the ‘‘don’t approach the throne’’ syndrome. This occurs when the
engineers begin to elevate themselves above the peasants of the shop ﬂoor, the
ones who really know what to do and how to build it. In these situations you
140
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

can get a lack of communication, which literally results in the shop ﬂoor
building things the way they believe they should be done, and leaving the
engineers out of it. There are a number of risks and impacts that are brought
about as the result of this situation:
n
Risk: The engineered BOM (bill of materials) is in error, as the shop ﬂoor is
using different components to manufacture the goods.
n
Impact: Whenever the BOM is released to the shop ﬂoor, the wrong
components will be called out of inventory, will have to be returned and
others obtained. This practice drives up handling and inventory costs
dramatically depending upon frequency.
n
Impact: In most Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) environments today
costing is ‘‘back ﬂushed’’ (unpleasant visual isn’t it?) based on the BOM.
Costing of that product for those components is by deﬁnition incorrect.
Pricing is wrong by deﬁnition because prices are based on costs, margins
may be in jeopardy, or at a minimum misstated.
n
Impact: Inventory stock status will be incorrect, and shortages will most
likely result causing downtime and disruption in the production schedule.
Costs head higher.
One relatively small risk was previously illustrated, and hundreds of others
could be cited. But the ripple effect of risks and related impacts that start to take
place throughout the organization are easily seen. Start multiplying those by all
of the aligned risks; well, again you get the picture. Key outcomes for the
engineering area to be considered include:
n
Determine accurate BOMs
n
Designs cost effective to build
n
R&D designs meet market demand
n
Designs to appropriate use criteria
n
Design things timely
n
Designs to appropriate specs
Receiving
Receiving is one of the key areas in which excess costs to the organization can
be eliminated. It can do this by stopping bad materials from being introduced
into the production process, ensuring there are no damaged goods being
introduced into inventory, and making sure that we get what we paid for.
Receiving are the gatekeepers for materials entering the facility. If they fail to
Deﬁning the Business Risks of the Enterprise: Utilizing Key Outcomes
n
141

perform this key responsibility, the consequences can be dire. Some key
outcomes include the following:
n
Ensure backorders are created
n
Ensure right quantities are received
n
Ensure right items are received
n
Ensure that quality items are received
n
Ensure no damaged items are received
n
Ensure that items received timely
Inventory Control (IC)
You cannot build what you don’t have, and you can’t sell what you don’t build.
IC must ensure that what appears on the stock status is accurate and that the
inventory levels are always veriﬁed to the physical inventory as required. It is
critical that there be a high degree of accuracy maintained in the stock status as
it impacts production planning and control, engineering, manufacturing,
shipping, and everything in between and beyond. There are numerous risks
that can take place here, but the key outcomes and points of maximum concern
are the following:
n
Maintain accurate inventory records
n
Ensure adequate inventory levels
n
Match the inventory to demand
n
Not tie up excess capital
n
Inventory is available as required
Quality Assurance
QA has been playing a key role in the success of manufacturing concerns
for decades. They constitute the hands-on reality check that is required on a
daily basis. They should be evaluated on their effectiveness and efﬁciency based
on their performance, as you would expect. These outcomes are those that
determine its success or failure as a process on a daily basis. Some of the critical
outcomes that could be considered for this function are the following:
n
Ensure quality of raw materials
n
Ensure quality of work in process
n
Ensure quality of ﬁnished goods
n
Apply consistent QA standards
n
Enhance the product quality
142
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

Manufacturing Departments
The product that determines the success or failure of the organization is squarely
in the hands of these areas, the production departments. Their activities and the
diligence with which they perform them are the keys to bigger and better things
or the slow self-destruction of what was once a great thing.
Ford, as a high-proﬁle manufacturing company, has done a tremendous
job of improving its designs, quality, and overall desirability of the products
while maintaining an intact and loyal dealership network.
In all situations the key outcomes that should be in evidence and utilized to
evaluate these departments would be as follows:
n
Produce high-quality product
n
Produce product on time
n
Produce the right quantity
n
Produce at lowest cost
n
Control production/report accurately
n
Maintain a safe working area
Pick, Pack, and Stage
Getting things organized is critical to ensure that efﬁcient and timely shipping
practices can be employed. There are a number of adverse impacts that will
occur if customer orders are not properly staged and shipped as required.
The goods to be shipped must be picked from inventory accurately, they must
be packed properly to withstand the rigors of shipment, and they must be
assembled with all other items that are part of the same order. Key outcomes
that must be achieved in this area to determine success are as follows:
n
Ensure all items are accurate in order
n
Ensure order is properly packed
n
Ensure that all items in order ship
n
Ensure staging of items is proper
n
Ensure orders are staged timely
Shipping and Logistics
The shipping department is now tasked with the ﬁnal critical task, which is to
ensure that the products are ﬁnally transported in proper condition to the
customer that ordered them. This constitutes another very risky part of the
Deﬁning the Business Risks of the Enterprise: Utilizing Key Outcomes
n
143

process. A number of undesirable things can happen when you have a lot of
activity and equipment all competing for the same space as well as having
outsiders present in the area. Key outcomes of these areas are presented as
suggested things to be considered. Again, opinions may differ, but it is an
excellent starting point for an extremely well-focused risk analysis if nothing else.
Key outcomes include:
n
Ensure all items loaded as staged
n
Ensure entire order is properly loaded and secured
n
Ensure that all items in order ship at once
n
Operate a safe working area
n
Schedule shipping vehicles timely
n
Utilize most efﬁcient shipping method
n
Utilize most effective shipping method
n
Ship all items on schedule
Key outcomes for any area of the enterprise set the stage for assessing risk.
The reason for this conclusion should be obvious. It is resident in the fact that
the failure to achieve the key outcomes of any enterprise subset indicates a risky
state of operation by default. In other words, any time you fail to achieve the
desired outcome, that subset of the organization, program, or whatever is risky
by deﬁnition.
For instance, an organization is responsible for a program such as ‘‘World
Food Program.’’ But here is what occurs. The food is shipped to the dictator’s
country and on to their warehouse. They then sell it on to their buddies so they
can buy a bigger personal jet to leave the country faster when things get hot.
Subsequent to all of the food being shipped to the country, the children still
don’t have rice in their bowls, the people are still malnourished, and the deaths
from starvation still escalate. Does anyone see anything wrong with this
picture?
It’s all about the outcome—nothing more, nothing less!
DEVELOPING KRIs FOR ASSESSING RISK FOR THE
ENTIRE ENTERPRISE
KRIs can be developed for evaluating risk in a number of ways. In this section
we will discuss and present extensive examples of the use of KRIs for these
purposes. We will consider them in a couple of different contexts. We will
144
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

discuss ﬁrst the utilization of KRIs as they relate to identiﬁed critical outcomes
of the enterprise. These KRIs may be used at all levels of the organization
from enterprise, global or high-level risk analysis, to process or task-level risk
analysis.
The second context in which KRIs will be presented is in the more detailed
levels of risk analysis where they can be created for any and all types of risk that
can and will occur throughout the organization. These can be employed in
large numbers when the systemization of the ERM takes place and a very high
level of sophistication of data-centric ERM has been achieved.
KRIs Related to Key Outcomes
Utilizing the key outcomes from the previous section we will now present the
related KRIs that could be employed to determine whether the outcome is being
achieved or not.
Accounting
In evaluating accounting, the KRIs in Table 7.3 could be utilized to determine
their success or failure as a process.
Treasury
Some of the key KRIs that could be utilized in an analysis of Treasury from a key
risk standpoint are shown in Table 7.4.
TABLE 7.3
Financial Statement Accuracy Deﬁned Outcomes/KRIs—Finance
Key Outcomes
KRI
Timeliness of ﬁnancial
information
Days to close
Timeliness of ﬁnancial
information
Completed ﬁnancials by due date
Accuracy of ﬁnancial
information
Number of adjusting journal entries
Accuracy of ﬁnancial
information
Dollar amounts of adjusting journal entries
Accuracy of ﬁnancial
information
Unreconciled balances
Accurate costing of products
Signiﬁcant variances being recorded for labor, material,
and overhead
Accurate costing of products
Margin compression in the product lines
Developing KRIs for Assessing Risk for the Entire Enterprise
n
145

Tax
Evaluating the Tax area without making it too taxing would perhaps be
accomplished by utilizing the related KRIs in Table 7.5.
Legal
The legal area should not abstain from the utilization of KRIs to evaluate its key
outcomes and therefore due consideration should be given to Table 7.6.
TABLE 7.4
Treasury-Deﬁned Outcomes/KRIs—Treasury
Key Outcomes
KRI
Manage cash effectively
Minimization of interest expense
Maximize return on cash
Percent of interest earned
Minimize cash management costs
Bank fees, charges
Manage cash effectively
Idle cash balances
Minimize cost of borrowing
Effective interest rate on debt
TABLE 7.5
Tax-Deﬁned Outcomes/KRIs—Tax
Key Outcomes
KRI
Minimize income tax impact
Taxes as a percent of net income
Minimize personal property taxes
Personal property tax rate as a percent of asset base
Aggressively pursue tax positions
Reserves related to tax events
Successfully defending tax
positions
Reversal of reserves related to tax events
Minimizing real estate taxes
Number of challenges, reductions in assessments
TABLE 7.6
Legal-Deﬁned Outcomes/KRIs—Law
Key Outcomes
KRI
Minimize legal expense
Trends in legal expense
Discourage litigation
Number of litigation actions brought—trend
Effectively manage costs—
litigating
Cost per litigated action—average
Minimize legal losses
Average settlements/verdict lost
Demonstrate litigation prowess
The victories as percent of total cases tried
Demonstrate litigation prowess
Number of cases referred to outside versus
handled internally
Effectiveness of selecting counsel
Outside counsel cost per case
Effectiveness of selecting counsel
Victories in tried cases by outside counsel as percent
146
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

HR
Utilizing KRIs to analyze HR from a key risk standpoint can help to predict
where the landmines of risk exist and can hopefully prevent us from stepping on
them or on as few of them as possible (see Table 7.7).
IT
IT is all about the data; data is what they do for a living. Doesn’t seem logical
that they should be evaluated from a risk standpoint by the very data they help
to create. Utilizing that as an accepted premise, the following KRIs could be
utilized in looking at the related key outcomes (see Table 7.8).
Business Planning
In the world of business planning the future is the timeframe in which they
operate. That is also true of a mature risk assessment environment; it is all
TABLE 7.7
HR-Deﬁned Outcomes/KRIs—HR
Key Outcomes
KRI
Minimize loss of talent
ETO (Employee Turn Over)
Provide good work environment
ETO
Adhere to all key regulations
Fines, penalties, regulatory interventions
Perform effective recruiting
Average employee retention time
Perform background checks
Dismissal for cause statistics
Effective compensation program
ETO, market compensation rates
Provide good beneﬁts
Beneﬁts complaints from employees/ETO
Provide cost effective beneﬁts
Beneﬁts cost per employee
TABLE 7.8
IT-Deﬁned Outcomes/KRIs—IT
Key Outcomes
KRI
Delivering timely information
Downtime, deadlines missed
Provide accurate information
Errors detected in outputs, change requests volumes
Safeguarding of data
Incidents of unauthorized disclosure
Effectively deploying technology
Network downtime
Effectively utilizing technology
No/poor Internet presence
Ensuring processing completeness
Suspense ﬁle volumes
Ensuring processing integrity
Downtime, Hot Site test failures
Deploying new technology
Time elapsed since major upgrade of ERP
Developing KRIs for Assessing Risk for the Entire Enterprise
n
147

about the future. Therefore, developing a reﬁned set of KRIs to evaluate
business planning seems most appropriate. The risk metrics related to the
key outcomes as deﬁned are shown in Table 7.9.
Purchasing
The primary outcomes of purchasing are very well deﬁned, and its key
functionalities are clear. The KRIs in keeping with those functionalities should
be readily available in the ﬁnancial and operational areas. If not, start to worry
now (see Table 7.10).
Sales and Marketing
The future potential of the organization is resting on its ability to effectively
establish itself in the marketplace. Failure to do so is not a viable option for any
organization anticipating a future. If you were to evaluate sales and marketing
TABLE 7.9
Business Planning–Deﬁned Outcomes/KRIs—BP
Key Outcomes
KRI
Identify potential acquisitions
Number of candidates identiﬁed and analyzed versus
selected for further investigation
Identify synergies to be gained
Actual efﬁciencies gained post-acquisition
Effectiveness of business planning
Number of acquisitions that met all original criteria
Maximize return on investment
Actual return on investment post-acquisition
Ensure due diligence is proper
Unanticipated poor results post-acquisition
Ensure due diligence is proper
Number of pre-acquisition adjustments made
Proper valuation of dispositions
Volume of negative price adjustments by an acquirer
ID highly successful organizations
Percentage of acquisitions exceeding expectations
TABLE 7.10
Purchasing-Deﬁned Outcomes/KRIs—SCM
Key Outcomes
KRI
Acquire the right item
Quantity of returned items
Within the right time frame
Out of stocks, downtime
To the correct location
Inventory shortages/inventory overages
Right quality
Quality rejection rates
Acquire the right quantity
Excess and slow-moving inventories
Pay the right price
Unfavorable PPV, increasing average unit price
Right speciﬁcations
Rejections for failure to meet tolerances/requirements
148
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

from a key risk standpoint, the key outcomes above and related KRIs would be
the appropriate starting point (see Table 7.11).
Operations
We will now turn our attention to the operational areas of our discussion. The
operational areas that were mentioned earlier could be evaluated utilizing the
following key outcomes and related KRIs. These are suggestions and brain
teasers, if you can identify better ones, by all means please do.
Production Planning and Control
Planning implies looking ahead and not in the rearview mirror. Therefore the use
of metrics for a forward look at things should resonate well here. The identiﬁed key
outcomes and key risk indicators (KRIs) are set out here (see Table 7.12).
TABLE 7.12
Production Planning and Control–Deﬁned Outcomes/KRIs—PP&C
Key Outcomes
KRI
Maximize production capabilities
Percent of idle capacity/zero activity cells/zero activity
depts.
Complete production on
schedule
Percent of missed ship dates/freight expense
outbound
Maximize efﬁciency in scheduling
Length of cycle time from scheduled to completion
Maximize coordination of
schedule
Delay times in subsets of customers’ orders/late ships
Release jobs to the shop ﬂoor
timely
Idle departments/downtime/indirect labor hours-
standby
Accommodate schedule changes
Cycle time to introduce scrap/rework items
TABLE 7.11
Sales and Marketing–Deﬁned Outcomes/KRIs—Marketing
Key Outcomes
KRI
Provide customer service
Customer complaints/lost volumes
Sell products at the right price
Average selling price/volumes of product sold
Maintain customer base and expand
Customer retention time/loss rates/unit volumes
Preserve company’s rights
Number and amount of unauthorized deductions
taken by customers
Accurately report performance for
bonus purposes
Credit/promos/discount patterns after year end
Maximize advertising money
Patterns in results tied to promotion campaigns
Establish products as brands
Ability to command higher prices than competition
Developing KRIs for Assessing Risk for the Entire Enterprise
n
149

Engineering
The impacts of engineering as demonstrated in the prior discussion are far-
reaching; therefore, the ability to mitigate or eliminate risk in this area should
be of critical importance. Key outcomes and the related KRIs that might be
considered for the engineering area are shown in Table 7.13.
Receiving
Receiving has a number of points of measurement that can be utilized in the
context of assessing risk. Some of the KRIs that could be well received are
deﬁned in Table 7.14.
TABLE 7.13
Engineering-Deﬁned Outcomes with KRIs—Engineering
Key Outcomes
KRI
Determine accurate BOMs
Material substitution variances/unanticipated out of
stock
Designs cost effective to build
Total cost per unit/labor or technology hours per unit
R&D designs meet market
demand
Unit sales of new products introduced
Designs to appropriate use
criteria
Warranty claims/average useful life/customer
complaints
Design things timely
Delays in shipment to customer/idle departments
Designs to appropriate specs
Rejection rates customers/customer change orders
TABLE 7.14
Receiving-Deﬁned Outcomes/KRIs—Receiving
Key Outcomes
KRI
Ensure backorders are created
Backorders every time quantity less than PO
Ensure right quantities are received
Unanticipated stockouts in raw materials/shortages
Ensure right items are received
Items rejected on shop ﬂoor—not to spec/wrong
item
Ensure that quality items are
received
Scrap-out in production/rejected by QA in
production
Ensure no damaged items received
Scrap-out in production/rejected by QA in
production
Ensure that items received timely
Expedited items are received timely
Expedited items cycle time/stock status update time
150
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

Inventory Control
Building an inventory of KRIs for inventory control should not be an over-
whelming task. What we want to do, of course, is to keep them relevant to the
key outcomes of the area. The KRIs that may be most relevant in this type of
operation are shown in Table 7.15.
Quality Assurance
When you undertake the task of developing KRIs for this area, you want to
ensure that they are high quality, or they might not pass inspection. Based on
the following critical outcomes, some of the KRIs that would yield a high-
quality result are shown in Table 7.16.
Manufacturing Departments
Developing a set of KRIs that are highly effective and useful is what we want to
achieve in these enterprise subsets due to their critical nature. We don’t want
to just manufacture anything, hope it meets expectations, and hope it sells.
We want to produce those sleek, highly functional products that will be
TABLE 7.15
Inventory Control–Deﬁned Outcomes with KRIs—IC
Key Outcomes
KRI
Maintain accurate inventory records
Volume of cycle count adjustments
Ensure adequate inventory levels
MRP inadequate stock levels incidents
Match the inventory to demand
Obsolete and slow-moving/stockouts
Do not tie up excess capital
Obsolete and slow-moving
Inventory available as required
Stockouts/indirect labor hours—material shortages
TABLE 7.16
Quality Assurance–Deﬁned Outcomes/KRIs—QA
Key Outcomes
KRI
Ensure quality of raw materials
Rejection rates at receiving/scrapout rates in production
Ensure quality of work in
process
Rejection rates in Work in Process (WIP) versus rejection
rates in ﬁnished goods
Ensure quality of ﬁnished
goods
Rejection rates in Finished Goods (FG)/returned product-
quality issues
Apply consistent QA
standards
Rejection rates trends/actual negative quality events
Enhance the product quality
Larger market share/branding/higher price
Developing KRIs for Assessing Risk for the Entire Enterprise
n
151

extremely efﬁcient and effective in the hands of the customer. Some relevant
KRIs that could be utilized to evaluate these departments are shown in
Table 7.17.
Pick, Pack, and Stage
Highly insightful and meaningful KRIs are not just picked out of the air. They
are carefully packaged and staged to yield the maximum result in evaluating
risk in key areas such as this. Key outcomes in this area could be deﬁned
utilizing the KRIs presented in Table 7.18.
Shipping and Logistics
Logistically your KRIs should be timely and focused, and lead you to the right
destination. In this area with a well-deﬁned set of related KRIs, your ship will
sail smoothly across the seas of commerce. KRIs to keep in mind are shown in
Table 7.19.
TABLE 7.18
Pick, Pack, and Stage–Deﬁned Outcomes/KRIs—PPS
Key Outcomes
KRI
Ensure all items are accurate in
order
Credit memos for wrong items/shipping expense 3þ
Ensure order is properly packed
Credit memos for damaged goods—nontransport
Ensure that all items in order ship
Credit memo for items short/shipping expense 2þ
Ensure staging of items together
Credit memo for items short/shipping expense 2þ
Ensure orders staged timely
Demurrage charges/shipping expense 2þ
TABLE 7.17
Manufacturing-Deﬁned Outcomes/KRIs—Manufacturing
Key Outcomes
KRI
Produce high-quality product
Rejection rates in production cycle/ﬁnished goods
Produce product on time
Cycle time on the shop ﬂoor/missed production
schedules
Produce the right quantity
Net quantity produced versus shop order requirements
Produce at lowest cost
Labor/material cost per unit/unfavorable variances
Control production/report
accurately
Items reported—quantity versus added to inventory/
shortages
Maintain a safe working area
Lost time injuries/workman’s compensation claims
152
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

The ability to identify key outcomes and then to deﬁne KRIs that clearly
measure whether the outcomes are being achieved or not is a science unto
itself. I do not proclaim to be the only person that can do this by a long shot.
However, I would not be reticent to state that I would have little difﬁculty in
deﬁning key outcomes for any organization of any type.
Then by association, I would have no reluctance in taking on the task of
identifying the KRIs that should be utilized in any and all situations to
objectively evaluate said outcomes. I sincerely believe that somehow, someway
all outcomes and therefore by extension all risks can be measured with only
rare exceptions. But to do this requires imagination, business knowledge, and
desire.
DETAILED INVENTORIES OF KRIs: WHEN GREATER
AUTOMATION/SOPHISTICATION IS ACHIEVED
In an attempt to demonstrate that the closing paragraph of the preceding
section is true, I will present a series of pairings of related risk events and KRIs.
The pairings will be presented in various areas of the enterprise.
Financial
Table 7.20 shows some lower-level and more speciﬁc KRIs that can be utilized
to monitor or evaluate risk events in the ﬁnancial area.
Some others of importance that could be considered might be those shown
in Table 7.21.
TABLE 7.19
Shipping and Logistics–Deﬁned Outcomes/KRIs—S&L
Key Outcomes
KRI
Ensure all items loaded as staged
Credit memos for wrong items/shipping expense 3þ
Ensure order is properly loaded
Credit memos for damaged goods in transit
Ensure that all items in order ship
Credit memo for items short/shipping expense 2þ
Operate a safe working area
Lost time accidents/WC claims/litigation for injuries
Schedule shipping vehicles timely
Demurrage charges/shipping expense 2þ
Most efﬁcient shipping method
Freight/forwarding expense
Most effective shipping method
Customer claims/complaints
Ship all items on schedule
Missed shipping dates/delivery dates
Detailed Inventories of KRIs
n
153

TABLE 7.20
Risk Events/KRIs—Financial
Risk Event
KRI
Bond covenants violated
Notiﬁcation of violation of covenants
Delays in ﬁnancial reporting
Reporting deadlines missed
Financials inaccuracy
Signiﬁcant deviation period to period
Failure to recognize expenses timely
Smoothing of ﬁnancial results—
expenses
Inventory valuation—misstated
Inventory adjustments—valuation
Management fraud—misrepresentation of
ﬁnancial statements
Inconsistency in ﬁnancials versus
market/economy
Misstatement of ﬁnancials
Inconsistency with industry/
competition
Net income manipulation
Cost/unit of volume inconsistent
Not funding/underfunding pension plan
Actuarial studies—investments versus
liability
Repair accrual inadequate
Actual repairs > accrued balances
Unrecognized contingency/Off the B/S liabilities
Restoration requirements versus
accruals
Director and ofﬁcer liability for misstatement/
inaccurate ﬁnancials
Utilization of D&O liability insurance
Shareholder action versus organization
Shareholder action/initiatives proxy
The Enron Syndrome
Minimal deviation from budget/
targets
IRS–FICA/withholding nonpayment
IRS interest penalties
IRS—income tax payments not made
IRS interest penalties
Failure to capture revenue/untimely capture
Average unit sales price declining
Improper revenue recognition
Average unit sales price increasing
Not capturing revenue accurately
Inconsistency in revenue/sales
volumes
Payroll—duplicate payments
Inability to reconcile payroll
Payroll—overtime payments inaccurate
Employee complaints to payroll
Payroll—overpayment
Average labor cost per unit increasing
Payroll—ghost employees
Unclaimed W2s
Payroll—underpayments
Manual/reissued checks
A/P—Paying too much for goods/services
Missed cash discounts
A/P—Risk of restricted terms such as COD
Days in A/P increasing
Future liability—cash discounts taken not earned
Unearned cash discounts taken
154
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

Examples of high-level global types of key risk indicators that could be
utilized within the ﬁnancial area are as follows:
n
Cash position
n
Increasing days in Accounts Receivable
n
Increasing days in Accounts Payable
n
Declining operating margins
Multiple accounts payable—locations vendors not
paid timely
Vendors’ interest charges
Improper aging of A/R
Signiﬁcant favorable improvement in
age buckets
Untimely/inaccurate invoicing
Customer complaints/credit memos
issued
Credit risk/A/R buildup/ﬁctitious sales
Days in A/R increasing
Customer insolvency
Receivables write-offs
Customer credit—overextended
Days in A/R increasing
Fixed assets value—misstated
Depreciation/amortization
understated
Assets not transitioned correctly in system
changeover
Variation of subledgers to new
system balances
Construction in Progress (CIP) not moved to
ﬁxed assets timely
Completion versus capitalization
date delay
TABLE 7.21
Risk Events/KRIs—Global Financial
Risk Event
KRI
Signiﬁcant Sarbanes-Oxley violation—ﬁnancials
Days to close extending
Signiﬁcant Sarbanes-Oxley violation—ﬁnancials
Number of adjusting entries
Signiﬁcant Sarbanes-Oxley violation—ﬁnancials
Dollar volume of adjusting entries
Cash shortage
Accelerating accounts receivable
Cash shortage
Increasing accounts payable
Financial statement manipulation
Always matching expectations
Capital shortage
Aging asset base
Signiﬁcant operational problems
High volumes of credit memos
Lack of pricing power
Downward trend in prices
TABLE 7.20
(Continued )
Risk Event
KRI
Detailed Inventories of KRIs
n
155

n
Declining ﬁxed asset base
n
Shrinking current ratio
n
Declining sales volumes
n
Increasing inventory balances
n
Signiﬁcant unfavorable purchase price variances
n
Inverted loan portfolio curve
n
Increasing inventory of nonperforming loans
n
Increase the debt-to-equity ratio increasing interest expense
n
Decreasing interest earnings
n
Increase in interest expenses
n
Increase in bad debt reserves
n
Increase in inventories obsolescence reserves
n
Volume of write-offs and obsolete and slow-moving inventories
Operational
As in ﬁnance there are plenty of examples that can be offered up as regards
operational failures to perform; here are just a few to demonstrate the point. An
operational risk register may look like Table 7.22 detailing the risk event and
key risk indicators.
Examples of high-level global types of key risk indicators that could be
utilized within the operational area are as follows. Examples of global risks and
indicators are shown in Table 7.23.
Other high-level KRIs that can be utilized in operational areas would be as
follows:
n
Quality indicators
n
Workman’s compensation claims
n
Returned goods and services
n
Warranty claims
n
Demurrage charges
n
Customer complaints
n
Late deliveries
n
Overtime hours
n
Production declines
n
Indirect labor hours
n
Morbidity rates
n
Recidivism rates
n
Number of loss events
156
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

TABLE 7.22
Risk Events/KRIs—Operational
Risk
KRI
Drivers exceed 15 hour/day DOT limits/70
hours week
Drivers logs versus payroll hours
Intervention by regulators—Increase in WC
claims
WC Claims Trend
Maintenance of trucks not done as required
Lack of entries to a preventive maintenance
log
Contractor fatalities
Number of Incidents/M(O)SHA actions
Batch plant freezes up and nonfunctional
0 production volume
Cold joint slabs—pour too slow
Number of re-pours
Concrete fails strength tests—core/swiss
hammer
Number of failures
Customer call system not logged off
properly
Customer complaints
Customer call system unresponsive
Excessive wait time
Injuries to others performing activities on
our property
Incident reports to risk management
Lost loads
Failure to deliver notices from customers
Quality assurance failure
Increasing costs
Untimely calls to drivers on canceled jobs
Paid with no delivery
Liability for concrete spill/dump property
damage
Expenses
Increase in litigation—personal injury
Lawsuits/incidents
Heat at job site not 280–300 degrees
Reshipment and reinstall costs
Order canceled after asphalt plant startups
Expenses with no revenue
Blending system inaccurate = bad mix
Shipments rejected
Decrease in production levels
Tons of output
Operating costs increasing
Total operations expense
Labor costs increasing
Total labor hours
Overtime hours increasing
Total hours of overtime
Personal injury/death—employee
Number of reported incidents
Personal injury/death—person on premises
Number of reported incidents
Products losing leadership position
Decline in primary product line volumes
Total dependence on limited products/
applications
New road construction technology
Increase in litigation—personal injury
Lawsuits/incidents
(continued )
Detailed Inventories of KRIs
n
157

Excessive labor content in product cost
Labor $/unit produced
Excessive material handling expense
Material movement cost/unit produced
Site cannot be worked—material slide/cave-
in
Clean up expenses/nonproductive labor
Failure of scaling system to interface with
auto custom mix system
Manual activity/invoicing/adjustments
Breach of contract
Notiﬁcations of contract breach
Flyrock—Injury and damage
Payment by locations to complainants
Personal injury—third-party contractor
Number of reported incidents
Personal property damage
Number of reported incidents
Product liability—failure
Number of reported incidents
Product liability—personal injury
Number of reported incidents
Real property damage
Number of reported incidents
Competitive disadvantage
Loss of market share
Drop off in demand for primary product
lines—economy
Volume decline in primary products
Geographic shift of the market away from
locations
Volume decline in primary products
Transportation costs restrict entry to market
and pricing
Transportation cost/ton
Customer conﬁdence decreasing
Customer complaints
Negative community impact—bad neighbor
Volume of complaints—neighbors
Undesirable public behavior by employees
Arrests—actions by law enforcement
Increase in litigation—nuisance issues
Lawsuits/claims
Increase in litigation—small claims
Claims/incidents
Conveyors over highway transporting
rock—new quarry
Number of incidents of material spills/
damage
Increase in litigation—personal injury
Lawsuits/incidents
Accidents involving aggregate haulers with
our loads
Number of incidents
Aggregate haulers not available for
transport of materials
Missed deliveries
Customer dissatisfaction with products/
services
Customer volumes/sales declines
Excessive rework of products required
Total reshipped units/total units shipped
TABLE 7.22
(Continued )
Risk
KRI
158
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

Inefﬁcient plant utilization/effectiveness
Electricity cost
Increase in litigation—personal injury
Lawsuits/incidents
Site cannot be worked—site is ﬂooded/too
wet to work
Clean-up expenses/nonproductive labor
Steel fabrication contractors—poor-quality
work
Collapse or failure
Fraud/kickbacks on construction
Large volume # of change orders
Purchase card discount not received/
applied
No records of discount received
Turnkey operations—failure to fulﬁll
obligations
Lack of capital replacement as required
Local contractors selected as opposed to
qualiﬁed low bid
Change orders—# volume
Low cost bidder selected—not pre-qualiﬁed
Change orders—# volume
Fraud can be perpetrated within vendor
relationships
Channeling of purchases to one vendor
Gentleman’s agreement used instead of
contract
Channeling of purchases to one vendor
Inability of contractors to guarantee work/
indemniﬁcation
Poor ﬁnancial condition
Ineffective vendor rating system
High volume of adjustments in A/P
Insurance certiﬁcates not current
No central records of certiﬁcates—capital
Lease interest rates not ﬁxed—interest rate
acceleration
Increase in interest expense
Purchase cards/check requests bypass
purchasing
Percentage of total purchases
Purchase cards not properly monitored
No detail transaction review
Purchasing activities are inefﬁcient
Blanket orders as % of total purchases
Subcontractors work not controlled/
guaranteed
Contract language
Third-party liability not indemniﬁed
Litigation $/case
Turnkey operations—insolvency of third
party
Certiﬁcation of ﬁnancial statements
Turnkey operations—third-party owner
operates
Contract language
Vendors given preferential treatment
Channeling of purchases to one vendor
Vendors not effectively evaluated for
stability
Bankruptcy, liens
(continued )
TABLE 7.22
(Continued )
Detailed Inventories of KRIs
n
159

n
Legal expenses
n
Unanticipated capital replacements
n
Accelerating unit costs
n
Loss of market share
n
Signiﬁcant concentration of all types of credit memos
Volume discounts are not maximized with
vendors
No central purchasing function
Financial/other exposure at end of lease
Costs to relocate operations
Operating leases improperly written to
protect organization
Financial losses due to contract language
Operating leases not effective
Cost of operating lease versus ownership
Poor contacting practices—purchasing
Penalties paid
Poor contracting—capital expansion
Modiﬁcations and change orders
Poor contracting—third-party operators
Litigation $ to enforce contract
Poor contracting practices—subcontractors
Litigation $ to enforce contract
Inability to acquire more green areas of
sufﬁcient size
Cost/acre large tracts prohibitive
Reserves not sufﬁcient to sustain market
expansion
Product shortages—by market
Coastal—unanticipated sink hole develops
Consultant $s/hours to rectify
Diminishing site reserves/deposits
Decline in region/company-wide reserves
DNR/DEQ—repetitive violations
Increasing number of inspections/onsite
days
Negative community impact—environment
Clean-up expenses/damage settlements
EPA/DEQ/DNR—groundwater impact
Fines/penalties/clean-up expense
EPA/DEQ/DNR air pollution—dust particles
Fines/penalties/clean-up expense
DNR/DEQ—noncompliance
Fines/penalties/clean-up expense
EPA—Superfund Legislation
Culpability under deﬁnitions
Environmental issues caused by lessees on
our property
Incidents of spills/noncontainment
Site restoration—not performed or
excessive
Cost of site restoration
Failure to resolve environmental issues
Increase in incidents
TABLE 7.22
(Continued )
Risk
KRI
160
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

Regulatory
As in Finance and Operations there are plenty of examples that can be offered
up in regard to regulatory risk events, and as you would expect there is some
overlap to be anticipated. A regulatory risk register might look like Table 7.24
detailing the risk event and key risk indicators.
Examples of high-level global types of key risk indicators that could be
utilized within the regulatory area are as follows. Example of risks and
indicators are shown in Table 7.25.
Other high-level KRIs that can be utilized in the regulatory area would be
as follows:
n
Workman’s compensation claims
n
Legal expense
n
Number of open compliance issues
n
Regulatory ﬁnes
n
Regulatory penalties
n
Frequency of regulatory intervention by type
n
Disgruntled employees
n
High rates of employee turnover
n
Repeatedly exceeding mandated regulatory timeframes
n
Regulatory hot buttons from Web sites
n
Increase in compliance costs
n
Cost of external assistance in compliance areas
n
Volumes of HIPAA data on premises
n
Number of employees impacted by Family Leave Act
TABLE 7.23
Risk Events/KRIs—Global Operational
Risk Event
KRI
Unsafe workplace
Number of lost-time injuries
Poor product quality
Volume of warranty claims
Untimely delivery
Customer complaints
Unresponsiveness at phone center
Abandonment rates
Ineffective R&D
Lack of market acceptability
Poorly designed advertising campaigns
Lack of anticipated results
Ineffective training
Low productivity
Machinery downtime
Low preventive maintenance costs
Unacceptable customer service
Declining customer base
Detailed Inventories of KRIs
n
161

TABLE 7.24
Risk Events/KRIs—Regulatory
Risk
Key Risk Indicator
DNR/DEQ—repetitive violations
Increasing number of inspections/onsite days
Negative community impact—
environment
Clean-up expenses/damage settlements
EPA/DEQ/DNR—Groundwater impact
Fines/penalties/clean-up expense
EPA/DEQ/DNR Air Pollution—Dust
particles
Fines/penalties/clean-up expense
DNR/DEQ—Noncompliance
Fines/penalties/clean-up expense
EPA—Superfund legislation
Culpability under deﬁnitions
Environmental issues caused by lessees
on our property
Incidents of spills/noncontainment
Site restoration—not performed or
excessive
Cost of site restoration
Failure to resolve environmental issues
Increase in incidents
Nonpayment of taxes
Fines/penalties
Overpayment of property taxes—
inaccurate asset locations
Inaccuracy in asset listings—PPT Jurisdictions
Assets purchased in acquisition at wrong
basis
Inconsistent valuation criteria applied
SEC—misstatement of ﬁnancials for tax
cushions booked
Cushions accrued versus used
State—Income tax not paid properly
Fines and penalties re: state taxes
Critical transactions not recognized for
tax consequences
Inability to identify critical tax issues
Development data availability/accuracy
Inability to identify critical tax issues
Inaccurate calculation of time value of
money
Interest expense and penalties paid versus
interest saved
Tax planning risk model not effective
Actual outcome versus anticipated
Tax software not useful for purpose
intended
Manual operations instead of using SW
Tax strategies overly aggressive
$ adjustments paid to taxing authorities
Disclosure of medical/drug information
Medical/drug information in personnel ﬁle
IRS—Independent contractors violation
Proportion of workforce that are IC
Environmental issues not properly
evaluated at acquisition
Subsequent shutdown
No environmental audits performed on
acquisitions
Environmental audit expenses
162
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

Purchase or acquire contaminated
property
Fines/penalties/clean-up expense
Increase in litigation—environmental
issues
Lawsuits/incidents
Effective risk assessment of ongoing
operations not done
Open items not followed up on
Ineffective evaluation of acquisition
candidate prior to close
Environmental audit expenses
Permit acquisition—Inability to obtain/
costly
Applied for versus granted
Phase I environmental audits ineffective
Environmental insurance claim
Beneﬁts not offered to contractors/
temps who = employees
Federal guidelines for exempt employees not
met
Classiﬁcations of employees not
correct—Exempt and Non
Federal guidelines for exempt employees not
met
OSHA/MSHA incident reporting inaccurate Incidents versus reported discrepancy
Workers Compensation Claims—Cross-
over to HB plan
Incidents versus WC claims
Litigation for regulatory violation
Increase in legal fees/special counsel
Denial, loss, or restriction of permits
Lost production days
Litigation for regulatory violation—
Industry-based
Regulatory actions against competitors
MSHA—safety inspections required on
equipment
Accidents with no equipment record
ADA—medical information present in
employment ﬁles
Medical info present
ADA—Working conditions do not
accommodate
Fines/penalties/rectiﬁcation expense
Contract labor/temporary employees
Independent contractors meet IRS tests
HIPPA—Medical information not being
held conﬁdential
Medical info present
ADA—Segregation of medical
information violation
Medical info present
ADA—Worker accommodation violation
Notices of violations/litigation
ATF explosives handling/reporting
Citations of violations from regulators
COBRA constructive notice of beneﬁts
Fines and penalties
COBRA monitoring of eligibility
Part/ETO 18 m
EEOC—Discrimination against minority
contractors
Notices of violations/litigation
(continued )
TABLE 7.24
(Continued )
Detailed Inventories of KRIs
n
163

EEOC age discrimination
Average age of persons laid off or ﬁred
EEOC hostile workplace (sexual
harassment)
Number of complaints to human resources
EEOC violation—Hiring discrimination
Notices of violations/litigation/ﬁnes/penalties
EEOC violation—Promotion
discrimination
Notices of violations/litigation/ﬁnes/penalties
EPA protected species violation
Notices of violations/litigation/ﬁnes/penalties
EPA Superfund cleanup violation
Notices of violations/litigation/ﬁnes/penalties
Family Leave Act denial of employment
Notices of violations/litigation/ﬁnes/penalties
FLRB—Unions and elections—Violations
Notices of violations/litigation/ﬁnes/penalties
Health beneﬁts discrimination
Notices of violations/litigation/ﬁnes/penalties
HIPAA—Medical information conﬁdent
Notices of violations/litigation/ﬁnes/penalties
Local—Air quality violation
Notices of violations/litigation/ﬁnes/penalties
Local—Building code violation
Notices of violations/litigation/ﬁnes/penalties
Local—Fire Marshall violation
Notices of violations/litigation/ﬁnes/penalties
Local—Land use planning and
regulations-permit loss
Notices of violations/litigation/ﬁnes/penalties
Local—Noise ordinance violation
Notices of violations/litigation/ﬁnes/penalties
Local—Special assessments
unanticipated
Notices of violations/litigation/ﬁnes/penalties
Local—Zoning violation
Notices of violations/litigation/ﬁnes/penalties
MSHA noise standards not adhered to
Notices of violations/litigation/ﬁnes/penalties
MSHA diesel emissions std. not adhered
to—Particulates
Notices of violations/litigation/ﬁnes/penalties
Overtime payment propriety
Overtime hour concentration with certain
employees
Random drug screens—performance
Maintenance of drug screens on premises
Robinson-Patman predatory/unfair
pricing
Pricing patterning
State—DNR efﬂuent discharge violation
Notices of violations/litigation/ﬁnes/penalties
State—DNR—site restoration
Notices of violations/litigation/ﬁnes/penalties
State—DNR air quality
Notices of violations/litigation/ﬁnes/penalties
State—DNR water table pollution/
impact
Notices of violations/litigation/ﬁnes/penalties
State—Sales and use tax
Notices of violations/litigation/ﬁnes/penalties
TABLE 7.24
(Continued )
Risk
Key Risk Indicator
164
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

n
Number of employees in the military
n
Percent of employment base that are independent contractors
n
Percent of employment base that are temporary employees
n
Volume of hazmat material on the premises
n
Volumes of explosive materials on the premises
Technological
The same rules apply regarding the number and variety of risk events that can
exist in IT/technology. A technology risk register may look Table 7.26,
detailing the risk event and key risk indicators.
Examples of high-level global types of key risk indicators that could be
utilized within the IT/Technology area are as follows in Table 7.27.
Other high-level KRIs that can be utilized in the IT/Technology area would
be as follows:
n
Turnover rates in technical IT positions
n
Downtime
State—Hours and wages, breaks, and
workers’ rights
Notices of violations/litigation/ﬁnes/penalties
State—Unemployment compensation
not covered
Notices of violations/litigation/ﬁnes/penalties
Sexual discrimination—Hostile work place
Suggestive material present on site—volume
TABLE 7.25
Risk Events/KRIs—Global Regulatory
Risk Event
KRI
Unsafe workplace
OSHA violations/penalties
Discriminatory employment practices
Employee complaints
Untimely processing of claims
Low ﬁrst-pass rate
Untimely processing of claims
SIC ﬁnes and penalties
Violation of grant reporting requirements
Loss of grant funding
Failing to constructively notify on COBRA
Excessive ﬁnes and penalties
Major environmental violations
Signiﬁcant increase in the legal expense
Failure to ﬁle taxes promptly
Fines and penalties
Failure to ﬁle required reports w/SEC
Fines, penalties, delisting
TABLE 7.24
(Continued )
Detailed Inventories of KRIs
n
165

TABLE 7.26
Risk Events/KRIs—Technology
Risk
KRI
Servers at remote locations not overseen
by IS
Downtime/loss of data
Inefﬁcient utilization of IS/IT resources
IT cost per gigabyte of data
Required capital expenditures—Information
Technology
Three releases behind on vendor software
Nonstandardization of processing platforms
Inventory of operating systems/platforms
Physical security over servers
Number of user control servers
Training of user department on system is
deﬁcient
Minimal or zero training expenses
Employees not deactivated after
termination
File compare active employees to security
ﬁle
Field techs share passwords with others
File compare for access/location/
attendance
Passwords not changed as required
Password effective time length
Security by job position—status not
changed
Multiple accesses/employee
Sharing of passwords by employees
Follow compare for password use/
attendance
No tech support and ownership of interfaces
written
Contract language regarding IP ownership
Ineffective help desk operation—Reporting
Coding inaccuracy in help tickets
Excessive modiﬁcations of software
Custom programming costs
Inability to integrate ERP effectively
Downtime/extended processing time
Inability to integrate application software
effectively
Downtime/extended processing time
Inability to perform—Database
administration
Job turnover stats—DBAs
Inability to perform technical support of
application systems
Consultant reliance/fees/hours
Ineffective help desk operation—Assistance
Call time/abandonment rates
Ineffective application support
programming
Failure on systems test/repeated user
change requests
Ineffective system utilization
Required data not available timely
Intellectual property rights not secured—
Systems
Loss of code/programming delays
Multi-vendor system strategy not effective
Time required to resolve problematic issues
Poor Contracting—Vendor developed SW
Cost overruns/delayed implementations
166
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

n
Transaction processing time
n
Number of suspended transactions
n
Reporting deadlines missed
n
Volume of conﬁdential data to be managed
n
Number of different technology platforms/application systems
n
Percentage of business conducted on the Internet
n
IT operating costs per GB/TB of data
n
Number of new systems implementations undertaken
n
Number of outsourced IT arrangements
n
Percentage of business conducted at shared sites
n
Number of emergency ﬁx procedures invoked
n
Failed tests of uninterruptible power supplies
n
Loss of communication with point-of-sale terminals
Poor implementation of vendor developed
SW-users
Zero training expense/repeated helpdesk
calls
Replacement of application system
potential
More than three releases behind/high
maintenance costs
Software Publishers Association (SPA)—Not
in compliance with SW licensing copyrights
No oversight of utilization rates/licensing
Underutilization of systems capability and
capacity
Percentage of capabilities actually utilized
Unreliable IS/IT Communications
Downtime of communication links
Data lost in transmission via
communications links
Downtime comm. links/volume of data lost
Inability to perform technical support of
operating systems
Job turnover stats—technical support
positions
Ineffectiveness of Internet site
Hits versus transactions consummated
Intranet/Internet utilization operational
impact
Customer/afﬁliate feedback/survey
outcomes
Capacity does not meet requirements
Capacity analysis—utilization %
Inability to recover from outage/interruption
Recovery time increasing
Ineffectiveness of disaster recovery plan—
Hot site
Promised recovery time versus test results
Ineffective anti-virus policies and
procedures
Virus infection of environment
No fallback plan if servers fail
Recovery time/inability to recover
Network/system downtime/loss
Dropped communications freq.
TABLE 7.26
(Continued )
Detailed Inventories of KRIs
n
167

n
Number of data integrity issues in data warehouse
n
Inability to process critical transactions timely
n
Number of systems that have historically not met budget criteria
n
Turnaround time on required program changes
The previous discussion was for the purpose of energizing the concept of
utilizing metrics for risk assessment. As can be seen by this exercise, the
utilization of metrics can range from very high-level types of metrics to
extremely low-level types of metrics and everything in between. The point is
neither to overburden the enterprise with metrics nor to get into the minutiae
of metrics in evaluating risk, but to demonstrate that virtually everything can
be measured. The key exercise is to determine what things are worth
measuring and then to utilize those as our risk criteria that we are going
to track.
Depending on the business, there are limitless numbers of key risk
indicators that could be employed. What has to be determined is which are
the best key indicators for your particular business and establish those
inventories for your usage.
In the next section we will not only talk about establishing risk registers;
we will also utilize key parts of the organization from an administrative and
operating standpoint as examples. These examples will then be accompanied by
metrics of their key areas of concern that should be measured in each of these to
actively manage risk effectively on a day-to-day basis.
TABLE 7.27
Risk Events/KRIs—Technology Global
Risk Event
KRI
A compromise of critical sensitive data
Number of locations available
A compromise of critical sensitive data
Number of accesses granted to ﬁles
Loss of processing capability
Increasing downtime
Loss of processing capability
Very high percentage of capacity utilization
Ineffective helpdesk
Repetitive calls for same events
User dissatisfaction with a system
Excessive change requests
Ineffective front end edit and validation
Growing suspense ﬁle volumes
Inability to recover from a major outage
Recovery times/failure rates at hot sites
Ineffective systems implementation
Lack of usable or desirable data/productivity
decline
168
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

BUILDING A BASELINE RISK REGISTER
Risk registers are some of the most important elements of an ERM environment.
Risk registers should be built for each and every logical business subset of the
organization. The process of building a baseline risk register, one that is
fundamental and easy to utilize, should be viewed as a straightforward process.
The ﬁrst step is to determine what the primary functionality is of the logical
business subset for which the risk register is being created. The second step is to
deﬁne what the key outcomes are that are desired from the primary function-
ality of the business subset. The third step is to identify other risks that could
prevent the key outcomes from occurring. Or, in a minimalist type of approach,
take the inverse of the outcome, and utilize that as the critical risk. The fourth
step is to identify KRIs, key risk indicators, for each of the risks, outcomes, or
both depending upon your approach and incorporate those. The ﬁfth step is to
relate the key risk to the key mitigation technique, or in certain cases the
related risk response, to ensure that the risk is properly controlled, limited, or
responded to. The sixth step is to enhance the risk register with graphics
displaying the risk or however one would choose to do so to maximize its
utilization.
The risk registers can all be built with Excel spreadsheets, as they are very
common and people know how to use them; then these can be embedded in the
physical mapping of the enterprise. This practice will be discussed in the next
section to highlight why this might be done and some of the key advantages of
doing so.
Figure 7.3 is an example of a risk register and how it might be created for
assimilation into an enterprise risk management scenario.
EMBEDDING RISK REGISTERS AND KEY INFORMATION
IN THE PHYSICAL MAPPING
The physical mapping of the enterprise is an essential part of making ERM
successful. It will take discipline to put the map together and to include all
aspects of the enterprise. However, not employing this discipline and expecting
to have a successful ERM environment should normally be considered mutu-
ally exclusive. Without understanding where the organization operates, what
it consists of operationally, and how it is physically structured, it becomes
virtually impossible to effectively analyze risk.
Embedding Risk Registers
n
169

One of the great advantages of making a physical map is that it allows you
to embed all of the key information relative to risk, controls, IT environments,
or whatever other information you would like to readily access. By creating
such a structure, you actually develop a central repository of all the critical
information you need to run an ERM environment. This can be irreplaceable for
effective corporate governance.
Within the mapping, the objects that would be embedded include all of the
key data and information as well as illustrations and diagrams if required. This
could be accomplished by populating Excel spreadsheets with this information
and then embedding them in the mapped diagram. If the map diagram is
created with Microsoft Visio, which nicely integrates with other Microsoft ofﬁce
products, a central repository of all risk, control, and governance information
could be available at your ﬁngertips for the use of all in the organization.
An example of what a physical map may look like is illustrated in Figure 7.4
with risk registers shown embedded in the map for ease of reference. Other
illustrations are also embedded at the various locations such as IT environment
diagrams and process maps.
By building a skeleton of the organization in the form of a physical
mapping, you can construct something very similar to how the human body
FIGURE 7.3
Risk Register—Example
170
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

FIGURE 7.4
Physical Map of Operations—Embedded Risk Registers
171

functions. The skeleton is the basis for all that is supported, the risk registers
diagrams are the musculature, the data that ﬂows up and down the
logical data pathways are the blood ﬂow and nervous systems. This is all
capped off with how it is displayed visually, which are the physical features
of the corporate entity. This means you can make it as sophisticated as
you like, or just utilize the basics, as long as they meet the needs of the
organization.
THE MODULAR APPROACH
In those situations where it is not possible to determine the entire physical
structure in one exercise, or where it may not be practical to do so in the short
term or near term, organizations can employ the modular approach. The
modular approach centers on the most critical risk areas of the entire
organization. That then is the basis for setting precedents for establishing
the ERM environment in the most expeditious manner.
What we’re not trying to do in this book is to create a monster; all we want
is a logical and systematic approach that is strategically laid out. If you have the
resources and the commitment to undertake the entire organization at one
time, by all means do it. If you do not have such resources or do not have the
commitment, then bite it off a piece at a time.
One way of accomplishing this is by utilizing the modular approach, which
then by deﬁnition centers on the key areas of risk with the intention of
strategically aligning them into an ERM environment.
If the intent is to follow the logical approach set out in this book for the
creation of your ERM environment, start where you have the best data.
Unfortunately, the one drawback here is that the best data normally resides
in ﬁnance, and, as we already established, that is not where risk resides, but it is
good for the historical context of the impacts.
The best option is to search out the ﬁnancial information that gives you
insight into the operational areas of your business where the problematic
conditions exist for purposes of managing risk.
It would stand to reason that one of the ﬁrst key exercises would be to
get all information that is relevant to customer service. Without question,
the biggest risk you can have is no customers. Therefore by deﬁnition, if you
have no other alternative, start with anything relevant to how happy your
customers are.
172
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

In ﬁnance some of this information would be data such as:
n
Credit memos
n
Deductions or short plays
n
Allowances
n
Free goods or services
n
Discounts
n
Number of units shipped/services rendered
In operations some of the information and data would be:
n
Customer complaints
n
Volume declines
n
Lack of orders booking
n
Quality and defect occurrences
n
Customer turnover statistics
n
Inventory buildup
Once you have determined your critical areas of risk, you can start to put
them in place one at time. The objective of the exercise would be to move on to
the next area of maximum risk and utilize the best data available to build a
methodology in that area and so on. You would simply progress stepwise from
there but in a logical fashion.
The modularapproach isreallyaboutbuilding an ERM environment in some
systematic fashion a piece at a time until the whole project is complete. This may
be a preferable strategy when resources and/or commitment are limited or
severely lacking. However, this is not the preferable way to build an ERM
environment. For an ERM environment to be highly functional, approaching
it in a piecemeal fashion may be counterproductive. However, given the
alternative of not having an ERM environment at all, this is deﬁnitely preferable.
DETERMINING A FOCUSED OUTCOME GROUP (FOG)
A method of approaching a modular ERM environment or, as an alternative,
establishing focused risk analyses methodologies, you can construct focused
outcome groups (FOGs). There are certain parts of the enterprise that lend
themselves naturally to objective-based risk assessment.
Determining a Focused Outcome Group (FOG)
n
173

These groups are naturals for analytically applied techniques and as such
should be evaluated accordingly. Therefore, even if you run a subjective-based
environment, although I hope not, you could intersperse FOGs within that
environment as well.
There are a number of advantages that can be gained by utilizing metrics
whenever possible even if it is not on a grander scale of ERM. Focused outcome
groups are just that kind of situation. As an example, let’s talk about call
centers, which tend to be very risk-intense parts of the organization. Call
centers fulﬁll a multitude of roles within organizations. Some of the function-
alities that are normally housed in call centers are customer support and
revenue generation.
Call centers provide the public face of the organization to the customer base
in most instances. Think back on your own personal experiences with call
centers. Did you have any bad experiences? Better yet, have you ever had a
good experience that you were totally satisﬁed with? In many cases, un-
fortunately, the answer to the ﬁrst question is yes, and to the second question is
no not really. That is a dismal commentary on how call centers tend to be
perceived by a very critical part of our business, our customer base.
In most instances call centers tend to be an outsourced arrangement,
which literally means we have turned over a critical part of our business to
somebody whom we have little control over. Therefore it is imperative that we
manage the risk of these operations quite closely, as they can do extensive
damage to the organization if not properly monitored.
The following is an example of call centers and the key statistics that may
be measured to evaluate risk of these operations. When you have multiple call
centers in place, you will have to evaluate the risk in a two-stage process. The
ﬁrst stage of the process is to do global analytics on all call centers for their
primary outcomes or functionalities.
By performing the global analytics, the organization should be able to
determine which of the call centers performs at the least acceptable level, with
the lowest level of customer satisfaction. Once that has been determined, then
the organization can analyze each of the metrics within those call centers that
were shown to be most problematic, ergo the most risky.
By tracking each of the key metrics within the call center, you can
systematically and methodically drill down to the speciﬁc point of concern.
When you have arrived at this point, you will be standing next to the root
cause of your problem. The analysis to be employed would be the following to
determine a highly effective methodology of evaluating the risk in a call
center.
174
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

Identify the key metrics related to the primary outcomes of a call center.
The key metrics would be:
n
Length of time on the call
n
Time to answer
n
Number of calls referred to a higher tier (level)
n
Abandonment rates
n
Employee turnover
n
Customer satisfaction surveys
n
Results of call quality monitoring
Once the key metrics have been identiﬁed, the data should be obtained and
analyzed for each and every call center. An example is shown in Figure 7.5.
NET RISK VERSUS RESIDUAL RISK
An area that needs to be discussed prior to launching into the analytics is some
terminology related to risk and how risk is evaluated. In the audit profession,
where I have spent the majority of my career, they have a tendency to utilize
terminology that is very audit-centric as opposed to business-centric. A critical
example of that pertains to risk assessment. The following is an expression that
represents how auditorseven in thisdayandageevaluaterisk,strangelyenough.
Inherent Risk  Controls ¼ Residual Risk
What is even more interesting is how they arrive at the conclusion of
residual risk. The process normally involves a scoring system in subjective-
based risk assessment—that is, scoring and calculating with some magic
formula. In other words, they score the inherent risk, or everything that could
go wrong in a situation, ﬁve, four, three, two, one, or some derivative thereof.
They then look at the controls that have been applied to the situation, and
again they score at ﬁve, four, three, two, or one based upon the maturity
framework for controls as espoused by the big consulting houses. Then, they
make some behind-the-scenes calculations to determine the effectiveness of the
controls at mitigating the risk. Finally, they arrive at residual risk.
This is all well and good, but it’s still a bunch of opinions with absolutely no
relationship to data or factual information in many cases, if not all. To me, of
course, this does not employ common sense and is irrelevant to the exercise of
risk assessment.
Net Risk versus Residual Risk
n
175

FIGURE 7.5
Call Center Multi-Location Analysis
176

In my many years of using analytics I have tried to apply them in the
context of deﬁnitive common sense and logic. I also am a proponent of using
business terminology as opposed to audit terminology. The one thing that I
have never understood is why auditors talk to business people as though they
were auditors; clearly they are not.
My approach to the same type of the previous analysis is to clearly use
metrics in the context of how they are developed by the business as it operates.
In other words, I do not substitute my own opinion in some artiﬁcial scoring
system for the actual operating information of the business itself. After all, isn’t
the business what we’re trying to risk assess and, in their case, audit? Therefore,
the following expression is how I approach this subject matter, stated in
business terms not audit terms.
Gross Risk  Mitigation ¼ Net Risk
You might ask, Why bother? The reason is the evaluation of controls and
their relevance to the mitigation of risk can be much more effectively arrived at
by utilizing this methodology. Gross risk is, of course, everything that can still
go wrong in the organization. Mitigation is not only controls, but also other
appropriate risk responses that have been brought to bear on the risk condi-
tions. Net risk, when utilized here in an objective-based risk environment, is the
analysis of the movement of the outcome measures, KRIs, as they are generated
by the process(es) under consideration.
If you are measuring the appropriate things and the outcome measures are
moving in a negative direction, by deﬁnition your process is out of control, ergo
risky. When the pattern of KRIs moves in a negative direction, then by
deﬁnition your net risk is increasing. This is a highly effective way of evaluating
not only the process effectiveness in achieving its outcomes, but also if it is
operating in a controlled state of existence.
In all of the analytics discussed in this book, the previous expression should
hold true. When the analytics show negative progression, no matter which one
is employed, your net risk is increasing and your process is running in an
uncontrolled state.
BUSINESS RISK ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES (BRATs)
Another critical part of a data driven enterprise risk model is the selection of
analytics to be used to evaluate the data. As noted earlier, the data and the form
of that data is absolutely critical. It was noted that OR data, outcome focused
Business Risk Analysis Techniques (BRATs)
n
177

raw data, is the best information to be utilized to evaluate risk. Likewise, it is
imperative that the right analytic be used depending upon the risk condition
that you are attempting to evaluate.
All analytics are not created equal and therefore cannot be utilized in every
situation. There are very speciﬁc analytics that should be employed in enter-
prise risk management to maximize the effectiveness of the environment. We’ll
discuss a number of different analytics in this section, but they all share a very
common trait; they are basic, straightforward, easy to understand analytics.
Why is this? It is because there is no reason to introduce unnecessary
complexity into the risk analysis process. I have discovered over many years of
doing this that complexity only breeds complexity, which runs counter to the
whole theory behind this book.
Trend Analysis
Trend analysis is far and away one of the simplest types of analytics that can be
employed. It lends itself extremely well, however, to the analysis of risk and
certainly to the evaluation of risk in a post-control situation. By looking at the
analytics KRIs, it is quite easy to determine if a process is in control or out of
control. As discussed earlier, what we are always trying to discover with risk
analytics is whether the risk has been mitigated or not by the controls or other
mitigation techniques.
Some of the unique characteristics of trend analysis are that it presents a
good baseline history, if properly employed, of the organization and how it has
performed in the past. This provides a sound basis for determining a predictable
pattern of performance in the future in most stable business circumstances. In
addition, when evaluating risk it provides a picture over time as to whether the
net risk is increasing or decreasing. When the net risk reverses direction,
whether that is positive or negative, you will know as fast as you can process
the data.
By measuring a business over time and as it operates, it is easier to
determine what the key indicators are saying about the business. Key risk
indicators should be developed for every critical business process, not only to
identify risk but also to identify potential efﬁciency and cost improvement
opportunities.
Figure 7.6 demonstrates the evaluation of risk, using trend analysis in the
banking sector. The subject matter of the graphic is lending and bad loans.
Strangely enough I’ve been using this example for years and years in my
seminars; little did I know that they were actually predicting the future of what
178
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

would occur with the subprime mortgage meltdown. Please take a look at the
example, and decide what it tells you about risk.
It can be seen in Figure 7.6 that there are two highly undesirable trends
going on in this particular bank from a lending perspective. The top trend,
which represents total loan portfolio on the graph, clearly depicts a reversal in
the total loan portfolio. The bottom curve, which is nonperforming loans, or the
waiting room for write-offs, has gained clear momentum to the upside.
Both of these curves are traveling in a risky direction, but worse yet they
are converging on each other. The sad commentary here, of course, is that
something has gone wrong in the lending process of the bank, and they are left
with signiﬁcant credit risk in their customer base.
This is a simple representation of a very serious situation. However, I
believe it can be seen undeniably that if you put that in front of a board of
directors sitting in a conference room, there is not a person in the room that
would not see the risk.
Pivotal Point of Change Analysis
Pivotal point of change analysis quite simplistically is abrupt movements in the
data beyond which point the metrics move in an undesirable risk direction. The
changes indicated in the data are indicative of underlying changes or condi-
tions in the process or system, which could be undesirable. When plotted
against a time axis in trend analysis, it can actually point out precisely where
you should start looking for your root cause events and eliminates the guess-
work from risk management.
FIGURE 7.6
Trend Analysis—Example of Risk-Banking
Business Risk Analysis Techniques (BRATs)
n
179

Pivotal point of change analysis is a very useful tool in identifying risk. It is
used in conjunction with trend analysis to spot those periods of maximum
interest. The nice thing about pivotal point of change analysis is that it acts as
an alert to the observer, immediately identifying change relative to the
movement of the data. This is normally indicative of where the risk is either
escalating or de-escalating depending on the circumstances. When employing
metrics in risk analysis, it is imperative to understand what the movement of
the data means. Pivotal point of change analysis is one of those key indicators:
when you see the pattern, it is time to pay attention.
Those doing any type of risk management and analysis should take the
time to identify the key analytics, which are going to help them to do their job
much more effectively and efﬁciently. Failing to do this is simply going to make
their job harder and make them less efﬁcient at what they do.
Pivotal point in change analysis helps to isolate risk consolidation points,
which are exactly where you should begin any type of root cause analysis. As
mentioned previously, one of the key objectives of risk management is to
identify root causes of unsatisfactory events and to eliminate them from the
process or business. In addition, reviewing the analytics should give us clues as
to what can be done or should be done to resolve the root cause conditions.
One bit of caution should be exercised when using this type of analytic. It
occurs in the bottom trend presented in Figure 7.7. The bottom curve, which is
the nonperforming loan curve, does not hold true to the analysis of pivotal
point of change. The exception here is that the events that caused the loans to
be nonperforming did not occur in those periods of abrupt change, but occurred
FIGURE 7.7
PPC Analysis—Example of Risk-Banking
180
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

in an earlier timeframe. However, the point of change is still signiﬁcant because
all loans following the point of change can be utilized to determine a common
thread of failure. This would be accomplished by step-down analysis that would
trace the data through the various levels of the lending process and back to the
loan ofﬁcer.
Mean Dispersion Analysis
Mean dispersion analysis (MDA) is probably one of the most useful of all of the
analytics presented here in performing any kind of risk analysis work. One of
the reasons is its ﬂexibility. It can be applied to all types of situations in virtually
all circumstances.
Mean dispersion analysis is used primarily for comparative purposes when
you have multiple points of comparison that must be made to arrive at an
intelligent decision relative to risk. In small, medium, and large organizations
where you have multiple locations involved, this tool can be irreplaceable.
The fundamental premise of how it operates, in keeping with the theme of
common sense and simplicity, is dispersion or variance from the baseline. The
baseline is determined by one of two standards that are established.
If the organization has levels of achievement or standards of performance
by which they operate, these can be utilized as the baseline for comparison. For
example, if a retail organization will only allow 1.5 percent shrinkage in their
inventory levels as a matter of corporate policy, that becomes a baseline for
comparison of all of their retail outlets.
In those situations where a corporate standard has not been set or
speciﬁed, a mean or average can be calculated for all of those locations
and/or business subsets under consideration. Once the average has been
established, each can be compared to that average to determine how far,
how dispersed, they are from the mean. In this type of analytic dispersion from
the mean, either positive or negative would be of interest.
For example, signiﬁcant dispersion to the positive side from the mean could
indicate a number of different things, some of which would be as follows. They
may be what is referred to in many circles as ‘‘best practice’’ or ‘‘top of game,’’ if
you prefer being sporty, but they also could be lying through their teeth and
perpetrating a signiﬁcant fraud in how they are reporting. Anyone charged
with the task of doing risk analysis and subsequent risk management would
have to be extremely well versed in how to interpret these indicators.
However, once a knowledge base has been developed relative to what these
indicators are—the common patterns, and how they normally perform—the
information derived from them can be massive.
Business Risk Analysis Techniques (BRATs)
n
181

Mean dispersion analysis is used for comparative purposes and can be used
to analyze anything from fast food outlets to call centers. It does not matter if
the locations or business subsets under comparison are of different sizes. You
would simply utilize ratio analysis to equalize the size of each one of the
locations under consideration.
For instance, if you were comparing numerous manufacturing operations
for risk in overtime, you would equalize them size-wise as follows. You would
calculate overtime hours as a percent of total HRS paid to ﬁrst identify the
intensity by location. When you have determined the locations that have the
highest intensity, you would then analyze them within their own operations.
The purpose of this would be to isolate the points of risk where overtime is being
concentrated. So in other words, you could analyze the overtime hours by shift,
by machining center, and by supervisor. This would give you the ability to
search for a number of different risks, not the least of which would be kickback
schemes involving the supervisors and the workers.
Utilization of mean dispersion analysis allows you to focus the risk
management resources where they can be the most effective. Identifying
unacceptable root cause situations in the patterns greatly facilitates corrective
actions that can be taken that will be meaningful and have high value added.
This type of analysis can be utilized for thousands of different types of situations
from efﬁciency and effectiveness to fraud. The key, of course, is that the outliers
become the focus of attention once they have been determined. If employed,
more effective resource allocation and overall business beneﬁts will be possible.
Threshold Analysis
Threshold analysis is a very versatile type of analysis. It would usually be
performed when trying to analyze risk in the context of a predeﬁned limit or
other types of decision-making criteria. This type of analysis is extremely useful
in validating that you do not have a fraudulent situation or that somebody is
purposely manipulating an authority level. Threshold analysis is a very
straightforward process as can be seen in the following example.
The risk you are trying to evaluate would be regarding all of those
individuals who have the authority to approve contracts, for example, and
their authority limit is attached to their user ID on the system within the
contacting area. Say that the established limit of authority for everyone in that
group is $50,000. If you want to evaluate the risk of fraud, or manipulation of
the threshold, then you would simply download all of the transactions for a
given period of time. Suppose you had downloaded all of the transactions, let’s
182
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

say for the period between July 1 and December 31. Then you could array them
against the threshold for all transactions executed and see if the pattern
displays anything undesirable.
Patterns that would be undesirable in this kind of analytic would be clearly
a situation where a person has exceeded the authorized level but more
importantly any cluster patterning just below the threshold. Cluster patterning
just below threshold is indicative of people utilizing splitting techniques to
defeat the threshold and to give them the ability to execute beyond their
designated authority limits.
When people have the ability to operate over and above their authority
limits and/or to split transactions thereby surpassing the limits, it puts them in
a position of being able to extract favors and or kickbacks. They now have the
ability to do things that may be lucrative to them in an undesirable and risky
way. A key way of isolating risk and in many cases identifying potential fraud
risk is through Threshold Analysis.
Period-to-Period Comparative Analysis
Comparative analysis is the analytic that can put things into perspective, which
otherwise may remain elusive. Comparative analysis is very commonly used in
a number of industries to help develop strategies, analyze performance, and, of
course, evaluate risk.
There are any number of period-to-period comparisons that can be
performed. Some of the more common are as follows.
Year-to-Year
Year-to-year comparative analyses are very common in the retail sector. For
instance, retailers are very adept at comparing same store sales from year to
year to determine how effectively they are performing in the marketplace. Also
as we are all well aware it is not uncommon to do comparisons between years
to see how much our retirement plans or stock portfolios have shrunk, or
increased hopefully, as well.
Quarter-to-Quarter
Quarter-to-quarter comparisons are actually some of the more standard types
we see in ﬁnancial reporting. We have all had the breathtaking experience of
sitting in front of the tube watching CNBC and having our ﬁnancial fate for the
day decided when the quarterly reporting comes around. But there are many
Business Risk Analysis Techniques (BRATs)
n
183

other things in many other businesses that should be looked at on this basis.
Some items to be considered would be unit sales volumes, airline passenger
miles ﬂown, and so on.
In evaluating risk, quarter-to-quarter comparisons are valuable in that
they move the risk evaluation timeline closer and closer to the point where
action can be taken. One of the other areas of concern that is impacted on a
quarterly basis is the number of required ﬁlings for regulatory organizations.
Therefore, one of the areas for risk evaluation might be the timeliness of these
ﬁlings or any other actions that were undesirable when viewed by the
regulators.
Month-to-Month
In looking at things in a month-to-month scenario, you start to shorten the
time horizon to those things that are very relevant to how the business
performs. When you have an unanticipated, signiﬁcant downturn in activity
from one month to the next, you start to look for all of the extraordinary factors
that could give rise to such an event. Month-to-month comparisons are
extremely helpful for taking stock in how the business is running for the
purposes of making adjustments as required.
Week-to-Week
The week-to-week timeframes for risk assessment get into the more minute
areas of risk that are managed quite closely. You will truly see these much more
in play in small to medium-sized businesses. The reason is that there is a need
to manage cash, employees, and all other aspects of their business highly
efﬁciently and effectively to maintain any type of competitive edge.
Day-to-Day
In the any number of organizations, there is also the requirement to manage
risk day-to-day. For example, hospitals manage bed count and patient census
on a day-to-day basis due to the demands on stafﬁng levels and also in
relationship to case intensity. Many of the activities of other ancillary services
of the hospital are tied to patient census. Some examples would be dietary,
laboratory work, housekeeping, and so on.
Also you would see other areas of the hospital where day-to-day activity is
critical to evaluate from a risk standpoint. For example, emergency rooms are
constantly monitored for day-to-day activity and as you can imagine would
have some predictable patterns.
184
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

Employing some common sense here, answer the following questions
relative to risk. Which two nights of the week would you believe have the
highest levels of activity in the emergency room? Which days and potentially
nights of the week would probably have the highest degree of traumatic
caseload concentration, barring something totally catastrophic occurring? It is
probably not hard to conclude that the nights having the highest level of
activity in the emergency room are going to be Friday and Saturday. The days
and potentially nights are probably most likely to be Saturday and Sunday.
The evaluation of risk relative to the emergency room lends itself to
common sense and data. The reason for the intensity of Friday and Saturday
night, of course, is that more people tend to be out celebrating, in many cases
over-celebrating and as a result end up incurring some kind of bodily harm. As
regards Saturday and Sunday, the intensity of trafﬁc on the roads is much
higher due to the fact that many more people are driving as opposed to being at
home or working in an ofﬁce. In addition, you also have athletic events that are
taking place, which lend themselves to injuries as well as those who view
themselves to be athletes with the occasional weekend outing.
The point being made is that by looking at the actual facts and statistics it
is much easier to predict the risk that there will be greater intensity in the
emergency room during those timeframes. As such, stafﬁng, equipment
availability, and certain types of medical supplies must be present and in
some cases in abundance.
The other obvious factors that play into this risk scenario are the key
outcomes of the emergency room. How many people that were wheeled
through those doors eventually walked out the door of the ER or the hospital?
When the morbidity rates start to escalate, something is desperately wrong, or
the intensity has shifted dramatically. Either of these cases demands instant
action and that required changes be made to mitigate these undesirable
outcomes.
Another real fact of life in emergency rooms, which also increases risk and
must be monitored, is a utilization of these facilities as walk-in clinics. When
this occurs, it obviously occupies extremely important facilities and talented
caregivers. If this practice starts to interfere with the ability to deal with real
emergencies, something has got to change. This pattern should be constantly
analyzed and alternate facilities be established to deal with this type of care.
Period-to-period comparisons can be highly useful, but they must be
closely scrutinized to ensure that they are reﬂecting the information that is
desired. Period-to-period comparisons are most useful where the data is
consistently measured, the business has been established for a period of
Business Risk Analysis Techniques (BRATs)
n
185

time, and the fundamental product/service lines have not been altered in any
way.
Other key issues that come into play are seasonal ﬂuctuations, changes in
the data being compared, and fundamental business changes such as reor-
ganizations, centralization, and decentralization.
The key to utilizing period-to-period comparisons as an indicator of risk is
clearly stability of the organization. In highly stable environments, these types
of comparisons can be tremendously valuable in the types of risks they can
evaluate and the information and insight they provide.
Some generic examples of data that can be compared would be as follows:
n
Receivables by aging category
n
Inventory concentrations:
n
Raw materials
n
WIP
n
Finished goods
n
Sales by product line
n
Gross margin by product line
n
Mean time between failures
n
Total units produced
n
Claims processed
There are literally millions of them that can be utilized. An example of one
that would be critical to the retailing industry is shown in Figure 7.8.
When looking at same store sales from year to year, an organization can
start to analyze events that are taking place in their market area. A good
example would be cannibalization of their own market by their predatory
practices of establishing multiple outlets in deﬁned market areas. The same
types of comparisons could then be done by department within the retailer, by
product line, and so on.
Stratiﬁcation
Another extremely useful tool is stratiﬁcation. The key thing in performing any
type of risk analysis is being able to recognize undesirable patterning. Data
stratiﬁcation allows for the grouping of similar items for analysis. Once the data
are grouped, they can illustrate quite clearly concentrations of risks that were
not evident before.
The key thing that must be remembered in this area, however, is that data
discipline is absolutely essential for this to be successful. What you would ﬁnd
186
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

more often than not in most companies and organizations is that their data
discipline is badly lacking, and effective stratiﬁcation would be severely
hampered, if not virtually impossible to accomplish.
In many of my seminars I jokingly refer to the helpdesk as the helpless desk,
and virtually everybody in the room laughs because they understand the
problem. There are so many times when people come away from the helpdesk
feeling not helped it is almost inconceivable that it would even be referred to as
the helpdesk.
That aside, the issue that I am referring to here is the proper categorization
of helpdesk tickets by reason code. This is absolutely essential to understand the
pattern of issues that are confronting the users, so that appropriate analysis of
the risk points can be done and the problems rectiﬁed. Unfortunately, if you
were to analyze the statistics with any degree of regularity, you might
determine that in fact a very high number of the codes used for the work
tickets fall into two categories: miscellaneous and other.
This is another example of useless information gathered within a corporate
or organizational structure. There must be absolute and strict discipline on how
work tickets are coded, each and every time, to the appropriate reason codes,
so that the problems can be analyzed and rectiﬁed. If this discipline is not
installed and not taken seriously, the user community will become increasingly
Average sale per employee
74133
49512
10016
33706
53589
Average sale $ per $ of advertising
Employee turnover
Average # of items purchased per customer
Average purchase amount per customer
Customer complaints per 100 transactions
Inventory shrink % per $1000 of inventory
Same store sales % – year to year
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
140%
160%
180%
FIGURE 7.8
Comparative Analysis—Retail Outlets
Business Risk Analysis Techniques (BRATs)
n
187

frustrated, and the degradation of service will intensify. The result will be
increasing cost of operations.
Data stratiﬁcation allows for the grouping of similar items to perform
enlightening analysis. This is extremely important, because in many situations
the data is not well organized for such analysis.
A good example of this would be the following. If most organizations were
to respond honestly, I would be willing to bet that nowhere in their accounts
receivable or customer database have they cross-referenced every customer
that belongs to a common holding company. As a result, they have no idea how
much of their business can be negatively impacted should they disenfranchise a
member of that group. This is just one of thousands of examples that could be
brought to the table.
Once critical data are grouped, the beneﬁts become obvious:
n
Totals become signiﬁcant
n
Types of data can be recognized as useful
n
Concentrations of risk can be determined
n
Issues previously unrecognized become apparent
Some common types of data that can be useful if stratiﬁed would be the
following:
n
Transactions by dollar size
n
Transactions by date
n
Transactions by customer
n
Critical codes by data type
n
Volumes by product line
This is the tip of the iceberg of things that can be stratiﬁed. However, within
your own organizations you will ﬁnd numerous examples of the areas where
stratiﬁcation can be irreplaceable as an analysis technique. The key is to
properly identify which codes or data are indicative of risk and pursue them to
maximize their information content. An example of stratiﬁcation analysis is
presented in Figure 7.9.
Ratio Analysis
Another very commonplace analytic, but one that is extremely useful in the
evaluation of risk, is ratio analysis. Ratios can be utilized to depict relationships
188
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

FIGURE 7.9
Stratiﬁcation Analysis—Credit Memos
189

between critical indicators of risk in the organization. They can also be utilized
to common-size various parts of the organization for comparative purposes as
was discussed earlier in mean dispersion analysis.
It is not difﬁcult to generate ratios; what is difﬁcult is to realize what they
are telling us. When used properly, ratios can identify very signiﬁcant and
highly undesirable trends in the risky areas of an organization.
Operational ratios are exceptionally good indicators of the fundamental
health of the company. An unfavorable movement in the inventory turnover
ratio can be extremely helpful in analyzing process failure in critical areas of the
organization.
Financial ratios provide multiple points of utility, and they can tell us a lot
about our ﬁnancial health as an organization, but they also are extremely
insightful about operational issues. Operations are what drive the success or
failure of the organization. The ﬁnancial results are of course a reﬂection of the
success of the operations and vice versa.
Figure 7.10 depicts a very fundamental ratio, days in accounts receivable
(DAR), trended over a period of time. The upward progression in the graph is
depicting a negative trend in the net risk position. This is not a trend that any
organization would like to see on a regular basis.
Figure 7.10 could be representing any number of risks that may be taking
place within this organization. A few examples of which would be the following:
n
Inaccurate billing or invoicing
n
Overextension of credit terms
n
Poor collection practices
n
Outside risk-ﬁnancial instability of customer base
n
Fraud risk—there is no customer at the other end of the transaction and
therefore no payments
As would be assumed there are any number of different types of risk
that could be taking place, which would be indicated by this patterning
of the days in AR. Also, this is only one of thousands of very useful ratios that
can be applied to risk analysis and risk management within the ERM
environment.
Proﬁling
Proﬁling is a method of predetermining areas of risk in data for the purposes of
isolating unacceptable conditions and managing them proactively, real time or,
190
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

FIGURE 7.10
Ratio Analysis—Risk Example
191

at worst, near time. By building proﬁles, risk management personnel can focus
their attentions on those key areas that can bring the most harm to the
corporation or organization. Proﬁling does involve some effort to correctly
construct the tool, but once created it will be invaluable in its ability to manage
risk in a timely manner.
Proﬁles are normally designed in such a manner that all issues are raised to
the appropriate person on an exception basis only. In other words, proﬁling will
not require the risk manager and/or risk assessor to constantly be looking for a
certain risk condition. The proﬁle should recognize the risk condition auto-
matically and raise it to the attention of the appropriate risk manager/
assessment person. The inherent message here is that when an exception
condition is raised it must be acted upon. The proﬁle should be designed in such
a manner as to not make reactions by key personnel elective but mandatory.
Proﬁling can be employed in any number of business circumstances and
also has clear application in others where societal beneﬁts can be attained. The
best example of that is screening for terrorism suspects by proﬁling patterns of
behavior. Some of the things that would clearly be included in these proﬁles
would be countries visited, length of stay in the countries, group afﬁliations,
personal acquaintances, travel habits, travel frequency, prior incidents—to
name a few. Proﬁling can be accomplished in near time or real time automa-
tion, which must be adapted to the circumstances.
A couple of basic examples for applying proﬁling for risk assessment and
risk management purposes are as follows.
Wire Transfers
Wire transfers are an obvious application for proﬁling from a
number of different aspects. One of the keys is timeliness, and the need to
respond and then take action as required. There are numerous laws that are in
effect worldwide trying to control the ﬂow of cash in and out of certain
countries and to and from certain groups.
One of the best ways to do that is to establish proﬁles to preclude the
sending of cash or to facilitate the movement of cash from those countries
which may be deemed hostile. For instance, any movement in and out of
those countries would be subjected to extreme scrutiny before any transac-
tions would be ﬁnalized. Proﬁles could be built that would isolate any such
transactions by geographic source or destination, ﬁnancial institution, bank
routing code, and so on. Any transaction determined to meet any of the
unacceptable criteria would immediately be truncated. The nice part about it
is that this can be fully automated and not rely on manual intervention for
any of the activity.
192
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

Money Laundering—Cash Deposits
A historical proﬁle can be built based
on daily or other types of frequent activity. For instance, the deposit patterns of
customers of a bank can be tracked by the cash in activity that takes place on
their accounts on a daily basis. In other words, you can build a historical proﬁle
to determine if cash deposits are just below reportable thresholds and are
distributed among various branches on the exact same banking date. When
unacceptable patterns have been detected, a proﬁle can be built to isolate those
customers and bring them to the attention of the appropriate regulatory bodies
or law enforcement ofﬁcials.
Retailing—Distribution and Warehousing
Proﬁling can be a big player in
the area of risk assessment but also in the area of maximizing opportunity. It is
no secret that Wal-Mart has been highly successful in retailing, and much of
that success has got to be attributed to their superiority in the area of systems
and data analysis. With the vast amount of online data that Wal-Mart
preserves on an ongoing basis, it is relatively easy to build proﬁles of typical
consumption patterns by its customers.
Havingthese proﬁles in theirpossession allowsthem to distribute products to
their stores much more efﬁciently and effectively, reduce shelf life and spoilage,
turn their inventories, and maximize their proﬁts. The type of competitive
advantages that they have gained by employing these methodologies is massive
and has facilitated their ascension to the top of the retailing industry.
Risk analysis and management has two sides: risk and opportunity. All the
tools, methodologies, techniques, and data that we have talked about here can
be used to evaluate and assess as well as manage either of these.
Figure 7.11 is a simple example of proﬁling analytics that could be used to
evaluate customers in the context of what types of risk may be posed to the
organization by the patterns that are made evident.
Customer concentration of:
n
Discounts
n
Allowances
n
Credit memos
n
Deductions
n
Free products
Data Patterns—The Fraud Factor
In deference to my esteemed colleague and very good friend, Leonard Vona,
founder of Leonard Vona and Associates, a highly talented and sought-after
Business Risk Analysis Techniques (BRATs)
n
193

Customer REAL Proﬁtability Proﬁle
Customer #
12356
48976
98732
00178
01569
Total Sales for the Year
$12,345,768
$44,447,890
$58,234,567
$98,765,124
$101,987,006
Total Credit Memos
$
38,765
$
876,054
$ 8,589,729
$22,387,690
$ 11,697,650
Total Adjustments
$
12,546
$ 2,897,650
$ 2,956,478
$ 3,452,678
$
4,678,945
Total Discounts
$
2,567
$
13,546
$ 6,543,762
$ 9,887,654
$
8,879,654
Total Allowances
$
1,298
$
229,876
$ 2,812,326
$ 5,985,235
$
6,796,543
Total Deductions (Short Pays)
$
0
$
12,095
$ 3,218,760
$ 8,871,234
$
5,123,987
Total Cost of Sales
$ 6,456,892
$21,908,765
$29,452,009
$46,324,897
$ 57,980,976
Total Discounts, Allowances,
Adjusments Etc.
$
55,176
$ 4,029,221
$24,121,055
$50,584,491
$ 37,176,779
Total # of Units Sold - Product A
8,746
18,345
23,769
39,897
45,834
Total REAL Proﬁt Per Customer
$ 5,833,700
$18,509,904
$ 4,661,503
$ 1,855,736
$
6,829,251
Average Unit Margin - Product A
$
667.01
$
1,008.99
$
196.12
$
46.51
$
149.00
FIGURE 7.11
Proﬁling Analytics—Proﬁtability Proﬁle
194

forensic accounting ﬁrm, I will not purport to be an expert in fraud, which I am
not. However, over my long audit career I have learned a few things about
fraud and how to recognize it.
One thing that has become crystal clear is that fraud can be detected only
when it is manifesting itself in patterns. The patterns can be detected only by
employing analytics and large-scale data analysis. There is no other way to be
successful in uncovering the risk of fraud.
Asa resultof Sarbanes-Oxley, I knowpeople dread the term,a very interesting
dilemma has been put upon the auditing profession. One of the key standards that
is employed in work relative to SOX is the PCAOB,s Audit Standard 5. It says in so
many words that auditors must, during the audit, be vigilant for fraud in those
areas that might give rise to fraud. That is no small task and cannot be
accomplished given the tools and techniques speciﬁed in the standard. The
primary types of testing speciﬁed in the standard are walk-throughs and
sampling. I will not belabor this point any further, but these methodologies
will never detect fraud except by pure happenstance or sheer unadulterated luck.
But more to the point is that fraud is a huge exposure to virtually all
organizations. A lot of people may not be aware of the points of exposure, but
they are numerous. I think one of the ones that were most blatantly obvious in
the latest banking scandal is executive compensation. Executive compensation
in most instances has become the root of all evil with respect to corporate
deception and less than above-board dealings with their shareholders and the
public in general.
The patterns that indicate executive compensation may be an area of
primary fraud concern have hopefully become exceptionally clear to everyone
and do not warrant reiteration. But just a ﬁnal thought on this, the next time
you are watching CNBC and you hear the quarterly or annual results, consider
this. If the commentator says ‘‘they exceeded the analyst expectations by a
penny’’ or ‘‘they were directly in line with analysts’ expectations,’’ ask yourself
is anybody really that good in the real world?
Because fraud always manifests itself in patterns, it lends itself nicely to risk
assessment using data and analytics. In areas where risk of fraud is extremely
high, it behooves the organization to employ analytics to mitigate these
exposures to the greatest degree possible. Detailed next are a couple of areas
where fraud is quite high in the normal course of events but is quite minimal in
regard to the areas where fraud is possible and is perpetrated daily.
There are two industries in which fraud is pervasive and unfortunately has
become so commonplace that a day-to-day occurrence is an accepted part of
the environment. These two industries are healthcare and construction.
Business Risk Analysis Techniques (BRATs)
n
195

Healthcare as an industry is subjected to fraud on a massive basis. Why is
that? Think about this in the context of how the marketplace is truly deﬁned.
This is the only marketplace in the world where the following qualities exist, at
least as it was operating at the time this work was written.
It is the only marketplace in the world where the primary consumer of
the services desires the highest quality healthcare, does not know what to
consume, when to consume it, how much to consume, why it is necessary to
consume it, how much it should cost, and does not pay for it directly in most
circumstances.
Worse yet, a huge portion of the population remain uninsured in terrible
economic times. If they need care by whatever deceptive or other means,
somebody’s going to ensure they get it. This may be another family member
who is insured through their employer, a very common practice indeed.
The providers of the services in order to remain economically viable must
sell as much as possible, at the highest price tolerable, and want to provide the
highest quality of services possible. They must also in most cases overbill the
consumer or other responsible party for the services rendered to private pay
and insured individuals to make up for the shortfall in reimbursement from
government programs.
To compound the provider’s problems, virtually none of them have cost
accounting to know how much each treatment is actually costing them, and
whether they should even be in that part of the marketplace. Add to this, for
those institutions that are 501(c)3 tax-free institutions under the Internal
Revenue Code of the United States, they are mandated to provide healthcare to
the indigent. Whether those patients are economically viable or not is
irrelevant; if they enter the institution, they must be cared for.
Those that pay the bills want the consumer to minimize consumption, with
the risk of much higher consequences down the road and minimize the
payment to providers to support a bottom line. But minimization of the
payments, of course, exerts downward pressure on the quality.
I ﬁnd it most entertaining when you watch the town hall meetings that
have taken place on the subject matter of healthcare in this country. The irate
citizenry sparked by the special interest groups of the insurance industry:
through their selectively implanted operatives, railing against the reform of the
healthcare system.
Not one of them understands anything about this environment. It is very
scary to see how little people in this country actually know about what goes on
and how out of touch with reality they really are. It is scary to the point of being
sickening if not downright depressing.
196
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

Even worse yet, perhaps I should run out and buy one of the wonder drugs
the pharmaceutical companies are always pitching on TV with all those
unsavory side effects, like oily discharge! What do you think; do I need a
second opinion?
Moving forward, two key areas of risk that impact many organizations can
be evaluated utilizing the following metrics:
1. Health beneﬁt claims. To evaluate the exposure brought to self-funded
health beneﬁt plans
2. Change orders on construction contracts. To review those areas of
virtual guaranteed exposure in any large-scale construction contract
Health Beneﬁt Claims
One of the biggest risk areas of most companies and
organizations these days is undeniably health beneﬁts for their employees.
Another known fact but poorly monitored and scrutinized is that fraud is
extremely high in the area of health beneﬁts. Fraud can be perpetrated and is
perpetrated on organizations by any number of parties that are actively
involved in the administration of health beneﬁts. These parties can be provid-
ers, employees who consume the health beneﬁts, and third-party administra-
tors who are unscrupulous.
Health beneﬁts provide a fertile ﬁeld for proﬁling that would greatly
enhance the ability to control the exposures that any organization undertakes,
most particularly in those that are self-insured, which is virtually all organiza-
tions of any size.
The importance of risk assessment and risk management in this area via
proﬁling is that the gains that could be a realized cannot be overstated. Proﬁling
can be a powerful tool in combating fraud in these arenas, and is absolutely
essential for pattern analysis.
There are a number of different proﬁles that can be built for analyzing
health beneﬁt claims for fraud. What has to be determined is what are going to
be the points of emphasis and where is the organization going to explore for
fraud. The proﬁles that are built will have to be speciﬁcally focused on known
fraud conditions that have been evidenced in the past, whether inside or
outside the organization.
These proﬁles can be built historically from the data or information that the
organization receives or can be one-off proﬁles given unacceptable occurrences
of certain events. Illustrated in Figure 7.12 is an example of proﬁling to
determine unusual consumption patterns by employees in a self-insured health
beneﬁt plan of an organization. This historical proﬁle, developed over a six-
Business Risk Analysis Techniques (BRATs)
n
197

Fraud Risk Historical Proﬁle—Insurance Card Sharing
Company Address: 55 E. Monroe St, Chicago
Provider #’s (Doctors)
11278965 OBGYN-A
54323879 OBGYN-B
Provider Locations
Miles from Company
Chicago-A
0.1
Hoffman Estates-B
25.6
Proﬁle of Employee
Avg. Proﬁle for Other Employees
Proﬁle Variance
CPT-4 Code Class
OBGYN-PreNatal
OBGYN-PreNatal
Dates of Service - Total Times -Standard OV-A
13
11.5
Dates of Service - Total Times - Standard OV-B
21
Total
34
11.5
22.5
Employee #
24563
1
Total $ Claims Through Birth
$54,500
$23,750
$30,750
# of hours absent for physician appointments
15.5
16.5
Average hours absent per ofﬁce visit
0.46
1.43
Average annual claim $/employee/Family Coverage
$107,750
$43,950
$63,800
# of family members covered/average # covered
4
5
Average annual claim$/family member
$26,938
$8,790
$18,148
FIGURE 7.12
Proﬁling Analytics—Example of Fraud Risk
198

month period, is then matched up against the average of all employees’
consumption within the plan, viewed in isolation as being excessive consump-
tion or matched against their attendance proﬁle, or a combination of the above.
Proﬁles can range from extremely simple to highly sophisticated; however, as
cautioned before, the simpler the better.
In this case the pattern utilizing very simplistic provider numbers for
example purposes is a case of sisters sharing an insurance card to have
coverage while both of them are pregnant. Of course, the self-insured plan
is then covering both the employed sister and her sibling who should not be
covered. In this case it was discovered that the noninsured sister had a
premature baby who incurred over $300,000 of the total charges.
Construction Contracts
Change orders in construction contracts as men-
tioned earlier are a key area to review. When they are excessive, change orders
are a virtual certainty for fraud exposure on any large-scale construction
contract.
If you are attempting to manage fraud risk in construction contracts, you
must ﬁrst monitor the bidding process. One of the popular misconceptions
about minimizing risk in the bidding arena is the use of sealed bids. This is
erroneous as regards any type of assurance in mitigating fraud. The reason is
that those facilitating the bidding process can easily call the contractor and the
contractor will tell them what was bid on the job.
The process that then takes place is that person, who in my mind is
considered the pivot point, takes that information and facilitates a winning bid
for the chosen contractor. The pivot point means it is a person on both sides of
the transaction. They are part of the bidding process and subsequent to award
are also the ones who are authorized to approve change orders.
All price information is fed to the designated winning contractor, who is
the last to bid, with the lowest price and submits the bid just before the closing
deadline. They are then awarded the contract in most instances, begin the
project, and start to submit the change orders. The change orders are normally
established on the basis of time and materials and not ﬁxed price. The under-
lying agreement between the contractor and the pivot point is that the pivot
point will get 10 to 15 percent of the change orders as they are approved and
paid by the organization.
In addition, much of this is facilitated by another fraud scheme known as
the merry-go-round. This is where you have a limited number of large
contractors in a region. The scheme would work as follows. Let’s assume
for this example you have four contractors: A, B, C, and D. They conspire to
Business Risk Analysis Techniques (BRATs)
n
199

make A the low bidder on the next contract and B, C, and D are then hired as
subcontractors on the contract. A can submit virtually any change orders
required since A is the winner of the bid by default. The person on the inside of
the organization that facilities the contracting also beneﬁts.
The next major project that is bid B wins, and A, C, and D are subcon-
tractors. However, in this situation the minimum bid has gone up securing
higher compensation for all four participants to the detriment of the organiza-
tion itself. The change orders ﬂow, and on and on it goes escalating each project
cost higher and higher into the clouds.
The key in proﬁling this situation is to focus on the change orders, the
frequency, and the dollar amounts, along with the terms. Also you must be able
to determine if the bidding process is really fair and equitable. These are
extremely good indicators of risk not only because they can identify a potential
fraud situation, but they can also identify a process that is ineffective. There are
only two major reasons why change orders would exist in any construction
contract: fraud or the project was ill deﬁned from the outset. If it is the latter of
these reasons, then you have a process that is highly ineffective and needs to be
corrected immediately. That would certainly be something that you would
want to become aware of if you are trying to manage risk in a large
organization with heavy construction requirements.
UTILIZING LOGICAL DATA PATHWAYS TO FOCUS ON
ROOT CAUSE AND RESOLVE IT
Logical data pathways (LDPs) constitute the blood ﬂow and nervous system of
the corporate body. The human body would not last long without a nervous
system or life-sustaining blood ﬂow. The same thing is true in the corporate
environment; an organization is nothing without its data. Logical data path-
ways are the means of transporting information from the source of the data to
the destination, for which it is intended.
As will be seen in the next bank lending example, the information ﬂow is
vertical, starting at the location that generates the loan and travels upward to
the organizational headquarters. This ﬂow of information is nothing more than
the source-to-destination ﬂow. By inference, you should also be able to follow
the information from destination to source, in other words in reverse order.
The ability to do this creates a great tool for enterprise risk management.
By virtue of this structure, we are able to follow the information from the
destination back to the root cause of the problem if in fact risk is indicated. By
200
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

THE Bank
100%
Investment
Management
Lending
100%
Commercial Lending
15%
Loan Officer Charley
Retail Lending
85%
Region 1
75%
District 138
10%
District 146
70%
Branch 14678
82%
Automobiles
5%
Loan Officer Mary
Credit Cards
14%
Loan Officer Alice
Mortgages
5%
Loan Officer Art
Unsecured Lines
76%
Loan Officer James
100%
District 154
20%
Region 2
10%
Region 3
15%
Lobby Operations
Trust Services
Loan Losses LDP™ % of Losses–
Bolded 
FIGURE 7.13
Bank Lending Example—LDP
201

utilizing common information that should be available in every organization,
ERM, the BRAIN of the organization, should be able to evaluate the bodily
functions on a continuous basis.
The whole purpose of this type of methodology is to approach logically the
subject matter of enterprise risk management in a manner consistent with how
we live our daily lives. In other words the body of the ERM environment mimics
our own human anatomy and how we function daily.
In Figure 7.13 we are tracing the logical data pathway of information from
the point of loan generation to corporate headquarters. By reversing the ﬂow of
the data, we are able to center on a point of signiﬁcant risk to the organization.
Along the logical data pathway, we are simply following the warning signs
based on percentage of concentration of bad loans strewn along the pathway.
The key to accomplishing any of this is not rocket science but simply having the
discipline of presenting good sound data to the organization. If that is the only
minimal requirement and is not being accomplished currently, what is wrong
with this picture?
The other nice feature of this approach is that it detects data integrity
errors as they occur. Knowing that you have data integrity errors in some of the
primary information ﬂows of your organization is a huge discovery but also a
signiﬁcant risk. As alluded to in Chapter 1, data, data everywhere but no
information, is a very common occurrence in many large but also medium- to
small-size organizations.
As shown in Figure 7.13, given a good ﬂow of information, it is not difﬁcult
to isolate and determine the root cause of the operational problem—risk. In
keeping with sound practice in enterprise risk management, that is the whole
purpose of the exercise. That is where the management portion of ERM comes
into play. It does no good to isolate the risk if you are not going to manage it or
do something about it. Logical data pathways provide the tools and the
methodologies to get to the point of resolution. In this case the branch loan
ofﬁcer for whatever reason has been permitted to lend money in a haphazard
and risky fashion. This has had the impact of jeopardizing not only the branch
but also has signiﬁcantly escalated the credit risk of the entire institution.
Granted as you move down the pathway the percentages get smaller, but the
concentration of risk is still the key factor to be isolated and dealt with.
202
n
Top-Down Risk Assessment

8
CHAPTER EIGHT
The Future Evolution
of the Model
ERM FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY
When setting expectations for the enterprise risk management (ERM) environ-
ment, it is important to understand the necessity for change. If there is one area
in the organization that must be dynamic and constantly ﬂuid, it is enterprise
risk management. As we move forward further into the twenty-ﬁrst century,
the frequency of change is going to be impossible to comprehend. At no other
time in history will technology, and knowledge gained through technology,
change more or be more inﬂuential in how our organizations and the world as a
whole runs.
The key to success in enterprise risk management is to stay on top of
change. More correctly stated, the mission of ERM is to predict change before it
happens. The mission statement of ERM must always say, ‘‘Our mission is not
to remain the same.’’ Therefore, from the ﬁrst day in which ERM becomes an
operational part of enterprises, they must be moving in the direction of where
they want to be in the future. This chapter will talk about a number of things to
be considered by the people who are responsible for enterprise risk manage-
ment as they set off down that road.
203

SYSTEMS STRATEGIES
The very ﬁrst thing that the Chief Risk Ofﬁcer (CRO) and/or head of ERM must
realize is that systems are the key to the future. Therefore, it would be very
prudent to closely align themselves with information technology and the Chief
Information Ofﬁcer (CIO). They must become an integral part of all new system
development efforts that are being brought to the table for the organization.
The purpose of this is to ensure that every new system that is brought into
the organization or created within the organization is done with a risk
emphasis as part of its inherent design. This effort must be initiated from
the outset and clearly communicated to those that are critical to new system
selection, design, and functionality. Whether they build the systems internally
or are going to be involved in the selection criteria from the world of the
vendors, the message must be consistent, and it must be uniform.
As discussed in Chapter 1, we can no longer afford to be implementing
substandard systems in our organizations. If discipline and strategic thought
process are not invoked each and every time that a system is being considered,
we will simply install another system that is inadequate to run a business today.
Here are some casual observations about risk relative to systems imple-
mentation and about how implementation is done today. In very few organi-
zations that I’m aware of is there active involvement up front by two critical
groups within the organization: namely, ERM and internal audit. In fact, in
most cases internal audit is nowhere near the system until it has already been
implemented. This, of course, is totally wrong. In order to have a knowledge-
able internal audit function, they should be actively involved on the front end of
all systems to ensure that all business risks have been considered and that
appropriate controls and security have been included in the design to mitigate
those risks.
At the same time, enterprise risk management must be in consultation
with the primary users of the system. The purpose is to ensure that they have
identiﬁed their key business outcomes for the processes to be operated and
supported by the system. Then by deﬁnition if they have identiﬁed key business
outcomes, they should also be identifying the key metrics or data they will use
to evaluate these objectively. By being involved up front in the process of
enterprise risk management, they can ensure that the relevant risks have been
properly taken into consideration and that there is a means of measuring them.
In the following sections, we will bring this emphasis formally into the
structure of how an organization should develop sound system criteria. The
ideal situation is to put in place an entire strategy for making every system that
204
n
The Future Evolution of the Model

is created and/or purchased risk-centric. A manner of accomplishing this will
be discussed in the following sections.
DESIGN CRITERIA AND SPECIFICATIONS
For every system that will be implemented in an organization there must be a
fundamentally sound set of design criteria and speciﬁcations. For those
organizations that are actively seeking a highly effective enterprise risk
management environment, an integral part of those design criteria and
speciﬁcations must be making the system risk-centric.
What does the term risk-centric really mean? Literally, it means that the
system in its fundamental design, tooling, speciﬁcations, capabilities, and even
the type of data gathered by it are centered on risk for the part of the business
supported by the system. To accomplish this, the user or primary owner of the
system must truly understand the concept of business risk and how it must be
accommodated by the system. This is where the enterprise risk management
people must center their efforts in every new system development project. They
must sit down and educate the individual risk owners not only in the risks they
own every day, but also in how they can effectively track and manage them by
the data they gather and the system’s capabilities.
DESIGNING RISK-CENTRIC SYSTEMS FOR EFFICIENCY/
GOVERNANCE: STEP BY STEP
Creating a risk-centric system should not be a task or a chore. Risk-centric
systems should have been in existence in every major organization since the
concept of a system was invented. Unfortunately, the historical landscape of
systems implementation is littered with misconceived ideas of what a system
should be to run a business. The popular mantra in the past has been to deﬁne
the business requirements, ﬁnd a system that closely approximated these, and
then modify it accordingly to meet the criteria. What is missing from the
equation, of course, is providing a real methodology for overseeing the business
from a risk and governance perspective.
Now that it is fashionable to consider the concepts of risk and governance,
everyone is rushing to the table to try and incorporate them in corporate
initiatives, but still in most cases practitioners are failing to do so. In the
following sections, we will demonstrate that it does not need to be difﬁcult to
Designing Risk-Centric Systems for Efﬁciency/Governance
n
205

create risk-centric systems that will give you a much better run business and a
higher degree of corporate governance.
Truly Understanding the Business
The very ﬁrst step in designing any kind of effective systems environment is to
really understand the business or business subset, which it is to support and/or
operate. This may seem like a very basic concept, but it is often misunderstood
and done poorly. It must take into account a number of different aspects of the
business to ensure that it is designed properly.
For instance, a system that is speciﬁcally dedicated to the provision of
customer service has got to have all of the features necessary to facilitate that
goal. It clearly must be extremely timely, which means fast processing; it must
be highly accurate; it must be highly ﬂexible to accommodate all situations; and
so on. Therefore, by deﬁnition, when a system like this is to be brought into the
organization, very signiﬁcant discussions need to be held about all aspects of
customer service. Every service to be rendered, every condition that could arise,
every code that must be entered, in other words everything that is necessary for
successful customer service experience, must be discussed and accommodated.
If the system is going to establish the public face of the organization, for
instance, on the Internet, great care has got to be taken that it is 100 percent
accurate and provides a pleasant experience for the customer. So whatever the
purpose of the system may be, in order to align it with a risk-based approach
we cannot just assume that everything is business as usual; our efforts must be
strategized to be accomplished. Unless we have run the business perfectly in the
past, anything else will be less than adequate. There is no substitute for
knowing the functionality of the business when designing the system.
Deﬁning the Primary Risk Events
Once we have a thorough understanding of the business, the next thing that
needs to be addressed is deﬁning the primary risk events. Depending on how
sophisticated you want to make the risk environment, this could be a multi-
stage exercise of risk analysis. Later on in this section, I will provide an example
of a limited multistage risk analysis for a systems environment.
However, if you want to maintain a very straightforward and basic type of
risk approach, the following is a strategy to invoke. First, understand the
primary outcomes of the business or the relevant business subset. These are
sometimes designated as business objectives; however, some business objec-
tives are not always deﬁned as outcomes and therefore are useless in risk
206
n
The Future Evolution of the Model

assessment. In isolating primary objectives, care should be taken to identify
only those things that are most critical if you want to limit the extent of metrics
that are going to be incorporated in the environment. Therefore it is imperative
that this exercise be performed very judiciously to ensure the maximum beneﬁt
from a minimum amount of content.
Deﬁning the Critical Data
Once we have established the key outcomes of that subset of the organization,
the focus then asks what data is required to manage these risks dynamically.
The data must have the appropriate qualities in order be effective as a key risk
indicator. These qualities are that the data should be outcome focused and raw
(OR data). This will require some time and effort to ensure that it has these
characteristics, however, it is time well spent as the future of the organization
depends on it.
First think about what sorts of data are normally gathered in the organi-
zation and how they could be modiﬁed to meet the requirements of risk
assessment. If possible, we want to utilize known data elements. We should
not go out and create things that do not need to be created. Many times we ﬁnd
that data we are already gathering, if utilized appropriately, could satisfy the
criteria. However, if appropriate data has never been gathered or is poorly
handled, then it should be abandoned and new metrics determined. There is no
reason to waste time trying to ﬁt a square peg into a round hole only to get a
badly distorted result. The data must ﬁt the task of risk assessment.
Identifying the Data Capture Methodology
Provision should be made within the design of the system to capture and house
the data that will be utilized for risk analysis and risk management of the
business subset. The objective here is to make the capture of data as painless
and ﬂuid as possible. This is not possible in all circumstances, but in most cases
with the technologies available today data capture will most likely be accom-
modated with some degree of ease.
There are many types of medium that can and are employed for the
capture of data. The most important thing to be remembered is that we must
capture the right data elements, not just any data element. Therefore whatever
technology and or methodology is employed it should only be selected if it will
capture, as efﬁciently as possible, exactly what we are intending.
In most cases the data that is going to be utilized will be forwarded from
some other systems environment, be captured digitally, or be input through
Designing Risk-Centric Systems for Efﬁciency/Governance
n
207

some front-end edit routine. The key for those items that are coming in through
the edit routines is to make sure that the edits are appropriately designed to
preclude data with form and content that is not as desired.
Designating the Critical Risk Data Fields in the System
It should be emphasized that the data ﬁelds that house the critical data for risk
assessment and management must be clearly identiﬁed and understood by
every user of the system. Why is it so important? The reason is because many
times when new systems are brought into an organization people are not
properly trained on the systems and as a result do not understand the criticality
of certain features. One of the most commonly overlooked concepts is the
emphasis on the ﬁelds that must be populated with data and the importance of
doing so. Without this emphasis, most people are going to take the lazy way out
in populating data on a system. In other words, they will use the easiest
alternatives and not feel compelled to do what is necessary.
A good example of this is the following. In creating a risk model for a major
organization, one of the key of risk factors from a cost perspective was the
consumption of electric power. During the exercise of building the model, that
became a very big point of contention with the accounts payable personnel.
The reason was that they would have to make a few more keystrokes to
populate the ﬁeld that was already present in the Enterprise Resource Planning
(ERP) environment indicating the units of power actually consumed. They
were adamant about the fact it was not their job to populate that ﬁeld and that
they only needed to capture the amount due to the utility company for
purposes of paying the bills.
Of course, this is ludicrous. If power consumption is a critical cost factor
that plays heavily into risk, it must be captured. The cost of a couple of extra
keystrokes by accounts payable personnel should never be the deterrent to
capturing the data that is required. Such occurrences are exactly why systems
with so many capabilities are so inadequate in today’s organizations.
An integral part of this exercise is to ensure that the data that is selected for
risk assessment can also be utilized to evaluate the effectiveness of the control
environment both from operations and design standpoints. What is the point?
The point is that if you are judicious in how this is done, you can establish
highly efﬁcient environments that can run virtually everything in the enter-
prise from a governance standpoint. It is imperative then that the right data be
captured and made available to support these critical functionalities. So do not
fail to designate the appropriate data ﬁelds, and make sure they are populated!
208
n
The Future Evolution of the Model

Building in the Appropriate Tools and Techniques
Once the risk-centric data has been determined and has been captured, the
other key component that must be present is the appropriate tool or technique
to analyze the data. It should be clear that in order to be effective, dynamic, and
ﬂuid for the facilitation of real-time risk assessment, the tools should be
automated. These types of tools, when built directly into the systems, are
called system-centric data-centric tools. These types of tools will be discussed
later in this chapter and must be very seriously considered in structuring an
ERM environment for the twenty-ﬁrst century.
The other part of this is the techniques, which boil down to the analytics.
As discussed in a previous section, there are hundreds of different types of
analytical approaches that can be taken, but we must select what is most
appropriate. In selecting an analytic technique, we must pay attention to the
longevity factor and the elimination of any type of distortion. What is implied
here is to stay with very fundamental analytics that will deliver reliable results
on a consistent basis, irrespective of the business conditions.
For instance, in Chapter 7 we talked about comparative analysis on a
period-to-period basis. But, as emphasized in that discussion, this type of
analytic is subject to misinterpretation where the business is known to be
cyclical or undergoes frequent change. When you are selecting an analytical
technique to be employed in risk assessment and management, you should go
with whatever is low- or virtually no-maintenance. Therefore, analytical
techniques such as these types of comparative analysis should be used
sparingly, if at all. It is not that they are not relevant in certain circumstances,
but another alternative may be a better choice.
Determining the Timing of Reporting
By inference from previous discussions, if you are going to go to the trouble of
building-in these types of tools and techniques, it would stand to reason that
you would like the reporting to be virtually real time. That is not the only
alternative, but in those critical risk situations where time is of the essence it
may be the best alternative. In designing the system then, consideration must
be given to not only the timing of the reporting but also the form.
It is a well-known fact that, historically, exception reporting has been
generated for years and years and years. However, this type of reporting was in
many cases ignored and not acted upon. This is not the type of precedent that
we want to follow going forward. Therefore, any type of reporting that is going
to be associated with this type of tooling must be real time and highly effective.
Designing Risk-Centric Systems for Efﬁciency/Governance
n
209

As a result, one of the things that will be discussed later is the utilization of
secure e-mail to deliver these types of results almost instantaneously to the
appropriate parties. As we all know in this day and age, information is king, but
stale information is useless. For example, in a rapidly rising stock market it does
no good to know what the stock sold for one minute ago; it is totally irrelevant
and has no bearing on an intelligent business decision.
The key to risk management report timing then is ‘‘the sooner the better—
don’t delay or you are going to pay!’’
Presentation of the State of the Enterprise
Just like the state of the union or the state of the state, the state of the enterprise
from a risk perspective is absolutely critical to senior executives and the board.
However, unlike these other types of informative sessions, this information
cannot be delivered on such an infrequent basis. Also, unlike these other types
of updates, key risk information should not be delivered orally or by audio means.
The information regarding the state of the enterprise to gain more risk
perspective must be presented in a timely and businesslike fashion. For
purposes of risk reporting, you should always use analytics that are as current
as possible, in a format that is easily consumed by senior executives and board
members. For that matter, risk information should be delivered in a format that
is easily consumed by virtually everybody in the organization. That format is
visual, not audio. In certain risk situations, for instance, a call to 911 regarding
something that is happening at that very moment, audio delivery may be the
only viable format. However, from an enterprise risk management perspective
to deliver the big picture of what is really going on, where it is happening, how
intense the impact is and so on, visualization is the only way to communicate.
By default then, the tools built into the system to communicate the risk
must have the capability of raising visually the red ﬂags as to the status of risk.
These tools will provide the senior executives and the Board of Directors with
the capabilities to manage risk on a dynamic basis and respond as soon as
practical to the situation.
The critical reason why this is so important is to make sure that commu-
nication actually takes place. As we know, the old idiom regarding communi-
cation is that it has not taken place until the other person understands. The
relevance here is that people at the top of the organization are visionaries not
audiophiles. Visionaries see, they don’t hear well; therefore give them the
picture, and they will grasp it quickly; tell them a bedtime story, and you will
lose their attention instantaneously. If you want action show it, don’t tell it!
210
n
The Future Evolution of the Model

Establish the Flow of Information to the ERM Environment
Once the system has been outﬁtted with the tools and information necessary,
then provision must be made for how this information will be transferred to the
ERM environment automatically. It is imperative that information ﬂow to ERM
with no intervention on the part of the user. If the transfer of information
involves any type of signiﬁcant activity on the part of the system user, the risk is
extremely high that it will not take place. The reason for this is that in most
situations the users already have enough on their platter of things to do
without having to feed another environment with information.
Therefore, the ERM personnel must be actively involved in the design of the
system to ensure that the information they require to effect change and
effectively manage risk is forthcoming timely. This may imply in certain
situations that there be designated personnel within ERM who are charged
with all of the tasking discussed in this section. The reason why this may be
necessary is that most businesses are undergoing some kind of major systems
change on a constant basis. If designated personnel are not established for this
type of function, ensuring that our systems environments are risk-centric will
be hit or miss and totally haphazard.
The timing of the information ﬂow to ERM is one of the most critical
aspects. It is extremely likely that critical information that is received may have
to be brought to the attention of the Board disclosure committee immediately,
for publication in some instances. Therefore, in this part of the exercise,
compatibility of format, content, and visual presentation capability should
be clearly emphasized.
It is implicit, as in any system exercise, that all of these capabilities be
thoroughly tested and determined to be functional prior to the system being
implemented. Making a system risk-centric must always take place in Phase 1,
as we all now know what happens to those things that are relegated to Phase 2.
DYNAMICALLY INTEGRATED RISK EVALUATION (DIRE)
Dynamically integrated risk evaluation (DIRE) is a methodology of utilizing
systems and systems capabilities to evaluate risks. In its very embryonic stages,
this science or methodology has been around for some time. I personally have
been employing these techniques for many years. However, such tools have
been scattered and haphazard in their implementation.
The whole thought process behind this type of approach is to have systems
do what they do best—process data. It is still amazing, in virtually all
Dynamically Integrated Risk Evaluation (DIRE)
n
211

organizations, how much heavy lifting of data is still performed by people. With
creative techniques in how systems are designed and implemented and with
the incorporation of appropriate tooling, a lot of this manual effort could be
avoided. The point here is not to downplay the importance of human inter-
vention, but too much human intervention actually slows down the process
and compromises the results.
Technology and systems as designed today have immense capabilities to
simplify the oversight and governance of organizations. The problem is that
these issues are not given high priority when the systems are created. As a
result, we end up trying to govern our organizations physically instead of
logically. Almost all enterprises today are simply too big to do it this way
anymore. We have to start to incorporate the realization that systems are built
to generate and manipulate data, and that is what they should be used for. By
utilizing the techniques discussed in this book all organizations can actually
generate full-blown governance methodologies that will help them run their
organizations better and cheaper, and give them a competitive edge over their
counterparts.
The types of tools illustrated in the following sections are not rocket
science. If they were, they would not be included in this book. The importance
of a key business tool lies in its simplicity.
TRIGGERS AND MOMS
The ﬁrst two tools, Triggers and MOMS, are very similar in functionality. The
ﬁrst one, threshold triggers, is the generic name for a tool utilized to evaluate
risk thresholds. The second tool, Metric Oversight Monitoring Systems (MOMS),
essentially has the same functionality. The implication of the acronym is that
you can’t get away with anything when MOMS is watching. Both of the tools
are centered on the evaluation of risk using metrics and in their implementa-
tion tend to be data-centric and system-centric. This implies by deﬁnition that
they tend to be incorporated directly into systems by design. They utilize the
capability of the system to automatically perform governance 24 hours a day, 7
days a week, 365 or 366 days a year.
Both of these tools rely upon data generated historically for the determi-
nation of the threshold of risk and the triggering mechanism, which will invoke
notiﬁcation automatically. In other words, to establish the risk threshold the
process owners or system users would look at the historical pattern of
information relative to a certain risk event. They would use that proven
212
n
The Future Evolution of the Model

information to determine what their risk threshold, or threshold of pain, is for
that particular functionality of the system. That then becomes the ﬁrst part of
the tool, which would then be established as a reference point for the system.
The second part of the tool is the triggering mechanism. The triggering
mechanism is normally established in relation to how much risk, or risk
tolerance, is acceptable within that particular functionality of the business
or system.
Once the MOMS threshold of risk as been established and is accepted, and
the triggering point has been determined, they are then established as reference
ﬁelds for the system to be evaluating against. These reference ﬁelds are locked
down by security and are not allowed to be modiﬁed in any way without the
explicit permission of the ERM organization, the senior executives, and/or the
board of directors as appropriate.
A MOMS mechanism should be established in each and every primary
module of the environment that directs key organizational activities or exe-
cutes critical transactions. These triggers become key oversight mechanisms
for the evaluation of processes or systems as required. One of the great
governance features of this is that it is independent of control of the process
owner or the system user. In other words, risky events or unsatisfactory results
cannot be swept under the carpet without appropriate notiﬁcation somewhere
up the line.
The MOMS would operate as follows:
n
The risk threshold is established.
n
That trigger point is determined.
n
The ﬁelds are populated and implemented in the system.
n
The ﬁelds are properly secured so that they cannot be altered.
n
The business is conducted as normal within the process or system.
n
When the threshold trigger point is breached an e-mail notiﬁcation is
generated.
n
The instantaneous e-mail notiﬁcation should be multiparty. It can be any
or all of these depending upon the seriousness of the risk event:
n
Process owner/systems user
n
Internal audit
n
ERM organization
n
Senior executive
n
Board of Directors
n
Root cause determination is undertaken.
n
Corrective action is appropriately taken and the trigger reset.
Triggers and MOMS
n
213

Asmentionedpreviously,thesethresholdtriggerscanbeandshouldbeputin
any and all critical modules of all software systems implemented in the organiza-
tion. This can run the gamut from physical security to logical security, from ﬁxed
assets to ﬁnancial reporting, from cash management to legal activity. There is
really no limitation as to where these types of tools can be utilized effectively.
Detailed next is a simplistic example of how threshold triggers could be
implemented. In the interest of keeping the example straightforward, I will
utilize a common ﬁnancial scenario. In this scenario a very commonplace, but
very critical, everyday occurrence is illustrated. Figure 8.1 is an accounts
receivable aging analysis shown in an Excel format. It shows the normal
buckets of aging that are represented in these types of processes. It also shows
the threshold trigger that was established and secured for this function. The
risk threshold or threshold of pain is set at 60 days, and the triggering point is
established at 27 percent of total outstanding receivables.
As accounts receivable is processed, if the amount of receivables out-
standing over 60 days exceeds 27.1 percent an instantaneous notiﬁcation
would be triggered to the preidentiﬁed parties. The process would then involve
a designated response from either the key executive, internal audit, or the ERM
organization as shown in Figure 8.2.
REAL-TIME PROFILING
Embedded Audit and Risk System (EARS) Real-Time Proﬁling is the further
migration of the proﬁling concept discussed in the analytics section. EARS, as
utilized in a data-centric system, is what will be illustrated here. EARS is used
for the purpose of isolating risky events within a computerized processing
environment. The thought process here is to create a proﬁle utilizing past
experience to trigger immediate response or oversight when required. The
proﬁles can either be historical proﬁles that are built over a period of time, given
a set of transactions or system events, or can be proﬁles developed to isolate
unacceptable conditions immediately.
This type of tool is also embedded in the system by inference and as such is
capable of instantaneous feedback whenever a triggering event is encountered.
These types of tools are used in circumstances when delays in corrective actions
are simply unacceptable. Common applications of these techniques are
encountered by businesses and individuals on a daily basis. In sophisticated
banking organizations, these types of proﬁles should be developed and
employed in two key areas as appropriate.
214
n
The Future Evolution of the Model

Accounts Receivable Aging
Days
% of A/R
Threshold Trigger
60
27.10%
0–30
31–60
61–90
91–120
120þ
Total
61–120+
% of Total
Customer1
$ 3,000.00
$ 2,478.00
$
—
$
354.00
$ 1,546.00
Customer2
$ 2,768.00
$ 1,820.00
$
126.00
$ 1,239.00
$
214.00
Customer3
$ 3,456.00
$ 1,765.00
$ 1,257.00
$
—
$
345.00
Customer4
$ 1,278.00
$ 3,590.00
$ 1,287.00
$ 1,326.00
$
762.00
Customer5
$ 6,734.00
$ 1,250.00
$ 1,238.00
$ 1,298.00
$
—
etc.
Total$
$ 17,236.00
$ 10,903.00
$ 3,908.00
$ 4,217.00
$ 2,867.00
$ 39,131.00
$ 10,992.00
28.09%
Trigger Is Active
FIGURE 8.1
MOMS Excel
215

FIGURE 8.2
MOMS Flow
216

The ﬁrst key area is wire transfers. It is imperative that a bad wire not make
it outside the bank. As a result, these tools can be implemented to ensure that,
given certain criteria, the wire is properly reviewed and authorized before it
leaves the premises.
The second key area is credit card administration. Every fraud unit of every
major credit card issuer depends heavily on EARS or similar types of mecha-
nisms to identify unusual spending patterns by their clients. By building-in a
historical proﬁle of how we consume goods on our credit cards, these units are
able to determine with a high degree of predictability what we will do. If we step
outside our normal pattern then the system automatically triggers an inter-
vention by a fraud investigator.
For example, I started to do seminars in Las Vegas, after not being in Las
Vegas for years. I presented my credit card at the hotel the ﬁrst time I went
there, and shortly after it was swiped I received a phone call from my wife. She
said the credit card company just called and asked if you were in Vegas. They
further inquired as to whether you were at a speciﬁc hotel. Once she was able to
afﬁrm that I was, the inquiry was over.
These types of tools are unbelievably efﬁcient and effective, in that the
fraud investigator really only has to talk into a headset and make the inquiry.
The system does all the heavy lifting relative to processing the data,
identifying the exception condition via the proﬁle, and dialing the phone.
Think for a minute how long it would take to do this simple action if it was
done without the beneﬁt of this type of tool. In reality, it could never be
accomplished in any type of timely fashion. And time is of the essence when
fraud is involved.
It is unfortunate that we have reﬁned and implemented these tools in
many situations for this functionality but we have not made the same types of
tools available for overall enterprise risk management and governance pro-
cesses. Therein exists the one great point of failure. There is absolutely no
reason why with appropriate discipline and effort these types of tools cannot be
integrated throughout the entire enterprise. There is plenty of technological
capability. The failure to use these tools truly lies in the failure to employ vision
and foresight.
Figure 8.3 shows a simplistic EARS example of how it might be seen from
an overall conceptual view.
The most critical point to be remembered about these types of tools is to
keep them straightforward and understandable. In addition, these types of tools
can be implemented in virtually every platform that is being utilized by
organizations of any size today.
Real-Time Proﬁling
n
217

FIGURE 8.3
EARS Overview
218

In this section risk evaluation and assessment has been discussed in the
context of system-centric/data-centric tooling. This can however be imple-
mented in a more primitive or evolutionary stage in the context of data-centric/
system-dependent types of tooling. If this is the only alternative, it still may be
far superior to the other option of not having it at all.
SETTING STANDARDS FOR FUTURE EVOLUTION
In setting the standard for the future evolution of the ERM environments and
systems in general, it is time to start setting the bar a lot higher. For years now,
corporate executives have been shortchanging their shareholders by shoddy
systems strategies that are keeping most organizations in the Dark Ages. All of
this has been done in the context of trying to meet the short-term expectations
for the next quarter’s performance.
I’m not sure when people are going to ﬁgure out that this is counter to their
best interest. Unless it is the stated intention of most corporations to have a
useful life of years instead of decades why do they keep thinking short-term and
hamstringing the organization? Do they really want to set themselves up for
failure?
It is time for shareholders to demand better performance from their Boards
of Directors, their CEOs, CIOs, and the rest of C-suite. The Achilles’ heel of most
organizations is their simple lack of meaningful and useful data and informa-
tion. The reason they do not have it is because of the lack of vision on the part of
the people just listed and their overwhelming desire to enrich themselves
instead of the organization.
As part of the ERM organization implementation, it should be a stated
strategy to improve all systems’ quality methodically and continuously both in
current time and in future times. In other words, whenever a new system is
raised, it must be done right and it must be risk-centric.
CEOs, CROs, and CIOs should be held directly accountable by the Board of
Directors for the ongoing creation of risk-centric systems. Any organization
that is serious about doing enterprise risk management on any type of global or
enterprise scale must make this mandatory. Shareholders should be conscious
of the fact that their organizations are running systems that are substandard in
every way and as such are subverting shareholder value.
The popular belief that next quarter’s results are what build shareholders’
value over the long term is ridiculous on its surface. What is sorely lacking in
what we’ve seen as massive corporate failures is the effective utilization of data,
Setting Standards for Future Evolution
n
219

or the lack thereof, to manage risk on a day-to-day basis. The best interests of
the shareholders and society in general have been sacriﬁced and sacriﬁced time
and again at the altar of greed on behalf of the senior executives and the board.
It is painfully obvious from both a public perception context and the inability to
perform consistently and effectively that executive compensation is out of
control. This is the biggest risk, next to the lack of data that is reliable and
usable, that most organizations have.
Therefore, the key strategy that must be implemented is to reward
executives based upon the types of visionary systems and overall governance
methodologies that they put in place instead of next quarter’s bottom line
and the attached bonus compensation. Clearly, the focus has to shift to a
technology-centric strategy that is clearly deﬁned and highly effective.
I can almost hear the grousing from here: We just don’t have the money or
that is just too expensive. Yet there is always money to pay bonuses and to do
other things that do nothing to ensure the longevity of the company. It has
reached a point now where this problem is so rampant in corporations around
the world that we can no longer afford not to solve it. How long will it be before
the next major meltdown occurs, the one we don’t recover from for years?
The necessity to establish a course of action that will achieve top-of-game
governance with the utilization of best-of-class systems is a plan that is long
overdue and sorely needed. By incorporating the concept of automating ERM
with the implementation of every new system we can build an extremely
powerful environment in which to run all organizations even if it is one system
at a time.
220
n
The Future Evolution of the Model

9
CHAPTER NINE
Related Topics and
Special Risk Situations
MANAGING RISK/AUDITING REAL TIME
One of the key things that should emerge from a highly functional enterprise
risk management (ERM) environment that is based upon an automated
platform as discussed in Chapter 8 are some economies of scale that are
lurking beneath the surface. Data-centric ERM has the potential to bring more
value to the table, much more value, than any initial ongoing cost of
automation could offset.
One of the critical rules I have always operated by is this: if no good
business reason to change something exists, then don’t do it. I do not want to
pontiﬁcate on the virtues of data-centric ERM or advocate its adoption if it does
not provide business value. There is no reason to spend money on a business
process or information system if the rewards are not going to be greater, far
greater, than the expenditures.
The same holds true with enterprise risk management. If it is just going to
be a ﬁgurehead organization sitting on the org chart looking important—
curtains for the windows as many would say—don’t make the investment. It is
a funny situation that we have slipped into in the world of business in which
221

many people like to talk about all the latest things and use the buzz words of the
day but in reality haven’t done a thing. The problem with most of the buzz
words they are employing is that people don’t have the slightest notion of what
they really mean or how to truly implement them in any kind of workable
business context.
The implementation of a highly automated enterprise risk management
environment should beget many more business advantages at the point of its
inception. Some of the cost advantages and economies of scale that can be
gained by implementing data-centric ERM will be discussed in more detail later
in this chapter. However, sufﬁce it to say that if there are not real business
advantages gained and measurable as a result of implementing such an
environment, then it has not been implemented correctly, or the design
was deﬁcient from the outset.
There should be any number of signiﬁcant advantages gained by imple-
menting a data-centric environment for managing risk. One of the most basic is
running a much more efﬁcient and effective business.
Let’s explore some fundamental examples to see if this is true in the context
of day-to-day business operations.
Let’s look at a manufacturing operation. Suppose that we are noticing over
time that the amount of unanticipated scrap that is being generated at a facility
is accelerating at a signiﬁcant rate. The global risk indicator brings this to the
attention of operating management. The risk metrics that they are maintaining
on the shop ﬂoor provide a logical data pathway to the point of failure. By
following the metrics, it has been determined that the problem is not the result
of bad machine setup or instruction sets. It is also determined that tooling is
correct and has been properly utilized in all instances. It is also determined that
we are using journeyman labor on the machining center where the majority of
the scrap is being generated.
The one common element of risk is the raw material component itself, and
those that are failing are all from one speciﬁc vendor. By utilizing this
information, it is easy to center on the source of the risk. It is clear that the
vendor is sending us substandard material. It could be either that the metal-
lurgical content is defective or the material has not been made to the proper
speciﬁcations and tolerances. By utilizing the logical data pathway, we are able
to isolate the problematic vendor and the related raw material component.
Why is this important, and why would we want to know?
Anyone who has worked in a manufacturing environment understands
quite quickly that when material fails in production it causes an avalanche of
aligned risks that start to take place—each one with its own attached cost
222
n
Related Topics and Special Risk Situations

factor. The following are some of the costs that are incurred when the material
from a vendor fails:
n
Production must stop while the material is removed, negatively impacting
productivity (indirect labor cost).
n
Other jobs relying on this component to be produced will have to be
rescheduled (rescheduling costs).
n
Additional time will have to be made on the production schedule to
accommodate the reintroduction of this job order onto the shop ﬂoor
(additional rescheduling costs).
n
The direct worker must now clock out and move to indirect coding for the
idle time (lost production cost).
n
Another job not involving that material must then be moved to the
machining center (material handling costs).
n
That is, of course, after we have had to issue it out of stock (issuance
costs).
n
The item must be removed from the production ﬂoor and taken to shipping
to be returned or sold to a scrap vendor (material handling costs).
n
Assuming the sale to the scrap vendor, we must then invoice it to the scrap
vendor (invoicing costs).
n
We then must make sure we collect the money due on the invoice to the
scrap vendor (accounts receivable and collection costs).
n
Purchasing must then generate another order for the same material
(material acquisition cost).
n
The material must be received when shipped (additional receiving
costs).
n
The material must be transported from receiving to inventory control
(material handling cost).
n
Inventory control must then record it on the stock status (handling
costs).
n
The material must then be reissued to the shop ﬂoor (reissuance cost).
n
The material must then be staged and loaded on the machine (production
setup costs).
n
The order must be brought to the point of completion prior to failure
(additional production costs).
In the preceding listing is a representation of the types of cost that get built
into organizations when fundamental risks are not properly managed in day-
to-day operations. What is most frightening about this situation is that this is
Managing Risk/Auditing Real Time
n
223

not at all unusual. If this goes undetected for any period of time, and that
vendor continues to introduce poor materials into our operations, the day-to-
day costs continue to escalate.
I could recite example after example after example of these types of
occurrences in virtually any industry and/or organizational structure, but
the simplicity of the message is clear. Most organizations feel that on a daily
basis they do an exceptional job of managing risk; however, if they looked
deeply into their operations and their organizational structure, they would get
a rude awakening at just how poorly they do, in fact, manage risk.
A fundamental premise that can establish an organization’s propensity to
manage risk is where they ﬁt in the pecking order relative to other companies of
their same size and characteristics. If the CEO looks you in the eye and says,
‘‘We don’t have any risk around here. My people are managing it effectively
every day,’’ start looking around. If you are able to determine that that same
company that is so proﬁcient at managing risk is actually number six in their
industry and not number one, it can only be concluded that somebody is
mistaken. It would appear at that point that the corner ofﬁce is out of touch
with the front-line operations.
If an organization is effectively managing their risk every day, they would
be number one in their industry or respective grouping, wouldn’t they? Why
would they not be?
MONITORING CONTROLS WITH METRICS
Monitoring controls is now fashionable and has been made so by the guidance
ﬁnalized in 2009 from COSO. I have been monitoring controls with metrics for
many, many years as part of the exercise of evaluating risk using metrics.
Approached logically and with common sense, controls should be part and
parcel of the same exercise of evaluating risk on a continuous basis.
As mentioned earlier, my colleague Dave Coderre has written a global
technology audit guide (GTAG) on continuous auditing. One of his key points
made in that highly progressive publication is that continuous risk assessment is
absolutely essential to the accomplishment of continuous auditing. By inference,
whenever continuous auditing is employed, it is normally centered on the subject
matter of controls. By logical deduction then, why would you not monitor controls
using metrics if you are using metrics to perform continuous risk assessment?
I originated the theory early in my audit career that there had to be a better
way of validating controls than slogging through a sample of transactions that
224
n
Related Topics and Special Risk Situations

is so small in relationship to the volume that it is virtually meaningless. One of
the great frustrations is that the sample when drawn judgmentally by an
auditor cannot be defended on the face of pure logic with any operations
personnel. Therefore, by virtue of its ineptness the exercise is useless, but it puts
a good curtain on the window by saying ‘‘it’s been audited.’’ As a result I
abandoned that practice early on.
It was clear to me from looking at risk using metrics that not only could I
evaluate the risk of a process, but I could also evaluate the status of the controls
in that process. The key to all of this lies in developing the right metrics to
evaluate each and every part of the enterprise. As discussed earlier, when you
concentrate on the outcome of a process and ﬁnd the metrics to measure it you
are clearly in touch with the key risks of the process.
The reason is because the inverse of the outcome is the key risk of the
process. Then, by logical extension, if that is the key risk of the process, you look
for those controls directly related to those key risks or outcomes, and you will
have identiﬁed your key controls. By further extension of the same logic, when
the metrics that measure those risks are performing erratically, the controls are
not functioning at an acceptable level or are totally nonfunctional. A simple
example to illustrate this is shown in Figure 9.1.
From the trend lines, it is painfully obvious that there is a tremendous
amount of risk taking place in this particular process, namely the billing,
accounts receivable, and cash collection process. What is shown is a proliﬁc
upward spiraling of the days in accounts receivable contrasting with a death
spiral downward of the day’s cash on hand.
Looking at those two trend lines, one can easily conclude that some of the
key outcomes in this process are not being realized. Namely the collection of
40
30
20
10
0
1 2
3 4
5
6
7 8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
Days in AR
Long-Term Care Facility Risk Assessment
Days Cash on Hand
FIGURE 9.1
DAR/DCOH Example
Monitoring Controls with Metrics
n
225

cash and the effective management of receivables as critical outcomes are
simply not occurring. We also know for a fact that whatever controls are in
place in this process have already had their impact on the process. The data
itself shows that the controls that are in place in the process are wholly
inadequate or are nonfunctional.
This harkens back to the net risk inherent risk discussion that was
presented in Chapter 7. In this situation we are looking at the net risk of
this process rapidly escalating on two different fronts.
Contrary to popular belief, it would simply not be sufﬁcient in this situation
for a ﬁnancial auditor to go into this process and advise the ﬁrm to increase
their bad debt reserve to properly state their ﬁnancials. Yet undeniably this is
precisely what would happen in this circumstance. The metrics, however, are
crying out about the massive operational risk that is present in this process. but
improvement will also bring to the table one of the greatest advantages of
utilizing data for the evaluation of risk and the evaluation of controls—the
ability to eliminate or severely reduce testing of the controls. It is painfully
obvious by the trends of the data in the net risk position, post-control, that the
controls are not working or are ineffective in design. What will be gained by
further testing the controls only to conclude the obvious? What has to be done
in this situation is to turn attention to why the controls are not working and
what needs to be corrected to bring this process back into a working state.
Yet in this situation I feel comfortable in stating that every audit ﬁrm out
there would still be pulling their samples for testing only to conclude that an
increase in the bad debt reserve was necessary. That is a ﬁnancial issue that can
be arrived at in two seconds without any testing, but that is nowhere near the
business issue that is the real risk to the enterprise.
What needs to be determined is what is wrong with the underlying billing
process, so that it may be rectiﬁed by eliminating the root causes of the problem.
That would yield some real audit value instead of the useless exercises that
consultants all go through on a continuous basis, which unfortunately then
the business pays for with zero value being realized.
UTILIZING ERM TO REDUCE AUDIT FEES AND LOWER
THE COSTS OF OPERATION
By utilizing metrics to monitor controls/risks a number of signiﬁcant cost
advantages can be gained. One of the greatest is the elimination of testing of
transactions by the external and internal auditors. Can you imagine how much
226
n
Related Topics and Special Risk Situations

the audit bill could be decreased if you could eliminate testing by your
externals? That is precisely what can be accomplished here. You can literally
eliminate transaction testing from the landscape and all costs that are wasted
and associated with it.
In addition, instead of having your internal auditors concentrated on
performing useless sampling, they could be pursuing the real meat of the
matter. The real issue here is the root cause of the increasing risk, as evidenced
by the metrics, and how it can be eradicated. When the root causes are
discovered and appropriately dealt with, you will get real productivity gains,
the controls that are failing will be detected and corrected, and in this case you
can forestall the failure of a business unit. All of this can be accomplished while
increasing your cash ﬂow dramatically.
This example is meant to put in perspective the real-life business gains that
can be realized by employing this type of ERM. Data-centric enterprise risk
management can actually reduce your cost of operations by doing away with
unnecessary activities that are being performed on a quarterly and annual
basis year in and year out.
I was warned by a relatively high proﬁle individual, after he concurred
with the effectiveness of this approach, that I was in the process of trying to
push a boulder up the mountain. The people living on top of the mountain are,
of course, the large ﬁrms that have no interest in a methodology that will lower
their fees or their billable hours. Essentially what he told me is that as I’m
pushing the boulder up the mountain there are thousands of people standing
on top pushing the boulder back down.
It is no secret to me that by taking this approach I am bucking the trend,
going against the establishment or swimming upstream. This is not the ﬁrst
time that I’ve been told, ‘‘Duckert, you are a maverick’’; ‘‘Duckert, you don’t
understand how it works around here’’; or the ever-famous ‘‘Duckert, you’re
not a team player.’’ If that is the case and it has never bothered me in the past,
why would I care if I am shoving a boulder up a mountain?
What I’m actually trying to accomplish is to restore some sanity to the
whole practice of auditing, risk management, and corporate governance.
Something has to change to ensure that the shareholders’ money is not
wasted on frivolous activities that have been evidenced time and time again
to be useless. You don’t have to look back far into the timeline to ﬁgure out that
something is rotten in Denmark—no offense to Denmark because it’s a
beautiful country, with fabulous people, and I think the world of it. Every
one of the major corporations that failed in the recent ﬁnancial crisis all had
opinions issued on their ﬁnancial statements as required by law, and I would be
Utilizing ERM to Reduce Audit Fees
n
227

willing to bet that the majority would have been unqualiﬁed opinions just prior
to the time that they ceased operations forever.
If highly effective governance can be accomplished by building a risk
model internal to the organization that can be utilized to minimize or
eliminate unwarranted testing that simply wastes money and yields no
beneﬁt, while delivering high value business results, why would any organi-
zation not do this?
Any visionary organization that is seeking to reduce its operational cost
and to ensure that it is highly effective in governing its organization should very
seriously consider data-centric ERM. It is the vehicle that can accomplish just
that. It is time to make the move toward effective corporate governance that is
cost-effective and provides real business returns of numerous types.
For the others that would choose to ignore what is in the best interests of
their organization both near-term and long-term, the tar pits are waiting. Give
my regards to the saber-toothed tigers, I have always admired them.
MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS: LET’S BUY
SOME MORE RISK
There are a number of options that can be utilized to increase market share.
You can invent must-have new products, you can create a niche that nobody
else controls, or, of course, you can always buy your way in. If you are not
going to be able to expand your organization by organic growth due to lack of
creativity or simple inability to do so by marketing or other means, get out
the wallet.
If utilizing your wallet or your stock value, for example, is the pathway to
be pursued, you had better be good at what you do. The battleﬁeld of mergers
and acquisitions (M&As) is littered with the remains of those that weren’t good
at what they did. The big caution, or better yet red ﬂags, should start waving
the minute the M&A phrase is uttered. Why?
Because for a number of years one of the percentages that has been
bantered about as to the failure rate of mergers to meet all of their initial
required criteria is northward of 85 percent. That in anyone’s view is a gigantic
rate of failure and would deﬁnitely qualify as risky on anybody’s Richter scale. It
would be huge if it was even 50 percent.
Let us start from the beginning and list of some of the most signiﬁcant risk
events that take place that should immediately put people on notice that the
chances of failure are huge and you are about to become a statistic.
228
n
Related Topics and Special Risk Situations

Selecting the Target
Identifying the organization that on the surface appears to be the ideal ﬁt for
our organization isn’t exactly easy and may even be highly speculative. What
are some of the reasons that could account for this?
Who has certiﬁed their ﬁnancial data, and have they under any circum-
stances fallen victim to the undue inﬂuence of the owner who is seeking to sell?
I’m not questioning the integrity of each and every accounting ﬁrm, but there
have been sufﬁcient instances in every ﬁrm (large and small) where things have
fallen through the cracks. That having been said, do you want to be the
organization that buys someone who is on the other side of that crack?
n
Key Risk: Financial statements are not properly stated and/or are inten-
tionally misrepresented.
Key questions to be answered:
n
How will you positively assure yourself that their ﬁnancial results as stated
do in fact accurately reﬂect their performance as an organization, both
current and historic?
n
If this is not done, how will you protect yourself contractually with right of
recovery if you miss something in due diligence or if it is misrepresented by
an outside party?
Due Diligence?
The reason for the question mark in the subheading of this section is asking is
due diligence ever done? In most instances it is not only due, it is certainly
overdue. One of the most critical points of failure in many merger and
acquisition scenarios surrounds due diligence. In many instances, due diligence
is insufﬁcient, poorly done, not done, or the results are totally ignored.
What I always ﬁnd amusing is that every internal auditor I’ve ever taught
has reacted uniformly whenever queried on the subject matter of due diligence.
They either have two days to do something while trying to remain un-
noticeable on the acquisition candidate’s premises or the reality of it is, in
virtually all instances, that they are nowhere near the place until the
acquisition has closed. I have never been able to understand what goes on
in the minds of senior executives who pursue this type of thought process. This
conclusion can only stem from two fundamental circumstances: (1) Their
internal auditors are extremely sharp, and executives don’t want to hear
what they have to say on the record and then act in deﬁance of it, or (2) the
Mergers and Acquisitions: Let’s Buy Some More Risk
n
229

executives have almost no conﬁdence in their internal auditors and believe
them to be totally inept. If that is the case, they should ﬁre the whole lot
of them.
n
Key Risk: Due diligence is not performed because the CEO has already
decided the M&A is going forward.
Key questions to be answered:
n
Who will be held accountable for causes of failure that could have been
discovered in due diligence?
n
Will the responsible executive be held accountable and subsequently
penalized for the failure? If not, why not?
Unanticipated Events
There are a number of unanticipated or unforeseen events that can take
place—these are commonly referred to as risks. An example from a colleague
would illustrate this fact exactly.
According to my colleague, a close family member of hers was actively
involved in business development for a major corporation. His job was to
identify and isolate potential merger and acquisition candidates, in this case an
acquisition. The targeted company was highly successful and in a very
compatible ﬁeld of products, which were, however, unique. The strongest
asset of the company was a highly charismatic and dynamic owner who
created all the products and established the customer base from scratch.
This person’s family member pursued the owner of this corporation to
sell the company to their organization for approximately ﬁve years. After ﬁve
years of relentless pursuit, the owner acquiesced and agreed to sell on the
condition that all monies would be exchanged at the closing with no delayed
earn out provisions. The track record of the company was solid, and so this
was agreed to. The purchase price of the company was approximately $400
million, and the date of closing was set. The owner of the corporation was 46
years old.
The closing took place at 10:00 A.M. and, since much of the preliminary
work had been performed in advance, was concluded by 11:00 A.M. with all
monies transferred. The owner of the business just acquired died at 1:30 P.M.
that afternoon with no provision having been made for key man insurance. The
subsidiary lasted approximately eight months before it imploded and disinte-
grated rendering the $400 million investment useless.
230
n
Related Topics and Special Risk Situations

n
Key Risk: All the critical components of the acquisition have not been
properly considered in terms of risk and the risk mitigated appropriately.
Key questions to be answered:
n
What are the critical components of this acquisition that make it succeed
or fail?
n
Have we properly identiﬁed the key risks and taken the appropriate
mitigating actions? If not, why not?
Inability to Integrate the Acquisition into the Organization
There are many reasons why an acquisition cannot ever be properly integrated
into the organization. Some of the more common ones that cause nightmares
in this arena include culture clashes, inability to integrate business processes,
and the ever-present inability to integrate systems. For purposes of this
discussion, I will use the one that is most common to everybody—the inability
to integrate the systems. The cost of accomplishing this task is always severely
underestimated because there are hidden surprises around every corner.
Let me relate a couple of actual incidents that occurred subsequent to the
acquisition date of two subsidiaries of two different companies. Both of these
involve the double whammy of ﬁrst of all acquiring somebody and secondly
having to deal with a totally outsourced IT arrangement.
In situation one, the organization acquired a subsidiary that had out-
sourced its IT and was 3 years into a 10-year contract. As related to me by
someone involved in the meeting, a meeting was scheduled between the
company and the outsourcer. The subject matter of the meeting was the
desire to exit the contract for the purposes of bringing all systems under one
roof in the parent organization. This is a very sound strategy and facilitates a
much greater control of your data and information systems.
In the meeting conducted at the outsourcer’s facility, there was only one
member of the outsourcer’s team present. When the appropriate introductions
were concluded, the CIO of the acquiring company told the outsourcer that
they wished to exit the contract. At that point the outsourcer asked if in fact
they had read the contract to which they responded afﬁrmatively. But the CIO
recognized something was wrong and asked directly what exactly the out-
sourcer was referring to. The outsourcer said the clause that relates speciﬁcally
to data ownership, which caught everybody by surprise. The contract terms
stated that the outsourcer owned all data that they processed on behalf of that
organization and as a result the stated price for their data was $50 million. The
Mergers and Acquisitions: Let’s Buy Some More Risk
n
231

price was subsequently paid, and the data was released. However, it repre-
sented a signiﬁcant increase in the cost of the acquisition.
Situation two was strangely similar to situation one as they were in the
similar position relative to their contractual arrangement with an outsourcer.
The key difference was there was no buyout provision for the data, but there
was a more insidious type of situation going on. A meeting was held, and it was
agreed that the outsourcing arrangement would be terminated. A date was
agreed upon for the systems and data to be returned to the acquiring parent
company.
Unfortunately, the contract that was in effect made no mention of the
format in which the data and systems must be returned. Clearly the funda-
mental assumption would be that digitized media would be utilized. Instead, the
outsourcer did total data dumps on paper media and returned it on pallets
wrapped in plastic. According to the person who was discussing this situation,
they were unable to raise the systems or restore the data in a timely fashion,
and the subsidiary disintegrated due to the inability to run the business.
n
Key Risk: All underlying arrangements especially related to critical func-
tionality such as IT are not known or fully understood prior to acquisition.
Key questions to be answered:
n
What are the critical underlying arrangements that do exist for critical
support units or parts of the business?
n
Have we properly identiﬁed the key risks related to these and made
provisions to properly safeguard our interests and operate the business
from day one?
Eliminating the ‘‘Us versus Them’’ Syndrome
It seems that there is no way to get around it, but workers’ loyalties are going to
remain with the original employers who saw ﬁt to provide them a livelihood.
Those types of loyalties and bonds are extremely hard to break, and in many
cases that never occurs. You then end up with ‘‘us versus them’’ and a
fractionalized organization. The unfortunate part about this is the impact on
operating costs, which can be monumental. This is exacerbated when there is a
culture clash as well.
n
Key Risk: Anticipated synergies will not be realized due to the in-
efﬁciencies that occur as a result of uncooperative labor forces.
232
n
Related Topics and Special Risk Situations

Key questions to be answered:
n
Do we understand the culture and the nature of the labor force that is
going to be acquired with this company?
n
What will we do to countermand a negative impact on the organization
due to personnel attitudes and work habits?
n
What types of deﬁnitive actions are we prepared to take, and how might
problems negatively impact the acquisition?
Making a Private Company Sarbanes-Oxley–Compliant
A number of acquisitions are actually privately held organizations, and in
many cases they are being purchased into publicly held companies. The issue
that immediately becomes front and center is the limited amount of time that
you have to make a private company Sarbanes-Oxley–compliant. You must
think about the impact on your quarterly reporting when you acquire a
company that has signiﬁcant control deﬁciencies. This may trigger an 8-K
disclosure and if proper assurance cannot be gained could be extremely
uncomfortable for the certifying executives.
n
Key Risk: All of the activities that must be undertaken to make them
Sarbanes-Oxley–compliant are not properly anticipated or investigated
prior to acquisition.
n
Key Risk: The control systems in the acquired company are signiﬁcantly
deﬁcient, and the acquired company represents a large percentage of the
combined operations.
Key questions to be answered:
n
Do we understand all the critical ﬁnancial and operational issues that they
have on their agenda?
n
How material will they be to our organization in the context of timing for
compliance with the law?
n
Do we have a clear grasp of the fundamental control structure that they
have in place (both manual and automated) that will impact the ﬁnancial
reporting cycle for 404 purposes?
n
Have we planned the closing date in such a manner as to not short-cycle
ourselves relative to being able to become compliant?
n
Have we dug sufﬁciently into their history to ensure that they do not have
any ﬁnancial and/or signiﬁcant operational skeletons hiding in the closet?
Mergers and Acquisitions: Let’s Buy Some More Risk
n
233

These are some of the areas that can be looked at in the context of mergers
and acquisitions relative to risk that are clearly only the very, very tiny tip of
the iceberg. Acquisitions involve a tremendous amount of dedication and
knowledge to the task of making them successful. These types of undertakings
are not for the faint of heart or for those operating on a shoestring. You must
have very deep pockets and thick skin to be successful in the merger and
acquisition business.
OUTSOURCING: WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW COULD
KILL YOUR ORGANIZATION
Outsourcing—where should we start with this mineﬁeld of risks? We have so
many to choose from, and that is what makes this subject matter great from a
risk perspective. There are so many areas that can be discussed in the context
of risk relative to outsourcing that it is almost overwhelming. It is even
scarier how poorly it is managed in a very large percentage of outsourcing
arrangements.
In the following subsections we will discuss a number of different risks that
take place in outsourcing—all of which or any one of which could be fatal to an
outsourcing arrangement if improperly managed. Let’s start by putting one of
the key facts in all of this right up front in the discussion.
There are a lot of people in corporations and other organizations who
believe once they outsource something and it leaves the door or leaves the
premises, their problems are over. What they don’t realize is their problems are
just beginning. There is one true fact about outsourcing that a number of
corporate executives fail to realize. That fact is you can outsource anything you
want, but you can never outsource risk! This statement bears repeating
therefore here it is again: you can never outsource risk!
Outsourcing has been purveyed by the snake oil salesmen of the consulting
arena to be the panacea for all corporate ills. Unfortunately, it brings on many
more ills than it cures in most instances. What the purveyors have not brought
to the attention of a lot of senior executives is that thinking that somebody else
can run your business better than you do is somewhat misguided. If not
misguided, it is certainly a commentary on themselves and their executive
skill sets.
Whenever critical parts of organizations are handed over to an outsider or
third party, you have lost a certain degree of control over its operation and its
quality. The one key, however, is that whenever something goes wrong they
234
n
Related Topics and Special Risk Situations

are coming to see you. Your customers, your employees, or your vendors do not
care who the outsourcer is; all they know is they are supposedly doing business
with or are employed by you. As a result, you will bear the brunt of any and all
undesirable consequences when supposedly the problem days were over. The
risk never goes away, and that plays into each and every thing that you
outsource.
In regard to enterprise risk management and the necessity to monitor and
manage risk in outsourcing, this cannot be overstated. There must be a high
degree of attention paid to any and all types of outsourcing arrangements
within the conﬁnes of the ERM environment. Some of the high areas of risk that
need to be considered (besides the ones to be discussed next) are preserving our
corporate image, impact on those most greatly affected by the outsourcing, and
the ability to oversee the arrangement long term.
We will now commence the discussion on some of the key risks that need to
be noted in the critical stages of any outsourcing arrangement. We will start at
the beginning of the process and work our way toward the end.
Analysis of the Decision
The very ﬁrst point of critical risk takes place at the decision to undertake
outsourcing in the ﬁrst place. There are some good reasons to outsource. A
couple of reasons include lack of available skill sets in critical functionality by
any other means and inability to locate suitable replacements for key talent sets
due to lack of succession planning. If you look back and think about things
logically, that is exactly what gave rise to the outsourcing industry in the ﬁrst
place. When organizations started panicking about the year 2000 and the
world coming to an end at 12:01 A.M. is when outsourcing got kicked into
high gear.
Because a lot of major systems were still written in some of the more
archaic languages (at least in today’s terms) like COBOL, to make changes
everybody started seeking out COBOL programmers. Most of the COBOL
programmers had written their last lines of code long before the advent of
the year 2000 and were long gone, much to the dismay of these panicking
entities. Luckily, I say somewhat facetiously, they were able to isolate the talent
source outside of the United States, and that was the start of things. All of a
sudden a new major corporate initiative and industry were formed, and the
consulting houses were off to the races.
The talented systems engineers from other countries stepped up to the
challenge, much to their credit, and dealt with that situation admirably.
Outsourcing: What You Don’t Know Could Kill Your Organization
n
235

However, a highly undesirable outcome of this same situation started to
develop below the surface and went undetected until in many cases it was
too late. As young people started to look around at job opportunities, fewer and
fewer of them were enrolling in the IT programs at major universities because
IT began bleeding jobs by the millions. Why would a very bright individual who
was paying top dollar for her education want to go into a ﬁeld where many
career paths within that area of study only presented the following two
opportunities? One opportunity was the ability to live and work in some
country halfway around the world, the second opportunity was to take a
job with a huge amount of job instability with an unsure future. You would
certainly want that for your child wouldn’t you?
What has now occurred is a self-fulﬁlling prophecy thanks to, in a great
part, the brilliant strategy of outsourcing. We have eliminated a very vital set of
talents in this country, eliminated massive amounts of jobs, which we could
sorely use right now, taught other people in the world how to beat us at our
own game, and are in the process of giving away one of our last great strengths
as a country, intellectual property. This, of course, is irrespective of the other
tangent effect of fueling other highly competitive economies to our own with
our money. What a strategy, dang we’re good. But I digress, you have my
humblest apologies.
Many of the following reasons for outsourcing and making the decision are
actually all the wrong reasons when you look at them logically:
n
Economic beneﬁt to the organization is one of the big ones you hear kicked
around all the time—we’re going to cut costs. Statistics will be cited later
on in this chapter that will prove categorically that this is incorrect. The
other fact is you don’t solve a short-term cost problem with a long-term
strategic initiative. That simply doesn’t make any sense.
n
‘‘Everybody else is doing it and we must do it to remain competitive’’ (better
known as but not often referred to in these circles as the lemming theory).
All of the rest of our competitors are heading in that direction so let’s follow
them, right off the cliff. Everybody else is doing it is a very poor reason to do
anything once you reach the age of reason.
n
The ‘‘it doesn’t make any sense for us to do things that are not our core
business’’ argument. All of a sudden some misguided business genius (I use
the terms very loosely) determined that everything that wasn’t ‘‘core’’
should go away. Without digressing into a massive conversation over each
and every aspect of this, I would simply refer you back to the core diagram,
Figure 3.1. Remember when I referred to the critical support units or CSUs,
236
n
Related Topics and Special Risk Situations

one of those being IT. Take about a minute and apply some common sense.
What, if anything, runs in your organization without your IT environment
being hot and functional? Nothing. When you start getting into this layer
of the organizational structure, you are cutting pretty close to the bone of
what holds everything together. But cut away if you must, until eventually
the core rots or you sever it from its ability to operate.
n
And last but not least, ‘‘I don’t want to tackle it because it’s too politically
volatile’’ reason. Outsourcing has now become a way of life and the answer
to all corporate problematic situations that nobody wanted to tackle
internally. The easy out for executives who do not want to wrestle
with the politics is to simply say in the best interest of the company
we are going to outsource this to cut costs. But again as mentioned we will
see later that this simply isn’t true.
The last point to be made in this section (you will see later on when we look
at the Ventoro study statistics) is that lack of preparation and improper decision
making are what causes a large percentage of these arrangements to fail.
Appropriate RFP Design
A key point of risk relative to outsourcing is to ensure that the request for
proposal (RFP) is properly designed and speciﬁed. The RFP forms the basis for
the contract and the arrangement that will eventually be struck with the
outsourcer. In addition, for anything not speciﬁed in the RFP you will not be
able to hold the outsourcer accountable for those criteria.
If an outsourcing arrangement is destined to fail, there are four key areas in
which the risks are extremely high when that part of the process does not arrive
at the appropriate outcome. Poorly deﬁned RFPs are the second key area of risk
of failure relative to outsourcing. Poor decision making is the ﬁrst.
There are a number of very speciﬁc things that must be noted in the RFP. A
few examples include forecast of future activities that are going to impact the
arrangement, critical deadlines that must be met, and how critical data will be
forthcoming from the arrangement. The critical data will be absolutely
essential to managing the risk in these types of scenarios, as physical presence
is not an option in most outsourcing arrangements. Therefore, the only hope of
having effective oversight in long-term management of the arrangement is
going to be logically. Without highly tailored risk-centric data that can be
obtained almost at will, you will not be able to be successful in these types of
endeavors.
Outsourcing: What You Don’t Know Could Kill Your Organization
n
237

Therefore if the RFP is poorly designed, you are immediately on the road to
a less than ideal outcome from any outsourcing arrangement.
Appropriate RFP Review and Selection
Some other relevant risks must also be looked at in the process of reviewing RFPs
and also selecting the vendor. Every organization must be cognizant of the types
of risks that can creep into this process and may in fact undermine its validity.
To avoid the risk of launching into a long diatribe of everything that can go
wrong here, let’s just pick one critical issue of risk. That risk issue is controlling the
RFP responses back to all that were originally sent out to perspective vendors. The
keyreasonfordoingthisistolearnanumberofthingsrelativeto theriskinessofour
RFP.Forinstance,wewouldliketoknowthateverybodyrespondedtotheRFPsthat
were sent. This ensures that a number of undesirable risks have not taken place.
One such risk is to exclude a prospective vendor from consideration because
somebody in the process simply does not mail them a packet or mails it too late to
respond. This could be interpreted as biased or prejudicial and may get you
litigated. A second risk is there are a large number of nonrespondents to the
original solicitation. This could be indicative of a number of subrisks. First, a large
portion of the prospective vendors were excluded to drive the business to a
preselected candidate. Second, a number of qualiﬁed vendors did not respond to
the RFP indicating that it may be poorly designed or impossible to execute with
any type of cost effectiveness. That then gives rise to another risk worthy of
consideration: what about those who did respond? Are they lying through their
teeth and really aren’t capable of doing the job? Those are just some of the reasons
whyyou wanttotracktheRFPresponsesandmakesuretheprocesshasintegrity.
Appropriate Contract Design and Protective Covenants
On this subject matter you could go on virtually into inﬁnity, and I simply am
not going to live that long. As a result we will severely constrain this discussion.
The key point is that this is the third critical area of risk where an outsourcing
arrangement can be doomed to failure. As mentioned earlier, the RFP process is
absolutely essential to setting good contract terms, but at the end of the day it is
what is in that contract, unless the RFP is included by reference, that governs.
In fact, that is one of the best provisions you can put into your contract is to
ensure that the vendor understands that they will be held accountable for each
and every capability responded to in the RFP.
There are literally hundreds of things that are extremely important, but
let’s just discuss the ‘‘right to audit’’ clause and the ‘‘acceleration of penalties’’
238
n
Related Topics and Special Risk Situations

clause. The ‘‘right to audit’’ clause gives you the ability to send your internal
auditors onto the premises at any time, at no cost, with open access to systems,
processes, and physical facilities. These are just some of the privileges that
should have been included in that clause but in many cases have not been.
What results is a toothless clause with virtually no enforceability. Standing on
the outside looking in with no right to change things in an outsourcing
arrangement is a poor place to be.
A second very basic clause is the ‘‘acceleration of penalties’’ clause. This
simply means that every time we have an unacceptable occurrence relative to
inability on the part of the outsourcer to meet service level agreements (SLAs)
or statements of work requirements a penalty should be levied. However,
these penalties must be escalating; otherwise you run the risk of never being
able to resolve an issue. It may become clear to the outsourcer, for instance,
that it is cheaper to simply pay the penalties and not ﬁx the problem. If this
situation is having major repercussions that are undesirable on your cus-
tomers, vendors, or employees, this may be totally unacceptable. At times,
you must be able to signiﬁcantly impact the wallet of the outsourcer to get
their attention.
Risk Proﬁles for the Arrangement
Another area that is unfortunately neglected when outsourcing parts of the
organization is that they never build the concept of risk proﬁles into the
arrangement to allow for appropriate oversight. Risk proﬁles should be devel-
oped for each and every part of the outsourced functionality and utilized to
evaluate the performance of the outsourcer. These should be designed to be
able to determine whether the desired outcomes are achieved or not. These
proﬁles many times should actually be designed within the RFP to establish the
expectations early on with the outsourcer.
When this is not done, there is little or no consistency in the oversight of
the functionality of the outsourcer. The problem is that when people change
places in the oversight function, or are replaced by new people, without these
types of tools available there is no point of reference. It is extremely difﬁcult at
best to try and gain any kind of continuity when these types of fundamental
processes are lacking. Risk proﬁles would normally be tied to the desired
outcomes of the process, and the metrics developed accordingly so that they
can be monitored logically. The lack of appropriately designated risk proﬁles is
one of the biggest risks that can take place due to its negative impact on the
ability to manage the outsourcer.
Outsourcing: What You Don’t Know Could Kill Your Organization
n
239

Appropriate Risk Metrics for Monitoring the Arrangement
The point has already been clearly made relative to the necessity of well-
developed risk metrics. One key thing to bear in mind, however, is that even if
you do not do enterprise risk management objectively, outsourcing is one area
that demands this type of methodology. There is no other way to effectively
monitor a remote location other than with the use of data and doing it logically.
If there is an area of risk that must be done in this fashion, this is deﬁnitely it.
The risk metrics developed should tie into the SLAs that have been
established for the outsourcer. These can then be used to effectively measure
their performance in a fair and unbiased manner. Besides taking great care in
developing the risk metrics, extra caution must also be taken relative to how
they are going to be measured and by what means.
In many areas of customer service that are historically outsourced,
timeliness of the ability to oversee what is occurring is of the essence. Therefore,
the risk metrics must be properly focused, and the means of producing them
and reporting them must be real time or near time. If this is not the case, the
organization starts to assume a very large risk from the standpoint of customer
service, which may become in some cases intolerable.
There are numerous studies and information sources that support the fact
that outsourced call centers are not increasing their levels of performance—
they are actually degrading over time. The Customer Satisfaction Index by the
CFI Group showed that customer satisfaction had declined by 20 percent
between the years 2008 and 2009. Further, ﬁrst-call resolution for onshore call
centers is 26 percent higher than for offshore call centers. More importantly,
the call center statistics also reﬂected that when connected with an offshore call
center, potential customers were three times more likely to defect and not buy
from that company again.
The appropriate risk metrics must be in place and must be utilized to
monitor the activities of all outsourced arrangements. One of the observations
in the Ventoro study to be referenced later is that the lack of appropriate
outcome-focused metrics and the right measurement criteria of same is a key
failure point in outsourcing.
A Good Set of Baseline Metrics Going In
Tied into the previous discussion is the necessity for developing a good set of
baseline metrics before the outsourcing arrangement is ever activated. Baseline
metrics are those measures of activity that we have conﬁdence in relative to
effectively running the business that were, or should have been, employed
240
n
Related Topics and Special Risk Situations

when we ran the business. Baseline metrics should be developed for every part
of an outsourcing arrangement. This can run the gamut from customer service
to the number of accesses granted to our critical datasets and systems.
Another observation of the Ventoro study is that most executives have no
idea what their baseline metrics should be, and have never had a good method
of measuring the effectiveness of their business. In the majority of outsourcing
arrangements, attention to baseline metrics is simply lacking or nonexistent,
which again establishes a pattern for certain failure. Let’s use a simple example
to illustrate the point.
Assume we have a supercritical system that is responsible for doing
everything that is imperative to the success of the business. If we do not
take a reading of what the baseline metrics are for accesses to that system, in
other words everybody that has access and at what level, what do we now do
when it is outsourced? If the outsourcer has taken over the security functions
and can essentially assign any accesses they would desire to, how would we
know who could get into our system and what they could do there?
As an example, what may be part of the outsourcing contract is the ability to
provide 24/7 support for that supercritical system. In order to accomplish that,
what if the outsourcer takes the liberty of opening up our supercritical system to
every one of its technicians all around the world for unlimited access at any time?
Without the baseline metrics of how many accesses were granted and in what
capacity, with the ability to compare that information to post outsourcing data,
how would you know? It would certainly be a major point of concern, if not an
unacceptable business risk, that has just been thrust upon us by the outsourcer
without our knowledge. No baseline metrics, no idea that it ever occurred!
Designing Appropriate Service Level Agreements
Service level agreements are pretty standard fare for any type of outsourced
arrangement. But ensuring that the SLAs have been properly designed to our
speciﬁc business is a signiﬁcant risk. The outsourcer may have canned or
predetermined SLAs that they employ in other similar clients, but they may be
irrelevant as applied to our business. Therefore, it is imperative that the SLAs
track directly to our business requirements.
The SLAs must be reviewed in signiﬁcant detail to ensure that they are
appropriate for the task at hand, namely running our business. It is pretty clear
that bad SLAs can keep you in the dark on unacceptable problems in the
business. This can lead to signiﬁcant backlash that is headed straight for your
company doors should the negative impacts become too great.
Outsourcing: What You Don’t Know Could Kill Your Organization
n
241

A key area of exposure in this area is the situation in which the measures
that determine satisfactory or unsatisfactory SLAs may be poorly developed or
ill-ﬁtted to the task. Here is an example of how this can occur.
A client of mine, by whom I was engaged, subsequent to many of their
outsourcing decisions, decided to outsource all of their transportation needs,
which included delivery of product to their customers. In my absence they set a
service level agreement that called for 99 percent accuracy in deliveries on a
monthly basis. That may appear stellar on the surface, and wouldn’t it be great
if this was achieved every month? Not so fast, the one percent that inevitably
was not done right on a monthly basis was the company’s largest customer.
How does it sound now, risky or not risky?
A generic example in the area of IT would be as follows. What if the
outsourcer guaranteed you 98.6 percent uptime on all of your networks on
average? That may sound terriﬁc, but what if you had one supercritical network
that supported every critical function of your business and 60 noncritical
networks? All of the noncritical networks had very high percentage uptimes,
but your supercritical network is only up 54.5 percent of the time. But when you
summarized all of the uptimes together it came to 98.9 percent. They exceeded
the service level agreement as stated, and earned a bonus for doing so. How do
youfeel aboutit?Riskyornotrisky,we all knowtheanswertothatone,don’twe?
Having a Good Oversight Methodology
and Technological Support
To round out the earlier discussion, this is the fourth major area of risk that if
poorly done is deﬁnitely going to doom your outsourcing arrangement to the
abyss of failed endeavors. There are a number of risks associated with this
functionality of outsourcing as you can imagine, so we are only going to
consider a couple at best.
The ﬁrst key area of risk is committing the money to have highly talented
people with extremely good working knowledge in the area that they are
overseeing. This normally means a high-level manager, director, or supervisor
who is intimately familiar with the function that has been outsourced. What is
most curious is that most organizations think they are going to save tons of
money by getting rid of all these highly paid people. That assumption is total
ﬁction, because without those knowledgeable people you cannot oversee this
arrangement.
What inevitably happens is organizations don’t make these full-time
positions, and the oversight dramatically suffers due to lack of attention. Or,
242
n
Related Topics and Special Risk Situations

it starts out well, but there is no succession plan, and highly talented people do
not desire to do this type of functionality forever. As a result, they lose interest
or get promoted, and they bring in a substitute who has absolutely no
knowledge of what’s going on. There are no risk proﬁles or underlying process
in place that provide stability, only poor metrics with no historical context all in
the hands of people who know nothing about what they’re doing. This is of
course a recipe for disaster.
The second key risk is how and where to establish the oversight, and how
to ensure the ability to restructure or retract that arrangement. There are two
key ways in which to establish oversight from a location perspective. The ﬁrst is
to retain the employees on your own company site, captive oversight (CO), and
then equip them with the tools and techniques they need to do oversight
remotely. The other option is to actually station employees at the outsourcer
permanently or what could be referred to as on-site oversight (OSO).
The ﬁrst model of captive oversight is only going to be as good as the
technology and the data given to them to perform this functionality. They must
have open access to all data they require at any time they desire to have it as
part of the arrangement. They must have properly deﬁned metrics that are
clearly risk-centric and clearly related directly to the primary functionality of
what is being overseen.
Also, they must have the technological platform that allows them to
extract the data, manipulate the data, and analyze the data in any form they
need to perform their oversight. The more automated this process and the more
real time the data, the more effective they are going to be. If any of these things
are lacking, you will basically hamstring their ability to do their job, and their
enthusiasm for performing the oversight tasks will wane quickly.
The OSO model is one of the riskiest that can be established in outsourc-
ing. If this is the initial oversight functionality that is established, you had
better have a contract provision that allows you to revisit that, retract it, and
establish the captive oversight model if required. The reason for this is that
once an organization sends skilled individuals out to the outsourcer it is like
cutting them loose from the mother ship and sending them to another planet.
In other words, if you live with Martians long enough, you begin to think like
a Martian or as a more familiar phrase goes, ‘‘When in Rome do as the
Romans.’’
It is a predictable pattern that the loyalties of these people will switch to the
outsourcer somewhere between the sixth and eighth month of their residence.
At that point, your oversight is essentially gone, and you will be very lucky if
they don’t start defending the outsourcer against your claims.
Outsourcing: What You Don’t Know Could Kill Your Organization
n
243

Multiply Your Outsourcing and Multiply Your Risk
The more things you outsource, the more you multiply your risk, but it is not a
straight-line linear relationship. In fact, your risk multiplication can take on
exponential proportions. As discussed, it is very common for organizations to
outsource multiple functions, not just one. When executives get on a roll,
anything that is not core has got to go. Let’s use an example that I developed
for a client of mine, which illustrates this point precisely. It is called the Baseball
Diamond of Risk (BDR). Referring to Figure 9.2, here is how it sets up. The
manager (MGR) represents a process owner or department head that still
remains with the company. This person is the only one still gainfully employed
by the organization.
Playing the catcher’s position is Human Resources (HR). HR, the ﬁrst
functionality that is outsourced, is responsible for all human resource activities
throughout the entire organization. The organization occupying ﬁrst base is the
outsourced pension fund administrator (PEN). They are responsible for manag-
ing numerous pension plans for the organization and its various employee
groups. The organization occupying second base is outsourced beneﬁts adminis-
tration (BEN).They are responsibleformanaging allbeneﬁts forthe organization.
We will skip the shortstop because well it just doesn’t ﬁt the game plan. Playing
the third base position is the outsourced payroll (P/R) function.
Now just for grins I have put IT as an outﬁelder in left ﬁeld because they are
very far removed from the rest of these with respect to normal functionality. But
ofcourse asyoumay haveimagined, ITisalreadyoutsourcedaswell.Thepointof
this illustration is just how convoluted risk can get when you have multiple
organizations running critical functionalities and they are all outsourced. Worse
FIGURE 9.2
Baseball Diamond of Risk
244
n
Related Topics and Special Risk Situations

yet, they all have to interact constantly because they all play important roles in
the health, well-being, and job satisfaction of our employee base, which is one of
our most critical assets.
Okay, let’s start the ball game. The manager pitches the ball to an employee
for strike three and says you’re out of here. The employee at this point has a
number of choices assuming the game is over for them and so is their playing
career with this team. They can go quietly out of the ballpark and disappear over
the horizon. They can raise a ruckus, kick dirt on the shoes of the manager, and
ﬁle a litigation action, or decide to go down into the clubhouse, hide out, and
dream up what kind of nasty things they can do for payback. Each of these
activities raises a certain specter of risk for the organization from the necessity of
notiﬁcation for COBRA beneﬁts, to having to wind up the legal team to defend
another purported wrongful discharge, notto be confused with theoily discharge
mentioned earlier.
Meanwhile back at the ballpark, the manager now must initiate the
termination notice for the employee who just left the team. That notice must
alert HR that this person is gone and that they should take the appropriate
actions for termination. It would be the hope then that HR has the contact points
for every one of the other players on the baseball diamond. In other words, they
must notify the pension managers if involved, so that the appropriate pension
actions can be taken if required dueto theemployee’s years of service to the team.
HR, or somebody, must notify the people that are responsible for beneﬁts,
wherever they exist, that this former team member must be removed from
the roster as appropriate.
Then HR, or somebody, must notify payroll that this person is no longer
eligible to be paid and what type of severance and/or vacation payouts, and so on
to which they may be entitled. While all this is going on, somebody must also
notifyITthatiftheformeremployeehasanytypeofsecurityclearances,theymust
be deactivated and cleared from any and all systems now. For instance, we would
not want that player down in the clubhouse to be a former operating systems
programmer and still have access. That could get ugly, to say nothing of risky.
What is the point of the baseball diamond scenario? It is meant to express
the complexity of how risk must be managed in a multioutsourcing situation.
That is why I mentioned before that enterprise risk management must have its
eye very clearly on the ball on the outsourcing arena. This is without question
one of the most risky areas that most organizations possess, and it can be
devastating if not properly overseen. Can you imagine—if you had massive
turnover on a regular basis—the times people could drop the ball and things
that are absolutely essential simply wouldn’t be done? The propensity to be in
Outsourcing: What You Don’t Know Could Kill Your Organization
n
245

violation of major regulatory requirements and the subject of signiﬁcant
litigation is virtually assured.
Just simply proving that all of the interactions are working correctly on an
ongoing basis for every employee in this scenario, irrespective of trying to
oversee all of these areas appropriately, would be mind blowing. Without an
extremely sophisticated, highly automated methodology used to evaluate this,
there would be few, if any, guarantees that you are not hanging out in a
thousand different directions from a risk standpoint.
DEBUNKING THE OUTSOURCING MYTHS:
THE VENTORO STUDY
Everything in this section that will be discussed will be referenced to a critical part
of the Ventoro study. The Ventoro Preliminary Findings and Conclusions Report
was issued around October 2004 and can be found at www.ventoro.com under
the research and publications tab. What an interesting coincidence that this is
about the same time, if not exactly the same time, that the COSO/ERM model
came out. What ashocker—aframeworkformanaging riskthatmayreallywork
and probably some of the best information I have ever seen for managing
outsourcing risk emerge at essentially same time. Since the Ventoro study was
dated as a 2005 study, now some people might say well that’s a little dated—
perhaps so in a pure temporal sense. However, I have no doubt whatsoever that
the ﬁndings then would be no different now except that they may reﬂect a much
more negative trending.
Why would I make such an assertion? A colleague of mine who works for
an outsourcing ﬁrm who specializes in locating economical labor sources for
their clients told me they have had to change sources 12 times in the last 15
years. In addition, there are only so many skilled workers to go around; as a
result compensation equalization is rapidly accelerating in a number of labor
markets globally. It all comes back to the famous premise of supply and
demand. The supply is not there, the demand is rising, therefore the compen-
sation rises. High tide raises all boats.
The Ventoro study is an extremely good document for anyone who is
entertaining the notion of outsourcing offshore or offshoring their operations.
The fundamental difference between the two is outsourcing offshore you hire a
ﬁrm that specializes in outsourcing in a different country. Offshoring your
operations is when you go in and establish your own organization and hire all
of your own people in another country.
246
n
Related Topics and Special Risk Situations

I will introduce a number of graphics from this study to ingrain the
message that outsourcing is wrought with risks if improperly done or done for
the wrong reasons. All of the graphics appearing here in this chapter are from
that Ventoro study and are the results of their excellent work. In connection
with the graphics shown, I will then make some of my own observations and
commentary relative to the risk or information that is being depicted and why
these things should be critical to the ERM environment.
Figure 9.3 depicts the participants in the study. There were 5,232 key
executives that were polled from North America and Europe. This is a very
representative group of informed individuals. In other words, this was not 10
people in Yale, South Dakota (no disrespect to Yale—my mother was born
there!).
It is signiﬁcant that it is a nice cross-section of information of experiences
that relate directly to the risks that can be encountered in this arena. It is also
signiﬁcant that it should be the key executives who are the decision makers in
these areas and therefore would know better than anybody the pitfalls that can
be encountered. This broad perspective of risk can be invaluable to the ERM
environment in getting centered on what is really important.
This graphic is important, in that it indicates that there are still a lot of
people waiting out there to make this kind of decision, even though outsourc-
ing has been in existence for any number of years now. However, it can also
FIGURE 9.3
Research Participants
Copyright # Ventoro 2004, page 10.
Debunking the Outsourcing Myths: The Ventoro Study
n
247

reﬂect that in organizations of certain sizes outsourcing is not such a pressing
issue, which then raises another interesting question. If we’re going to try and
stimulate job growth in this country, what kind of ﬁscal policy do you establish
to foster job growth?
Based upon this and Figure 9.4, you could conclude that the small to
medium-sized businesses should get a tax break and those that are shipping the
jobs offshore should actually be subject to a tax for the privilege. A risk that
would certainly have to be considered here is whether that type of tax policy
will become a reality.
As you can see in Figure 9.5, again it is undeniable that the Fortune 1000
group has actively embraced outsourcing as a strategic initiative. This raises
another very interesting question. If you look at the graphs that will be
following (from Figure 9.8 on), why are we seeing what we see? If these
FIGURE 9.4
Percent with an Outsource Strategy
Copyright # Ventoro 2004, page 12.
FIGURE 9.5
Fortune 1000 Firms with Offshore Strategy
Copyright # Ventoro 2004, page 12.
248
n
Related Topics and Special Risk Situations

are supposed to be the best and the brightest organizations, the results they are
experiencing don’t seem to substantiate that they are the best and brightest by
any stretch of the imagination. The risk clearly being depicted here is if they
continue with this strategy, which as indicated by Figure 9.6 they will, does
this bode well for the future? In other words, is it a sound strategic initiative,
and will their cost structure be positively or negatively impacted?
Figure 9.6 shows that 68 percent more executives were considering and
were already planning an outsourcing strategy for the following year. This
implies by deﬁnition that outsourcing will continue to expand. The risk issue
that is being raised is how many of these organizations will succumb to the
same mistakes that have been made in the past? From an ERM perspective, this
should ratchet up the consideration they give this risk if they are in a ﬁrm
where this is being considered.
TheoverwhelmingmajorityinFigure9.7weredeﬁnitelygoingtobespending
more money in the year after the study on offshore outsourcing. This means by
deﬁnition that they are placing more corporate assets at risk in an area where as
cited inthe study theycannotcalculatea returnoninvestmentduetotheirlackof
baseline information. If this is still true today, which would be highly likely, it
wouldseemtobeanextremelylargeﬁnancialrisktobeinvestingpreciouscorporate
resources in those areas where a provable return is virtually an unknown.
Figures 9.8 and 9.9 are two of my favorites of all of the graphics presented
in the Ventoro study. These are the key decision points as to why this type of
strategy is undertaken in the ﬁrst place, and as a result they are the key areas of
FIGURE 9.6
Next-Year Strategy
Copyright # Ventoro 2004, page 13.
Debunking the Outsourcing Myths: The Ventoro Study
n
249

FIGURE 9.7
Change in Offshore Spending
Copyright # Ventoro 2004, page 13.
FIGURE 9.8
Why Offshore?
Copyright # Ventoro 2004, page 14.
250
n
Related Topics and Special Risk Situations

risk that must be considered by enterprise risk management. Clearly in 70
percent plus of the cases presented in Figure 9.8, the primary reason for
embarking on this strategy was to save costs. What is extremely alarming
with the graphic is that the second-most-prominent reason is to improve quality
for roughly 49 percent of the respondents. A couple of big risks come jumping out
from this particular graphic.
The ﬁrst big risk is that there is this blind assumption that they will save
costs by invoking this strategy, and the sheer number of respondents believing
it says it’s essentially guaranteed. Yet the likelihood is excellent that they have
not anticipated all of their costs or included them in the analytics to determine if
this was the right choice. I would be willing to assert with little or no risk that
one of the key costs that was excluded in virtually all of the cost studies was the
cost of exiting the arrangement.
Most executives and other people involved in this process do not under-
stand that they are going to leave this arrangement at some time in the future.
It is not going to last forever, and by deﬁnition when you leave, you will have
massive transition costs or pay a signiﬁcant fee for the privilege if it’s premature.
These costs are virtually never factored in, and as such these expectations
FIGURE 9.9
Why Stay Onshore?
Copyright # Ventoro 2004, page 15.
Debunking the Outsourcing Myths: The Ventoro Study
n
251

are totally unrealistic. The other portion of the expectations that is unrealistic is
the percentage of cost savings that are going to be experienced. In very few, if
any, instances are the percentages expected ever realized.
The second bigrisk is the quality issue. This is saying that executives actually
expect their quality is going to go up by shipping this function out to somebody
else whohasneverperformeditbeforeinourcircumstances.Ifoneweretolookat
this applying common sense, this also says that whoever made this decision
clearly was running an organization where quality was not important. I do not
know about you, but to me that seems to be a damning commentary on the
senior executives. That would also go along with other observations in the study,
which clearly stated that executives had no idea how to measure the functionali-
ties within their own organizations before they outsourced them. This implies
that their organizations were poorly run and displayed a lack of discipline.
Figure 9.9 is extremely interesting from a number of different perspectives
that impact risk. The number one reason not to embrace the strategy of moving
offshore is security. That is an extremely important consideration, but there will
be an interesting twist on this further on in one of the other graphics.
Depending upon how you interpret it, this is a very visionary executive saying
it is not worth the security risk to take this action because they are concerned
about the offshore ﬁrm or personnel. Another interesting question is how many
of them foresaw the risk, which is actually the bigger risk that exists in their
own organizations? This risk is quite the opposite of what you would logically
conclude. This risk will be illustrated later.
The second key point of observation is that just as in the previous graphs,
the second-largest reason (approximately 77 percent) not to do it is quality.
This also implies that whoever responded accordingly feels that the risk is
extremely low in their current operations and that they must be running a
fairly tight ship. That is actually quite refreshing and would be interesting to see
if the statistics of those organizations actually substantiated that belief.
The third and most interesting of all that I will discuss here are those
respondents who said the model does not work (approximately 48 percent of
the respondents). That may be indicative of a population that has done some
intense homework and isolated all the key risks that are inherent in these
arrangements. Those people probably have an extremely good set of insights
into how their organization actually operates. They have risk-assessed the
situation and have resisted the call of the Sirens of outsourcing.
How much needs to be said about Figure 9.10 from a risk perspective? The
commentary on the effectiveness of the assumptions versus the reality of the
world of outsourcing could not be more conclusive. The ﬁrst bar saying that 27
252
n
Related Topics and Special Risk Situations

percent roughly actually spent more to outsource than it costs those organi-
zations to operate it themselves is absolutely comical. These organizations
incurred more risk, and the point clearly is they did not do their homework, did
virtually no research, had no idea what they were doing when they ran it
themselves, and didn’t know whether they should outsource the function or
not, but they did it anyway. How much are these companies actually paying
these people to make these business decisions? That is a pathetic commentary
on corporate governance.
The next bar at 24 percent basically says that they broke even. However, it
is highly unlikely that they broke even when you factor in all of the costs
incurred, the process and system disruption, and every other type of dys-
functional activity that was undertaken to accomplish this. Wow, talk about
chasing oneself around the block; what an exercise in futility!
Add both of those bars together, and the number is 51 percent who either
spent more for the privilege or at best broke even, but as I mentioned that is
highly unlikely. Let me see, I seem to recall from Figure 9.8 that the number-
one reason for doing this in the ﬁrst place was to save money—obviously in
these cases it is not happening.
FIGURE 9.10
How Well Is It Working?
Copyright # Ventoro 2004, page 16.
Debunking the Outsourcing Myths: The Ventoro Study
n
253

One of the critical risks that ERM must then undertake is to make sure that
all signiﬁcant assumptions relative to major strategic corporate initiatives are
sound and proven. When you couple this with the dismal success of mergers
and acquisitions, which was discussed earlier, it does not take a rocket scientist
to ﬁgure out that something’s wrong with the guidance system of these
organizations.
There are a number of things of interest to be noted in Figure 9.11. It is
very clear that 28 percent of those that fail are due to client preparation and
execution. They don’t understand why they’re doing it, and they don’t know
how to execute. Another 21 percent of the root failure causes are because of
joint client-vendor planning. Poor planning, indicative of total lack of prepa-
ration, is responsible for this second-greatest set of causal events. Another 14
percent say that what was done was the wrong answer. This percentage is
indicative of poor research and again not understanding what they are doing.
Add this all up, and this means a whopping 63 percent of all causes of
failure are because of ill-prepared misguided efforts.
All of this information points very clearly to what we discussed earlier,
which is that organizations that go into outsourcing offshore many times do it
for the wrong reasons and they don’t plan well at all when they do it. Worse
yet, they don’t take the time to determine if it is a valid strategic initiative. Much
FIGURE 9.11
Offshore Outsourcing Root Failure
Copyright # Ventoro 2004, page 18.
254
n
Related Topics and Special Risk Situations

of this may be prompted by consultants as well, which again goes back to our
discussion of the blind leading the blinder.
As shown in Figure 9.12, offshoring root failure causal events follow a very
similar pattern, and again there are undeniable indications of the client not
being able to prepare themselves adequately and not able to execute this
strategic initiative in 33 percent of the cases. Failing because you are not
prepared adequately is a dismal statistic and speaks volumes about the direction
that the organization is getting from its senior executives.
In addition, the teams that they formed are clearly not adequate to the
task, have low morale, and are receiving inadequate support in the areas in
which it is required in 18 percent of the cases. Further, Figure 9.12 illustrates
that 17 percent say that it was the wrong answer, clearly pointing out they did
not properly research their strategic initiative before executing it, or in most
cases executing themselves. Add all of these numbers up, and this totals 68
percent of failures due to ill-preparedness, little or no research or understanding
of the subject matter, and improper execution.
These damning statistics go back to the points that I was making earlier in
this section. If you are not prepared, if you don’t do your homework, if you don’t
execute a proper RFP, if you don’t execute a good solid business contract, if you
don’t have baseline metrics, you’re going to fail!
Of all of the graphics presented in the Ventoro research study, this is my
favorite by far because it destroys one of the greatest urban myths about
FIGURE 9.12
Offshoring Root Failure
Copyright # Ventoro 2004, page 20.
Debunking the Outsourcing Myths: The Ventoro Study
n
255

outsourcing. Going back to Figure 9.10, which we talked about earlier, if you
ask the question ‘‘Where all the savings?’’ you can stop right there, and it
would still be a great question in almost 52 percent of the cases. However,
referring to Figure 9.13, the very ﬁrst common misperception that the savings
are actually going to come from labor savings or salaries and wages is blown
out of the water. Nothing could be further from the truth—only 9 percent is the
result of the employee cost, and you would think that that is the scary part.
As shown in Figure 9.13, that is not nearly the scariest part. The scariest
part is the largest percentage of savings category on the graphic is 46 percent
for internal process improvement. Do you realize what a commonsense, literal
interpretation of that result would be? It would mean that you could take some
total quality management methodologies (TQM) that were in this country in
the 1940s, thanks to such notables as Deming and Crosby, apply those same
methodologies today, and solve all of the problems noted here without leaving
your own building in 46 percent of the cases.
These data point to another alarming and annoying conclusion about
outsourcing. A number of these outsourcing strategies are undertaken simply
because nobody wants to play the internal politics, and nobody wants to take
an active interest in resolving the root causes of problems in their companies.
They don’t want to manage, they just want to be paid huge sums, and then
they want to make it somebody else’s problem. The fallacy in their logic, of
course, is that it remains their problem.
FIGURE 9.13
Where Are the Savings?
Copyright # Ventoro 2004, page 22.
256
n
Related Topics and Special Risk Situations

It is clear that vendor execution is only responsible for cost savings of 45
percent. In my mind this raises the immediate question of where is the real gain?
Whilegivingupcontrolofcriticalpartsofourorganizations,youstillretainallthe
risk? I must be missing something; unfortunately, no I don’t think so.
According to the research conducted by the Ventoro group, any ﬁrm
executing an offshore strategy has a 1 in 10 chance of incurring Intellectual
Property (IP) theft. It is alarming that there is at least a 10 percent chance that
you going to lose some of your IP, and as we all know, the chances of loss are
much higher in certain countries. But the scariest part is what is depicted in
Figure 9.14.
The chances are twice as high that you are going to lose IP to internal
employees as opposed to offshore personnel. The reason for this is that they feel
they are being abandoned by the company. Whenever that feeling sets in, self-
defense is the only logical strategy to pursue, which is what they do.
This surfaces another huge area of risk and exposure whenever outsourc-
ing is undertaken as a strategic initiative. Just as discussed earlier in this
chapter, utilizing the OSO, on-site oversight model, those people who are
charged with overseeing the outsourcer but are resident at the outsourcer also
feel this same form of alienation.
In the area of risk in outsourcing, it cannot be overemphasized that loss of
critical employees during that time, after it becomes known that outsourcing is
FIGURE 9.14
IP Theft
Copyright # Ventoro 2004, page 102.
Debunking the Outsourcing Myths: The Ventoro Study
n
257

on the agenda for strategic initiatives, is imminent. Any highly or semi-skilled
employees who believe they are within the areas that will be affected by
outsourcing are going to immediately start heading toward the exit unless they
are retained by some very lucrative arrangements.
Normally, the best strategy for retaining personnel is to select those that
you want to retain in advance, come up with a lucrative package to make them
stay, and put them in responsible positions overseeing the outsourcer. This
does, of course, run counter to the whole theory of thinking you are going to
save a lot of money—because you are not. If you do not do these things,
however, you run the bigger risk of losing all of your qualiﬁed personnel. If, in
fact, the outsourcing arrangement never goes forward at that point, this would
be catastrophic.
If you are looking to be defrauded in outsourcing, you have come to the
right place. As shown in Figure 9.15, the statistics overwhelmingly state that
you will be defrauded in these types of arrangements. Step right up to the
table, your seat is waiting for you, or, more correctly phrased, your seat is
waiting to be handed to you. In virtually 70 percent of these cases, you will be
defrauded, meaning the vendor will be out of compliance with your SLAs or
statements of work. So in an extremely large portion of the circumstances it is
not a question of whether you will be defrauded—you will—it is just a matter
of severity.
The only things that will mitigate these types of occurrences are good sound
metrics and highly qualiﬁed oversight of the contract. Organizations that do not
have these in place are twice as likely to be defrauded as those who do. It just
makes good business sense to put the right processes in place, but this also gives
you a baseline to measure your success or failure in the outsourcing arena.
FIGURE 9.15
Fraud Rate
Copyright # Ventoro 2004, page 105.
258
n
Related Topics and Special Risk Situations

Figure 9.16 rounds out the discussion of fraud relative to offshore out-
sourcing strategies. As shown in Figure 9.16, 6 in 10 of these are minor
violations, 3 in 10 moderate violations, and 1 in 10 is severe. It is important to
realize that in many cases the outsourcers have encountered operating costs
that perhaps they did not anticipate or they are looking to shave a few corners
to make a bigger proﬁt. Whatever the case is, it comes right out of your pocket.
That is where their hands seem to be permanently attached like an undesired
extra appendage.
This concludes thoughts on these issues for this chapter. I will now move
forward to our closing discussion in Chapter 10.
FIGURE 9.16
Fraud Severity
Copyright # Ventoro 2004, page 105.
Debunking the Outsourcing Myths: The Ventoro Study
n
259

10
CHAPTER TEN
Maximizing Impact—
Minimizing Exposure
WHO OWNS THE RISK MANAGEMENT PROCESS?
In establishing an enterprise risk management (ERM) environment, one of
most critical questions is this: Who owns the risk management process, and
how are the duties divided accordingly? Let’s make some clariﬁcations initially
so that everybody understands precisely what is being discussed here. The ERM
environment, risk management process, and everything that constitutes it can
be very simply divided up from a responsibility standpoint.
Let’s start with the ﬁrst fact that the chief risk ofﬁcer (CRO) does not own all
of the risk of the enterprise. He is responsible only for the risk of not properly
reporting signiﬁcant risk events in a timely fashion to the appropriate parties.
The ﬁrst things that must be owned are the business and/or organizational
risks. Business/organizational risk are the risks that confront the organization
every day and are owned by everybody in the organization in the respective
levels at which they operate. In other words, everybody throughout the entire
organization owns risk just because they come to work every day and collect a
paycheck. But just for the sake of discussion, let’s give a very simple example.
Bank tellers have a tremendous amount ofrisk that they deal with everyday,
yet strangely enough they are the least paid position in most banks. The bank
260

teller has primary responsibility for pleasing the customers and retaining their
patronage. They are the front-line people who build or destroy the image of the
bank every day by the relationships they form and constantly enhance with the
customer base or by the ones they ruin. They handle all the cash transactions
coming over the teller line and must balance every day. In the context of
regulatory violations, they should be the ﬁrst ones that would notice undesirable
patterns of behavior with persons or companies within your customer base.
In other words, if there was a company or a person who was constantly
trying to wash money through the bank by avoiding the lawful limits of
reporting, these types of practices should be noticed by the tellers, and the
proper persons should be informed. But if the tellers are not diligent or if they
are not inspired to be diligent, these things will go unnoticed. They also set the
tone for whether the customer is going to be interested in buying other services
of the bank that are being offered, especially if as a result they are going to have
to have more interaction with those tellers.
It doesn’t make any difference if you are teller in a bank or a worker on a
high voltage line trying to restore power—you own your own set of risks and
certain risks of the organization as well.
The second part of the ERM environment that must be owned is the ERM
functionality itself. That means, of course, the infrastructure of gathering the
risk information, setting the risk responses, determining probability of occur-
rence and impact, discovering the root causes of risk, and the timely reporting
of same. All of the noted responsibilities belong to the CRO or ERM head in the
case where a CRO does not exist. This person is responsible for every facet of the
ERM functionality and must be held accountable for any shortcomings
encountered within that discipline.
So there is a clear division of responsibilities within the enterprise risk
management. Everybody within the organization is a risk owner. The head of
ERM is responsible for the process of bringing signiﬁcant risk events to the
attention of senior management and the Board of Directors.
INVOLVING THE STAKEHOLDERS: CREATING A
CRITICAL BUSINESS TOOL
To be successful, enterprise risk management must involve virtually every key
person in the organization. This is true because if those people within the
organization who are key to its operating capabilities do not embrace ERM,
then ERM will never become a viable part of the business on a day-to-day basis.
Involving the Stakeholders: Creating a Critical Business Tool
n
261

In implementing ERM, it must always be approached as an environment
that is owned by everybody for their own mutual beneﬁt. Enterprise risk
management should not be something that is thrust upon the persons in the
organization and then subsequently undermined by their failure to embrace
the concept.
However, in order to ensure success, the ERM environment must be truly
built as a business tool that earns a return on the investment that is deemed
acceptable by the organization. If done properly, there is no reason why ERM
would not be sought after by each and every key member of the organization,
not just tolerated as another one of those useless corporate initiatives.
That is why I advocated that it be incorporated into every aspect of the
environment and that it be data-centric to yield the maximum beneﬁt with a
minimal amount of resources required. In addition, if properly implemented, it
will be a tremendously valuable exercise in proving that the data integrity of
the organization is intact and functioning as intended.
Everyone in the organization should want to actively participate in it
because it has proven itself highly successful in those areas that have embraced
it as the quintessential must-have business tool.
EXTENDING THE IMPACT: MAKING IT A
COMPANY ESSENTIAL
One way to extend the impact of the ERM environment and to make it highly
effective in the twenty-ﬁrst century is to make it an organizational essential
strategy (OES). An OES is a deﬁned strategic emphasis that must be undertaken
each and every time that a major change to the company infrastructure is
undertaken.
The literal interpretation would mean that you cannot establish a new
business process, nor can you build and implement a new system, without
employingtheappropriaterisk emphasisasrequired to facilitate the functionality
of ERM. Every organizational essential strategy should be mandated to be
included in the design and execution of every critical infrastructure modiﬁcation.
If these types of mandates are not put in place, there will be no uniformity
of purpose as the movers and shakers of the organization will not be compelled
to focus on risk as a major part of their responsibilities. The identiﬁcation
and management of risk within acceptable tolerance levels should be part and
parcel of every goal or objective established throughout the enterprise. It would
be even more effective if it was established as a key part of every executive’s
262
n
Maximizing Impact—Minimizing Exposure

and key manager’s compensation packages relative to amounts received,
bonuses paid, and promotions earned.
If ERM becomes an interwoven part of the fabric of the enterprise, then it
has a chance of attaining a high degree of success. If it is viewed as simply a
bolt-on attachment occupying space on an already crowded engine block, then
chances for success are extremely slim.
STRATEGICALLY LINKING KEY RISKS AND KEY
CONTROLS: CREATING A HOME
As stressed earlier in this book, it is essential to recognize the undeniable link
between key risks and key controls. Wherever there is a key risk in the
organization, there must also be a key control to perform one of two critical
functions. The ﬁrst critical function is to help mitigate or completely eliminate
any highly undesirable risk condition from the organization. The second critical
function would be to trigger an appropriate risk response in those situations
where the risk does manifest itself within the organization.
Essential to the ultimate success of any organization is the need to
understand the importance of ERM as the driving force of all strategic initiatives
undertaken within it. ERM must be thought of as the Holistic Oversight
Management Environment (HOME) and must become the overlord of all
management and governance of the enterprise. All other initiatives become
logical symbiotic subsets or layers of the environment with the responsibility of
taking information from ERM and feeding back critical information that may
not be known to ERM. Such things would be unknown or emerging risks,
changes in existing risks, modiﬁcations of potential impacts, known impacts,
and changes in probability of occurrence to enhance ERM effectiveness. A
visualization of what is being discussed here is shown in Figure 10.1.
ERM provides the only logical total environment to incorporate everything
required for good sound organizational governance. As discussed earlier,
without utilizing ERM as an anchor point for all governance, risk, and control
(GRC) concepts, the organization will end up with a highly fractured and
dysfunctional governance environment, which is counterintuitive at best.
Common sense would say that makes no sense whatsoever. We do not need 2,
3, 4, 5, or 20 different little groups, all looking after the same or similar subject
matter within one organization.
A structure that is organized in that fashion will lead to haphazard
information ﬂow and massive duplication of effort, resulting in a high degree
Strategically Linking Key Risks and Key Controls: Creating a HOME
n
263

of inefﬁciency and excessive cost. There is absolutely no reason not to
incorporate all governance functionality into one totally integrated, highly
functional enterprise. The exception to this statement, even though it should
have a symbiotic relationship with ERM, is internal audit.
Internal audit is a very important part of the overall governance structure
when it is properly focused and the department leadership is strong and
visionary. However, it cannot be incorporated under the oversight and control
of the ERM environment. The reason is that it must maintain its independence
and its objectivity as a result of the way in which its audit charter is structured
by the audit committee.
The internal audit group must risk-assess and audit everything in the
enterprise, which includes ERM. The group cannot be totally unbiased or
impartial if they were to audit enterprise risk management while reporting
into the function. Hmmmmmm! That sounds as if it would be a problem if
internal audit reported anywhere but administratively to the CEO with a direct
line to the Board of Directors–Audit Committee. Oh well, that is a problem for
another day.
Internal audit must be able to independently review the process and reach
conclusions relative to its efﬁciency and effectiveness for the purposes intended.
What must be required is that it fulﬁll its mission to accurately identify,
manage, and report timely on the status of all critical risks existing within
the enterprise.
FIGURE 10.1
HOME
264
n
Maximizing Impact—Minimizing Exposure

BUILDING THE DREAM HOME: AUTOMATING EVEN
YOUR SOX
In the everyday world of going to the ofﬁce, I do not know what big advantages
would be gained by automating your socks in the process of getting dressed. But
when we talk about automating SOX in the context of making Sarbanes-Oxley
much less painful to comply with, that should certainly spark some attention
around the old water cooler.
One of my other tricky acronyms, DREAM (Data-Centric Risk Evaluation
Assessment and Management), should be the ultimate goal to which every
ERM environment aspires. In discussing the subject matter in Chapter 8, I
identiﬁed threshold triggers and MOMS as two critical tools that should be
incorporated into the future strategic initiatives of each and every ERM
environment that exists. The incorporation of these tools goes hand in
hand with the up-front immersion of the ERM environment into the new
systems development efforts of the organization.
By applying these types of tools and activities to the world of IT, all
organizations can make monstrous strides toward highly effective governance
in the twenty-ﬁrst century. As mentioned earlier, the one great differentiator
between highly successful organizations and all of the others with whom they
compete is their highly effective employment of advanced automation and
technology.
It can never be overstated that behind every successful organization is a
highly disciplined, highly automated environment that facilitates its operations
day in and day out without exception. DREAM HOME is nothing more than an
ERM-based governance infrastructure combining one of the greatest assets you
have, your data, with a resource that in this world is deﬁnitely plentiful and
comparatively cheap, computing power. Bringing these together into a data-
centric risk assessment and management methodology to make you a super-
power within your industry or competitive segment certainly warrants some
signiﬁcant strategic attention.
A high-level representation of what a DREAM structure may look like is
shown in Figure 10.2.
The concept of a DREAM HOME may look overwhelming at ﬁrst, but it is
something that can be obtained strategically by each and every organization
with careful planning and visionary forethought. The only thing that is holding
back any organization in this country, or for that matter the rest of the world,
from accomplishing these types of things is senior executives who are not
visionaries. It’s like any other fundamental issue—it all goes back to tone at the
Building the DREAM HOME: Automating Even Your SOX
n
265

top. If their longest view of the world is the end of next quarter, an organization
has no ability to build for the future. These types of concepts are meant for
companies that intend to be around for the next 20, 30, 50, 100 years, and
beyond.
If you look at those corporations that are truly great, and unfortunately
there are not many, those are the ones that will see the need for the tools and
get them built. They will see also the return on that investment multiply year
after year while they bypass their competitors and start dominating the
marketplace. Risk assessment and management is all about being able to
predict the future, seeing the risks before they are upon us, and taking the
appropriate action to avoid the need for crisis management. These types of tools
turn from reactive when they ﬁrst come into existence as a result of having to
establish a historical baseline, to proactive and predictive once that line in the
sand has been drawn.
The problem that plagues subjectivity-based risk models, which is essen-
tially what everybody is still using today, is that they are now and always will
be grounded in guesswork and supposition instead of data and facts. They will
always have to be repopulated with guesswork and scoring every time a risk
assessment is desired. They will never ever attain the plateau of being data
driven, ﬂowing, liquid, and able to predict the future based upon building
historical context dynamically.
FIGURE 10.2
DREAM HOME
266
n
Maximizing Impact—Minimizing Exposure

Without this capability such ERM environments will never be able to see
the future, which is the whole objective of enterprise risk management in the
ﬁrst place. Therefore, if you cannot see and predict the future, which requires
looking forward, then by process of elimination you must always be looking
backwards. That is the equivalent of driving a car by looking in the rearview
mirror.
Only the truly great companies know that you have to look out of the
windshield to drive a car!
Building the DREAM HOME: Automating Even Your SOX
n
267


About the Author
G
REGORY H. DUCKERT, MBA, CPA, CISA, CIA, CRISC, is a
Certiﬁed Public Accountant, Certiﬁed Information Systems Auditor,
and Certiﬁed Internal Auditor. Mr. Duckert was educated at the
University of Wisconsin–Madison and obtained an MBA in Accounting in
1989, a BBA in Accounting in 1978, and a BA in Economics in 1971. He is also
the CEO and Founder of the Virtual Governance Institute. The Virtual Gov-
ernance Institute specializes in consulting with major organizations regarding
progressive twenty-ﬁrst century methodologies for the construction of data
centric enterprise risk assessment and management models including Finan-
cial, Operational, Regulatory, and IT areas of concern that yield high business
values. He also consults with his clients in all areas of auditing including
continuous audit/consulting platforms.
In addition, in depth hands-on consulting is also performed in the areas of
operational analysis and process improvement methodologies. He has devel-
oped extensive risk assessment metric inventories for evaluating risks in all
organizational areas including operations, IT application systems, IT opera-
tions, regulatory and ﬁnancial areas. During his audit career he has champ-
ioned progressive, high value, high impact audit techniques to ensure the
maximization of the audit product delivered.
Mr. Duckert is the only non-governmental person ever invited to address the
Permanent Undersecretary for Military Affairs of Parliament and the Defense
Audit Board of the Ministry of Defense–United Kingdom on the subject matter
of risk. He also is involved in the building of or consulting on the creation of
Data Centric Risk Assessment and Management models on a continuous basis.
Mr. Duckert is also a Senior Consultant for MIS Training Institute and a
lead instructor in their audit practice area on an independent contractor basis.
He has also authored and taught numerous IT/audit/consulting seminars and
workshops which are currently or were previously offered in the public and
private venues.
269

His professional works and publications include the following: Process
Flow Auditing; An ERM Approach to Building Annual Audit Plans; From
Auditor to Consultant, Developing Essential Competencies; Data Driven Audit-
ing: A Business Approach; Using Risk Assessment to Build Individual Audit
Programs; The Business Risk Lab; Auditing the Manufacturing Process;
Acquisitions, Mergers, and Divestitures; Auditing Healthcare Institutions;
Auditing for Quality Improvement; Auditing Health Beneﬁts; Sarbanes-Oxley:
Roadmap to Compliance; COSO-ERM Utilizing the New Framework for SOX
Compliance; Auditing Outsourced Operations; Establishing Enterprise Risk
Assessment and Management Environments; Continuous Auditing: A Data
Centric Approach; Establishing a 21st Century Audit/Consulting Function;
Data Mining: An Essential Auditing Competency; Risk Boot Camp; Risk Based
Internal Auditing; Auditing the ERM Environment; Dashboard Metrics for
Auditing/Risk Management; Building Continuous Risk Assessment Models;
and The CEO’s 10 Key Question Handbook for Their Direct Reports.
270
n
About the Author

Index
Accounting, 135, 145
Accounts receivable, 102, 120, 150, 190, 214,
215, 225, 226
Administration
key outcomes, 134–139
KRIs, 145–149
physical mapping, 123–125
Analytics, 30, 209. See also Business risk
analysis techniques (BRATs)
Audits, 204, 213, 214, 226, 227, 229, 230,
239, 264
Automation
ERM environment, 14, 29, 31, 211,
220–222
of KRIs, 153–168
outsourcing oversight, 243, 246
physical mapping, 43
proﬁling, 192
risk assessment tools, 209, 211, 212
and risk indicators, 117, 120, 121, 134,
153
risk management, 95, 112, 192
SOX compliance, 265, 266
BADMAN (bad manager) proﬁle, 90, 95
BADSYS (bad system) proﬁle, 89, 95
Banking industry
bank tellers, 260, 261
business risk, 35, 64, 65
cash deposits and money laundering, 193
corporate image risk, 68
deﬁning the business, 35, 38, 39
key early warning indicators, 115. See also
Key early warning indicators (KEWIs)
logical data pathways, use of, 200–202
OCC risk categories, 64
pivotal point of change analysis, 180
real-time proﬁling, 214, 217
and risk appetite, 28
and Sarbanes-Oxley, 15
trend analysis, 178, 179
universal risk indicators, 89
Baseline for risk categories, 64–74
Baseline metrics for outsourcing, 241
Baseline risk register, 169, 170
Benchmarking, 25, 26, 33, 81
BRAIN (Business Risk Assessment Information
Network), 33–37, 202
BRATS. See Business risk analysis techniques
(BRATs)
Budget process, 102–104
Business
core business processes, 40–52
deﬁning, need for, 38–40
physical mapping, 42–52. See also Physical
mapping
structure, 41, 42, 46, 48–52, 76, 77, 79, 81
understanding, need for in systems design,
206
Business Planning, 138, 139, 147, 148
Business processes
core processes, 40–52
outcomes, 59–62. See also Outcomes
outputs, 59–62, 98
Business risk analysis techniques (BRATs),
119, 120, 178–200, 209
Business Risk Assessment Information
Network (BRAIN), 33–37, 202
Business risk, deﬁning, 59–77, 206, 207
Business/organizational risk, 260, 261
Call centers, 174–176, 240
Change, 203
Chief Executive Ofﬁcer (CEO), 29, 92, 219,
224, 264
Chief Information Ofﬁcer (CIO), 7, 29, 204, 219
Chief Risk Ofﬁcer (CRO), 27, 29, 35, 204, 219,
260, 261
Coderre, Dave, 224
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations
(COSO)
cubes, 16–22
ERM framework, 14–22, 88
framework for SOX compliance, 2, 3, 14–22
271

Comparative analysis, 183–200, 209
Conﬁdentiality risk, 65, 69–71, 129, 130
Construction industry fraud, 195, 199, 200
Continuous auditing, 224
Continuous evaluation of risk, 11, 31, 52, 62,
81, 90, 219, 224. See also Dashboard
indicators; Key Risk Indicators (KRIs)
Control environment, 18, 19, 208
Core business processes, 40–52
Corporate culture, 28, 29
Corporate image, 65, 67, 68
Costs
audit fees, 226, 227
cost concentration, 100, 101
economies of scale and cost beneﬁts, 221,
222, 226–228
outsourcing, savings from, 13, 14
Courier services, 129, 130
Credit cards, 217
Credit memos, 120
Credit risk, 35, 38, 39, 202
Crisis management, 266
Critical support units (CSUs), 41, 42, 104, 232,
236, 237
Customer satisfaction, 39, 172–175,
240
Dashboard indicators, 111–115
Data
analysis, 10, 11, 76, 193, 195
and automation, 120, 121
and benchmarking, 81
conﬁdentiality. See Conﬁdentiality risk
data-centric ERM. See Data-centric ERM
(DCERM)
integrity. See Data integrity and reliability
limitations on, 120, 121
logical data pathways. See Logical data
pathway (LDP)
Outcome/Raw (OR) data, 94–98, 177, 178,
207
patterns, 193, 195
raw versus blended data, 95–98
sources of, 99
and systems design, 207, 208
use of to deﬁne risk, 80–86
Data integrity and reliability, 8, 10, 65, 69, 77,
99, 168, 202, 262
Data-centric ERM (DCERM)
automation, 29
business value, 221–224
and COSO/ERM, 20, 88
and cost reductions, 226–228
data, amount of, 120, 121
DREAM (Data-Centric Risk Evaluation
Assessment and Management), 265–267
economies of scale and cost beneﬁts, 221,
222, 226–228
importance of, 29, 30, 79, 92
overview, 87, 88
risk model, building. See Fluid/dynamic risk
model
system-centric data-centric tools, 209,
212–219, 265
Data-Centric Risk Evaluation Assessment and
Management (DREAM), 265–267
Disaster recovery/contingency planning risk,
65, 72, 73
Distributed Risk Assessment and Management
(DRAM), 77, 79
DREAM HOME, 265–267
Dynamically integrated risk evaluation (DIRE),
211–216, 265
EARS (Embedded Audit and Risk System) Real
Time Proﬁling, 214, 216–219
Engineering, 108, 140, 141, 150
Enron, 53, 66, 74
ERM (enterprise risk management)
business value, 221, 222
and change, 203
corporate sponsorship, 27
COSO framework, 14–22, 88
data-centric. See Data-centric ERM (DCERM)
DREAM HOME, 265–267
ﬂuid/dynamic risk model. See Fluid/dynamic
risk model
focused outcome groups (FOGs), 173–175
future evolution of, 219, 220
and future prediction, 31, 32, 266, 267
governance, risk, and control (GRC), 14,
263, 264
Holistic Oversight Management
Environment (HOME), 263–264
IT, alignment with, 31
modular approach, 172, 173
as organizational essential strategy (OES),
262, 263
ownership of risk management process,
260–262
qualities of effective ERM, 27–32
and risk models, 23–26
stakeholder involvement, 261, 262
and strategic initiatives, 263, 264
and systems design, 211, 219. See also
Systems design
systems strategies, 204, 205
Executive compensation, 195, 220
Exxon Valdez, 68
Finance, 134, 145, 146, 153–155
Financial risk, 35, 43, 65, 66, 154, 155, 249
272
n
Index

Fluid/dynamic risk model
dashboard indicators, 111–114
data used, 94–98
drivers for, 100–111
implementation of. See Implementation of
ﬂuid/dynamic risk model
key early warning indicators (KEWIs), 113,
115
and Key Risk Indicators. See Key Risk
Indicators (KRIs)
need for, 92, 93
proactive versus reactive risk management,
93, 94
universal risk indicators, 117–120
Focused outcome group (FOG), 173–175
FORT ( ﬁnancial, operational, regulatory, and
technological) KRIs, 112, 120, 121
Fraud, 102, 193, 195–200, 217, 258, 259
Global technology audit guide (GTAG), 224
Governance, designing risk-centric systems for,
205–211
GRC (governance, risk, and compliance), 14,
263, 264
Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA), 36, 70, 161,
164
Healthcare industry
comparative analysis, use of, 184, 185
conﬁdentiality risk, 36, 70, 71. See also
Conﬁdentiality risk
fraud, 195–199
HIPAA, 36, 70, 161, 164
physical mapping example, 43–52
Human Resources (HR)
and business structure, 41, 125
key outcomes, 136–138
Key Risk Indicators (KRIs), 147
outsourcing, 244, 245
related risk example, 62, 63
risk, 136–138
Impact analysis, 7, 8, 52–58, 82, 86, 88
Implementation of ﬂuid/dynamic risk model
baseline risk register, 169, 170
business risk analysis techniques (BRATs),
177–200
business risks, deﬁning, 133–144
focused outcome group (FOG), 173–176
Key Risk Indicators (KRIs), 144–168
logical data pathways (LDPs), use of,
200–202
modular approach, 172, 173
net risk versus residual risk, 175, 177
overview, 122, 123
physical mapping, 123–133,
169–172
Industry speciﬁc risk, 65, 68, 69
Internal control, 2, 3, 14–23, 208, 224–226
Inventory control (IC), 142, 151
Inventory turnover, 106–111
Investment management, 116, 117
IT (Information Technology) department
alignment with ERM, 31
key outcomes, 138
KRIs, 147, 165–168
and outsourcing, 236, 237. See also
Outsourcing
physical mapping of, 125–130
physical risks and metrics, 130
universal risk proﬁles, use of, 89
Janitorial services, 126, 127
Johns Manville Corp., 53
Key early warning indicators (KEWIs), 113,
115
Key Process Indicators (KPIs), 30, 59, 88, 98
Key Risk Indicators (KRIs)
administration, 145–149
detailed inventories of for automated
systems, 153–168
determining, 115–117
developing, 144–153
ﬁnancial, operational, regulatory, and
technological (FORT), 112, 120, 121
in ﬂuid/dynamic risk model, 98–100
and key outcomes, 145
and net risk, 177
and operational outcomes, 84, 85
operations, 149–153, 156–161
as part of effective ERM, 29, 30
raw data versus blended data, 95–98
regulatory compliance, 161–165
risk registers. See Risk register
Legal liability, 55, 65–67, 135, 136, 146
Lehman Brothers, 53, 93
Leonard Vona and Associates, 193, 194
Logical data pathway (LDP), 42, 77, 78, 106,
123, 172, 200–202, 222
Machinery maintenance, 54–58
Maintenance and installation services, 127, 128
Management, universal risk proﬁle, 89, 90
Manufacturing, 106–111, 143, 151, 152,
222, 223
Mean dispersion analysis (MDA), 181, 182
Mergers and acquisitions (M&As), 138, 139,
228–234
Merrill Lynch, 93
Index
n
273

Metric Oversight Monitoring Systems (MOMS),
212–216, 265
Microsoft, 67
Microsoft Excel, 169
Microsoft Visio, 170
Modular approach, 172, 173
MOMS (Metric Oversight Monitoring Systems),
212–216, 265
Money laundering, 193
Monitoring, 224–227, 240
MORE (Multiplied Organizational Risk Effect),
53–58, 88
Multi-Dimensional Risk Assessment, 88–91
Multi-level Risk Ownership (MRO), 50–52
Multiplied Organizational Risk Effect (MORE),
53–58, 88
NASA, 69
Net risk, 175, 177
OCC (Ofﬁce of the Comptroller of the Currency),
risk categories, 64
Offshoring. See Outsourcing; Ventoro Offshore
2005 Research Preliminary Findings and
Conclusions
On-site oversight (OSO), 243, 257
Operations
key outcomes, 139–144
KRIs, 149–153, 156–161
physical mapping of, 131–133
risk, 65, 73, 74
OR (Outcome/Raw) data, 94–98, 177, 178,
207
Order entry, 107, 108
Outcomes, 9, 40, 49, 53–55, 57–63, 84, 85,
102, 104, 116, 118, 145–153, 169
administration, 134–139
business processes, 59–62
operations, 139–144
OR (Outcome/Raw) data, 94–98, 177, 178
use of to deﬁne business risks, 133–144,
206, 207
Outputs, 59–62, 98
Outsourcing. See also Ventoro Offshore 2005
Research Preliminary Findings and
Conclusions
call centers, 174, 175, 240
cost savings from, 13, 14
dashboard indicators, 112
request for proposal (RFP), 237, 238
and risk management, 133, 234–246
security guards, 127
Paper recycling services, 128
Payroll process, 61, 154, 157, 244,
245
Period-to-period comparative analysis,
183–187, 209
Physical mapping
administration, 123–125
automation, 43
creating, 42, 43, 123–133
healthcare system example, 43–52
IT department, 125–130
and key processes, 104
modular approach, 172, 173
need for, 27
operations, 131–133
risk registers, embedding, 169–172
Pick, pack, and stage process, 110, 111, 143,
152
Pivotal point of change analysis, 179–181
Proactive approach, 93, 94
Probability of occurrence, 32, 52, 75, 76,
81–86, 91, 261, 263
Process chaining, 106–111
Process owners, 104, 115, 116
Process-based risk analysis, 75, 76, 101–106
Production planning and control (PP&C), 108,
109, 140, 149
Proﬁling, 190, 192–200, 214, 216–219, 239
Proprietary data risk, 65, 71, 72, 115, 257
Purchasing (procurement), 61, 62, 106, 109,
116, 119, 139, 148
Quality assurance (QA), 142, 151
Quarry operations, 118, 119
Ratio analysis, 102, 182, 188, 190, 191
Real-time risk management, 221–224
Receiving, 131, 133, 141, 142, 150
Regulatory compliance, 55, 65, 67, 73,
161–165
Reporting, 29, 209, 210
Request for proposal (RFP), 12, 237–239, 255
Research and development (R&D), 115
Residual risk, 175, 177
Return on investment, 22, 138, 148, 249,
262, 266
Risk analysis for systems environment, 206,
207
Risk appetite, 28
Risk assessment
attributes of, 81–86
banking example, 38, 39
business structure as driver of risks, 76, 77
components of, 32, 82
continuous, 52, 224–226
deﬁning risk, 80–91
deﬁning the business, 38–40
Distributed Risk Assessment and
Management (DRAM), 77, 79
274
n
Index

impact analysis. See Impact analysis
multi-dimensional. See Multi-Dimensional
Risk Assessment
Multi-Dimensional Risk Assessment, 88–91
net risk, 175, 177
probability of occurrence. See Probability of
occurrence
process-based, 75, 76
related risks, 52–57, 62, 63
residual risk, 175, 177
risk identiﬁcation, 82
root cause analysis. See Root cause analysis
static models for, 3
Risk categories, 30, 31, 64–74
Risk chain, 49, 54, 55
Risk culture, 28, 29
Risk indicators
dashboard indicators, 111–114
key early warning indicators (KEWIs), 113,
115
Key Process Indicators (KPIs), 30, 59, 88,
98
Key Risk Indicators (KRIs). See Key Risk
Indicators (KRIs)
universal risk indicators, 89, 90, 117–120
Risk language, 28
Risk management. See also ERM (enterprise
risk management)
ownership, 260, 261
proactive versus reactive, 93, 94
real time, 221–224
stakeholder involvement, 261, 262
Risk models
and ERM, 23–26
ﬂuid/dynamic risk model. See Fluid/dynamic
risk model
subjectivity-based, 24–26, 32, 82–86, 94,
99, 174, 175, 266
universal risk model, 25, 26
Risk register, 82, 83, 123, 156–172
Risk thresholds. See Triggers
Risk universe, 74–76
Rittenberg, Larry, 4, 15
Root cause analysis, 42, 76–78, 106, 107,
119, 120, 174, 179–182, 200–202, 226,
227, 256, 261
Sales and marketing, 107, 139, 148, 149
SAP, 8
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX)
compliance, 77, 265
and COSO framework for internal control, 2,
3, 14–22
and fraud, auditing for, 195
misconceptions, 1–3
private companies, acquisition of, 233, 234
violations, 155
Security guards, 127
Service level agreements (SLAs), 239–242,
258
Shareholder value, 219, 220
Shipping and logistics, 111, 143, 144, 152,
153
Sources of risk, 36. See also Risk categories
Stakeholders, 40, 261, 262
Step-down analysis, 181
Stratiﬁcation analysis, 119, 120, 186–189
Subjectivity-based risk models, 24–26, 32,
82–86, 94, 99, 174, 175, 266
Supply chain management. See Purchasing
(procurement)
Systems, Applications & Products in Data
Processing (SAP), 8
Systems design, 205–212, 219
Systems implementation
dynamically integrated risk evaluation
(DIRE). See Dynamically integrated risk
evaluation (DIRE)
and future evolution of ERM, 219, 220
risk-centric systems, designing, 205–211
shortcomings of, 4–13
and systems strategies, 204, 205
technological risk, 167, 168
threshold triggers, 214
Tax department, 104, 105, 135, 146
Threshold analysis, 182, 183, 212, 213
Threshold triggers, 88, 212–215, 265
Total Quality Management (TQM), 13, 14,
256
Treadway Commission, 15
Treasury, 135, 145, 146
TREC (The Risk Evolution Chain), 53–55, 88
Trend analysis, 88, 178–180
Triggers, 88, 212–215, 265
Union Carbide, 68
Universal risk indicators, 89, 90, 117–120
Universal risk model, 25, 26
Universal risk proﬁles, 89, 90
Ventoro Offshore 2005 Research Preliminary
Findings and Conclusions, 13, 240,
246–259
Vona, Leonard, 193
Wal-Mart, 193
Wire transfers, 192, 217
Index
n
275


LEARN THE ULTIMATE 
COMMON SENSE APPROACH 
TO ERM IMPLEMENTATION
Emphasizing an enterprise risk management approach using actual 
business data to estimate the probability and impact of key risks in 
an organization, Practical Enterprise Risk Management: A Business 
Process Approach boils ERM down to the essential nuts and bolts, 
making it accessible to everyone in your organization, from line 
managers to high-level executives. 
Take the risk! Open the book and find out:
• Why facts and common sense are a risk management 
program’s best friends
• What risk assessment and management are really all about
• How to create pictures of your business to ensure that 
effective risk management is put in place
• How NOT to run IT
• What you don’t know about outsourcing could wreck 
your organization
• Who really owns the risk management process—the 
answer will surprise you
Tired of assessing risk with your best guesses? It’s time to calculate 
probability and impact using cold hard facts and data. 
Practical Enterprise Risk Management shows you how, with hands-
on guidance based on practical methodologies that will enable 
your organization to create a highly effective governance and over-
sight tool that will yield genuine business value.

