FREE
to Enter Competition!
FEBRUARY 2018 
£3.99 ISSN 0141-0857
Display until 8th February 2018 
● The Yaesu FT-290 Mk1 ● RF Interference - Special Feature ● SEAnet 2017 - a trip to SE Asia 
2017 70MHZ
CONTEST
The results of last September's
Contest - see how you got on
WITH
ALL YOUR
FAVOURITE
COLUMNS
We look at two new compact 
switch-mode units from ML&S
E
!
201
result
ontest
ompact
om ML&S
Two Nissei Power 
Supplies Reviewed
Win a DMR transceiver 
courtesy of Moonraker
Read our review of these two great radios
2
r
o
courtesy of Moonraker
Read our review of these two great radios
The 
Co
Read our review of these two great radios

Waters & Stanton Ltd • Unit 1 • Fitzherbert Spur • Farlington • Portsmouth • PO6 1TT
@wsplc         blog.hamradiostore.co.uk        facebook.com/WatersandStanton           Waters and Stanton
W
b
call: 01702 204965 email: sales@wsplc.com
2018 - a New Year full of new challenges. In the ham radio field
few can deny that digital modes are now changing the way that
we operate. Whilst purists may argue against turning away from
SSB and CW, it is difficult to argue against the advantages.
Those with small gardens and simple antennas are finding that
digital modes puts them back in touch with DX. And even low
power works! You just need a good receiver section such as
found in the Elecraft KX2 and KX3. Of course the K3S has even
more to offer. But whatever your choice, real DX can now be
worked from a back garden. 
Peter Waters G3OJV
Brought to you by W&S!
4m or 2m Option
• Total portability SDR design & DSP
• Includes 5MHx band + receive 1.5-30MHz
• SSB CW AM and FM modes
• Tx and decode RTTY and PSK32
• External 9-14v or (optional) 8 x AA cells
• 8 band graphics in Tx and RX
• Digital Voice and CW Player
• Direct keypad entry and A/B vfo
• Full QSK with variable selectivity
• Notch filter and AF filter
• Speech Compression and VOX
• SSB CW AM FM
• New low noise synthesizer
• USB Port & 12m-6m extra pre-amp
• Multiple Attenuator
• Improved AF output design
• Now includes rx 470kHz band
• Combines superhet and SDR
• 32 bit DSP design
• Built in RTTY and PSK send/decoding
• Firmware update USB via web
• Pocket portable HF transceiver
• Built-in internal microphone
• SSB CW AM modes
• Same SDR and DSP as KX3
• Optional Li-ion battery or external 9-14V
• Variable selectivity and AF filter
• Speech compressor and full QSK
• Includes the 5MHz band
• Receiver matches the best base stations!
CS40       Small compact carry case for KX2, and small accessories....................£38.95
CS60       Large compact carry case for KX2 & MH3 mic plus more accessories....£54.95
KXAT2     Internal ATU to tune even non-resonant ‘random’ wire antenna ......£219.95
KXBT2    Internal battery gives up to 8 hours operation from a single charge ..£69.95
KX2 ACCESSORIES
Microphone
and key not
included
• 600W Solid State FET
• Same Size as K3D
• Built-in AC Power Supply
• Low noise analogue AC Supply
• Instant Operation
• RF sensed Band Change
• Ultra High Speed QSK
• No switching noise
• Able to receive band data
• 6 Speed temp. Sensing fan
• VSWR Protected
KX3 160m - 6m
KX2 80m - 10m
Portable Operation at its Best
Elecraft K3S 160m-6m 10W or 100W
Kit       £999.95                
Built    £1,079.95
Built    £859.95
Microphone and key
not included
The K3S is the “sports car” of ham radio
transceivers! Its under the bonnet that
counts. The K3S certainly can out perform
almost any other ham radio transceiver.
Its fun to own and fun to operate. It is the
most popular radio for DXpeditions for
both performance and reliability.
The optional P3 enable you to see any
part of the RF spectrum from 2kHz -
200kHz wide. It has both spectrum and
waterfall displays. Can also be use for Tx
monitoring with Tx monitor option.
KRX3A....2nd Receiver.................£789.95
8 pole Roofing filters 20Hz-13kHz .£184.95
MH2........Electret Microphone........£79.95
KDVR3....Voice Recorder..............£179.95
K3 POPULAR ACCESSORIES
KAT3A ....Automatic ATU..............£449.95
K144XV..2m Transverter..............£449.95
KBPF3.....Gen.f coverage BP Filter.£229.95
KTCXO3..High stab. Ref. oscillator.£149.95
The Optional P3
100W Kit           £2849.95                   
100W Built        £2999,95
Join the “Club” and Experience Real Performance
10W Kit             £2999.95                   
10W Built          £2449.95
KPA500 600W HF-6m Amplifier
Matches Any HF Transceiver
The KPA500 easily delivers 600W output and can be driven by any HF transceiver
that can provide around 30W of drive power. Instant operation from switch on
means that DX is not missed. The large bar graph give true pep indication and the
small foot print will enable it to fit onto almost any desk.
Elecraft Accessories
KAT500 1kW Auto ATU
Ideal for use with the KPA500 amplifier, it
matches coax systems to enable full power
output.
PX3 Spectrum
Display
T1A Portable Auto ATU
Plugs directly into the KX3 to give same
spectrum display as P3. Bandwidth 2kHz-200kHz
XG3 Signal Generator
A highly accurate
portable signal source
with spot frequencies
on all bands 160m to
2m with levels of: 
107dBm (1 uV)
-73 dBm (50 uV, S9)
-33 dBm (S9+40)
0 dBm                  £199.95
The T1A is a fully assembled
auto ATU that covers 160m
to 6m up to 20W and
matches whips, end fed
wires and coax cable. Great
for FT-817 etc. Totally self
contained              £194.95
Kit  £819.95
Built  £859.95
Kit  £799.95 Built  £839.95
Kit  £569.95 Built  £629.95
Kit  £2449.95
Built  £2699.95
Elecraft Receive Ratings*
1st        Flex-6700                         £7800
2nd     K3S                              £2999
3rd      K3 no longer available
4th       IC-7851                           £8,000
5th       PT-8000                         £12,000
6th      KX3                             £1,000
The performance positions are based on
independent tests by Sherwood US
Check: www.sherweng.com
It is hard to believe that to beat the receiver performance of both these radios
you would need to spend another £3,000 at least! You get top base station
performance in a radio that you can take anywhere. No other portable HF radio
gives you so much functionality and flexibility. The KX2 even has a built in mic.,
whilst the KX3 offers 2m or 4m options. It is not difficult to see why more and
more operators are moving up to Elecraft. And to add to the fun, you can even
opt to build the KX3 yourself if you wish. Both are available as ready built. 
UK’s LARGEST Ham Warehouse
We are Hiring!
Do you love Radio? Come and work with us in a
fast moving, friendly sales position in Portsmouth
- we look forward to hearing from you! 
email your CV to:  sales@wsplc.com

www.hamradiostore.co.uk
Pay us a visit and check out our amazing demo facility
Sign up to our WEEKLY DEALS at hamradiostore.co.uk for exclusive deals and latest news
DON’T SEE WHAT YOU NEED? Call us for available stock and BEST PRICES
     
     
It’s the latest mobile form ICOM and
includes terminal mode and airband
AM monitoring as well as being a dual
band D-Star radio.                   £469.95
Almost every ham operator knows somebody who owns an IC-7300. That in itself is
a great recommendation. It is the most successful radio for many years. Primarily
because it is based on SDR that offers so many advantages and results in such a
great receiver. And the added bonus with the IC-7300 is the 4m coverage. It’s a
great all in one station with lovely colour screen full of information. The internal
ATU copes well with most antennas and the touch screen makes operations much
easier to navigate the various functions.                                                         £1199
IC-7300 HF - 4m Transceiver
The New 
IC-R8600 Receiver
A Great Receiver at
a Great Price
£2499 
The NEW IC-7610 Transceiver
●100W HF Transceiver
●USB, LSB, CW, RTTY, PSK, AM, FM
●Dual Antenna inputs plus BNC Receive
●Tuning steps down to 1Hz
●SDR Design throughout
●Dual select Pre-Amps
●Auto Antenna Tuner
●Ethernet and USB Connectors
The new IC-7610 transceiver is now a reality.
Few can fail to be impressed with the advanced
technical promises. And nobody should be
disappointed once their new radio arrives. We
have good orders in for this radio and so will be
happy to bring your dreams to reality. And if you
need any additional items to go with your new
radio then we are sure that we can delight you
a great deal.
ID-5100E 
Mobile
Dual band 2m / 70cms mobile offering
50W output on both bands and
includes DTMF microphone     £574.95
ID-4100E 
Mobile
IC-7100 Mobile/Base
The IC-7100 is a complete HF-70cms
radio that also includes 4m operation.
You get a remote unit with extension
cable and D-Star capability.        £998.95
IC-7200 HF Base Station
SP-10 Mobile Speaker
We like he IC-7200 a lot. It is a very
rugged HF transceiver and covers all
bands from 160m to 6m. The picture
shows the side handles which are extra,
but really gives it a military look.
£799.95
Get some decent audio in your car with
this dedicated Icom mobile speaker. 
£51.95
Part
Exchange
Saves You
Money
PHONE TODAY
●External Display Connector
●External Keypad and S-meter jacks
●Reciprocal Mixing DR 110dB
●Ultra low phase noise
●Dual Receive (Separate bands)
●Live Spectrum Display 5kHz to 1MHz
●7” Colour Display
●SD slot for saving settings
Part Exchange
Welcome!
BIG SAVINGS
on this RADIO
At W&S we are known for our great part exchange deals and it
may be that your new IC-7610 may cost you less than you think.
So give us a call and we will be happy to quote you.
• 10kHz - 3GHz SDR Wide Band Performance
• Absolute S-Meter Measurements
• Supr FPGA for ultimate processing
• Great Dynamic Range for modern band conditions
• 2000 Memories with full scanning
• Spectrum Scope with Waterfall
• SD Card slot and I/Q output 
New!
FREE!
Icom AD-55NS
Power Supply
+ FREE MFJ 10%
Discount Voucher
+ FREE MFJ 10%
Discount Voucher
+ FREE MFJ 10%
Discount Voucher
Plus £89 Voucher
GOT ANY OLD MILITARY 1940S GEAR?
We will collect it free of charge and
pay you a nominal amount for it. 

Waters & Stanton Ltd • Unit 1 • Fitzherbert Spur • Farlington • Portsmouth • PO6 1TT
@wsplc         blog.hamradiostore.co.uk        facebook.com/WatersandStanton           Waters and Stanton
W
b
call: 01702 204965 email: sales@wsplc.com
KENWOOD DEALS
OFFICIAL RE-SELLER
TH-D74
New 144-430MHz
handheld featuring
Kenwood’s APRS,
Automatic Packet
Reporting System, and
the popular D-Star.
Kenwood has made it
possible to use this
handheld in a wide range of radio
applications with wideband
reception function allowing the
user to receive HF SSB and CW.    
£599
TS-590SGE2 Limited Edition
Based on the current TS-590SG HF/50MHz transceiver, this Special Black
version features a distinctive front panel, main dial and glass screen. It’s a
classic radio that you will be proud to own and will love to operate
£1699.95
FT-991A
Successor to the FT-991 this all
band HF - UHF transceiver which
includes Yaesu’s System Fusion as
well as traditional modes. The 
FT-991A packs the same features
as the FT-991 plus an added real
time spectrum display and 
multi-colour waterfall display.
Call for latest deal
FT-891
100W HF +
6m mobile
transceiver
with AM,
USB, LSB and CW modes featuring
triple conversion, noise blanker and
attenuator.    
Call for latest deal
FT-450D
Compact yet superb HF/50MHz radio
with state-of-the-art IF DSP
technology configured to provide
worldclass performance in an easy
to operate package.
Call for latest deal
FT-2DE
2m/70cm dual band
handheld transceiver
designed with ease of
use in mind such as its
1.7 inch full back-lit
touch panel display.
Includes FM and
System Fusion modes.
Call for latest deal
FT-DX1200
HF + 6m transceiver provides up to
100W on SSB, CW, FM and AM (25W
carrier) and a rugged state of the art
highly balanced receiver circuit
configuration for top performance on
today’s crowded bands.
Call for latest deal
FT-857
World’s
smallest
HF/VHF/UHF
100W
mobile transceiver including DSP.
Call for latest deal
FTM-3200DE
Rugged yet compact System
Fusion/FM 65W mobile transceiver.
Loud and Crystal Clear Front Panel
Speaker with 3W of Audio Output.
Instantly recognises digital or
analogue transmission and adjusts
automatically for flawless
coexistence of both digital and
analogue users.
Call for latest deal
TS-590SG
Be witness to the evolution of
Kenwood’s pride and joy - the 
TS-590SG HF transceiver - pushing
performance and technology to its
utmost limit, with the receiver
configured to capitalise on roofing
filter performance and IF AGC
controlled through advanced 
DSP technology.
Call for best price
YAESU DEALS
OFFICIAL RE-SELLER      FREE UK SHIPPING
New!
New!
New!
New!
FT-817 BHI-DSP
BHI DSP
Filtering This
micro size board
fits inside the 
FT-817ND.  A mini
press button &
LED are installed beneath the top
cover for switching. The unit cycles
through 4 levels of filtering and then
reverts back to ‘out of circuit’ mode.
£769.95
In Stock!
FT-65E
2m/70cm Handheld Transceiver
Variable 5W output
£129.95
FULL RANGE OF RT SYSTEMS SOFTWARE AND CABLES FOR ALL KENWOOD, ICOM AND YAESU
NEW
LICENCE 
DEAL
CALL FOR
DETAILS
We provide finance on all Ham equipment
Buy now pay later or regular finance deals can be arranged in store or over the phone, call for details
We provide finance on all Ham equipment
Buy now pay later or regular finance deals can be arranged in store or over the phone, call for details
FT-25E
2m Monoband Handheld
Transceiver with variable 5W output
£89.90
FROM
STOCK
AR-DV-10
At last!
A True Digital 
Scanner
• 100kHz - 3GHz 
• 10 Digital Modes
• inc Icom, Yaesu, DMR
• Auto Mode Detect
• Water Resistant
• Micro SD card backup
• Lithium Battery
• Data Management
AR-8200 MkIII 
This 100kHz-3GHz
scanning receiver covers
all the popular modes
including FM, AM and
SSB. It is regarded as the
industry standard by
many and is also supplied
for commercial use.
Includes a ferrite LF
antenna system for LW
and MW and MW
reception
£459.95
FT-DX5000MP 
A massive £230! Plus great PX Deals
Call for latest deal
HLV-770
70cms 770W Amplifier 25W Drive
..................................................£2595.00
HLV-800
23cms 900W Amplifier 18W Drive
..................................................£3650.00
BEKO Amplifiers
ACOM 1200S
1200S
A great new Desk Top amplifier that
offers robust construction and
excellent protection.
• 160m - 6m
• Soiid State 1200W
• Approx 70W Drive
• Colour Data Display
• Internal AC Power Supply
• 418 x 372 x 162mm
• Weight: 12kg (26.5lbs)
At last, a scanner that will allow
you to listen to digital signals. It
automatically detects the mode. Of
course it also works on AM and FM
as well. A total communications
monitor in the palm of your hand.
AOR of Japan
New!
£995
Available early 2018
Pre-order now 

Practical Wireless February 2018 ● Volume 94 ● Number 2 ● Issue 1329
Copyright © Warners Group Publications Ltd. 2017. Copyright in all drawings, logos, photographs and articles published in Practical Wireless is fully protected 
and reproduction in whole or part is expressly forbidden. All reasonable precautions are taken by Practical Wireless to ensure that the advice and data given to 
our readers are reliable. We cannot however guarantee it and we cannot accept legal responsibility for it. Prices are those current as we go to press. Published 
on the second Thursday of each month by Warners Group Publications Ltd. Printed in England by Holbrooks Printers Ltd., Portsmouth P03 5HX. Distributed by 
Warners Distribution, West Street, Bourne, Lincs, PE10 9PH. Tel: 01778 391000, Web: www.warnersgroup.co.uk
Practical Wireless is sold subject to the following conditions, namely that it shall not, without written consent of the publishers ﬁ rst having been given, be lent, 
re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of by way of trade at more than the recommended selling price shown on the cover, and that it shall not be lent, re-sold, 
hired out or otherwise disposed of in a mutilated condition or in any unauthorised cover by way of Trade, or afﬁ xed to or as part of any publication or advertising, 
literary or pictorial matter whatsoever.
6 
Keylines
Don G3XTT looks back on 50 years in 
the hobby.
7 
News
PW’s monthly roundup of news from the 
UK and internationally, including new 
products, club news and recent events.
10  Review − Two DMR Rigs from 
Moonraker
Tim Kirby G4VXE takes a look at the 
 TYT MD-9600 144/430MHz DMR mobile 
transceiver and the Moonraker HT-500D 
DMR Dual-Band Handheld Transceiver. 
13 PW Competition
A chance to win one of the radios from 
Tim Kirby’s Moonraker review.
14  Review – Nissei Switch-Mode 
Power Supplies
Don G3XTT has been taking a look at 
two power supplies from Nissei.
16  Kits & Modules – Stereo 
Ampliﬁ er & FM Tuner
Geoff Theasby G8BMI looks at a 
stereo ampliﬁ er and FM tuner that are 
inexpensive and complement each other 
nicely.
17  The Ninth Practical Wireless 
70MHz Contest − Results 2017
Contest adjudicator Colin Redwood 
G6MXL has the results of the 2017 
contest.
23 Valve & Vintage
Michael Marinaro WN1M concludes the 
story of transatlantic communications 
during the First World War with a look at 
some of the advances that resulted and 
beneﬁ ted the next generation.
26  Feature – Radio Frequency 
Interference
Dr John Rogers M0JAV, Chairman of 
the RSGB EMC Committee, presents 
an overview of RFI/EMC issues as they 
affect the UK amateur radio community.
30 Carrying on the Practical Way
Eric Edwards GW8LJJ describes a novel 
approach to achieving diversity reception 
by combining your shack receiver with an 
internet-based SDR.
34 In the Shop
Harry Leeming G3LLL laments the 
problem of dealing with intermittent faults 
in a variety of situations.
40 Technical for the Terriﬁ ed
Don Field G3XTT, with help from the 
PW technical team, explains what a 
Switched Mode Power Supply is and 
its advantages and disadvantages 
compared with conventional Linear 
Power Supplies.
42 The World of VHF
Tim Kirby G4VXE asks, “Can a 
F oundation licensee make a moonbounce 
contact using only 10 watts?” There is all 
the usual news too.
On Sale 
11th 
January
2018
46 Data Modes
Mike Richards G4WNC has news 
of a new release from SDRplay, 
enhancements to Spy Server and 
some thoughts about measuring SDR 
performance.
49 What Next 
Colin Redwood G6MXL looks at a 
variety of topics, some of which should 
appeal to operators, while others will 
hopefully be of interest to those new to 
construction. 
52 HF Highlights
Steve Telenius-Lowe PJ4DX reports on 
a month replete with DXpedition activity 
and a major contest as well as looking 
forward to what may prove to be the 
most expensive DXpedition ever.
55 Buying Second-Hand
Chris Lorek G4HCL revisits the hugely 
popular Yaesu FT-290R Mk1 2m 
multimode transceiver.
58  SEAnet Convention and CQWW 
Contesting from HS0ZAR
Don Field G3XTT reports on his recent 
trip to SE Asia.
62 The Morse Mode
Roger Cooke G3LDI has news of two 
more very successful Bootcamps, along 
with some other Morse-related snippets.
64 Readers’ Letters
More on nomenclature, APRS and a 
selection of snippets from a regular 
contributor to our Letters page.
65 Rallies 
Locate a rally or event near you; we have 
our usual comprehensive list.
66 Classiﬁ ed Adverts
67 Bargain Basement
68 PW Publishing Bookstore
72 Subscriptions
February 2018 Practical Wireless  
5
Contents
58
23
10

Practical Wireless
Warners Group Publications
The Maltings
West Street
Bourne
Lincs PE10 9PH
www.warnersgroup.co.uk
Tel 01778 391000
Editor (c/o Warners Group Publications)
Don Field G3XTT
practicalwireless@warnersgroup.co.uk
Designer
Mike Edwards
mike.edwards@warnersgroup.co.uk
Advertisement Manager
Claire Ingram
claire.ingram@warnersgroup.co.uk
Advertising Sales
Kristina Green
kristina.green@warnersgroup.co.uk
Advertising Production
Nicola Lock
nicola.lock@warnersgroup.co.uk
Publisher
Rob McDonnell
robm@warnersgroup.co.uk
Subscriptions
Subscriptions are available at £44 per annum to 
UK addresses, £53 Europe Airmail and £63 RoW 
Airmail. See the subscription page for full details.
Subscription Administration
Webscribe,
Practical Wireless Subscriptions,
Unit 8, The Old Mill, Brook Street, 
Tring, Hertfordshire HP23 5EF
pw@webscribe.co.uk
Tel: 01442 820580
www.webscribe.co.uk/magazine/pw
Components for PW projects
In general, all components used in constructing 
PW projects are available from a variety of 
component suppliers. Where special, or difficult 
to obtain, components are specified a supplier 
will be quoted in the article.
Photocopies & Back Issues
We can supply back issues, but we only keep 
them for one year. If you are looking for an article 
or review that you missed first time around, we 
can still help. If we don’t have the actual issue 
we can always supply a photocopy or PDF file of 
the article. See the Book Store pages for details.
Technical Help
We regret that due to Editorial timescales, 
replies to technical queries cannot be given 
over the telephone. Any technical queries are 
unlikely to receive immediate attention so, 
if you require help with problems relating to 
topics covered in PW, please either contact 
the author of the article directly or write or 
send an email to the Editor and we’ll do our 
best to reply as soon as we can.
Don Field
G3XTT
Don G3XTT looks back on 50 years in the hobby
I 
recently received a 
badge from the RSGB 
to recognise 50 years 
of membership. Although 
licensed in September 1968, 
I had joined the Society several 
months earlier as a Listener 
(A5885).
The driving forces behind 
amateur radio back then were, I 
suppose: 
the attraction of being to speak 
to folk around the world (even in 
Communist lands) at zero cost 
when it was expensive and difﬁ cult 
to make international telephone 
calls.
a technical hobby for those in-
terested in science and engineering 
(computer-related hobbies seem to 
occupy that space nowadays)
What’s more, although in the 
UK there was a single Radio Ama-
teurs Exam (generally considered 
to be pitched at a level somewhere 
between GCE O and A level) 
and an annual licence fee, other 
barriers to entry were relatively 
low – most gear lent itself to home 
construction and there was lots 
of cheap war surplus equipment 
available.
Operating was largely CW, AM 
or SSB on the HF bands and FM 
on VHF, with relatively little com-
mercial equipment available for 
the latter. It was ﬁ ve years before I 
acquired an SSB rig – an early FT-
101 Mk1. Prior to that, I had found 
AM to be ﬁ ne for UK nets on the 
160, 80 and 40m bands but had 
quickly discovered that CW was a 
far more effective means of work-
ing across Europe and beyond.
A Changing Hobby
The hobby has changed dramati-
cally since then. Although there is 
still a keen minority who build their 
own gear, most opt for commercial 
equipment and there’s lots avail-
able. Wandering round the Martin 
Lynch & Sons showroom at their 
recent Open Day, I was struck by 
the number of manufacturers and 
wide range of products available 
to tempt us. I consider the barriers 
to entry to be lower than ever – a 
progressive licensing system (with 
no annual fee), cheap entry-level 
gear from China and else-
where (and great second-hand 
prices compared with the £200 
I paid in 1973 for that FT-101, 
equivalent to well over £1,000 
today) and a huge amount of 
supporting information (and 
software) available free from 
the internet.
However, the attractions 
of the hobby are perhaps 
somewhat different. Interna-
tional communication, even 
using video, is ubiquitous and 
near-enough free using Apps 
such as Skype and WhatsApp. 
And there are different hurdles 
affecting our enjoyment – dif-
ﬁ culty with planning permis-
sion, a huge number of noise 
sources and a diminution 
of day-to-day chat on local 
repeaters or simplex channels 
(perhaps a reﬂ ection of a wider 
social malaise – go into a pub 
nowadays and you’re more 
likely to see a group of young 
people drinking and looking at 
their smartphones rather than 
drinking and chatting!).
Still Lots to Offer
However, our hobby still has 
lots to offer. Satellite activity, 
even moonbounce, are no lon-
ger the preserve of those with 
mega-stations. And although 
you may not hear a lot on your 
local repeater, interconnec-
tion of digital voice modes 
with the internet means that 
you will always ﬁ nd some-
one, somewhere to talk to. 
Data modes such as FT8 are 
hugely attractive, too, again 
not requiring massive power 
or antennas but facilitating 
long-distance communication 
even at sunspot minimum. 
Long-haul VHF communica-
tion can be year-round, thanks 
again to digital modes that 
make meteor scatter and other 
weak-signal working so much 
more accessible. Portable 
operation is also on the up, 
partly due to readily available 
lightweight gear and partly, 
no doubt, as a way of getting 
away from urban noise. Sum-
mits on the Air, the RSGB VHF/
UHF Activity contests and similar 
activities are all thriving as radio 
amateurs take to the hills.
While home construction may 
have changed, I continue to be 
amazed at club construction 
evenings when members bring 
in projects based on integrat-
ing modules together – maybe a 
Raspberry Pi, a simple transceiv-
er and some other bits and bobs 
to create a WSPR transmitter or 
similar. I guess it’s the modern 
equivalent of converting a piece 
of ex-military gear.
Any of the above must also 
be beneﬁ cial to young people 
studying maths and physics, for 
example, putting a practical gloss 
on the theory that they learn at 
school or college. 
Emercomms
What we don’t have so much of 
in this country, thank goodness, 
is the imperative of emergency 
communications. The American 
Radio Relay League (ARRL) 
sent a number of sets of gear to 
Puerto Rico following the recent 
devastating hurricanes and the 
YASME Foundation have since 
sent shipments of licence mate-
rial, responding to an upsurge 
of interest in gaining amateur 
radio licences, ready for any 
repeat problems in the years 
to come. This is also a driver in 
much of Asia – there is a strong 
awareness that tsunamis, hur-
ricanes/cyclones, earthquakes or 
volcanic activity can all too easily 
render commercial communica-
tions inoperative.
All in all, despite continued 
prognoses of the demise of 
amateur radio throughout my 
50 years in the hobby, it has 
continued to reinvent itself and 
the future is, I’d like to think, as 
bright as ever. But do feel free to 
send me your own views on past 
and future – our Letters column 
awaits!
Keylines
FREE
to Enter Competition!
FEBRUARY 2018 
£3.99 ISSN 0141-0857
Display until 22nd February 2018 
● The Yaesu FT-290 Mk1 ● RF Interference - Special Feature ● SEAnet 2017 - a trip to SE Asia 
2017 70MHZ
CONTEST
The results of last September's
Contest - see how you got on
E Asia
WITH
ALL YOUR
FAVOURITE
COLUMNS
We look at two new compact 
switch-mode units from ML&S
E
!
201
result
ontest
compact 
om ML&S
Two Nissei Power 
Supplies Reviewed
Win a DMR transceiver 
courtesy of Moonraker
Read our review of these two great radios
2
r
o
courtesy of Moonraker
Read our review of these two great radios
The 
Co
Read our review of these two great radios
Subscribe to
Practical Wireless
www.webscribe.co.uk/magazine/pw
6  
Practical Wireless February 2018

February 2018 Practical Wireless  
7
ANAN-7000DLE
Both ML&S and Nevada Radio have notified us 
that they have stock of the new ANAN-7000DLE 
HF and 6m 100W SDR transceiver from Apache 
Labs. Many specifications have been improved 
over earlier models, based on the work of the 
OpenHPSDR community. The receiver uses Direct 
Down Conversion, with an ultra-low phase noise 
clock that gives an RMDR of 116dB @ 2kHz. 
This means that close-in weak signals will not be 
masked by the receiver’s phase noise.
There is a new PA board that Apache 
Labs claim takes the specifications ‘off the 
charts’ compared to other SDRs. It features 
gain redistribution for better IMD, thermally 
compensated Bias, Current/Voltage/Temp 
Sensors, a temperature controlled fan and several 
other improvements.
The transceiver features LDMOS Drivers and 
Finals with an Adaptive Predistortion Algorithm 
yielding an IMD of –68db @ 100W PEP along 
with two 16-bit phase synchronous ADCs for 
diversity reception and ultimate noise mitigation 
with reduction of signal phasing. The price will be 
around the £3000 to £3100 mark.
Send your information to: 
Practical Wireless Letters, Warners Group Publishing
West Street, Bourne, Lincs PE10 9PH
E-mail: practicalwireless@warnersgroup.co.uk
Newsdesk
Essex RAYNET News
On Sunday December 3rd, Essex RAYNET 
supported the Farleigh Hospice 2017 Santa 
Fun Run. 859 Santas ran or walked the 5km 
route starting at Chelmsford’s Central Park. 
Over a dozen members of Essex RAYNET 
provided event communications, including 
a team of three at Control, eight stationed 
at various points along the walk and two 
members acting as sweeps.
Advanced Distance 
Learning
The next Advanced Distance Learning run 
by the Bath-based team course is due to 
start on January 26th, aiming for an exam in 
early July. The course has been running for 
six years now and over 500 students have 
passed following the distance learning. The 
average pass rate is 85% for students who 
have completed the course. 
The course is free but students must 
provide their own textbook, calculator and 
arrange their own exam when the time 
comes. Guidance is provided by the course 
team. 
A £30 deposit is required to secure a place 
on the course and the deposit is refunded to 
those who see the course through. Deposits 
from students who did not complete the 
course, and generous donations from 
students who did, have so far raised over 
£10,000 for charities such as the RCF, 
Wireless for the Blind and RAIB.
Depending on the forthcoming syllabus 
changes this may be the last of these 
courses under the current arrangements. The 
Bath-based team await details of the syllabus 
changes and the timetable for change before 
planning beyond July 18th. 
Places are limited in number and the last 
three courses have been full well before the 
start date but there be the odd space still 
available when this appears. So, if you are 
interested in joining, contact Course Leader, 
Steve G0FUW, via e-mail: 
g0fuw@tiscali.co.uk
Problems with 
December Issue
We apologise that a few batches of the 
December issue of PW were incorrectly 
bound, with some pages duplicated and 
others missing. This was unusual – for the 
time being Warners are using the same 
printers that PW has used problem-free for 
many years. If you did end up with a faulty 
copy, please let Warners know and they will 
do they best to rectify matters. 
New Products from ML&S
Elad are an Italian manufacturer of high-end 
commercial specialist test equipment but also 
have an amateur radio division. Three years 
ago they introduced the very popular FDM-Duo, 
a beautifully constructed 5W QRP transceiver. 
They are now producing a matching 60W Linear 
Amplifier, the ELAD Amplifier DUO ART, with a 
built-in PSU, four-way antenna switch and clever 
control software. While the unit is intended for 
operation with the FDM-Duo, it will work with 
other QRP transceivers such as Yaesu’s FT-
817ND. 
www.HamRadio.co.uk/DUOART 
Another Italian manufacturer, M&P, have 
established themselves as the go-to brand for 
superior cabling for professionals and amateur 
radio use. Their huge range of 50Ω cables has 
just been joined by the ‘UltraFlex-7 Crystal’. A 
clear sheath allows the user to view the design 
of the 83% coverage braid made up of 144 
individual wires. This new design is lightweight 
(half the weight of URM-67) for reduced stress of 
hanging and swing when using around rotators. 
Priced at only £1.59/m, for full details see:
www.HamRadio.co.uk/ultraflex7crystal 

Newsdesk
ML&S Open Day
The annual ML&S Open Day and Hog 
Roast in December proved to be the best 
attended to date. Representatives from 
Icom, Kenwood, bhi, WonderWand and 
other suppliers as well as the RSGB were in 
attendance, back to back lectures were run 
in the training room and coffee and cake 
were available as the day went on.
Essex Skills Night
The final Essex Skills Night of the year 
saw a bumper range of activities from 
the Chelmsford ARS: Training candidates 
could get ahead of the game with various 
Intermediate Practicals, a 2m Slim 
Jim kit was on sale for £5, there was a 
demonstration of various SDRs, plus CARS 
merchandise. An impressive board of all of 
the Intermediate practicals was on display, 
created by the new CARS Chairman and 
Training Manager, Peter Davies M0PSD.
Also on offer, a live demonstartion of 
SSTV in action on 70cm from Essex Ham, 
the Essex CW Club supporting Morse, and 
‘Getting Started with EchoLink’, by Jim 
2E0RMI.
Essex Ham
Keen to get one more Field Day in before the 
end of 2017, Essex Ham visited Shoebury 
Each Beach to support the county-wide 
‘Essex 2m Activity Day’. Sadly, the weather 
had other ideas, so the event was run from 
the back of various cars. Running 2m SSTV 
in a car packed with damp operators led 
to some rather steamy windows, but some 
good contacts nonetheless. The photo shows 
Nick M0NFE operating from a car.
The ‘Essex 2m Activity Day’ is an initiative 
launched by the Thurrock Acorns ARC to get 
more activity on 2m, whether using FM, SSB, 
CW or data.
New Antenna from 
Innov
InnovAntennas have a new log periodic Yagi 
that covers 100MHz to 750MHz to replace 
their popular 100MHz to 600MHz version. The 
new antenna, with rear mounting, is 1290mm 
long and unlike the original, this one can be 
mounted in either the horizontal or vertical 
plane. Additionally, the front of the log cell has 
three sets of twin parasitic elements through 
the booms/feedlines. These enhance top-end 
performance, a failing of more traditional log 
periodic antennas.
The new antenna has an introductory price 
of £199.95, only £20.00 more than the original. 
Available now from stock:
www.innovantennas.com
sales@innovantennas.com
New Product from 
WonderWand
At the ML&S Hog Roast, WonderWand 
Antennas UK were showcasing their latest 
product, the TWC-4010. Described (loosely) 
as a ‘tuneable Windom’, this is an offset-fed 
wire antenna tuned at the feedpoint by the 
dedicated rig-mounted tuning unit. The TWC-
4010 tuner unit works from 40 to 10m and 
has a power rating of 10W. It is designed for 
use with rigs such as the Yaesu FT-817 and 
connects directly to the rig’s SO-239 antenna 
socket. At press time we have no pricing 
information or photograph.
www.wonder-wand.co.uk
Icom IC-7300 
Resources Page
Ian Wade G3NRW has announced the 
introduction of the ‘IC-7300 Resources Page’. 
The site contains hundreds of references to 
IC-7300 documentation, software, firmware, 
HOWTOs, TechNotes, reviews and other 
support material, plus a collection of over 80 
(mostly) YouTube videos demonstrating many 
aspects of using the transceiver. Motivation 
for building the site arose from Ian’s difficulties 
in finding all this information, much of which 
is scattered all over the internet. The site 
will particularly appeal to anyone who is 
considering buying the Icom IC-7300, as well 
as existing users requiring more information on 
this very popular transceiver.
g3nrw.net/IC-7300
8 	
Practical Wireless February 2018

Newsdesk
Examination System News
Nancy Bone G7UUR reports, “It is now 
three years since I and David Stansfield 
G0EVV organised the Invigilator Training 
Workshop for a group of amateur radio 
clubs and societies in RSGB Region 4, the 
Five Bridges Cluster and STARS, which 
was attended by 40 members. We then 
compiled a report with recommendations 
based on the feedback from members and 
a presentation was delivered at the RSGB 
Education and Training Committee Forum 
at the RSGB Convention. Our workshop 
identified a wide range of concerns about 
the then current examination system. Slowly 
but surely the RSGB has addressed our 
observations. A major improvement was the 
rewriting of the Examination Guide EX500 
a year ago.
“I am pleased to say that our remaining 
concerns have all now been addressed at 
this year’s Forum and our thanks go to all 
involved at the RSGB. The concerns are 
addressed as follows:
“Indicative marking is not needed if online 
examinations are used by exam centres, 
and instantaneous pass/fail with perfor-
mance feedback provided by the software.
“Online exams are now available for the Full 
Licence and were due to be rolled out to 
Intermediate in November with Foundation 
in January 2018.
“Independent Exam Inspectors (independ-
ent of clubs) are being appointed and 
trained.
“I am no longer Deputy Regional Manager 
for the Five Bridges Cluster and STARS but 
have been asked to continue as Convenor 
for ongoing activities such as training, edu-
cation, special events and activities, espe-
cially those involving children and young 
people and help with access to the hobby 
for all”.
Eleven Cities Marathon
Eleven special callsigns will be on the air for 
the ‘11 Cities Marathon’, which spans all of 
2018. The city of Leeuwarden, Netherlands, 
is being called ‘a European Capital of Cul-
ture’ for the year. That city and ten others in 
Friesland Province will host the event. The 
callsigns are:
PF2018LWD, Leeuwarden in January
PF2018SNK, Sneek, February
PF2018YLS, Ijlist, March
PF2018SLO, Sloten, April
PF2018BOL, Bolsward, May
PF2018HIN, Hindeloopen, June
PF2018FRA, Franeker, July
PF2018HAR, Harlingen, August
PF2018DOK, Dokkum, September
PF2018WOR, Workum, October
PF2018STA, Stavoren, November
In December 2018 all of the 11 stations 
will be on the air. QSL using LoTW, Club 
Log, or via PA0MBD. Other stations in 
Friesland, optionally, may change the 
number in their callsign to 2018. As an 
example, PA0ZZ could use PA2018ZZ. 
Awards are available. 
http://hamecc2018.eu
Bittern DX Club
Club meetings are held on the last Thursday of 
each month. On other Thursdays, the club net 
is held on 2m on 145.500MHz at 19:30 local. 
The January 25th meeting will be held at the 
Crown pub, Banningham NR11 7DY and will 
include a talk and planning the club events 
calendar for 2018. Please note the change 
of location because the regular venue has 
ceased trading. See the website for details of 
the new venue when sorted.
www.bittern-dxers.org.uk
Train the Trainers
Newton le Willows ARC (MX0NRC) are pleased 
to announce that they will be hosting a ‘Train 
The Trainers’ event on Saturday March 3rd. 
Places are strictly limited, so early booking is 
advised.
This is scheduled to be an all-day event, 
running from approximately 9am to 5pm. Tea 
and coffee will be provided, though you will 
need to provide your own lunch or use one of 
the local shops a Fish and Chip shop or one 
selling pies and cakes.
The event is free to attend, although the 
club would appreciate any donation no matter 
how small to go towards the tea/coffee/
biscuits/venue hire. The venue is Derbyshire 
Hill Family & Community Centre, Derbyshire 
Hill Rd, Parr, St Helens WA9 2LU. For more 
information phone Lee M0LGL on 07414 
836945 (after 3:30pm please).
New Allocations 
for Croatia
Croatian radio amateurs now have access 
to the WRC-15 60m amateur secondary 
allocation of 5351.5 – 5366.5kHz under ITU 
Footnote 5.133B, allowing them 15W EIRP.
They now also have access to the full 160m 
band from 1810 to 2000kHz as follows: 1810 
to 1850kHz max. power 1.5kW; 1850 to 
2000kHz max. power 1kW
Thanks are expressed to the regulator, 
HAKOM, because in recent years they have 
issued temporary one-year licences for 60m to 
Croatian radio amateurs.
SOTAbeams News
As a result of expansion, UK amateur radio manufacturer SOTAbeams has relocated. 
CEO Richard G3CWI explains, “For the last few years we have operated out of an historic 
19th century silk mill in the centre of Macclesfield. However, the growing needs of our 
business have required new premises. Our new unit is a modern two-storey office block, 
which gives us a much improved lab area for product development and more space. Most 
importantly for our five staff, it’s actually warm in the winter too!”
SOTAbeams also report that they have started stocking a speech processor for the 
FT-817. The compressor plugs inline between the radio and microphone and helps to 
keep the transmitted audio level high, a great help when SSB signals are weak. The 
compressor is available as a kit or fully built and tested.
www.sotabeams.co.uk 
February 2018 Practical Wireless 	
9

10  
Practical Wireless February 2018
The TYT MD-9600 Dual-Band
DMR Mobile
Here’s what the publicity says about the 
TYT MD-9600 Dual-Band DMR Mobile: 
“Now you can go digital on the road with 
the TYT MD-9600 DMR Digital Mobile Two 
Way Radio! The MD-9600 gives you the 
crystal clear, noise-free audio of over-the-
air digital communications in your vehicle, 
full analogue transceiver capabilities, and 
bundles it all together at a price you can 
afford! The MD-9600 supports analogue 
and digital modes so you can enjoy the 
best of both. It provides dual-band sup-
port, operating on both 400-480MHz UHF 
frequencies and 136-174MHz VHF at up 
to 50W VHF and 45W UHF, using Time-
Division Multiple-Access (TDMA) digital 
technology. This digital mobile radio is also 
compatible with Motorola TRBO and DMR 
Tier II. The MD 9600 offers 250 zones with 
16 channels for each zone. It has built-in 
CTCSS/DCS, channel scan, priority scan, 
short text message features, draft message 
edit, contacts check and edit, and encryp-
tion. As for calling features, the MD-9600 
has them, including Private Call, Group Call 
and All Call. It also includes Lone worker 
mode, power save mode, low power alarm, 
an emergency alarm and VOX capability. 
Review − Two DMR 
Rigs from Moonraker
Tim Kirby G4VXE takes a look at the  TYT MD-9600 144/430MHz DMR mobile 
transceiver and the Moonraker HT-500D DMR Dual-Band Handheld Transceiver. 
Tim Kirby, G4VXE, Willowside, Bow Bank, Longworth OX13 5ER
● E-mail: tim@g4vxe.com  ● Twitter: g4vxe 
Review by Tim Kirby G4VXE
T
owards the end of the 
National Hamfest at 
Newark, Chris Taylor from 
Moonraker approached 
our editor with a couple of 
boxes, saying, have a look at these! 
Very kindly, Don passed them onto me 
to review.
I’m always pleased to look at new rigs 
and fi nd out what they’re like but I was par-
ticularly looking forward to trying the TYT 
MD-9600. Here in west Oxfordshire, we’re 
just in range of a few DMR repeaters and I 
was curious to see what the mobile experi-
ence would be like.
The MD-9600.

February 2018 Practical Wireless 	
11
Plus, it’s PC programmable and firmware 
upgradeable to boot, providing the maxi-
mum flexibility and versatility to rival any 
other digital mobile radio on the market! The 
TYT MD-9600 gives you a colour LCD dis-
play with clear, sharp text for an easy read 
from your dash or console. It also gives you 
programmable function keys on the console 
and a hand mic with programmable keys, 
two built-in LEDs and a DTMF keypad and 
for full access to its menu of powerful digital 
and analogue features. No doubt about it, 
the MD-9600 gives you all the value of a 
premium digital mobile radio at an amaz-
ingly low analogue price!”
The features are listed in the sidebar.
Getting Started
Within minutes after taking delivery of the 
rigs from Don, I had the MD-9600 out of the 
box and was connecting it up to my PC to 
set up the basics. I should add that Moon-
raker had supplied the rig with a codeplug, 
which is ready to go. (A quick reminder that 
the codeplug of a digital radio determines 
the setup and configuration of the radio, in-
cluding the channels, talkgroups and so on. 
The codeplug supplied with both the radios 
reviewed here includes all UK DMR and 
analogue repeaters along with Marine band 
and PMR446 receive channels). All I had 
to do was to load the Customer Program-
ming Software (CPS) on my PC, connect 
up the programming lead between the rig 
and the computer and press ‘read radio’. 
To my delight it worked first time. It doesn’t 
always, so It’s good when it does, espe-
cially because I use a virtual PC running on 
my Macbook, which shouldn’t complicate 
things but sometimes does.
Because the codeplug was all set up, 
the only thing I really needed to change was 
to enter my DMR ID into the rig rather than 
the demonstration one that had been set. 
That done and the configuration saved back 
to the rig, I was all ready to go. I installed 
the rig into the car (it’s a little too big to 
go in the centre console) but managed a 
temporary solution quite easily and looked 
forward to the morning commute to see 
what I could hear.
Here in west Oxfordshire, my daily com-
mute takes me on the fringes of several 
DMR repeaters, including the GB7CT VHF 
repeater at Tring some 40-odd miles away. 
I knew I could detect that signal quite well 
through the journey, so I was curious to see 
how that translated into digital coverage.
Sure enough, I found that I could receive 
DMR signals from GB7CT although only 
on certain parts of my journey. I became 
quite adept in making quite short, snappy 
contacts on pieces of road when I knew 
there was coverage. One morning there 
was a lift and signals were gloriously strong 
all the way to the railway station. On one of 
my first mobile DMR contacts, it was great 
to speak with Steve M3SXA also using the 
GB7CT repeater.
If I was travelling in a more westerly 
direction, then I could use the GB7TC 
Swindon UHF DMR repeater. It was on a 
trip over the Cotswolds to the Cheltenham 
area that I discovered a problem with the 
MD-9600s firmware.
At the start of each transmission you 
make, there’s a quick handshake protocol 
(known as the Transmit Admit criteria) to 
check that the repeater can be contacted 
and if it can’t, then what should happen is 
that you get a warning tone to show you’re 
out of range. However, I discovered that 
quite often with the MD-9600, the rig would 
not be able to establish communication 
with the repeater but, rather than issue the 
warning tone, it would hang up the radio, 
which would then need to be switched off 
and on again before it would transmit. On 
a hilly road with a variable path to the re-
peater, this could happen quite a lot! Clearly 
this isn’t an issue if you use the rig in a 
base station situation where the signal path 
to the repeater is much more of a known 
quantity.
When I got home, I did a little research 
to see if anyone else had encountered 
these issues (yes, they had) and whether 
there was any sort of workaround or fix 
(yes, there is!). It transpired that the problem 
only occurs if the Zone (a group of chan-
nels and talkgroups within the codeplug) is 
solely on UHF, so the fix was to edit each of 
the zones and put a dummy VHF frequency 
into it. Actually, this worked out well for me 
because for my commute, I wanted to be 
able to switch between GB7CT, GB7TC, 
GB7BK, GB7AV DMR repeaters as well as 
some analogue repeaters!
So, I programmed up a new zone 
called ‘Commute’, which reflected this and 
The MD-9600.
 
The following features are 
listed for the MD-9600:
n 1000 Channels 
n 136-174MHz VHF Frequencies 400-480MHz 
UHF Frequencies 
n Repeater Capable 
n AMBE+2™ Digital Vocoder
n Encryption (Digital Mode Only) 
n Private Call/Group Call/All Call 
n 45W/25W Output Power 
n Hi/Low Power Selectable 
n Emergency Alarm 
n Channel Scan 
n Priority Scan 
n Talk Around 
n Colour LED Display 
n Lighted LED Keypad 
n Text Messaging 
n LED Status Light On Hand Mic 
n Low Battery Alert 
n Battery Saver 
n Timeout Timer 
n VOX 
n Audible Button Beeps
n Voice Prompts 
n Cloning Capable 
n PC Programmable (Optional Software and 
Cable Required) 
n Programmable Multifunction Key 
n MIL-STD-810 C/D/E 
n Digital/Analogue Combined

12 	
Practical Wireless February 2018
Moonraker review
wondered whether it would solve the issue 
with the rig hanging up. Sure enough it did! 
This made for a much better mobile DMR 
experience. It didn’t improve the coverage, 
of course, but at least the rig didn’t need to 
be switched off and on at regular intervals.
Using DMR mobile, apart from the 
coverage issues, was enjoyable. The qual-
ity of the received audio is excellent and 
I enjoyed making contacts around the coun-
try and across the world. Similarly, I was 
pleased to receive good audio reports of my 
transmissions using the MD-9600.
The MD-9600 contains many useful 
DMR facilities. The ability to listen across 
all the talkgroups on each timeslot was 
perhaps the most useful one to me. That 
way, you can keep an ear on what’s going 
on without having to scan across all the 
talkgroups. The codeplug supplied by 
Moonraker also included a good range of 
contact details, so that the radio will display 
someone’s name and callsign, which it 
translates from the DMR ID that they are 
transmitting. 
Of course, the MD-9600 works on FM as 
well, so my regular commuting configura-
tion was to have the FM repeater, GB3RD, 
running on one side of the radio and one 
of the DMR repeaters running on the other 
side of the radio. That way I was able to get 
the best of both worlds. Audio reports on 
FM were also very good. The display is nice 
and sharp and easy to read when mobile, 
RF power output can be set to any of 
four levels, which equate to around 5, 10, 
18 and 45W on 144MHz, with the highest 
level just a little lower on 430MHz. This 
makes the rig usable by Foundation licen-
sees on the lowest two power settings. 
As supplied, the codeplug contains all 
current digital and analogue repeaters in the 
UK as well as other things to listen to, such 
as Marine and NATS (aircraft) frequencies – 
the latter being some FM outlets given that 
the MD-9600 does not work on AM (used 
for many aircraft channels). 
Conclusions
I found the MD-9600 enjoyable to use. The 
firmware bug around the ‘transmit admit’ 
feature was annoying but once I found 
a way around it, that was fine. I strongly 
suspect that by the time you read this, there 
will be a new version of the firmware that 
will, all being well, resolve the issue, but 
do check with your vendor first. As noted 
previously, if you are going to use the rig 
at home on a base antenna, it’s unlikely 
that you will notice the problem at all. I was 
pleased to find that various problems that 
had been reported with earlier versions of 
the firmware had been eliminated and did 
not show up during the review period. Keep 
checking for firmware releases because I’m 
quite certain that further improvements and 
features will be added. 
If you have one or more DMR repeaters 
in your area, as well as conventional FM 
repeaters and simplex activity, you could do 
a lot worse than consider the MD-9600. It 
is available for £279.95 from major amateur 
radio retailers.
The HT-500D DMR Digital Dual-Band 
Transceiver
Also in the box from Chris was a dual-band 
DMR handheld! A quick look at the rig 
and I realised that this is almost identical 
to another handheld we reviewed here in 
our November 2017 issue. Given this is 
the case it’s obviously not appropriate to 
publish a full review of the rig. However, we 
thought it might be useful to refer you to the 
features of the HT-500D:
The publicity says: “The HT-500D takes 
the experience of DMR to a new level with 
features designed for the amateur radio 
user. The MOONRAKER HT-500D operates 
in analogue and digital modes 400-480MHz 
frequencies on UHF and 136-174MHz VHF 
at up to 5W of power. It uses Time-Division 
Note from Moonraker
As a postscript to Tim’s review, 
Moonraker have asked us to include 
the following: “TYT are a progressive 
company and since the launch of the 
MD-9600 radios the manufacturers 
have done many updates both to the 
firmware and, in the latest batch, to 
the hardware too. We have carried out 
factory approved modifications to the 
radios supplied in the early batches to 
address customers issues. The radio 
has become a very good seller for us 
alongside the HT-500”.
Moonraker have also said that, if 
readers call and quote PW, they will 
include free shipping to UK mainland.
The Moonraker HT-500D.
The Moonraker HT-500D.

February 2018 Practical Wireless 	
13
Multiple-Access (TDMA) digital technology 
to double the number of users on a single 
12.5kHz channel.
The Audio on DMR is excellent in both 
transmit and receive ensuring dependable 
communications.
The HT-500D boasts 3,000 channels, 
10,000 contacts, built-in CTCSS/
DCS (analogue mode only), single call, 
group call and all call, remote kill/stun/
activate, transmit interrupt, VOX, and 
lone worker function. It is compatible with 
MOTOTRBO™ Tier I and II, 
The MOONRAKER HT-500D is equipped 
with an excellent large colour LCD display. 
It also has the traditional keypad allowing 
pre-programmed functions as well as direct 
frequency entry in VFO mode
The HT-500D dual-band digital radio 
uses Digital Mobile Radio (DMR) Tier 2 
Standard protocol. It is compatible with 
the popular MOTO TRBO series Tier I and 
II using standard encryption, as well as 
other makes and models of DMR supported 
radios. It is also compatible with any 
existing analogue two-way radio operating 
on the supported UHF and VHF frequencies 
for easy migration to digital technology.
The radio is waterproof to IP67 as long 
as all covers are fitted. The radio is firmware 
upgradeable and software is supplied free 
of charge”.
It’s also worth mentioning that the HT-
500D comes with two years warranty and, 
as mentioned in the context of the MD-
9600, the codeplug is programmed with a 
wide range of talkgroups, repeaters and so 
on.
Overall
Perhaps it’s useful to repeat some of my 
conclusions from that previous review, 
because the same thoughts apply with the 
HT-500D.
Decide for yourself whether you need a 
dual band DMR rig. It’s certainly nice having 
the two bands available on one rig, rather 
than carrying a UHF DMR rig and a FM 
The Questions:
What does DMR stand for?
 Data Modes Radio.
 Digital Mobile Repeater
 Digital Mobile Radio
What are the SKU codes for the two radios reviewed? 
(Hint – check the Moonraker website!) ......................
........................................................................................
dual-bander and if you don’t have an FM 
dual-bander already, the HT-500D would 
probably be cheaper than two separate rigs.
I wasn’t fond of the trackball but I was 
glad that I was able to get around that by 
programming the side buttons on the rig. 
Other than that, I found the rig easy to use 
and didn’t have to resort to the instruction 
manual, which was probably a blessing.
Bear in mind that the supplied antenna 
seems quite poor to me, so be prepared to 
replace it – this need not be expensive to 
do. RF performance of the rig itself seemed 
good.
The Moonraker HT-500D costs £199.95 
from Moonraker UK Ltd.
Our thanks to Chris Taylor and Moonraker 
UK Ltd, for the loan of the two rigs for our 
review. Moonraker were also kind enough 
to say that we could offer the two radios 
as competition prizes, for which we are, 
of course, extremely grateful. Please see 
below for how to enter for a chance to win.
Two prizes to be won, worth £480 in total!
Thanks to our friends at Moonraker, we are able to offer the two transceivers reviewed by Tim Kirby as 
competition prizes. See below for details of how to enter. The first correct answer will win the TYT MD-
9600 144/430MHz DMR mobile transceiver and the second correct answer will win the Moonraker HT-500D 
DMR Dual-Band Handheld Transceiver. To be entered into the draw to win one of these super DMR 
transceivers, answer the following questions by completing the form below. Photocopies are 
accepted. Please provide a valid phone number so we can contact you should you win!
PW Competition
How to Enter
Free entry by returning this form to the address below.
Title............................ Initials...................................................................
Surname.................................................................................................
Address..................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
..................................................................... Postcode..........................
 Yes I am happy to receive special offers by post.
Telephone...............................................................................................
 Yes I am happy to receive telephone calls about special offers.
E-mail address.......................................................................................
 Yes I am happy to receive emails about special offers.
Entries close at midnight on February 11th 2018. To be 
accepted into the draw, you must answer the questions 
correctly and answers received after the date will not be 
accepted. Two winners will be notified by e-mail or telephone 
on February 28th 2018. If either winner cannot be contacted 
or does not claim the prize within 30 days of notification, 
we reserve the right to withdraw the prize from the winner 
and pick a replacement winner. The winners will also be 
announced in the May issue of PW.
ENTRIES CLOSE 11/2/2018
Return to Competitions, Marketing Department, 
Practical Wireless, Warners Group Publications, 
The Maltings, West Street, Bourne, Lincs PE10 9PH

14  
Practical Wireless February 2018
• E-mail: practicalwireless@warnersgroup.co.uk
Review by Don Field G3XTT
H
ow do you review a pow-
er supply? Surely it does or 
it doesn’t? That was my ﬁ rst 
reaction when Martin Lynch 
suggested I take a look at 
the two new compact switch-mode power 
supplies from Nissei that we had carried 
news of in last month’s issue. (And if you 
want to know more about the difference 
between linear and switch-mode supplies, 
be sure to read this month’s Technical for 
the Terriﬁ ed feature.)
When I started thinking about it, 
though, I realised that I actually have a 
number of criteria when choosing a power 
supply unit (PSU). It’s no mistake that for 
many years I have been using a rather 
heavy but effective linear mode Daiwa 
power supply in the home shack but car-
rying a lightweight Samlex SEC1223 with 
me on DXpeditions. For the former, weight 
is not an issue but I want plenty of capac-
ity for running shack equipment, includ-
ing a typical 100W transceiver but also 
various ancillaries, along with a variety of 
connectors so that I don’t have to retermi-
nate everything that arrives in the shack, 
and some metering so I can see what is 
happening (current being drawn and so 
on), especially when I am reviewing a new 
piece of gear. And, of course, I don’t want 
any spurious noise that might affect my 
receiver when chasing that elusive DX.
For portable use, weight is probably 
the major criterion but, again, the PSU 
must be able to deliver sufﬁ cient cur-
rent to handle a transceiver plus the odd 
additional item of equipment (such as an 
external keyer). Again, it must not emit any 
spurious radiation (often a problem with 
cheap switch-mode units). And, ideally, it 
should be usable on both 110 and 220V 
mains supplies, depending on where in the 
world I end up.
Description
As I said, we carried details of these two 
new units in last month’s News pages but 
to save you looking back, here are the 
details again.
The Nissei NS-1230M with metering, 
Fig. 1, and NS-1230B (without), Fig. 2, 
both offer continuous duty at 25A, peak 
to 30A, at 13.8V. Both feature short-circuit 
and over-voltage protection. The PSUs 
measure just 154x127x63mm (6x5x2in) 
and weigh only 1.35kg. Both have switch-
able inputs of either 110V or 234V at 
47-63Hz. 
Mains is connected via a standard IEC 
lead. Both units have a pair of screw ter-
minals on the rear (which will also accept 
a banana plug) and, as you can see from 
the photos, the NS-1230B also has an 
identical set of terminals on the front along 
with a cigarette-lighter style of connector. 
In contrast, the NS-1230M offers adjust-
ment of the output voltage, along with a 
meter to indicate both the voltage and the 
current being drawn. 
In Use
The ﬁ rst thing to say is that these power 
supplies do indeed merit the description 
compact. The photo, Fig. 3, shows them 
Review - Switch-Mode 
Power Supplies
The editor has been taking a look at two power supplies 
from Nissei that we mentioned in last month’s News pages.
Fig. 1: The NS-1230M.
Fig. 2: The NS-1230B.

February 2018 Practical Wireless  
15
alongside my two existing power supplies. 
And they weigh in at slightly less than my 
Samlex too (1.35kg as against 1.59kg) so 
that’s also a point in their favour. There’s 
quite a lot packed inside them as my 
internal photo, Fig. 4, demonstrates. And, 
yes, they can be used on both 110 and 
220/240V as the speciﬁ cation says. How-
ever, the supply voltage is factory preset 
and to change it, you need to remove the 
cover and extract the voltage selector 
switch from the back panel. Personally, I 
wouldn’t hesitate to do this if I was using 
one of these units on a DXpedition – the 
process takes no more than about ﬁ ve 
minutes (yes, Martin, I’m afraid I did it just 
to see!).
The NS-1230B showed an output of 
13.8V on zero load, dropping no more than 
200mV when running 100W with my Icom 
IC-7300. The NS-1230M has a notch on 
the variable voltage control at a nominal 
13.8V (again measured at 13.8V no load, 
as per speciﬁ cation). The output voltage 
was variable from about 3.5 to 16.4V and 
the built-in meter appeared to be pretty 
accurate. 
Both units include a fan, unlike my 
SEC1223, so I did wonder whether this 
might be a problem (in terms of acoustic 
noise). In practice, I had a job persuading 
the fan to come on – it appears to do 
so only when you have been running 
a full load for an extended period (or, 
presumably, in a very hot shack as might 
be encountered on a tropical DXpedition 
– I’ve been there!). And even when the fan 
is running, it’s very quiet compared with 
other fans in my shack (on the radio or the 
linear ampliﬁ er, for example).
As for the ever-present concern about 
electrical noise, I checked on a wide range 
of frequencies and failed to detect any-
thing untoward from either unit.
Finally, the speciﬁ cation says that these 
units have short-circuit protection. This 
seemed like a claim I needed to check out! 
It was quite a let-down – the unit simply 
shuts down and immediately returns to life 
when the short-circuit is removed. Oh, and 
on the NS-1230M the red LED lights as a 
warning. So, no worries there.
Summary
These two PSUs do what it says on the 
can. My Daiwa power supply is no longer 
available but the current equivalent ap-
pears to be the MyDEL MP-304Mk11, sold 
by Martin Lynch for £99.95 at the time of 
writing. 
And although I bought my Samlex 
PSU in the USA on offer for about $80, if 
you can ﬁ nd one in the UK nowadays, it 
will probably cost over £100 new. As for 
those ‘matching’ power supplies to sit 
alongside your HF transceiver, some of the 
prices are quite ridiculous! So, at £84.95, 
(non-metered) and £89.95 with meter, the 
Nissei units from ML&S look very attrac-
tive indeed. And by using the code PW 
at checkout on the website, carriage is 
included free for UK Mainland, saving 
£10.95. My thanks to ML&S for loan of the 
review samples.
www.HamRadio.co.uk/Nissei-PSU
Fig. 3: An indication of size relative to the author’s two existing power supplies.
Fig. 4: An inside view of the NS-1230B.
World Radio TV Handbook 2018
W
NOW IN STOCK!
This is the 72nd edition of World Radio TV Handbook and this great directory continues to offer the most comprehensive 
guide to broadcasting on the planet. With the help of an international network of contributors they again provide the most 
up-to-date information on mediumwave, shortwave and FM broadcasts and broadcasters available in any publication.
For more details visit our Radio Book Store on page 69
JUST
£35
INCLUDING P&P

16 	
Practical Wireless February 2018
• geofftheasby@gmail.com
Review by Geoff Theasby G8BMI
T
his time I built a 3W + 3W 
stereo amplifier and the 
ready-built module I’m look-
ing at is an FM stereo tuner. 
These seem a natural choice to 
work together, although not amateur radio 
as such. However, the amplifier is small and 
makes a good bench amplifier for general 
testing. It took about three hours to as-
semble.
I realise that a built module isn’t so much 
fun as a project you made yourself but at 
the prices quoted, collecting the compo-
nents individually would be much more 
expensive or difficult, particularly the PCB. 
It may also be the case that these are ‘end 
of line production’ or obsolete components 
and when they’re gone, they’re gone! No 
doubt others will come along later.
I dealt with two main suppliers, Ama-
zon and eBay, which in my experience are 
trustworthy to deal with, safeguard private 
details and have a formal complaints pro-
cedure. Other suppliers may be similar, but 
I haven’t been trading with them enough to 
form an opinion. In any case, neither PW 
nor the author can accept any responsibil-
ity for any subsequent difficulties. Caveat 
emptor!
Sourcing
There are usually several suppliers, and 
even some counterfeit products, notably of 
JYE Tech kits. Not all kits are supplied with 
circuits or instructions but the information 
is usually to be found elsewhere on the 
internet. Search engines are a great help. 
One kit’s details were particularly difficult to 
track down. I spent about half a day looking 
but was ultimately successful. If a search 
by the kit reference number reveals nothing, 
try under the main active device and its 
Application Notes. Failing that, a reference 
number is often marked on the PCB, which 
leads to further information. I have built or 
bought every kit and module reviewed and 
to date every one has worked first time or 
straight out of the box.
Amplifier
The amplifier runs from 12V AC. Please 
note this odd supply requirement. It’s so 
that a dual-rail, ±17V DC, can be supplied 
to the TDA2030A power modules. I found a 
computer printer power supply in my spares 
box that gave an AC output, but it was too 
high at 20V. On my bench, though, I have 
a Variac autotransformer, so I reduced 
the mains voltage to the PSU to the point 
where 12V AC was produced. The rest of 
the components are on the PCB, so it’s 
just a case of carefully building up the kit. 
In other circumstances, a suitable trans-
former will be required. Be very careful with 
all equipment using mains voltages!  The 
only points to watch are to remember the 
four wire links, to loosely bolt together the 
power modules and their respective heat-
sinks while the five pins and the heatsink 
mountings are persuaded to engage with 
the PCB, and to make sure that the three 
potentiometers (Bass, Treble and Volume) 
are properly pushed down onto the PCB 
before soldering, because if their spindles 
are not in line, it is very noticeable. (Don’t 
ask me how I know!) Matching control 
knobs are supplied but not for the on/off 
push-switch. I spent three hours carefully 
building the kit and, true to form, it worked 
first time. Component locations and orienta-
tion are clearly marked on the PCB, as are 
the component values themselves. The 
finished board measures 90 x 75 x 40mm 
high, including heatsinks. I obtained a pair 
of Sony bookshelf loudspeakers through 
the Freecycle movement. There are lots of 
pairs of speakers about, often left over from 
a defunct, cheap stereo.
Tuner
The FM tuner module is delightful! Fully 
synthesised, with LCD display, it covers 
88 −108MHz extendable to 50 – 115MHz 
with some tinkering. It uses a PIC12F1840 
microcontroller, a TEA5767 (RDA5807) radio 
module and other ICs. It will drive small 
speakers direct, or a stereo amplifier. It 
measures 75 x 45 mm, and has a mini-USB 
socket for power, or a separate supply of 
3 − 5.5V DC. A USB cable is supplied. RF 
input from a 500mm bit of wire is adequate, 
suggesting that a telescopic antenna is ac-
ceptable, and it is tuned by a rotary control 
working in the opposite sense to that 
expected (turn anticlockwise for increasing 
frequency). Pressing it briefly starts scan-
ning, ‘Up’ or ‘Down’ in frequency, depend-
ing on the direction last moved, and which 
stops on locating a signal. 
A longer press displays RF signal level, 
in dB/µV from 1 to 63 (representing 1mV). 
Another control adjusts volume in 15 steps, 
also working in the ‘opposite’ sense. Press-
ing it mutes the output. Search the internet 
for Application Notes and data sheets on 
the PIC and tuner, plus circuitry. Current 
consumption is about 20mA, and a 32Ω 
output is provided for headphones. This 
little board is so good that I intend replacing 
my analogue stereo tuner of great age (£1 
at a jumble sale!) with this device, suit-
ably cased and beautified for the domestic 
environment. The phasing out of VHF/FM 
broadcasts has been mooted in favour of 
DAB but no definitive announcement has 
yet been made and it will probably take 
years to implement. 
(Editor’s note: Checking at press time, the 
amplifier was available on eBay for $6.99 
while the tuner could be found on Amazon 
at the URL below).
http://tinyurl.com/y9gderk4
Kits & Modules – Stereo 
Amplifier & FM Tuner
Geoff Theasby G8BMI looks at a stereo amplifier and FM tuner 
that are inexpensive and complement each other nicely.
The stereo amplifier.
The FM tuner on 105.7MHz. The resistor, top left, 
is to enable an antenna to clip on. The red & 
black leads are for audio outputs.

February 2018 Practical Wireless  
17
● E-Mail: practicalwireless@warnersgroup.co.uk
Contest Adjudicator Colin Redwood G6MXL
V
ery mixed weather greeted 
those who ventured out 
portable for the 9th PW 
70MHz Contest on Sunday 
September 24th 2017. 
Participation was up on 2016 and the 41 
entrants made a total of 895 contacts 
with 153 different stations in 29 different 
squares, Fig. 1.
Low Power Section Winner
The SADGITS G4RLF/P operating from 
Win Green in IO80WX are the winners of 
the low power section. They used an Icom 
IC-7300 running 10W into a 5-element Yagi, 
Fig. 2.
Open Section Winner
The winner of the open section is again 
Fred Handscombe G4BWP, operating 
from JO02FH. Fred used an Elecraft K3 
transceiver + OZ2M transverter + Gemini 
amplifi er, feeding a 7-element PowAbeam 
antenna. 
Full details of the results can be found in 
the tables in this article. As usual, certifi -
cates will be sent to all the leading stations 
and leaders in each square.
RF Conditions
Dave Keston G8FMC thought the band 
seemed, “A bit quiet & hard going with very 
noisy conditions, also windy so mast not at 
full height. I am glad I was not out portable 
on a hill-top!”
Neil Smith G4DBN only popped on for 
just over an hour to give some points away 
and support the contest. He says it was 
a “Nice and relaxed session. Nice to work 
GM4JJJ on CW. Heard PA but unable to 
raise them with only 4W”.
David Whitty G4FEV was only able 
to operate for the last 30 minutes but still 
managed to make 12 contacts from his 
QTH in Northamptonshire. 
Chris Brown G4CLB operated from his 
new QTH and enjoyed the contest even 
though his restricted antenna was lower 
than he would have liked.
Cambridge and District Amateur 
Radio Club G2XV noted that “As the band 
closed so the noise level came up. In the 
last 20 mins the noise disappeared just 
as the sun went in. Suspect solar installa-
tions?”
Guildford & District Radio Society 
G4SDM found the band very noisy. They 
had problems hearing stations from what is 
normally a good location.
Weather
Those stations that went out portable found 
less than ideal weather conditions. Poole 
Radio Society G4PRS/P, Fig. 3, operat-
ing from the Purbeck Hills in Dorset, were 
at times shrouded in mist but were able 
to shelter from the worst of the elements, 
thanks to the use of a van belonging to one 
of their members. Things weren’t much 
better in Wales, from where Ron Price 
GW4EVX/P was out on the hills, Fig. 4. 
Equipment
The trend of using transceivers with 70MHz 
capabilities rather than transverters ap-
pears to be continuing with just over half 
the entrants using such transceivers. No 
equipment problems were reported by any 
of the entrants!
First Time
John Rockdove M6JIJ, on behalf of 
the Sheffi eld & District Wireless Society, 
entered a PW contest for the fi rst time and 
used the MINOS logging program to log his 
contacts and submit his entry. 
 Fig. 1: Map showing locator squares of stations 
that entered (in dark blue) and other stations 
worked (light blue).
The Ninth Practical Wireless 
70MHz Contest − Results 2017
Colin Redwood G6MXL has the results of the 2017 contest.
Fig. 2: Leading low-power station G4RLF/P at 
Win Green in IO80WX.
Table 1: Leading stations.
Description
Name/Team
Callsign
Low-Power Winner
SADGITS
G4RLF/P
Open Winner
Fred Handscombe
G4BWP
Leading Single Operator
Fred Handscombe
G4BWP
Leading Multi-Operator
Guildford & District Radio Society
G5RS/P
Leading English Station
Fred Handscombe
G4BWP
Leading Welsh Station
Ron Price
GW4EVX/P
Leading Scotish Station
David Anderson
GM4JJJ
Leading GU/GJ Station
Keith Le Boutillier
GU6EFB
Leading Isle of Man Station
Mike Webb
GD6ICR
Leading Overseas Station 
Mathieu de Breyne
OT7E

18 	
Practical Wireless February 2018
Pos Call
Name
Transceiver
QSOs
Squares
1
G4RLF/P
SADGITS
Icom IC-7300 + LNA
38
13
2
G3YDD
Hereford Amateur Radio Society
Icom IC-7300
36
13
3
G4PRS/P
Poole Radio Society
Elecraft K2 + Spectrum TVTR
24
12
4
G8FMC
Dave Keston
Elecraft K3 + OZ2M TVTR
21
11
5
G4DBN
Neil Smith
Elad FDM-DUO + UT5JCW TVTR
16
11
6
GW0EIY/P
Simon Pryce
Icom IC-7100 
15
10
7
M0OMB
Roger J Rimmer
Elecraft K3 + Meon TVTR
12
9
8
2E0OLG
Dean Rugen
Yaesu FT-707+ FTV707
10
7
9
G4FKI
David Thorpe
Yaesu FT-847
10
5
10
OK1DIG
Daniel Glanc
Icom IC-7300modi
5
5
11
M0HFY
Barry Eames
Icom IC-7410 + HB TVTR
4
4
12
GD6ICR
Mike Webb
Yaesu FT-817 + MM TVTR
3
3
13
M6JIJ
Sheffield & District Wireless Society
Yaesu FT-847
4
2
14
G8ZAX
Guildford & District Radio Society B Team
Elecraft K3S + HB TVTR
2
3
15
PA9RZ
Robert Van Der Zaal
Icom IC-7300
1
1
Table 3: PW 70MHz Open Section Results Table
Operating Techniques
Regular entrant Keith Le Boutillier 
GU6EFB, operating from Guernsey, found 
the contest very slow going, with a low 
level of activity. He added that, “Most 
QSOs were only made by the use of 
ON4KST” [meaning the arrangement of 
contacts via the ON4KST chatroom – ed.].
David Anderson GM4JJJ was among 
several stations to use CW for some of his 
contacts.
The Norfolk Coast Amateur Radio 
Society M0CNA, decided to operate from 
their club shack, which is at the QTH of 
their Secretary G3PND, near Cromer on 
the North Norfolk Coast. The location is 
40m ASL with a clear view of the sea to 
the north and virtually round to the west 
and east. They used an Icom IC-7300 
with a 5-element Yagi, Fig. 5. NCARS 
were hoping to better their first attempt 
last year when they managed just twelve 
QSOs. Unfortunately, they only managed 
six contacts this year although all were at 
a good distance, to Wales and the South 
West. Steve ponders whether being out on 
a limb on the Norfolk coast is a problematic 
location – wondering whether those in the 
centre of the country point their beams 
easterly in their direction (although the 
fact that G4BWP managed 70 contacts 
from East Anglia suggests that this isn’t 
the complete story). “We will try again next 
year – so don’t forget we’re out here”, says 
Steve.
Jim Joyce GM4JTJ says that, “There 
seemed to be much more activity this 
year and also more GMs active. It was 
an enjoyable way to spend a Sunday 
afternoon, gentlemanly operating and just 
the right length of time”.
Peter GW4JQP says, “Nobody else 
from the St Tybie Club could make it this 
year, so I did the contest on my own, 
hence the change of callsign. There were 
obviously more English stations than I could 
hear but, as usual, many of them didn’t 
beam West, so they didn’t work the Welsh 
stations. The site was shrouded in mist and 
rain throughout, but that did help me get a 
10GHz contact at the end of the day”.
Machine Generated Modes
A small number of stations used machine 
generated modes (MGM) in the contest to 
make meteor scatter contacts. A couple of 
days before the contest I was approached 
by one station to clarify whether this would 
be permitted, while others went ahead 
regardless. However, fewer than 10 MGM 
contacts were made and those contacts 
Table 2: PW 70MHz Low Power Results Table
Ninth Practical Wireless 70MHz Contest
did not affect the overall position of the 
stations concerned. 
For future years the rules will be 
reviewed to better accommodate MGM 
activity. One approach may be to have 
an additional section for stations making 
some or all of their contacts using MGM 
(such as JT6M, JT65M, FSK441). This will 
not, though, extend to digital voice modes 
such as DMR, Fusion or D-STAR. I would 
Fig. 3: The Poole Radio Society operated from the 
Purbeck Hills in IO80WP.
Pos
Call
Name
QSOs
Squares
Score
Locator
1
G4BWP
Fred Handscombe
80
26
2080
JO02FH
2
G5RS/P
Guildford & District Radio Society
60
17
1020
JO00EW
3
G3NPI
Geoff Suggate
52
17
884
IO92MA
4
G8CUL
Mike Stevens
50
17
850
IO91JO
5
G2HX/P
Gloucester Amateur Radio & Electronics Society
53
14
742
IO81WU
6
G5TO/P
Sheffield & District Radio Society
45
14
630
IO93EH
7
M0ORO
Ossett Amateur Radio Operators
42
14
588
IO93EQ
8
G4FKK
Martin Charman
30
14
420
IO91WI
9
G0SKA
Charlie Mitchell
36
11
396
IO91QN
10
GW4EVX/P
Ron Price
35
11
385
IO83KB
11
GM4JJJ
David Anderson
24
14
336
IO86GB
12
GW4ZAR
Dave Flanagan
25
13
325
IO83KF
13
GW4TTA
Dragon Amateur Radio Club
25
12
300
IO73QH
14
G4SDM/P
Guildford and District Radio Society
24
10
240
IO90QV
15
GM4JTJ
Jon Joyce
16
13
208
IO86RP
16
G2XV/P
Cambridge & DARC
16
10
160
JO02AD
17
GW4JQP/P
Peter Harston
15
9
135
IO81AS
18
G4FEV
Dave Whitty
13
7
91
IO92RG
19
G8EOP
Mel Jackson 807ARO Contest Group
10
9
90
IO93EQ
20
G4CLB
Chris Brown
9
8
72
IO92HM
21
GU6EFB
Keith Le Boutillier
8
7
56
IN89RK
22
M1CJE
Andrew Eastland
8
6
48
IO91CJ
23
OT7E
Mathieu de Breyne
6
5
30
JO11TA
24
G4LDR
Neil Underwood
5
5
25
IO91EC
25
M0NCA
Norfolk Coast ARS
3
4
12
JO02PW
25
GW0GEI
Pembrokeshire Contest Club
4
3
12
IO72WC

February 2018 Practical Wireless 	
19
Score
Locator
Antenna
Ht. m asl
494
IO80WX
5-ele
277
468
IO82PE
InnovAntenna 3-ele quad
105
288
IO80WP
4-ele Yagi
198
231
IO91NW
4-ele Moxon-Yagi HB
11
176
IO93NR
5-ele PowAbeam
18
150
IO82LQ
3-ele Yagi
353
108
IO83PO
6-ele PowAbeam
100
70
IO83MN
Create clp5130-1n log periodic
11
50
IO92SA
Dipole
170
25
JO60XJ
7-ele YU7EF
305
16
IO81UT
Dipole
15
9
IO74PF
7-ele CQM PowAbeam
30
8
IO93GI
Single-ele Dipole 
137
6
IO91RF
bazooka dipole
94
1
JO22GF
3-ele HB9CV
15
Square
Name
Call
No. entries
IN89
Keith Le Boutillier
GU6EFB
1
IO72
Pembrokeshire Contest Club
GW0GEI
1
IO73
Dragon Amateur Radio Club
GW4TTA
1
IO74
Mike Webb
GD6ICR
1
IO80
SADGITS
G4RLF/P
2
IO81
Gloucester Amateur Radio & Electronics Society
G2HX/P
3
IO82
Hereford Amateur Radio Society
G3YDD
2
IO83
Ron Price
GW4EVX/P
4
IO86
David Anderson
GM4JJJ
2
IO90
Guildford and District Radio Society
G4SDM/P
1
IO91
Mike Stevens
G8CUL
7
IO92
Geoff Suggate
G3NPI
4
IO93
Sheffield & District Radio Society
G5TO/P
5
JO00
Guildford & District Radio Society
G5RS/P
1
JO02
Fred Handscombe
G4BWP
3
JO11
Mathieu de Breyne
OT7E
1
JO22
Robert Van Der Zaal
PA9RZ
1
JO60
Daniel Glanc
OK1DIG
1
Table 4: Leading Stations in Each Square. 
welcome feedback from this year’s entrants 
on the approach to be adopted in future 
years. 
2018
The 2018 PW 70MHz Contest is 
provisionally booked for Sunday 
September 23rd 2018. I am expecting the 
rules to appear in the September 2018 
issue, due in the shops mid-August. 
Contest Length
The reduced length of the contest this year 
seems to have met with general approval.
Congratulations and Thanks
Congratulations to the 2017 winners and 
on behalf of all entrants a big “Thank You” 
Fig. 4: The antenna at the leading Welsh Station, 
Ron Price’s GW4EVX/P. 
Transceiver
Antenna
Ht. m asl
K3, OZ2M, Gemini SSPA
7-ele PowAbeam
20
IC-7300 + 4CX250B amp.
9-ele DK7ZB & 8-ele Jaybeam
170
ANAN10+T4M TRVTR-+ H/B MOSFET amp.
6 over 6 LFA
110
Yaesu FT847 + PA
6-ele Yagi
60
Yaesu FT-991+ Spectrum TVTR + amp.
3-ele Quad
273
Icom IC-7100
5-ele PowAbeam 
410
Yaesu FT-847 + Gemini Amp
5-ele Vine Yagi
110
Icom IC-756 Pro3 + HB TVTR + 150W HB PA
HB 5-ele LFA
79
Icom IC-7300
9-ele dual band Yagi   
73
Yaesu FT-817 + Spectrum TVTR
3-ele Yagi at 5m
456
Icom IC-7300 + LDMOS PA
5-ele HB dual band Yagi  
60
Icom IC-7300 
4-ele OWL Yagi
35
Trio TS-120V + Spectrum TVTR + HB Linear
4-ele Sandpiper Yagi
162
Yaesu FT-847
4/6 dual band Yagi
208
Icom IC7100 + PA
5ele HB Yagi
90
Icom IC-7100
4-ele Yagi
27
Yaesu FT-847   
HB9CV at 5m agl
374
Icom IC-7100
5-ele Yagi
90
Yaesu FT-847 
5-ele PowAbeam
12
Spectrum TVTR
Moxon
90
Icom IC-756 ProII + TVTR + preamp + HB amp.
5-ele beam 
130
Icom IC-7300
3-ele beam
165
Icom IC-7300 
5-ele. DK7ZB HB
18
Icom IC-7300
5-ele 'OWL' Yagi
145
Icom IC-7300
5-ele Yagi
40
Icom IC-7300
7-ele PowAbeam 
100

Radio Communication Manufacturer & Reseller
Ampliﬁ ers
The BLA 600 is a wideband 
compact linear ampliﬁ er for the HF 
bands and 6m, from 1.8 to 54 MHz
Using Freescale MRFE6VP5600, 
Output 500W. Dual MCU Control, Fast 
PIN Diode RX-TX TX-RX switching 
enables QSK operation, 2x16 LCD Display for Ampliﬁ er Status, Separate 
LED displays for power and antenna VSWR, Input drive from 1W to maxi-
mum of 40W, 3 user conﬁ gurable Antenna Output connectors, Dual large 
diameter MCU controlled, multispeed cooling fans for efﬁ cient cooling
.................................................................................................£1999.95
BLA350 1.5-30MHz 300w mains 
powered solid state ampliﬁ er
.............................................£699.95
HLA305V 1.8-30MHz 250W 
professional ampliﬁ er with LCD ..£649.95
HLA300V+ 1.8-30MHz 300W all mode 
ampliﬁ er with fans ................£469.95
HLA150V+ 1.8-30MHz 150W all mode
ampliﬁ er with fans ......................................................................£399.95
LA250V 140-150MHz 200W professional ampliﬁ er with LCD .....£549.95
ULA100 420-440MHz 100W compact linear for 70cms ..............£449.95
5
Tuners
LDG Z-817 1.8-54MHz ideal for the Yaesu FT-817 ......................£129.95 
LDG Z-100 Plus 1.8-54MHz the most popular LDG tuner ............£169.95 
LDG IT-100 1.8-54MHz ideal for IC-7000 ....................................£179.95 
LDG Z-11 Pro 1.8-54MHz great portable tuner ...........................£179.95 
LDG KT-100 1.8-54MHz ideal for most Kenwood radios ..............£209.95 
LDG AT-100 Pro II 1.8-54MHz ....................................................£244.95 
LDG AT-200 Pro II 1.8-54MHz ....................................................£259.95 
LDG AT-1000 Pro II 1.8-54MHz continuously .............................£519.95 
LDG AT-600 Pro II 1.8-54MHz with up to 600W SSB ..................£394.95
LDG YT-1200 1.8-54MHz 100W for FT-450D, FT-DX1200 & FT-DX3000 .....£244.95
LDG YT-100 ideal for your Yaesu FT-857D .......................................................£199.95
LDG AL-100 1.8-54MHz 100w designed for the Alinco range of transceiver  ....£139.95 
ast 
QJE QJPS50II 50 AMP Switch Mode Power Supply Unit
Same as above but in a 50amp version  
SPECIAL OFFER £129.95 £119.95
www.moonraker.eu
Sales line 01908 281705
Moonraker UK Limited, Cranﬁ eld Road, Woburn Sands, Bucks MK17 8UR Open Monday-Friday 9:00-5:30pm
E-mail sales@moonraker.eu
Authorised dealer
VV-898S Dual Band Mobile Transceiver
New VV-898 “S” version now 
with 25W as standard – 
comes complete with 
keypad microphone, 
radio bracket all in a 
compact size with 
an a amazing 
compact price 
of just £69.95!
 
ersion now
ard –
with
e,
n a
Moonraker MT-270M 
Dual Band Mobile 
Transceiver ...£79.95
A lovely small compact 
Dual Band Transceiver but still
with a 25W punch at a remarkable price – 
See the reviews from some customers of the 1000 pcs sold!
t
but still
Antenna Tuners
See our website for full details.
Automatic Tuners
MFJ-925 Super compact 1.8-30MHz 200W ..........................................£199.95 
MFJ-926B remote Mobile ATU 1.6-30MHz 200W ..................................£329.95 
MFJ-927 Compact with Power Injector 1.8-30MHz 200W .............................£309.95 
MFJ-928 Compact with Power Injector 1.8-30MHz 200W ....................£229.95 
MFJ-929 Compact with Random Wire Option 1.8-30MHz 200W ..........£249.95 
MFJ-991B 1.8-30MHz 150W SSB/100W CW ATU .................................£249.95 
MFJ-993B 1.8-30MHz 300W SSB/150W CW ATU .................................£299.95 
MFJ-994B 1.8-30MHz 600W SSB/300W CW ATU .................................£399.95 
MFJ-998 1.8-30MHz 1.5kW ...................................................................£769.95 
Manual Tuners 
MFJ-16010 1.8-30MHz 20W random wire tuner .....................................£79.95 
MFJ-902B 3.5-30MHz 150W mini travel tuner ......................................£124.95 
MFJ-902H 3.5-30MHz 150W mini travel tuner with 4:1 balun ..............£134.95 
MFJ-904 3.5-30MHz 150W mini travel tuner with SWR/PWR ...............£144.95 
MFJ-904H 3.5-30MHz 150W mini travel tuner with SWR/PWR 4:1 balun ........£169.95
MFJ-901B 1.8-30MHz 200W Versa tuner ..............................................£109.95 
MFJ-971 1.8-30MHz 300W portable tuner ............................................£139.95 
MFJ-945E 1.8-54MHz 300W tuner with meter ......................................£149.95 
MFJ-941E 1.8-30MHz 300W Versa tuner 2 ...........................................£164.95 
MFJ-948 1.8-30MHz 300W deluxe Versa tuner .....................................£189.95 
MFJ-949E 1.8-30MHz 300W deluxe Versa tuner with DL .....................£209.95 
MFJ-934 1.8-30MHz 300W tuner complete with artiﬁ cial GND ............£229.95 
MFJ-974B 3.6-54MHz 300W tuner with X-needle SWR/WATT .............£229.95 
MFJ-969 1.8-54MHz 300W all band tuner .............................................£249.95 
MFJ-962D 1.8-30MHz 1500W high power tuner ...................................£349.95 
MFJ-986 1.8-30MHz 300W high power differential tuner .....................£399.95 
MFJ-989D 1.8-30MHz 1500W high power roller tuner .........................£439.95 
MFJ-976 1.8-30MHz 1500W balanced line tuner with
X-Needle SWR/WATT ................................................................................£549.95
Analysers
MFJ-259C 530 KHz to 230MHz .......................£329.95
World’s most popular SWR analyser is super easy-to-
use. It gives you a complete picture of your antenna’s 
performance. You can read your antenna’s SWR and 
Complex Impedance 530 KHz to 230 MHz continuously 
with no gaps.
 
Handheld
GT-3 136-174/400-480MHz 
transceiver......................................... £44.95
GT-5 (right) 136-174/400-520MHz 
transceiver......................................... £39.95
UV-5RC 136-174/400-480MHz transceiver ...................£29.95
BF-888S 400-470MHz transceiver ................................£14.95
 
Accessories
Speaker microphone ....................................................£9.95
Software cable..............................................................£9.95
Now you can go digital on the road with the TYT MD-
9600 DMR Digital Mobile Two-Way Radio! The MD-9600 
gives you crystal clear, noise-free audio of over-the-air 
digital communications in your vehicle, full analogue 
transceiver capabilities, and bundles it all together at a 
price you can afford!. ...............................................£279.95
“NEW” Leixen VV-898SP Portable Dual Band Transceiver
Introducing the Leixen VV-898SP, the mobile backpack 
transceiver you can take virtually anywhere you need it! 
Leixen combined their micro-compact, 25 watt Dual Band 
UHF/VHF Mobile Radio with a powerful 12A Li-ion 
rechargeable battery and put it all in 
a sturdy chassis you can ﬁ t in 
your pack or emergency 
bag for use anytime, 
anywhere!
All for an 
amazing 
£149.95!
1 Choose your desired rig, scanner or even accessory
2 Call or email what you would like to part exchange
3 We will give you the best deal and agree the balance owed
4 Pack your equipment securely and wait for the door bell
5  Swap your old gear for shiny new with the delivery driver 
 and enjoy! IT’S THAT SIMPLE
PART EXCHANGE THE EASY WAY WITH 5 SIMPLE STEPS AT MOONRAKER
DON’T WANT THE HASSLE OF SELLING, QUEUING 
AT THE POST OFFICE OR PAYING ONLINE FEES?
WANT A NEW RADIO AND GET SOME 
MONEY BACK FOR YOUR OLD ONE?
DMR Dual Band
Transceiver
Dual Band DMR has arrived with twice the fun with the 
MOONRAKER HT-500D Dual Band DMR Digital & Analogue 
hand held Radio!
The HT-500D takes the experience of DMR to a new level 
with features designed for the amateur radio user.
The MOONRAKER HT-500D Operates in analogue and 
digital modes  400-480MHz frequencies on UHF 
and 136-174MHz VHF at up to 5 watts of power. It 
uses Time-Division Multiple-Access (TDMA) digital 
technology to double the number of users on a single 
12.5kHz channel.
The Audio on DMR is excellent in both transmit and 
receive ensuring dependable communications.
The HT-500D boasts 3000 channels, 10000 contacts, built-in 
CTCSS/DCS (analogue mode only), single call, group call and all 
call, remote kill/stun/activate, transmit interrupt, VOX, and lone 
worker function. It is compatible with MOTOTRBO™ Tier I and II.
Amazing value £199.99!
Power Supplies
PS30SWIII 30A peak switching power 
supply provides 13.8 VDC at 20 Amps 
continuous, 30 Amps surge. The output 
voltage is adjustable from 9 to 15 VDC. 
Red and black terminals on are the rear 
panel (30A) 
SPECIAL OFFER £79.95 £69.95
 
PS30SWIV switching power supply 
provides 13.8 VDC at 20 Amps continu-
ous, 30 Amps surge. The LCD digital 
panel meter simultaneously displays 
voltage and current. There is a Noise 
Off-Set control that can be adjusted to 
eliminate pulse noise from the power 
supply.
SPECIAL OFFER £79.95 £69.95
PS30SWII 25A continuous switch 
mode PSU with variable output voltage 
and cigar socket also includes noise 
offset function 
SPECIAL OFFER £99.95 £89.95
QJ1830SB 30 AMP Linear PSU, 
no noise issues with the great old school 
power supply unit, nice digital display and 
heavy as you like, so you feel like you 
bought something and on offer this month. 
SPECIAL OFFER £129.95 £119.95 
QJE QJPS30II 30 AMP Switch Mode 
Power Supply Unit
Includes noise offset control to elimi-
nate the pulse noise of the switching 
circuit. This patent pending function is 
specially designed for communica-
tion equipment use. Its effectiveness 
may vary depending on the frequency 
and mode. 
SPECIAL OFFER £79.95 £69.95
 
Follow 
us on
Postage (UK Mainland Only): Small items just £2.99  
Medium items just £4.99     Maximum charge just £8.99

Baluns & Ununs  
High quality TX, RX baluns, and Ununs all fully potted and
weather protected with SO239 socket
 
MB-1 1-30MHz 1:1 Current Balun 400W 50 Ohms ........................£29.95
MB-4 1-30MHz 4:1 Current Balun 400W 50 Ohms ........................£29.95
MB-6 1-30MHz 6:1 Current Balun 400W 50 Ohms ........................£29.95
MB-1X 1-30MHz 1:1 Current Balun 1000W 50 Ohms ....................£39.95
MB-4X 1-30MHz 4:1 Current Balun 1000W 50 Ohms ....................£39.95
MB-6X 1-30MHz 6:1 Current Balun 1000W 50 Ohms ....................£39.95
MU-9 1-50MHz 9:1 Unun 500W 50 Ohms .....................................£29.95
LWB-1 0-40MHz Receive only 50 Ohms ........................................£24.95
VHF/UHF Mobiles
GF151 Glass Mount 2/70cm, Gain 2.9/4.3dBd, Length 78cm complete 
with 4m cable and PL259 .............................................................. £29.95 
MRM-100 MICRO MAG 2/70cm, Gain 0.5/3.0dBd, Length 55cm, 1” 
magnetic base with 4m coax and BNC  .......................................... £19.95 
MR700 2/70cm, Gain 0/3.0dBd, Length 50cm, 3/8 ﬁ tting ................ £9.95 
MR777 2/70cm, Gain 2.8/4.8dBd, Length 150cm, 
3/8 ﬁ tting ....................................................................................... £19.95 
MRQ525 2/70cm, Gain 0.5/3.2dBd, Length 43cm, PL259 ﬁ tting
(high quality) .................................................................................. £19.95 
MRQ500 2/70cm, Gain 3.2/5.8dBd, Length 95cm, PL259 ﬁ tting 
(high quality) .................................................................................. £26.95 
MRQ750 2/70cm, Gain 5.5/8.0dBd, Length 150cm, PL259 ﬁ tting 
(high quality) .................................................................................. £36.95  
MRQ800 6/2/70cm Gain 3.0dBi/5.0/7.5dBdBd, Length 150cm, PL259 
ﬁ tting (high quality) ....................................................................... .£39.95 
MRQ273 2/70/23cm Gain 3.5/5.5/7.5dBdBd, Length 85cm, PL259 ﬁ tting 
(high quality) .................................................................................. £49.95
MRQ900 10/6/2/70cm Gain 10m (2.15dB) 6m(2.5dB) 2m (2.8dB) 70cm 
(5.5dB) Length: 125cm PL259 ﬁ tting ............................................ £49.95
HF Mobiles 
AMPRO-10 Slim line design 28MHz 2m approx. 3/8th ﬁ tting ........£22.95
AMPRO-11 Slim line design 27MHz 2m approx. 3/8th ﬁ tting ........£22.95
AMPRO-12 Slim line design 24MHz 2m approx. 3/8th ﬁ tting ........£22.95
AMPRO-15 Slim line design 21MHz 2m approx. 3/8th ﬁ tting ........£22.95
AMPRO-17 Slim line design 18MHz 2m approx. 3/8th ﬁ tting ........£22.95
AMPRO-20 Slim line design 14MHz 2m approx. 3/8th ﬁ tting ........£22.95
AMPRO-30 Slim line design 10MHz 2m approx. 3/8th ﬁ tting ........£22.95
AMPRO-40 Slim line design 7MHz 2m approx. 3/8th ﬁ tting ..........£22.95
AMPRO-60 Slim line design 5MHz 2m approx. 3/8th ﬁ tting ..........£24.95
AMPRO-80 Slim line design 3.5MHz 2m approx. 3/8th ﬁ tting .......£27.95
AMPRO-160 Slim line design 28MHz 2m approx. 3/8th ﬁ tting......£59.95
Other frequencies available. Call or see online for more details.
Multiband Mobile
Why buy loads of different antennas when Moonraker 
has one to cover all!  SPX series has a unique ﬂ y lead and 
socket for quick band changing
SPX-100 9 Band plug n’ go portable, 
6/10/12/15/17/20/30/40/80m, Length 165cm retracted just 
0.5m, Power 50W complete with 38th PL259 or BNC ﬁ tting to 
suit all applications, mobile portable or base - brilliant!
..............................................................................£44.95 
SPX-200S 6 Band plug n’ go mobile, 6/10/15/20/40/80m, 
Length 130cm, Power 120W, PL259 ﬁ tting ....................................  £44.95 
SPX-300S 9 Band plug n’ go mobile, 6/10/12/15/17/20/30/40/80m, 
Length 165cm, High Power 200W,PL259 ﬁ tting  ............................ £59.95
HF Wire Antennas 
All our HF wire antennas are made with complete waterproof potted 
baluns and high quality “original” ﬂ exweave antenna wire.
MDHF-80 3.5MHz balun matched mono dipole, length 40m ..........£59.95 
MDHF-40 7.0MHz balun matched mono dipole, length 20m ..........£44.95 
MDHF-20 14MHz balun matched mono dipole, length 10m ...........£39.95 
OSHF-80 3.5-30MHz balun matched off set dipole, length 40m ....£59.95 
OSHF-40 7.0-30MHz balun matched off set dipole, length 22m ......£44.95 
OSHF-20 14-30MHz balun matched off set dipole, length 11m .......£39.95 
LWHF-160 1.8-50MHz unun match end fed antenna, length 42m ...£49.95 
LWHF-80 3.5-50MHz unun match end fed antenna, length 20m ...£44.95 
LWHF-40 7.0-50MHz unun match end fed antenna, length 10m ...£39.95
GRP Fibreglass Base Antennas
Diamond quality – 
Moonraker pricing
Diamond quality – Moonraker prices ! These 
high gain antennas have been pre-tuned for your 
convenience, easy to use, easy to install, and a 
choice of connection … look no further
SQBM100P 2/70cm 3.00/6.00dBd, RX 25-2000MHz, 
Length 100cm SO239. ........................................................
............................................£49.95 special offer £39.95   
SQBM200P 2/70cm, Gain 4.5/7.5dBd, RX 25-2000MHz, 
Length 155cm, SO239 .................................£54.95 special offer £44.95  
SQBM500P 2/70cm, Gain 6.8/9.2dBd, RX 25-2000MHz, 
Length 250cm, SO239 .................................£74.95 special offer £69.95  
SQBM1000P 6/2/70cm, Gain 3.0/6.2/8.4dBd, RX 25-2000MHz, 
Length 250cm, SO239 ................................................................... £84.95 
SQBM223N 2/70/23cm, Gain 4.5/7.5/12.5dBd, RX 25-2000MHz, 
Length 155cm, N-Type .................................................................. £79.95
SQBM4010P Quadband 10/4/2/70cm Gain 2.5/3.2/3.6/5.5dBi 
Length 120cm...............................................................................£69.95
SQBM6010P Quadband 10/6/2/70cm Gain 2.5/3.0/3.6/5.5dBi 
Length 120cm...............................................................................£69.95
SQBM4060P Quadband 6/4/2/70 Gain: 2.5/3.0/3.6/5.5dbi Length 120cm   
...................................................................................................... £69.95
Yagi Antennas
All Yagis have high quality gamma match ﬁ ttings 
with stainless steel ﬁ xings! (excluding YG4-2C) 
YG27-35 Dual band 3/5 element 3.5/12.5 dBd gain with
one feed! .................................................................................... £79.95
YG4-2C 2 metre 4 Element (Boom 48”) (Gain 7dBd) ................... £29.95 
YG5-2 2 metre 5 Element (Boom 63”) (Gain 10dBd) ................... £69.95 
YG8-2 2 metre 8 Element (Boom 125”) (Gain 12dBd) ................. £99.95  
YG3-4 4 metre 3 Element (Boom 45”) (Gain 8dBd) ..................... £79.95 
YG5-4 4 metre 5 Element (Boom 104”) (Gain 10dBd) ................. £99.95 
YG3-6 6 metre 3 Element (Boom 72”) (Gain 7.5dBd) .................. £99.95 
YG5-6 6 metre 5 Element (Boom 142”) (Gain 9.5dBd) .............. £119.95 
ZL Special Yagi Antennas
The ZL special gives you a massive gain for the smallest boom 
length … no wonder they are our best selling Yagis! 
ZL5-2 2 Metre 5 Ele, Boom 95cm, Gain 9.5dBd .........................  £69.95 
ZL7-2 2 Metre 7 Ele, Boom 150cm, Gain 11.5dBd  ....................  £79.95 
ZL7-70 70cm 7 Ele, Boom 70cm, Gain 11.5dBd  ........................ £49.95 
ZL12-70 70cm 12 Ele, Boom 120cm, Gain 14dBd  ....................  £59.95
HB9CV
Brilliant 2 element beams … 
ideal for portable use
HB9-2 ........................................................................................ £34.95 
HB9-4 ........................................................................................ £49.95 
HB9-6 ........................................................................................ £59.95 
 
Halo Loops
Our most popular compact antennas, great 
base, mobile, portable, or wherever!
HLP-4 4 mtr (size approx 600mm square ) ................................ £44. 95
HLP-6 6 mtr (size approx 800mm square) .................................. £49.95
Get great results with the Moonraker range 
of HF mobiles! From as little as £22.95!
Base Antennas
Simple plug and play HF antennas radial free and at 
a great price
GP2500 All Band 80-6M Vertical TX 80-6M RX 2-90MHz, 
Power 250W Length 7.13M ..............................£199.95
GPA-80 budget version of GP2500 80-6M 
Length 6.0M  ......................................................£99.95
Portable HF Kits
Great dual band kits for portable use, 
two compact dipoles on an upto 14ft 
mast just requires coax
 
PK1217 HF Kit for 12/17M ..... £149.95
PK1520 HF Kit for 15/20M ..... £149.95
PK3060 HF Kit for 30/60M  .... £154.95
PK4080 HF Kit for 40/80M ..... £159.95
(please note each kit requires two feeds)
QRP Antennas
The Moonraker Whizz range are great for getting on HF in a neat 
compact and totally portable way
Whizz Whip HF/VHF/UHF portable antenna with telescopic 
whip - ideal for any situation where a long wore or vertical 
antenna is just not an option - get on air today for just £99.95
n a neat
Whizz Loop 20-60m compact loop  is 
ideal for QRP Transceivers when space is 
limited or using portable with a Yaesu FT-
817ND or similar. Can be used indoors with 
surprising results and handy for travelling 
due to its “pocket” size antenna ideal for 
indoor or out and can be packed away and 
all for just £69.95
Whizz Loop V2 (right) same as above 
but with a frequency range from 40-
10m.............................£79.95
Mobile Antenna Mounts
TRIMAG-S Triple magnetic mount with SO239 antenna ﬁ tting with 4m 
RG58 and PL259 ﬁ tted – ideal for those larger antennas ........just £39.95
TURBO-S single 170mm magnetic mount with SO239 antenna ﬁ tting with 
4m RG58 and PL259 ﬁ tted – will suit most antennas upto 5ft. .......£19.95
HKITHD-SO Heavy duty hatch back mount with SO239 antenna ﬁ tting 
with 4m RG58 and PL259 ﬁ tted .....................................................£32.95
HKITM-S Mini hatch back mount with SO239 antenna ﬁ tting with 4m 
RG58 and PL259 ﬁ tted ...................................................................£32.95
y
Coax Switches
CS201 2 Way Switch 3 X SO239, 2500W 1-1000MHz .  
........................................................................ £19.95
CS201N 2 Way Switch 3 X N-Type, 2500W 
1-1000MHz ..................................................... £24.95
 
Lightning Arrestors
ST-1 SO239 to PL259 adapter with earth wire 
connection ..........................................................£4.95
CDX-1 Lightning Arrestor 2 X SO239 sockets 400W ....  
........................................................................ £19.99
 
Dummy Loads
DL-15 PL259 DC-800MHz 15W CW 20W 50 Ohms
........................................................................ £24.95
DL-15N N-Type DC-800MHz 15W CW 20W 50 Ohms
........................................................................ £29.95
 
SWR Meters
SWR-100 Frequency 26-30MHz 100W 50 
Ohms ............................................................... £16.95
SWR-270 Frequency 120-500MHz 100W 50 Ohms
........................................................................ £29.95
Ferrites
High quality ferrites to suit all the popular cables
FCS-S to suit 6mm cable such as RG58 ............£1.95
FCS-M to suit 7mm cable such as MINI8 ...........£2.95
FCS-L to suit 9mm cable such as RG213 .......... £3.95
COME AND VISIT US FOR A BROWSE, FRIENDLY IMPARTIAL ADVICE AND EXTRA INSTORE DISCOUNTS
OPEN
9:00AM-5:30PM 
MON-FRI
The largest stockist of Amateur, 
Scanner, CB and Hobby Radio 
products for 60 miles around. 
Plenty of parking and easy 
access from the M1 – 
come for a visit soon.

www.moonraker.eu
Moonraker UK Limited • Cranﬁ eld Road • Woburn Sands • Bucks • MK17 8UR
Email: sales@moonraker.eu • Telephone: 01908 281705
NEW SITE, NEW STYLE
SAME GREAT SERVICE
Our new website has launched
•  Fresh, simple and uncluttered design
•  Smooth 24/7 shopping experience
•  Faster site performance
•  LIVE stock so that you can purchase 
with conﬁ dence
•  Mobile and tablet friendly
•  Next Day delivery with full tracking 
details
•  Subscribe to our newsletter for
up to 50% discount offers
22 	
Practical Wireless February 2018

February 2018 Practical Wireless 	
23
l E-Mail: wn1m@msn.com
Valve & Vintage with Michael Marinaro WN1M
I 
mentioned in the previous 
two parts of this narrative 
several situations that are 
worthy of elaboration. These 
concern the WW1 activities of 
Naval Radio installation NBD, Fig. 1, at 
Otter Cliffs in radio noise quiet northern 
Maine. This ultra-sensitive listening post 
was acclaimed at the end of the war by 
Josephus Daniels, Secretary of the Navy 
as “the most important and the most 
efficient station in the world”. The station 
was established and commanded by 
amateur radio operator Lt Alessandro 
Fabbri 1VX, Fig. 2, and staffed by Navy 
Radiomen operators, some of whom were 
previously and later radio amateurs.
Signals Heard
NBD could, with exceptional clarity, hear 
the ALLO radio calls sent by vessels in 
the Atlantic when other Navy east coast 
reception centres could not. ALLO, 
followed by the name of the vessel and 
its position, was the distress call used 
by vessels under submarine attack 
or reporting a U-boat sighting. As an 
abbreviation ALLO means ALL OTHERS 
and was one of several marine distress 
signals in use at the time. The Marconi 
interests popularised the use of CQD, 
which signified ALL STATIONS: DISTRESS 
but this was not adopted as the universal 
standard by world maritime bodies. 
SOS (with the elements run together, 
no spacing: …---…) was the formally 
accepted distress signal recommended for 
maritime use.
Whatever, hearing any of these signals 
emanating from the Atlantic, the NBD 
operator could envisage a fellow operator, 
a ‘sparks’, in the ship’s radio room at 
his key, Fig. 3, in peril of immediate 
torpedo or deck gun attack. Frustrated, 
the only rescue action available to the 
land operator was to relay the message 
to Naval headquarters in Washington 
and Boston in the hope that an Allied 
ship at sea could intervene. From the 
Naval centres, informational alerts and 
orders were dispatched to ships at sea 
via the Naval Station NAA at Arlington, 
Virginia or the commandeered, previously 
commercial, wireless stations. Not many of 
the ships operators survived these attacks 
and it became apparent that the signals 
identified doomed ships.
During 1918, the last 11 months of the 
war, 2,666,942 tons of Allied and neutral 
shipping was sunk by submarines. Despite 
the use of convoys and other defensive 
and offensive tactics, 21% of the total 
wartime shipping tonnage or over 500 
ships was lost during this final period while 
the US was engaged.
The Flotilla
The Germans had declared unrestricted 
submarine warfare on February 1st 1917, 
provoking the US to enter the war two 
months later. The North Atlantic was a 
battlefield where U-boats wreaked havoc 
virtually undeterred. The vital transatlantic 
lifeline of food and critical supplies 
destined for the Allies was hanging by 
a thread. With the US entry into the 
war, the Navy was confronted with the 
prodigious task of not only sustaining that 
Fig. 1: Former Bar Harbor Country Club becomes the headquarters of NBD.
Insights
Michael Marinaro WN1M concludes the story of 
transatlantic communications during the First World 
War with a look at some of the advances that resulted 
and benefited the next generation.
Fig. 2: Lt Alessandro Fabbri, 1919.
Fig. 3: Typical ship’s radio setup of the time.

24 	
Practical Wireless February 2018
lifeline but also of safely transporting the 
troops of the US Expeditionary Force. It 
was essential that the troops and their 
equipment arrive at the port of Liverpool 
and ultimately directly to the port of Brest 
in France quickly because they were 
urgently required to break the stalemate.
The troop ship armada comprised US 
ocean liners and confiscated German 
liners, Fig. 4. They were converted to 
accommodate the troops and their 
equipment and lightly armed. The 
average vessel carried 5,000 troops and 
the enormous 950ft, newly named USS 
Leviathan was capable of carrying over 
11,000 soldiers and crew.
The troopships were obviously priority 
targets for the U-boats, particularly when 
they transited the treacherous 300 miles 
of the Irish Sea. Known as ‘torpedo alley’, 
during February and March 50 cargo 
ships had been sunk there. However, 
the troopships had an advantage over 
freighters on this mission. They could 
speed along at 18 to 22 knots to outrun 
and thwart U-boat attack strategies. Also, 
they had destroyer escort for this last and 
most dangerous part of the journey. Later, 
they travelled in convoy the entire voyage, 
which further reduced the risk. There were 
no major losses or damage to any US 
carrier and, in fact, a troop carrier, the USS 
Mongolia, is credited with sinking a U-boat 
with one of its deck guns.
The Navy ferried 1,800,000 combatants 
each way to and later from Europe without 
mishap. Obviously, NBD had a role in the 
communications required for organising 
and conducting this prodigious operation.
Code Interception
NBD was also capable of monitoring 
coded German U-boat signals. The 
German naval code was known to the 
British early in the war and was likely used 
by the Washington receptors to decipher 
the messages relayed to them by NBD.
Early in the war the British Admiralty 
established a formal cryptanalysis 
organisation to interpret intercepted 
German wireless messages. They 
established a network of intercept stations 
along the coasts. Augmenting the reports 
of coastal stations, British amateur 
listening operators were included in the 
system as well as NBD and other US 
Navy listeners. Because the deciphered 
contents of the intercepts and the 
consequent naval reactions were classified 
as Top Secret, it is not known precisely 
how the enormous volume of messages 
decoded assisted the war at sea. It is 
known that the intercepts enabled the 
Allies to plot German naval strategies 
and win several engagements and also to 
direct the destroyer escort effort to protect 
troopships and convoys. 
Amateur operators again contributed to 
the war effort in this instance as listeners 
and reporters.
The Operators
Obviously, the Navy operators at NBD, 
Fig. 5, had to be highly skilled. Speed 
and accuracy were required at every 
post, on every watch (six hours on, twelve 
hours off) daily. Every message, often in 
five-letter cipher, had to be received and 
retransmitted with precision.
Initially, these skills were provided by 
the enlisted regular Navy radiomen and 
the reservist amateur radio operators. 
However, the demand for qualified 
operators was intense for both land and 
sea duty. The Navy addressed this need 
by establishing an operator’s school 
on the campus of Harvard University in 
Cambridge, Massachusetts. New recruits 
who were capable of copying 10WPM 
(words per minute) at the conclusion of 
their initial basic training were sent to 
Harvard. Upon achieving 22WPM the 
radioman was transferred to the fleet or a 
land-based facility. The length of training 
varied. At the conclusion of activities the 
facility was training 3,500 men at a time. 
The school was closed in 1919.
A Postwar Adventure
Although the fighting had ceased, NBD 
was as busy as ever with the organisation 
of the return of the troopships and the 
traffic to and from the Peace Treaty 
conferences at Versailles. In the midst 
of these activities arose a spectacular 
adventure involving not the shepherding of 
ships across the Atlantic but the guidance 
of aircraft to France.
WW1 brought powered manned 
flight from primitive fragility to crafts 
of substance and practicality. The 
development of radio paralleled that of 
aircraft, meeting the communications 
needs of increasingly sophisticated aircraft 
and their expanding missions.
Going into the Great War inadequate 
aircraft, essentially flimsy engine powered 
flying wings of fabric, were pressed into 
service to meet the demands of the mili-
tary. However, technology quickly began 
Fig. 4: A packed troopship.
Fig. 5: NBD operator’s position.
Fig. 6: Navy model NC-4 seaplane (four engine 
configuration).
Valve & Vintage

February 2018 Practical Wireless  
25
to address the needs more adequately. 
Near the end of the war substantially con-
structed and specialised aircraft, fought in 
aerial combat, strafed with machine guns, 
dropped bombs and provided valuable en-
emy position and movement information.
The ultimate in this evolution were the 
Navy’s fl ying boats, Fig. 6, conceived near 
the end of the war for long-range subma-
rine surveillance and potential transatlantic 
fl ight to augment maritime steamships.
In early 1917 a group within the Navy 
was concentrating on designing a fl ying 
boat capable of long-range fl ight with 
suffi cient engine power to lift the sizeable 
load from the grasp of the sea. Weight 
and lift were the basic design considera-
tions and non-stop transatlantic capability 
the objective. Identifi ed as the NC (Navy, 
Curtiss) series, basically the craft would 
be a biplane with a short hull and a tail 
group suspended on outriggers. The ship 
that emerged had wing spans of 126ft 
upper and 94ft lower and a hull 68ft long. 
Powered by four 400HP engines, the 
craft weighed in at 15,900lbs (7.2 tonnes) 
and was rated to carry a useful load of 
12,126lbs (5.5 tonnes), most of which 
would be fuel (11,346lbs, 5.1 tonnes) to a 
speed of 58 (stall) to 74 knots when load-
ed. Little weight capacity remained for six 
personnel and radios and navigation gear 
but it was, nevertheless, a remarkable feat 
of aeronautical engineering. Four of these 
craft NC-1, NC-2, NC-3 and the most 
recently built NC-4, each approximately 
of the above specifi cations, were assem-
bled into a squadron bent on crossing the 
Atlantic from their base in the Rockaway’s 
of Long Island.
With the obvious constraints, it was 
diffi cult to fi t in the navigational and 
radio gear that was were essential to the 
mission. Each craft was equipped with 
a compact and lightweight radio pack-
age comprising a propeller-driven 500W 
spark-gap transmitter type SE-1310 for 
communications when airborne; a 5W 
battery powered radio telephone type SE-
1350 for communications on the water; 
an aircraft receiver type SE-950 for broad 
range reception; a radio compass type 
SE-1441-A for operation on a wavelength 
of 1500m as well as 600 and 2500m; and 
an SE-1605-B amplifi er switchable for 
either the receiver or the compass. Anten-
nas were a skid-fi n type or a single trailing 
wire for use when airborne. The equipment 
and radio operator’s position were located 
in the stern of the hull.
Three craft began their attempt, without 
the NC-2, which had been disassembled, 
on May 8th 1919. The route took them 
for 895 nautical miles from Long Island; 
to Chatham, Massachusetts; to Halifax, 
Nova Scotia, and fi nally to Trepassey, 
Newfoundland, the jumping off point 
for the ocean crossing. The fl ight had 
been guided on this part of their journey 
by two groups of four destroyers, each 
spaced along the two open water hops. 
The eight destroyers furnished navigation 
information and meteorological updates, 
transmitting principally on 1500m, or 
1200, 952 or 756m when requested by the 
operator aloft to avoid interference. The 
planes transmitted on 425m.
On May 16th the three NCs began the 
1200 mile fl ight to the Azores, this time 
shepherded by 22 destroyers spaced 
approximately 50 miles apart, Fig. 7. At 
night these ships were brightly illuminated 
and fi red star shells to keep the planes on 
course. Despite these measures, NC-1 
and NC-3 were unable to navigate through 
the heavy fog they encountered, forcing 
them to land in rough seas. They were 
unable to resume their fl ights. NC-1 was 
damaged in landing and was taken in tow 
by a rescuing freighter but sank en route. 
NC-3 had mechanical problems and taxied 
on the surface for 200 miles to the Azores. 
NC-4 however, succeeded in reaching 
Horta, Azores Islands, after fl ying 1206 
miles in 15¼ hours. 
After repair delays NC-4 left Ponta Del-
gada on May 27th for a three-leg journey 
of 768 miles to Lisbon, Portugal; 237 miles 
to Ferrol, Spain and fi nally 487 miles to 
Plymouth, England, again guided all the 
way by ten destroyers. NC-4 arrived on 
May 31st.
The fi rst crossing of the Atlantic by an 
aircraft of any type was accomplished 
with the two legs from Newfoundland to 
Lisbon, which consumed almost 25 hours 
total fl ight time. The second ‘fi rst’ was the 
continental connection between America 
and Europe. The US Navy had reason to 
be proud of a clear demonstration of air 
and sea supremacy − a colossal feat of 
daring and organisation.
NBD played a signifi cant role in this 
operation, assuring continuous communi-
cations and relaying critical weather and 
navigational information.
The feat was acclaimed by a world anx-
ious for such adventurers. But the intensity 
of the praise began to wane as reports of 
the fl ight of two Englishmen dominated the 
news. Just two weeks after NC-4 landed 
in Plymouth, John Alcock and Arthur 
Whitten Brown piloted a Vickers Vimy 
biplane, heavy bomber across the Atlantic 
from Newfoundland to Ireland. This fi rst 
non-stop crossing was accomplished in 
only 16 hours, 12 minutes and captured 
the attention of the world. The modifi ed 
plane was not radio equipped. This was 
a feat endorsing the abilities of British 
aviation.
This concludes these facets of the 
history of WW1 relating to the application 
and development of wireless. The Great 
War not only thrust wireless technology 
forward to meet the challenges – there 
were mighty advances in other fi elds that 
went on to serve a world that was, sadly, 
only temporarily at peace. 
Fig. 7: NC seaplane transatlantic ﬂ ight path.

26  
Practical Wireless February 2018
• E-mail: emc.chairman@rsgb.org.uk
Feature  by Dr John Rogers M0JAV
Is Radio Frequency Interference (RFI) 
causing you problems?
Radio Frequency Interference (RFI) has been 
a problem amateurs have had to deal with for 
many years, with sources like atmospheric, 
galactic, and power line noise. Recently, new 
technologies have caused added concerns, 
both with the number of sources and the 
broad frequency range impacted. Electro-
magnetic Interference (EMI) can cause prob-
lems when radiated or conducted emissions 
interfere with the operation of other elec-
tronic equipment. Electromagnetic Compat-
ibility (EMC) tries to ensure equipment can 
operate properly in close proximity to other 
equipment without them causing interference 
to each other. 
This means equipment must not cause 
undue interference to other equipment or be 
susceptible to interference (whether radiated 
or conducted) from other equipment. RFI, 
the subset of EMI at RF, has many sources. 
RFI can be man-made or from natural causes 
and it can have different characteristics. It 
can be broadband, it may have harmonic 
structure or be impulsive noise but its impact 
of obstructing radio reception is similar, irre-
spective of its origin. In all cases good EMC 
design will minimise the problem of RFI to a 
radio amateur’s equipment. The severity of 
the impact varies depending on the type and 
strength of RFI. Evolving technologies are 
proving more harmful to the spectrum than 
older ones because they are additive and 
combine to block reception of radio signals. 
In Fig. 1 the impact of one of the most 
common sources of harmful RFI − VDSL − 
can be clearly seen on the busy 80m band 
below 3.7MHz, where all signals are seriously 
degraded or completely obstructed by con-
stant RFI. Communication was available on 
frequencies in the VDSL transition between 
bands 3.7 to 3.8MHz but the majority of 
the band is unusable because signals are 
obstructed by VDSL.
What can be done to help solve RFI Prob-
lems?
The EMC committee of the Radio Soci-
ety of Great Britain (RSGB) has two main 
roles, ﬁ rst to provide advice and support to 
amateurs with RFI problems and second 
to help to protect the spectrum from RFI. 
Advice and support is provided through an 
EMC Helpdesk (helpdesk.emc@rsgb.org.
uk), through a website forum (URL below), 
through advice on the webpages (also below) 
and by regular articles to increase awareness 
of the problems and their solutions. If you 
require help, please remember the service is 
provided by unpaid volunteers and send an 
e-mail address for them to contact you or be 
prepared to call them if you wish to speak to 
them in person.
http://forums.thersgb.org/index.
php?forums/emcmatters
www.rsgb.org/emc 
Spectrum protection is tackled three ways. 
First, EMCC members sit on standards com-
mittees to ensure these standards provide 
adequate protection to radio communication 
devices. Emission and Immunity standards 
are designed to allow devices to operate 
together. Radio amateurs and shortwave 
listeners rely on low background noise so 
these standards are essential to aid inter-
ference-free reception. Second, they lobby 
regulators, suppliers and service providers 
to minimise the impact on the spectrum 
of inadequate EMC provision. Third, they 
investigate interference caused primarily by 
new technology and make recommendations 
to minimise the impact of these emerging 
technologies on amateur radio.
VDSL Survey
Following extensive concern about RFI from 
broadband connections, the RSGB con-
ducted a survey (Sept 2017), which asked 
amateurs to measure VDSL RFI and back-
ground noise levels to ﬁ nd the true extent of 
this problem. We received 1,300 responses 
in six weeks; about half of the respondents 
showed evidence of VDSL RFI.
More than 50% of respondents found 
steps of more than 6dB in noise level at 
VDSL band transitions. Of these, more than 
An Overview of RFI
This article has kindly been submitted by Dr John Rogers M0JAV, Chairman of the RSGB EMC 
Committee, to increase awareness of EMC issues across the UK amateur radio community.
Fig. 1: VDSL Interference below 3.7MHz masking most 80m band signals.

February 2018 Practical Wireless  
27
25% found steps of more than 12dB. The 
number impacted per VDSL band is shown in 
the histogram, Fig. 2.
VDSL2 superfast broadband is present 
24 hours a day, seven days a week. It is 
like white noise but with signal strength 
varying with frequency. This degrades radio 
reception up to its highest used frequency 
of 17.7MHz by obstructing signals of levels 
lower than the VDSL level. For each 10dB 
increase in this VDSL level above the 
background noise level, over 80% of signals 
present are obscured. At some locations, 
only a few percent of the signals present 
(the strongest ones) can be received in the 
impacted bands, the rest are masked by the 
noise from VDSL.
The impact can be clearly seen in the 
spectral plot, Fig. 3, where D denotes 
downstream and U denotes upstream VDSL 
bands.
At this location, the levels measured are 
40dB above the expected levels in a rural 
environment across most of the amateur 
bands, making radio communication virtually 
impossible here.
These problems vary from location to 
location as can clearly be seen in these heat 
maps, Figs. 4 and 5, of measured RFI levels 
covering about four square km and contain-
ing three VDSL cabinets. Blue and dark green 
are levels expected in this rural environment, 
yellow and orange result in degraded recep-
tion, red would make communication near 
impossible. These heat maps differ for each 
of the bands. More information can be found 
on the EMCC pages of the RSGB website:
http://rsgb.org/main/ﬁ les/2017/08/2017-
RFI-Update-RSGB-Convention.pdf
What can be done about It?
It is over 20 years since the RSGB EMC 
Committee ﬁ rst expressed concerns about 
the proposed Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) 
system and its potential impact on the HF 
radio spectrum allocated to the Amateur 
Radio Service. These concerns were partially 
addressed by VDSL standards that require 
VDSL hardware to have the capability of 
‘notching’, that is to avoid using certain 
frequency bands such as amateur bands. 
Unfortunately, there is no requirement for this 
‘notching’ capability to be used and it is not 
currently being employed in the UK. Many 
other countries are seeing much less VDSL 
interference than us in the UK. This seems to 
be a combination of three things: notching 
of critical frequencies by VDSL operators, 
a higher proportion (in some countries a 
very much higher proportion) of customers’ 
premises served by underground telephone 
cabling, and an absence in other countries 
of the unbalanced third wire (the so-called 
bell wire) in customer premises wiring. RSGB 
continues to press Ofcom and Openreach to 
take remedial action.
Despite the widespread adoption of VDSL 
in the UK, it is not too late to do something 
about the signiﬁ cant increase in HF noise 
that has come about as a result. In the short 
term, we should all complain to Ofcom where 
the interference is limiting our use of the 
bands. We believe that there are other HF 
users who are also at risk of being adversely 
affected (including the military) and between 
us we should make our complaints heard. 
We have to demonstrate actual Harmful 
Interference to Ofcom. We recommend ‘Here 
and There’ testing using an equivalent setup 
at two close locations at the same time, 
one your home QTH suffering from RFI and 
another a nearby site free from RFI. Com-
parison of logs will show communications 
received at the quiet station that cannot be 
received at the RFI-impacted QTH. In the 
longer term, our expectation is that VDSL will 
become obsolete, most likely replaced by a 
combination of G.FAST (with amateur band 
notching) and Fibre to the Home.
Fig. 2: Number of respondents to RSGB VDSL survey reporting noise steps of different levels at VDSL 
band transitions. 
Fig. 3: Spectrum of VDSL RFI 10m from a cabinet showing alternating downstream (D) and Upstream 
(U) VDSL bands.
Fig. 4: Upstream 1. Fig. 5: Upstream 2 (The term no aggregation in Figs 4 and 5 is courtesy of 
Microsoft Excel and denotes each reading is plotted individually).

28  
Practical Wireless February 2018
An Overview of RFI
VDSL is just one of the New Sources. 
What are the Others? 
Other sources of interference can be consid-
ered in two classes:
Green energy devices primarily using high 
power, including wind farms, high-voltage DC 
distribution (HVDC), solar PV devices, wire-
less power transfer (WPT) and LED lighting.
Digital technology primarily using switch-
mode power supplies (SMPSUs), or associ-
ated with electronic communication (xDSL), 
which result in high level broadband noise 
across much of the spectrum. Of particu-
lar concern is the fact that this broadband 
noise-like interference is additive, so the 
strength of interference is proportional to 
the number of sources. We probably all have 
hundreds of electronic devices close enough 
to cause interference to our radios. So, it 
is all the more important that each device 
minimises its RFI contribution.
These emerging technologies try to 
reduce environmental pollution or improve 
digital communication. Their aim is to provide 
improved lifestyle while minimising the im-
pact on the environment. An unfortunate side 
effect of these new technologies is that they 
increase RFI, which pollutes the electro-
magnetic spectrum instead of the physical 
environment.
Amateur radio operators conducting 
experiments in radio communication notice 
the impact of RFI before it affects the gen-
eral public. They perform the ‘canary in the 
coalmine’ role to give others advanced warn-
ing about the potentially disastrous impact of 
the loss of electromagnetic communication 
as a result of this harmful interference.
Similar investigations have been carried 
out by the RSGB EMC committee in recent 
years into solar PV and wind farms. Plotted 
in Fig. 6 are typical levels measured for some 
of these devices at some affected amateurs’ 
locations. 
On the graph in Fig. 6 the dotted lines 
are the expected levels of total manmade 
noise as predicted in ITU recommenda-
tions on Radio Noise ITU-R P.372.13. They 
represent expected levels in three differ-
ent environments, Quiet Rural, Rural and 
Residential. To check these predictions, we 
measured a number of rural sites and found 
the total levels plotted as the blue and green 
diamonds. There is good correlation between 
expected and measured levels. By compari-
son, in a residential environment each of the 
problem sources (VDSL, windfarms, solar 
PV) contributes RFI much higher than the 
grey dotted line, which is the expected total 
manmade noise level. The windfarm meas-
urement shown is at a member’s QTH while 
measurements taken on the perimeter of the 
windfarm were up to 20dB higher.
For reference, the purple line shows 
S9 from a half-wave dipole at each of the 
frequencies. Note particularly how many of 
these RFI levels are well above S9, S9+40dB 
not being unusual. It should be stressed that 
worst-case levels are signiﬁ cantly higher than 
the typical levels plotted.
What Technologies do we expect to 
cause New RFI Problems in the Future?
In the future we can expect a number of 
new technologies to add to our existing RFI 
problems:
More high-power AC/DC conversion on 
the UK electricity grid as DC interconnects 
are introduced for renewable energy sources 
such as windfarms and solar PV systems, 
with battery banks giving the potential for 
24-hour operation
Wireless power transfer (WPT) to charge 
our electric vehicles, perhaps in every car 
park and in every home’s garage or drive 
added to wireless charging of most other 
battery-powered home devices 
Even faster wired broadband xDSL, g.fast 
and more use of PLT for home video distribu-
tion through mains wiring
The RSGB is becoming increasingly con-
cerned about these growing levels of Radio 
Frequency Pollution (RFP) being reported in 
the UK. This pollution is invisible but would 
appear to be all around us today, coming 
from the most innocent looking devices and 
cables. It can be seen in all bands, LF, HF, 
VHF, UHF and microwaves; it is often present 
at all times of day and night. It impacts many 
users of the radio spectrum, not just the 
amateur radio bands.
We see RF noise pollution having a similar 
effect on radio users that light pollution is 
having on optical astronomers, where reme-
dial measures are beginning to have a posi-
tive effect. We ought to be able to inspire a 
similarly successful campaign to reduce RFP. 
Ofcom has powers to enforce the UK 
EMC Regulations, which apply at the point 
of ﬁ rst sale or taking into service. They also 
have powers to enforce the Wireless Telegra-
phy Act provisions on interference, which ap-
ply to apparatus already in use. However, it is 
extremely difﬁ cult to convince Ofcom of the 
non-compliance of apparatus or installations, 
or that harmful interference has been caused 
to amateurs, even though we are fully entitled 
to protection under the law.
We all need to protect the spectrum from 
RFI but if you don’t complain to Ofcom, they 
will say they don’t get reports so things must 
be alright. It is down to all of us to make the 
case that the spectrum is being constantly 
degraded.
If Ofcom do not act, we need to try 
some different approaches to bring pres-
sure to bear on them. If we continue to take 
the same approach, we can only expect 
the same outcomes. We all need to lobby 
the people that Ofcom are accountable to, 
including our MPs.
Fig. 6: Field strengths of RFI measured at problem locations compared with expected/measured 
background levels in various environments. All measurements are average (RMS) except the 
windfarm which is Quasi Peak because of its high peak-to-mean ratio.


30  
Practical Wireless February 2018
● E-Mail: ericgw8ljj@outlook.com
Carrying on the Practical Way with Eric Edwards GW8LJJ
D
iversity reception is 
usually associated 
with either two (or 
more) antennas with 
different orientations 
or polarisation sharing the same 
receiver (commonly known as 
antenna diversity, space diversity 
or spatial diversity) or it can be two 
receivers (ideally phase-locked), 
each with its own antenna. It is not 
always practical for the radio amateur to 
provide any of these conditions but there 
is another way. The shack receiver has its 
own station antenna, which is the usual 
set-up and the other receiver and antenna 
set-up can be an internet-based SDR 
(Software Defi ned Radio) such as Hack 
Green located at the Nuclear bunkers at 
Nantwich. There is a long list of web-
based SDR receivers on the internet, 
which will be worth looking at. Fig. 1 
shows a block diagram of the set-up.
Why it is Needed
When band conditions are variable, I 
regularly change from the shack receiver 
to Hack Green and back again to the 
shack receiver because sometimes the 
signal will go low on Hack Green and 
come back up on my shack receiver and 
vice versa. One of my contacts, Cess 
GW3OAJ, my mentor of many years, when 
on our daily net suggested that I built up 
a system that could be used for diversity 
reception using Hack Green (remote 
station) as the second receiver and 
antenna. This is a relatively simple process 
because all that is needed is a mixer to 
combine the two headphone outputs 
of each receiver, one being the sound 
card from a computer for the web-based 
receiver (remote) and the other from the 
shack (local) receiver, each connected to 
one (mono) headphone. The problem with 
doing that is that there is a delay from the 
remote station so this had to be taken into 
consideration when building up a suitable 
headphone mixer. The local signal (shack 
receiver) has to be delayed to the same 
timing as the remote station. Both signals 
can then be connected to the headset via 
a simple mixer circuit.
The Delay
Searching the internet for an IC (integrated 
circuit) that could do what I needed, I 
found one that is used in musical echo 
and reverberation units and is based on 
the ‘bucket brigade’ principle. I remember 
using similar types many years ago when 
playing with digital echo chambers for 
tape recordings. The device I found is 
a PT2399, which is a 16-pin DIL (Dual-
in-Line) echo audio processing IC. I 
downloaded the datasheet and with the 
aid of a breadboard, I started playing with 
the device. 
The Circuit 
The circuit is powered by the shack 12V 
(13.8V) supply and the OpAmps are con-
nected as single supply so there are bias-
ing resistors placed on the non-inverting 
Fig. 1: Block diagram of the diversity 
arrangement.
Diversity 
Reception
in the Shack
Eric Edwards GW8LJJ describes a novel approach 
to achieving diversity reception by combining your 
shack receiver with an internet-based SDR.
Fig. 2: Circuit diagram.

February 2018 Practical Wireless 	
31
connection (pin 3) to provide the linearity 
needed. The heart of the circuit, Fig. 2, is 
the PT2399 and a 5V regulator is used as 
the supply for it. Two eight-pin OpAmps 
are used with one of the OpAmps used as 
a low-level buffer amplifier to give a little 
gain (about x1.2) from the output of the 
PT2399 and the other is the mixer circuit 
combining the remote and local receiver 
outputs. There are multi-turn pre-set gain 
controls for both the local and remote 
signal inputs. These could be bypassed if 
building your own but they may be useful 
for presetting the levels.
The headphone output from a PC 
sound card that is receiving an internet 
SDR is connected to the ‘remote in’ preset 
volume control and through the 470nF 
capacitor and 270kΩ resistor to one chan-
nel of the combining mixer (IC1, NE5534 
pin 2). The shack receiver input from the 
headphone output of the station receiver 
(or transceiver) is connected to the ‘local 
in’ socket and is taken via the 47µF ca-
pacitor and the resistor network to pins 15 
and 16 of IC2, PT2399. This is the ‘delay’ 
IC and is needed because the remote 
signal will have a delay when listening to it 
compared to the local signal. To bring both 
signals into line, the local received signal 
must be delayed by the same amount as 
the remote signal. This is carried out with 
the convergence control, which should 
be easily accessible by fitting it on the 
front panel. The delay (convergence) 
control value has been chosen so that it is 
compatible with both analogue and digital 
(SDR) shack receivers because they will 
need different delay settings. The output 
of IC2 is buffered and has a small amount 
of amplification of 33 (330kΩ/10kΩ) with 
IC3 and is taken to the second channel of 
the mixer IC1 via the 270kΩ resistor. The 
output from Pin 6 via the 10µF capacitor 
is at headphone level. Because this output 
is mono, the headphones need to be con-
nected accordingly. 
In Use
One of the inputs is the ‘local’ signal 
from the shack receiver and the other is 
the ‘remote’ signal. The shack receiver 
signal goes via a delay circuit whereas 
the remote is a direct connection to the 
mixer. This delay of the shack receiver 
input is necessary to enable it to coincide 
or converge with the remote signal. 
The multi-turn potentiometer (I used a 
50kΩ Bourns type), which is fitted on 
the front panel, Fig. 3, is to adjust the 
‘convergence’, which reduces the delay 
between the two received signals. It 
should be adjusted slowly, especially 
when approaching convergence, because 
it is possible to produce an echo in the 
opposite direction if you ‘tune’ through the 
converging signals! It will also be noted 
that the delays will be different if the shack 
receiver is either the usual analogue type 
or a digital type such as the ‘Flex’ series. 
It may also be necessary to readjust this 
control slightly because QSB (fading) on 
either signal will also affect the delay. 
Is There a Kit?
I am not offering a kit on a normal basis 
but the PCB will be available along with 
any parts that are not in your usual shack 
stock or you may prefer to order with the 
PCB. The prototype was built as shown 
in the photos. Fig 4 shows the inside with 
the PCB almost the same (two resistor 
positions change) as the final design. 
Fig. 3: A view of the front panel.
Fig. 4: A view of the PCB mounted in the case.

MUCH MORE ON OUR WEBSITE 24/7........SHOWROOM OPENING HOURS: MON - FRI 9AM - 5:30PM CLOSED SATURDAY
023 9231 3090
Unit 1    Fitzherbert Spur
Farlington
Portsmouth
Hampshire
PO6 1TT
OPEN: Mon to Fri 9.00am - 5.30pm 
Generous Part Exchange or Cash waiting for your used Gear
Full range now available!
LIMITED EDITION 
TS-590SG-70
Celebrating 70 years of Kenwood
Owners receive Special Kenwood tour jacket
& commemorative call sign plate
TS-480HXE. 200W DSP mobile/base HF/6m....... £899.95
TS-590SGE..100W DSP HF/6m all mode TX......£1299.95
TS-2000E....HF 50/144/430MHz transceiver.... £1449.00
TM-710GE ..VHF/UHF - APRS/TNC/GPS ................£459.95
Kenwood TH-D74E
Dual Band Handheld with APRS
and Digital (D-STAR) capability
• Built in GPS
£599
IN STOCK!
Kenwood 
TS-480SAT
100W
Mobile/Base
£849.95
Soft Case for D74E ......£29.95
CALL FOR SPECIAL PRICE £1695
IN-STOCK - LIMITED QUANTITY
More Kenwood
HLV-950 
Dual Band solid state amplifier
• Covers 50MHz & 70MHz
• Output 1kW for input 
from 1W to 25W
Amplifiers
HLV-350-7...400W 23cms 7W drive power.. £2,695 £2399
HLV-770.......770W 70cms.............................£2,550 £2295
£2549.95
£2199.95
German engineered - excellent linearity
with high spectral purity
IN STOCK!
IC-7610
• HF/50MHz 100W SDR Transceiver
£3599.95
GENEROUS Part X
CALL NOW!
Icom IC-7300
100W HF+6m+4m
• RF direct sampling
• Touch screen control
IC-8600...NEW communications receiver..........£2499.99 
IC-718.....100W 160-10m base/portable ...........£594.95
IC-7100...HF/VHF/UHF 4m (70MHz) touchscreen.£999.95
IC-7600...HF+6m twin DSP base transceiver. ...£2295.95
ID-4100E.Dual band D-Star ...............................£475.95 
ID5100E..Standard version Dual Band D-Star.....£574.95
£1199.95
ID-51E Plus 2
• Dual Band Transceiver
• New Terminal Node and
Access Point Modes
£379.95
NEW
GENEROUS PART EXCHANGE
on your old radio
AH-4.......Automatic antenna tuner 120W .........£333.95
SM50......Top of the range desktop microphone £249.95
SM30......New compact style microphone..........£119.95
SP23 .......Deluxe extension speaker ...................£249.00
SP38 .......Matching speaker for IC7300 .............£149.95
INRAD RX-7300..2nd receiver mod Kit ................£49.95
More Icom
FT-991A 
• Coverage: 160-6m, 145/433MHz
• All modes AM/FM/SSB/Data
• 100W HF/6m-50W 145/433MHz
• NEW colour waterfall display
FTDX5000MP....Premium Class Transceiver ......£3199.95
FTDX3000D ..100W HF/6m all mode TX................£1429.95
FTDX1200D ..100W HF/6m all mode TX..................£999.95
FT991A.........160-6m Transceiver ...................£1199.95
FT857D.........Multiband HF/VHF/UHF mobile.....£689.95
FT817ND ......All mode multiband portable........£529.95
FT450D.........100W all mode HF/6m+ATU........£589.95
FT891........... HF plus 6m mobile......................£599.95
FT7900E .......Twinband 145/433MHz mobile ....£249.95
FT-25 ............NEW  2m 5W Handheld.................£69.95
FT-65 ............NEW  144/433MHz Handheld........£89.95
FT-70D..........Dual band digital TX handheld .....£189.95
FT1DXE.........Ipx5 digital handy....................... £219.95
FT2DE...........C4FM/FM 144/430MHz digital H/H.£389.95
FTM400XDE..Twinband digital/analogue mobile....£499.95
FTM100DE....New C4FM 50W Dual Band mobile ...£299.95
VX6E ............Submersible 145/433MHz handy ..£159.95
G2800DXC ...Extra heavy duty rotator...............£929.95
G5500..........Azimuth/elevation rotator.............£654.95
G1000DXC ...Varispeed heavy duty rotator........£499.95
G450C..........Rotator + 25m cable kit...............£319.95
STA77...........Stereo headphones ........................£79.95
More Yaesu
£1199.95
NEW ACOM A1200S
• 1.2kW solid state amp
• Covers 1.8-54MHz
ACOM A600S
1.2kW solid state amp
• Covers 1.8-54MHz
• Weighs just 12kg
K3S HF+6m transceiver
Latest version with many
improvements Available in kit
form or fully built 10W or 100W
versions - your choice.
K3S  HF+6m transceiver
K3S/100-F ..............100W (Assembled)....................£2999.95
K3S/10-F ................10W (Assembled)......................£2449.95
K3S/10-K................10W (Kit) ..................................£2299.95
K3S/100-K..............100W (Kit) ................................£2849.95
KPA-500  160-6m 500W Amplifier
KPA-500..................(Kit)..........................................£2449.95
KPA-500..................(Assembled)..............................£2649.95
KX3  160-6m all modes + DSP
KX3-K.....................(Kit) ..............................................£999.95
KX3-F.....................(Fully assembled).........................£1079.95
KX2........................80-10m 10W (Assembled).............£859.95
£2795
Large stocks of Elecraft accessories - call!
2 year Warranty!
AVAILABLE FROM STOCK!
save
10%
or more this
month
Pre-Amps
HPP-144 2m pre-amp 
2.5kW thru power£669 £599
HPP-432 70cms pre-amp 
2.5kW thru power......£669 £599
Full range now available!
Palstar HF-AUTO  
FREE SHIPPING!  £1699.95 £1499.95
DX-SR9
£599.95
DJ-V57
• IPX7 waterproof
• Computer programmable
• Tough case
• Fully featured
£129.95
DJ-G7E
Tri-band Radio, die-cast chassis
• 2m/70cms/23cms
• 1000 memory channels
• Full duplex 
£299.95
DM-330MW MkII
30A Deluxe Supply
variable voltage, low noise,
extra filtering
£129.95
DR-735E
Twin Band Mobile ‘Rainbow’
display, VHF/UHF transceiver
• Extended RX 108-174MHz,
400-479MHz 
£299.95
DM-30E
Lightweight 30A
Switch Mode Digital
Volt/Amp meter
£89.95
Still as popular as ever!
• HF + 6m 
• Built-in ATU, DSP
TH-D72E..... VHF/UHF handheld GPS/TNC/APRS. £399.95
TH-D72E..... B Grade Model Full warranty..........£329.95
MC60A.......Classic desktop microphone ............£135.40
MC90M ......Deluxe desktop microphone............£215.72
• Receiver 150kHz-30MHz
• Front mounted speaker
• 3 Ceramic Filters 
• Built-in CW Keyer
• Power 50/20/5W output
DX-R8E
• 150kHz-34.999MHz
• AM/FM/LW/MW/CW
LSB/USB
£469.95
CN-801VN......140-525MHz 20/200W N type........£119.95
CN-103LN.......140-525MHz 20/200W N type..........£89.99
CN-101L   
• Freq: 1.8-150MHz
• Power: 15/150/1.5kW
£89.99
DAIWA SWR Meters
More Daiwa
CN-501H2 ......1.8-150MHz 20/200/2kW.................£89.99
CN-501VN......140-525MHz 20/200W N type..........£89.99
CN-901...........1.8-200MHz, Power: 20/200/2kW...£129.95
High Quality Switches
CS-201A.........2Way 600MHz, 1kW SO239..............£24.95
CS201G11 ......2 Way 1.3GHz, 1.5kW HF N type ......£39.95
LIMITED SUPPLY SO PRE-ORDER!
DUE SOON!
PALSTAR
• Covers 160 - 6m
• Quality Ceramic inductor
• 4 to 6 seconds tuning time
• Large 4-line display
• Power 12V @ 4 Amps - not incl.
1.8kW (PEP) Automatic Tuner
AT-5K .......3.5kW manual tuner......................£1249.95
AT-4K .......2.5kW manual tuner......................£1024.95
AT-2K .......600W diff tuner, 6-160m .................£599.95
HF-Auto....1.5kW auto ant tuner.. save £200 £1499.95
DL-1500...1500W high power dummy load ........£199.95
BK4C/1:1..4kW 1:1 ratio current balun...............£99.95
BK4C/4:1..4kW 4:1 ratio current balun...............£99.95
More Palstar
£599.95
Top quality tuner 
– BEST SELLER!
AT-2K
• Covers 6-160m
• Output: 2000W PEP
• Optional 4:1 Balun for
• Balanced Wire Feeders
Top selling desktop HF
communications receiver
NEW
£1099
ACOM ATU-04AT
1.5kW Remote ATU
Covers 1.8-54MHz, weatherproof, 4-way antenna switch.
Works only with Acom Solid State Amps
No extra cables required
£2399.95
£2895
HF Transceiver + SDR capability
CN-501H  
High quality cross needle meter
• 1.8-150MHz 15/150/1.5kW
• Reads Average & PEP power
£89.95
save
£200
ANAN 8000DLE
Top of the range
HF & 6m 200W SDR
Transceiver
Peter Hart says: “excellent audio quality”
“Impressive pan adaptor 
and waterfall displays”
£3999.95
NEW ANAN 7000DLE 100W SDR
Improved receiver and 100W transmitter
specifications, that are “off the chart”
Pure signal mode for ultra 
clean TX. Plus lots more!
NEW
£3099.95

PRICE PLEDGE WE ALWAYS AIM TO BE COMPETITIVE - SEEN IT CHEAPER? LET US KNOW!
www.nevadaradio.co.uk
Huge Stocks • Friendly Service • Expert Staff • Fast Despatch
®
nevada
Superb receiver and DSP features including -
direct conversion, razor-sharp-adjustable
filters, noise reduction, noise blanker, audio
equalizer and even a built-in bandscope. Built
in speech processor, audio equalizer and even
comes with a hand mic at no extra cost.
• Modes: LSB, USB, CW, AM, FM, DIGI 
• Covers 160m - 6m (including 60m)
• 7 Low Pass Filters & 7 Bandpass Filters
• CW: Built in Electronic key
• Size: 147 x 60 x 107mm
• Weight: 580g
£699
SKY-ONE SDR NEW 5W QRP Transceiver
NEW
H-422
Rotary Dipole covers: 7, 14, 21, 28MHz
1kW PEP, 10.3m (straight), 7.4m (Vee)
£289.95
HF BASE ANTENNAS
H-422.......Trap Vee Dipole 7/14/21/28MHz ...............289.95
CHA-250BX11....3.5 - 57MHz  (RX: 2.0 - 90MHz).....349.00
CWA-1000..Multi Band dipole 3.5/7/14/21/28MHz...124.95
VHF/UHF FIBREGLASS BASE ANTENNAS
GP-15N....50/144/430MHz, length 2.4m N Type.........99.95
GP-1M .....144/430MHz length 1.2m (SO239).............49.95
GP-3M .....144/430MHz, SO-239 Lgth 1.78m (SO239)...59.95
GP-6M .....144/430MHz, SO-239 Lgth 3.07m (SO239)...99.95
GP-93N....144/430/1200MHz, Length 1.78m  N Type ...99.99
GP-9M .....144/430MHz SO-239 Lgth 5.15m (SO239) .149.95
VHF/UHF BEAMS
CYA-1216E...6 Element 1200MHz, N Type...................99.95
CA-52HB......2 Element HB9CV for 50MHz .................79.95
CA-52HB4....4 Element HB9CV for 50MHz ...............129.95
HF MOBILE ANTENNAS
UHV-4......Whip 28-29/52/145/430MHz......................89.95
UHV-6......Whip 7/21/28/50/144/430MHz...................99.95
L-18 .........18MHz Coil for CA-UHV/UHV-6..................25.95
VHF MOBILE ANTENNAS
CA-285 ....50/144 MHz, 1.32m 300W.........................25.95
CSB7900..144/430MHz  5.1/7.7dBi   1.56m 150W ....69.95
SB-15.......50/144/430MHz 2.15/4.5/7.2dBi 1.53m 120W..49.95
SBB-2.......144/430MHz, 2,15 / 3.8dBi   0.46m  60W .29.95
SBB-4.......144/430MHz, 3.0 / 5.5dBi  0.92m Black.....39.95
M-24M ....144/430MHz Magnetic Mount  c/w Coax ...36.95
ANTENNA TUNERS
CAT-10.....Mobile 3.5-50 MHz, 10W (CW) ..................99.00
CAT-273...144/430MHz, 250W (PEP)........................169.95
CAT-300...1.8-56MHz, 300W (PEP)...........................199.95
BALUNS
CBL-1000.1.7-30MHz, 1kW/CW .................................34.95
CBL-2500.1.8-56MHz, 2.5kW/CW ..............................39.95
LOW PASS FILTERS
CF-30MR..1.8 - 32MHz, 1kW/CW...............................59.95
CF-50MR..1.8 - 57MHz, 1kW/CW...............................59.95
DUPLEXERS
CF-360A...1.3-30/49-470MHz 2xleads SO239 socket..49.95
CF-4160B.1.3-170/350-540MHz SO239 N Type, SO239....39.95
CF-416A.1.3-170/350-540MHz SO239 + 2 x PL259 leads..39.95
CF-416B..SO239 + 1 x PL259/N leads.........................39.95
CF-503C..1.3-90/125-470MHz, PL259 lead, 2xSO239 ...49.95
CF-530....1.3-90/125-470MHz  2x SO239,PL259 lead...49.95
CF-530C..1.3-90/125-470MHz, SO239 2 x PL259 lead..49.95
CF-706....1.3-57/75-550MHz,SO239, 2 x PL259 leads...49.95
CF-706N..1.3-57/75-550MHz, SO239 N type, PL259 leads.49.95
HANDHELD ANTENNAS
CH-99 ......BNC Telescopic 144/430, 70-1000MHz RX....24.95
SMA-3 .....SMA for 144/430/900MHz .........................29.95
SMA-501..SMA for 144/430/900MHz .........................22.95
SMA-701..SMA for 144/430/1200MHz .......................19.95
SMA-99 ...SMA Telescopic 144/430 70-1000MHz RX..22.95
SCANNER ANTENNAS
AB-380 ....Base Ant for 108-140/220-400MHz............79.95
AB-1230H..Rubber Duck 108-140/220-400MHz.........29.95
AB-1230M..Mobile 108-140/220-400MHz..................34.95
CROSS NEEDLE SWR/POWER METERS
CMX-200..1.8-200MHz, 30/300/3k.............................79.95
CMX-400..140-525MHz, 30/60/300W ........................89.95
ACCESSORIES
CS-400P...Coax lightning Protector for DC-500MHz....29.95
CSW-201G...2 Way Coax switch DC-600MHz..............29.95
D-21M .....Dummy Load 100w DC - 600MHz ..............39.95
CABLE ASSEMBLIES
3D4MB ....4m Jap. 3DQEFV Coax with SO239 socket ..19.95
3K054M...4m RG188A Coax with SO239 socket.........26.95
HM10 BNC..1m of Jap. 1.5DQEV Coax with BNC socket..12.95
ANTENNA MOUNTS
CM-5M ....Mag. Mount + 5m of RG-58, & PL259 plug....24.00
CMB-GH ..Pole mounting bracket................................25.95
CTC-50M .Thru Window cable mount SO239-PL259....39.95
LD-5M......Trunk/Hatch back Mount w/ 5m of cable.....36.95
MCB-III ....Drive on Mast Support & Stand...................69.95
MG-4M....Mag. Mount 4m 3.5DQEFV COAX SO239...29.95
RS6 ..........Roof Rack mount (adjustable).....................23.95
RS-660U ..Roof Rack mount (adjustable).....................24.95
RS-020B...Trunk/Hatch back mount.............................21.50
RS-020S...Trunk/Hatch back mount.............................21.50
RS-730.....Trunk/Hatch back mount.............................21.95
RS-840.....Trunk/Hatch back mount.............................24.95
• Reads: AVG & PEP power
• Range: 1-200MHz
• Power: 3/300/3kW
£79.95
• TX: 3.5-57MHz
• RX: 2–90 MHz
• Power: 250W (max) SSB
• Length: 7.13m
• Frequecy: 1.8-60MHz
• Power: 30W/300W
• Reads: AVG & PEP power
• Cross needle
£349
CMX-200 
Quality Cross Needle Meter
CAT-300
HF+6m Antenna Tuner
CAT-273
VHF/UHF Antenna Tuner
• Covers: 120-150MHz VHF
                    340-450MHz UHF
• Reads: AVG & PEP power
• Two antenna inputs
£199.95
CHA-250BXII
Wideband Vertical Antenna 
£169.95
Latest version - ideal
for small gardens.
Works with or without
radials, (depending on
mounting). High
quality construction
(beware cheap
imitations)
CBL-2500 Hi-power 1:1 Balun
£39.95
• Power: 2.5kW (PEP)
• Freq: 1.8-56MHz
• Imp. 50 Ohm
• Ratio: 1:1
• SO239 Socket
MFJ-1835
5 Band 
Cobweb Antenna
£239.95
225..............1-180MHz graphic analyser..............£429.95
226..............Graphic analyser (1-230) MHz ..........£359.95
259C ...........HF/VHF portable antenna analyser....£299.95
266..............New style HF/VHF/UHF analyser........£349.95
269C ...........HF/VHF Digital Analyser....................£369.95
385B ...........Deluxe Comms. Speaker......................£54.95
407D...........Deluxe CW Keyer................................£99.95
461..............Morse Reader-pocket sized .................£99.95
492-X..........CW Memory Keyer............................£164.95
550..............Popular Morse code practice key.........£19.95
557..............Morse code key with oscillator............£46.95
826B ...........Digital SWR/Wattmeter.....................£209.95
901B ...........Versa Tuner 200W HF.......................£119.95
912..............Remote 4:1 balun box ........................£84.95
921..............2m Antenna Tuner ............................£114.95
923..............2m Tuner & SWR/Power....................£249.95
931..............Artificial ground unit.........................£114.95
934..............300W Tuner + artificial ground.........£219.95
941E............300 Watts max Versa Tuner II............£164.95
945E............1.8-60MHz 300W manual tuner.......£149.95
948..............300W PEP reading antenna tuner.....£174.95
949E............300W tuner + Dummy load..............£199.95
959C ...........Receive antenna tuner + pre-amp.....£145.95
969..............300W tuner 160-6m ........................£229.95
971..............Portable Ant. tuner 1.8-30MHz.........£139.95
986..............1.5kW HF tuner................................£369.95
989D...........1.5kW HF tuner................................£399.95
993B ...........Auto Tuner 150W/300W...................£309.95
994BRT .......600W remote Auto Tuner..................£409.95
998..............1.5kW Auto Tuner 1.8-30MHz ..........£719.95
998RT .........1.5kW remote Auto ATU...................£779.95
1020C.........Tunable Active Antenna ....................£129.95
1025 ...........Noise canceller/signal enhancer ........£209.95
1026 ...........QRM eliminator + active antenna.....£214.95
1118 ...........High Current DC Multi outlet..............£94.95
1700C.........6 Way coax switch............................£144.95
1701 ...........6 Way coax switch 2kW (SO239) ........£89.95
1704 (P)......4 way coax switch 2.5kW (SO239) .....£84.95
1704 (N).....4 way coax switch 2.5kW (N type)......£95.00
1705H.........RF By-pass switch...............................£38.95
1707 ...........Auto RF sensing Ant switch ..............£109.95
1708 ...........RF Sensing T/R Switch.........................£94.95
1763 ...........3 Element 2m beam ...........................£74.95
1786X.........Loop (10-30)MHz 3ft dia..................£479.95
1788X.........Loop (7-21)MHz 3ft dia....................£529.95
1779B.........80/40m Dipole ...................................£64.95
1799X.........9 Band vertical .................................£479.95
1868 ...........Discone antenna with cable................£94.95
2980 ...........Wire vertical (40m-6m).......................£99.95
4416B.........Super battery booster .......................£174.95
If you don't see it in the list below, 
visit our web site for lots more!
MFJ We hold HUGE STOCKS!
nevada
• 40A (max) with meter
• Voltage: 1.5-15V DC
• Cigar adaptor output
£129.95
PS-40M Linear 
QUALITY POWER SUPPLIES
PS-08 ........Linear 8A (max) 13.8V DC..................£34.95
PSW-50.....Switch mode 50A (max) 9-15V DC...£129.95
PSW-30.....Switch mode 30A (max) 9-15V DC.....£79.95
PSW-30H...Switch mode 30A (max) 9-15V DC.....£69.95
PS23-SW1.Switch mode 23A (max) 13.8V DC.....£59.95
PSW-07.....Switch mode 7A (max) 13.8V DC.......£29.95
PSW-04.....Switch mode 5A (max) 13.8V DC.......£24.95
• 30A (max) with meter
• Voltage: 3.0-15V DC
• Cigar adaptor output
£99.95
PS-30M Linear 
2 YEAR WARRANTY!
1kW End Fed Antennas
TYT Digital Radio
Telescopic Masts
• DMR digital & Analogue
• Dual time slot
• Colour screen
• Large frequency display
• Commercial grade
• IP67 waterproof rating
TYT MD-2017
Dual Band Digital
FREE DELIVERY £199.95
NEW
nevada
33 ft...Aluminium 7 ft. retracted .................£99.95
26 ft...Aluminium 5.5 ft. retracted ..............£89.95
20 ft...HD Fibreglass 5.5ft retracted..........£179.95
30 ft...HD Fibreglass 7.5ft retracted..........£249.95
50 ft... HD Fibreglass ...8ft retracted.......... £349.95
Morse Keys
SDR Receivers
SPIDERBEAM
UL-404L Ultra-lite Dxpedition antenna
Dipole covers: 40, 20, 17, 15, 12, 10.6m.........£109.00
Fibreglass Telescopic Poles
12mtr Heavy Duty............................................ £89.95
18mtr Standard...............................................£199.95
22m ‘Long John’ NEW....................................£399.95
26mtr Standard...............................................£499.95
Base Plate for Fibreglass Poles ..........................£28.95
Aluminium Telescopic masts
10.metre Standard..........................................£299.95
10 metre Heavy Duty ......................................£325.00
12.5 metre......................................................£329.95
14.5 metre Heavy Duty ...................................£425.00
Antennas, Telescopic Poles, Aluminium Masts 
26mtr Standard
MyAnt EFW 80-10
Resonant on 80/40/
30/20/17/15/10m
NO ANTENNA TUNER
REQUIRED! Length: 130ft
£159.95
MyAnt EFW 40-10  
Resonant on 40/20/15/10 + 
WARC with tuner Length: 63ft
£149.95
Bencher BY-1 ........................£189.95
Bencher BY-2 ........................£239.95
Vibroplex Keys
Iambic Deluxe Paddle .......Chrome ..............£239.95
Iambic Standard Paddle....Black ..................£169.95
Code Warrior Jr................. ..........................£169.95
DJ-MD40: UHF
• RF output 1W to 5W
• 1000 channels in 16ch/zone
• Text messages
• IP54 dust & waterproof
• Voice recorder
DJ-AXD4: UHF Version
DJ-AXD1: VHF Version
• DMR Tier I and Tier II
• RF output 1W to 5W
• IP67 dust & waterproof
• Heavy Duty - feature rich!
£159.95
£149.95
NEW
NEW
DMR/ANALOGUE HANDHELDS
Flex 6400...........Now with preselectors ......£1999.95
Flex 6400M .......Including front panel ....... £2999.00
£2999
World class SDR Transceivers 
Flex 6400M
FLEX-6400M features include:
• TX: 160-6m Amateur Bands
• RX: 30 kHz - 54MHz
• RF Power: 100W
• Panadapter BW: 7MHz
• Digital Audio Exchange (DAX)
• Plus, lots more!
Factory appointed dealer
FREE UK
DELIVERY
Flex 6600...........Now with 2 x SCU’s..........£3999.95
Flex 6600M .......Including front panel.........£4999.95
One of the very best for
weak signal reception and
strong signal handling
• 9kHz- 13MHz
• 60 MHz - 260MHz
AIRSPY HF+
HF/VHF SDR Receiver 
New entry level model
with great performance
1 kHz-2GHz
SDRplay RSP-1A 
HF/VHF SDR Receiver 
£229.95
£89.95
NEW

34  
Practical Wireless February 2018
To avoid any loss in translation, if you 
are leaving any kind of equipment for 
repair, it is best to attach a note with full 
details of the complaint along with your 
day and evening telephone number. Avoid 
vague comments because no engineer is 
going to have time to test every operating 
combination. He (or she) simply wants to 
know what the main faults are.
“Do You Know Anything about Tape 
Recorders or Record Players?”
I am sure that quite a few PW readers 
have had this question from their 
neighbours, who have valued recordings 
but ancient equipment that will no longer 
play. This can often happen due to lack 
of use, causing the drive belts to become 
hard and stiff, or to idler pulleys or rollers 
that have been left engaged for years, 
developing a dent. You are unlikely to be 
able to obtain replacements but you may 
The Cedars, 3a Wilson Grove, Heysham, Morecambe, Lancashire LA3 2PQ ● E-mail: G3LLL@talktalk.net
In the Shop with Harry Leeming G3LLL
H
oldings of Blackburn Ltd 
was started originally by 
my father-in-law James 
Holding, who in his spare 
time started buying and 
selling second-hand ofﬁ ce dictating 
equipment. He eventually opened a 
shop and moved into photography and 
tape recorders. By the late1950s, he 
wanted to expand the electronics side 
of the business. He knew me through 
church connections and I agreed to take 
on this task but our plans had to be put 
on hold while I completed my compulsory 
two years of National Service. Towards 
the end of my National Service a large 
Hi-Fi exhibition was advertised in 
London, which Mr Holding asked me to 
attend. Because I was rather keen on 
his daughter Brenda (we have now been 
married for over 55 years), this sounded 
like a good excuse for a bit of leave. I 
got him to write me an offi cial letter on 
his company note paper and a few days’ 
leave was granted. Brenda managed 
to tag along and the three of us had an 
informative and pleasant few days.
When I eventually started work 
at Holdings, none of the staff were 
electrically qualifi ed and a lot of the 
electrical wiring at the shop had been 
carried out by an odd-job man. The old 
style 5A and 15A amp three-pin sockets 
had been extended into un-fused un-
earthed three-pin and bayonet-cap 
sockets with lengths of twin lead and 
the shop’s electrical system looked 
like an accident waiting to happen. At 
my insistence a ring main system was 
installed and some very unsafe practices 
were banned.
Leaving Equipment for Repair
Previously they had farmed out repairs 
but when I took over this work, I soon 
found out that getting non-technical staff 
to book in repairs creates quite a few 
problems. Tape recorders arrived with 
notes such as ‘Give it a good overhaul’ 
with no indication at all as to what the 
customer was actually complaining about.
Fig. 1: Location of C11 in the FT-101 circuit.
Intermittent Faults
Harry laments the problem of dealing with intermittent faults in a variety of situations.
Fig. 2: This what C11 looks like.

February 2018 Practical Wireless 	
35
be able to effect a cure as follows.
Either remove the stiff belts and/or 
dented drive or roller and place them 
into a bowl of boiling water or heat them 
with a hair dryer in situ for a couple of 
minutes. You should then find that it is 
possible to mould the item back to its 
original shape. Refit it, and with luck the 
recorder or player should then run and 
enable the recording to be transferred to 
a modern medium.
I was reminded of this old dodge when 
I tried to refit the back on a digital watch 
and found that the thin waterproofing 
washer would no longer fit. I heated it 
up with a hair drier. It then returned to its 
original shape, fitted perfectly, and I once 
again had a waterproof watch.
Likewise, I set out to discover why 
the suction on our vacuum cleaner had 
become somewhat reduced. Between 
the dust collecting receptacle and the 
cleaner is a rubber seal. It had shrunk, 
become stiff and was causing an air leak. 
I removed it, warmed it up with a hair 
drier, stretched it back into its original 
shape and our cleaner is once again as 
good as new.
Intermittent Faults 
It doesn’t matter if they repair cars, 
washing machines, Hi-Fi or amateur radio 
gear, any technician will tell you that 
intermittent faults are the bane of their 
lives. I have spent many hours trying to 
track down such complaints − if a fault 
will not occur, you can’t repair it! 
I was often asked how much I charged 
per hour for carrying out repairs but as 
far as fault finding is concerned, this 
question makes no sense at all (Would 
you rather pay £50 an hour to someone 
who nails the fault in 30 minutes or £25 
an hour to someone who takes a couple 
of days to find the trouble?).
A fault that a few customers had 
as early Yaesu FT-101s got older, was 
intermittent interference on reception, 
which continued even when the antenna 
was removed. Of course, like an aching 
tooth at the dentist, the fault would 
disappear as soon as the rig was brought 
in to my workshop. The first time I had 
this complaint the rig in question was 
returned to the customer unrepaired 
because I couldn’t find anything wrong 
with it but he still had problems. 
Eventually, after taking the rig home with 
me, I found it would occasionally ‘play 
up’ for a few minutes but I still was not 
much nearer to finding the cause of the 
trouble. After wasting many hours, the 
fault was tracked down to an intermittent 
leak on C11, Fig. 1. This was surprising 
because it is not in the receive path but 
is in the driver anode and PA neutralising 
circuit and, to be honest, I only found it 
by chance. I noticed that the fault could 
sometimes be cured or triggered by 
removing and then immediately refitting 
the driver valve. At first, I thought the 
problem was the valve but swapping C11 
completely cleared the trouble.
Well, if I had charged the customer 
an hourly rate, it would have amounted 
to over twice the value of the rig so I just 
had to make a reasonable charge and 
book it to experience.
Over the next few years several other 
FT-101s came in with the same fault. I 
therefore charged these customers a little 
extra for my ‘experience’ and I made up 
for the time I had wasted when I had first 
come across the problem.
Capacitors looking like C11, as shown 
in Fig. 2, seem quite reliable in the short 
term, but can be guaranteed to fail in old 
age and should be checked. (If I look in 
the mirror, I see something with a very 
similar mortality rate!)
Many intermittent faults can be difficult 
to track down. A high or low temperature 
can often trigger a problem and I have 
been known to bring rigs home and 
leave them in the garage overnight (or 
even to leave small rigs in the fridge). 
Alternatively, squirting freezing fluid or 
applying a hair dryer to the circuit boards 
will quite often start the trouble.
Once the fault has occurred, you are 
on your way because at least you know 
what you are looking for. Gently poking 
and prodding around may then allow 
you to localise it. This can, however, 
be deceptive because when you apply 
pressure at one end of a circuit board, the 
board may flex and disturb a component 
or connection at the other end. If in 
doubt, it is often best to concentrate your 
efforts on the most likely causes. Relays 
are a prime cause of poor contacts, and 
tapping or pressing them will usually 
show whether they are the problem. 
Bad soldered joints tend to occur on 
the larger parts such as regulators or 
output transistors that are subject to 
vibration, particularly when the device 
Fig. 3: The underside of the FT-102 RF board, with the relays buried under switches and spindles.

36 	
Practical Wireless February 2018
In the Shop
is bolted to the chassis or a heatsink. 
The contacts on plug-in circuit boards 
are another source of trouble and these 
can usually be cleaned with something 
like Servisol. The crimped connectors 
in multi-way plugs that run to and from 
circuit boards can also be a problem. If 
one of these is found to be intermittent 
when its connecting lead is flexed, often 
the simplest way to cure the problem is 
to remove the plug and solder the leads 
directly to the circuit.
Smoking Was Good for My Wealth
I started work as an apprentice radio and 
TV engineer in 1952. At that time TVs 
were not to be found in every household 
and many people went down to the pub 
to watch the TV. Pub TVs were rather hard 
worked and frequently needed servicing. 
The cathode ray tube was mounted 
behind a plate glass protection screen 
so in a pub’s smoke-laden atmosphere 
it was not long before the electrostatic 
charge on the tube attracted a coating 
of nicotine, making the picture dim. This 
also happened, but to a lesser extent, 
in customers’ homes, especially if they 
smoked or, as was very common then, 
had a coal fire. 
A frequent cause of intermittent 
operation of TVs in those days was bad 
connections between the valves and 
the valve holders, which smoking also 
contributed to. Being the workshop 
junior, I often found myself dismantling 
TVs to clean the screens. I also had to 
remove the valves, scrape their pins with 
a penknife, squirt cleaning fluid on the 
valveholders and wiggle them about a bit 
while I refitted them.
(I cleaned them one at a time and 
avoided the error that a trainee once 
made in a local nursing home. He was 
sent to collect the patients’ false teeth 
for cleaning but wasn’t told to make any 
records. He put them all together and 
then found he could not match the teeth 
to the patients!)
When I later progressed to repairing 
tape recorders, radios and Hi-Fi 
equipment, smokers once again helped 
pay my wage. I would frequently get 
equipment brought to me from pubs, 
would squirt cleaning fluid on the PCBs 
and watch a yellow stream flow off. 
Fortunately, equipment seemed to have 
been specially designed so that the 
ingress of nicotine did not do its worst 
until the guarantee had run out! Switches 
then became intermittent, variable 
controls became noisy and internal preset 
bias potentiometers became intermittent 
and blew output transistors. All good 
business for the service department.
Later the fun really started when I 
moved into servicing amateur radio 
equipment. ‘Joe’ would walk into his 
cold shack, light a fag and switch on 
his FT-101. The fan would draw in the 
smoke, which would condense on the 
cold rig and eventually, if Joe was lucky, 
its operation would become intermittent. 
He would then bring the rig to me and 
I would have to clean a few relays and 
switches. If he was unlucky, there would 
be a flashover in the PA stage and he 
would have to make a much larger 
contribution to my following month’s 
salary. 
The FT-102
When the first samples of the Yaesu 
FT-102 arrived, I thought the radio was 
excellent. Instead of using loads of 
switching diodes in the RF stages, Yaesu 
had taken the more expensive route of 
fitting small relays to do the job. This 
reduced cross-modulation and certainly 
improved the receiver and I thought it was 
a great rig but, oh dear, Yaesu had not 
allowed for what would happen when the 
rigs were used by heavy smokers! After a 
year or two they started coming into my 
workshop with insensitive receivers and 
various intermittent faults.
The effect of smoke on amateur radio 
equipment, as I eventually realised, is very 
much dependent on the number of small 
relays fitted. In addition to the normal 
transmit/receive relays, the FT-102 had 
five small RF switching relays mounted on 
the RF board. Even worse, most of these 
relays were impossible to clean because 
the plastic covers could not be removed, 
due to them being mounted under various 
control spindles and switches, Fig. 3. 
The time involved in removing the relays, 
cleaning them, refitting them and then 
finding that one still did not work, was out 
of proportion to the value of the relays 
so the only answer was to swap the lot, 
which was easier said than done.
Removing and Fitting New FT-102 
Relays
At first glance removing and fitting 
new relays in the FT-102 looks nearly 
impossible without removing the entire RF 
board but this is quite a task and many 
radio amateurs made a real mess of their 
rigs trying. I always ‘cheated’, which you 
can do this way.
Remove the metal inspection cover, 
which is in the chassis under the RF 
board, to gain access to the underside of 
the relays. Use a solder sucker to remove 
as much solder as possible from the 
relays and then on the relays that have 
obstructions stopping them being lifted 
straight up from the RF board, cut the 
relay pins as short as possible. If you then 
bend the flat end of a small screwdriver 
as per Fig. 4, you will be able to lever the 
relays out of their sockets, after you have 
once again melted the remains of the 
solder, and then gradually tease them out 
of the rig.
To fit the new relays, clean the holes 
in the PCB with a fine drill, then cut the 
relay pins so that they are only just long 
enough to reach through the PCB and be 
soldered. Then with a little patience and 
some sticky tape, you should be able to 
squeeze them under the switches and 
spindles and solder them in position.
After fitting sets of relays, quite a few 
of the rigs continued to come back after a 
year or so with the same health problems 
and I was forced to give my customers a 
choice − they either got rid of their fags 
or their FT-102. From watching the TV 
programme GP’s Behind Closed Doors, 
I see that it is not only ‘Rig Doctors’ that 
have this problem.
Spare Parts
Please note; that it is now many years 
since I retired so I am sorry but I can no 
longer help regarding sources of Yaesu 
spares. Try Yaesu UK or Google. 
Fig. 4: Levering out small relays with a bent 
screwdriver.




40  
Practical Wireless February 2018
Fig. 1: SMPSUs come in a variety of shapes and sizes.
riety of s
● E-Mail: practicalwireless@warnersgroup.co.uk
Technical for the Terrified with Don Field G3XTT
I
n this month’s issue we feature 
a review of two switched-mode 
power supplies. Nowadays, 
though, you’ll ﬁ nd switched-mode 
power supplies everywhere, whether 
powering your laptop or desktop comput-
er, LED bulbs, your microwave oven or just 
about any electronic device in the home.
Fundamentals
A traditional, linear power supply takes the 
mains voltage and steps it up or down via 
a suitable transformer. Valve equipment, 
whether transceivers or linear ampliﬁ ers, 
generally requires high voltages of the 
order of several hundred or even a few 
thousand volts on the anode. There is also 
a requirement for a low voltage (typically 
6.3V AC) for the valve heaters. A suitable 
power supply would, therefore, have 
two secondary windings on the mains 
transformer, one to give the necessary 
high voltage (HT) supply (with suitable 
rectiﬁ cation and smoothing) and one to 
give the low voltage AC supply for the 
heaters.
Solid-state equipment, as used by radio 
amateurs, is usually designed to work on 
voltages ranging from 12V to 13.8V (the 
latter because this is the usual open-circuit 
voltage of a car battery). In some case, 
higher voltages (such as 50V) are required 
for, as an example, high power MOSFET 
power ampliﬁ er stages of a transmitter. 
Conversely, lower DC voltages may be 
needed to power various logic circuits, a 
5V requirement being not untypical.
Again, there is nothing to prevent a 
traditional linear power supply being used, 
with one or more secondary windings on 
the transformer according the voltages 
required within the equipment. The AC 
from the secondary winding is then 
rectiﬁ ed and smoothed in the usual way, 
usually with a voltage stabiliser of some 
sort, short-circuit protection and any other 
monitoring circuitry that maybe deemed 
necessary. The block diagram, Fig. 2, 
shows the sort of thing.
This is all well and good but 
transformers designed to work at mains 
frequency (50Hz in the UK) are substantial 
and heavy, needing lots of iron in their 
core along with lots of expensive copper 
wire. In contrast, switched mode power 
supplies offer a number of advantages 
in terms of size and weight. Although the 
circuitry is somewhat more complex than 
linear power supplies (see, for example, 
the internal photo of the Nissei supply 
in this month’s review), they can be 
substantially cheaper because, as we all 
know from the way the cost of PCs has 
fallen, a lot of circuit complexity can be 
bought very cheaply nowadays whereas 
big transformers remain expensive.
The Theory
The RSGB’s Radio Communication 
Handbook opts out of explaining the 
theory, saying that the “subject would 
ﬁ ll a book”. The ARRL Handbook is 
more helpful in explaining the various 
approaches and, as you would expect, 
there’s quite a lot of material on the 
internet, some more readable than others 
(as usual, Google is your friend). 
The name is the main clue, though. 
Unlike a linear power supply, the pass 
transistor of a switched mode power 
supply (SMPSU) continually switches 
between low-dissipation, full-on and 
full-off states, and spends very little time 
in the high dissipation transitions, which 
minimises wasted energy so that efﬁ ciency 
can be much higher, typically up to 75% 
or so, even higher in some small units 
Switched Mode
Power Supplies
Don Field G3XTT, with help from the PW technical 
team, explains what a Switched Mode Power Supply 
is and its Advantages and Disadvantages compared 
with Conventional Linear Power Supplies

February 2018 Practical Wireless  
41
working at switching frequencies as high 
as 750kHz or more. Voltage regulation is 
achieved by varying the ratio of on-to-off 
time. In contrast, a linear power supply 
regulates the output voltage by continually 
dissipating power in the pass transistor. 
This higher power conversion efﬁ ciency is 
an important advantage of an SMPSU. 
The input supply can be a true DC 
voltage from a battery or solar panel, or 
a rectiﬁ ed DC voltage from an AC supply 
using a diode bridge along with some 
additional capacitive ﬁ ltering. In the case 
of a mains SMPSU, a transformer is 
usually included for isolation purposes.
The heart of a typical modern SMPSU 
is an IC that handles all the clever stuff. 
This IC doesn’t have to deal with the 
incoming rectiﬁ ed 220V but controls 
a power FET of some sort (MOSFET, 
IGFET, and so on) that is happy with such 
voltages. Because the switching is done 
at high frequencies, any transformer that 
might be required can be a lot smaller than 
one working at 50Hz, again saving cost, 
weight and size. Any residual ripple on 
the supply will also be at a much higher 
frequency than in a linear power supply 
and will therefore require a lower value 
smoothing capacitor than would otherwise 
be the case, thereby saving size.
Circuit Implementations
There are various ways in which SMPSUs 
can be implemented (you’ll come across 
terms like the Buck converter, the Boost 
converter, the Buck-Boost converter or 
the Flyback converter, for example). In 
each case the mains input is rectiﬁ ed, 
chopped up (switched, hence the name) 
into a square wave, transformer isolated 
then rectiﬁ ed. There is feedback from 
the output that controls the duty cycle to 
maintain voltage regulation Because the 
transformer is an isolation transformer, 
Fig. 2: Block diagram of a typical linear PSU.
Rectiﬁer / Filter
Rectiﬁer / Filter
Fuse
Mains
AC
Regulated
output
Primary
ground
Secondary
ground
Switching
Transformer
Ref.
Reference 
ampliﬁer
Opto-isolator
PWM Driver
50/60Hz
sense
Isolation
t
Fig. 3: Block diagram of an SMPSU.
Transformer
Rectiﬁer
Filter
Regulator
Fuse
Mains
AC
Regulated
output
rather than a voltage step up/down, it is 
not needed in, for example, a 12V to 5.2V 
DC to DC SMPSU. The feedback signal is 
often isolated with an opto-coupler
The block diagram, Fig. 2, shows a 
basic switch-mode supply.
The main disadvantage of switched 
mode power supplies is that the square 
waves that I mentioned earlier are, 
by deﬁ nition, an amalgam of a basic 
frequency and lots of harmonics. If not 
properly screened and smoothed, those 
harmonic frequencies can propagate 
some distance from the power supply, 
causing problems to your HF reception 
– some cheap, plastic wall-wart style 
power supplies are terrible in this respect, 
producing spurious outputs across the 
bands. I heard recently of some handhelds 
from two well-known manufacturers that 
were bought for military use. The radios 
passed acceptance tests without problems 
but the power supplies failed dramatically 
because of spurious emissions. Modern, 
properly designed switched mode PSUs, 
however, can be as electrically quiet as 
their linear counterparts and perfectly 
acceptable for shack use as well as, often, 
being light enough and small enough for 
portable operations. Some also include a 
facility to change the switching frequency 
so that, should the odd spurious output 
occur, it can be moved to a frequency that 
isn’t important to you. 
MASTERCARD, ACCESS, SWITCH, BARCLAYCARD
accepted. P&P £3 under £15. Over Free, unless otherwise stated.
Please make cheques payable to J. Birkett
REGULATOR 2 AMP MC78 C12-CK @ 6 FOR £1.00
GOOD QUALITY BLACK SMALL KNOBS @ 50P EACH OR 5 
FOR £2.00
MULLARD WIRE ENDED 2200 UF 25 VW @ 4 FOR £1.00
EAGLE TRANSFORMERS LT44 @ £1.00,LT700 @ £1.00
DISC CERAMICS 0.01 UF 500 VW @ 8 FOR £1.00
AIR SPACED VARIABLE CAPACITORS 200+300 PF @ £4.50
WIMA WIRE ENDED 0.068 UF 400 VW @ 8 FOR £1.00
SIEMENS GERMANIUM DIODE 0A85 @ 4 FOR £1.00
WIRE WOUND POTENTIOMETERS 25 OHM,250 OHM,2.5K ALL 
@ £2.00 EACH
VINTAGE AMMETER 0 TO 25 AMP FOR £5.00
MAT TRANSISTORS LIKE MAT121 CV5441 @ 4 FOR £1.00
10 WAY CERAMIC TAG STRIPS @ 50P
¼” COIL FORMERS WITH COIL @ 8 FOR £1.00
ROTARY SWITCHES 1 POLE 11 WAY @ £1.50, 3 POLE 4 WAY 
@ £1.50
MULLARD TRANSISTOR OC43 @ 4 FOR £1.00
SMALL CAPACITORS 0.15 UF 400 VW @ 8 FOR £1.00
AIR SPACED VARIABLE CAPACITOR WITH SM DRIVE 200+400 
PF @ £4.50, JACKSON TYPES 10 PF @ £3.50,15 PF @ £3.95, 20 
PF @ £4.50
PLESSEY CAPACITOR 0.02 UF 1500 VW @ 6 FOR £1.00
25 The Strait.
Lincoln LN2 1JF.
Tel: 01522 520767.
Partners J.H.Birkett.
Partners J.L.Birkett.
J. BIRKETT.
ELECTRONIC COMPONENT SUPPLIERS
POLYESTER CAPACITORS 0.1 UF 250 VAC 600 VDC @ 5 FOR 
£1.50,0.22 UF 250 VAC 600 VDC @ 5 FOR £1.00,0.68 UF 250 VAC 
600 VDC @ 8 FOR £1.00
POWER FETS BUZ255 @ 6 FOR £1.00
RF POWER TRANSISTORS BLY92C @ £1.00 EACH OR 4 FOR £3.00
FETS HOUSE CODED 2N3819 (E5565) @ 5 FOR £1.00
AIR SPACED VARIABLE CAPACITORS 350+400+25+25PF WITH 
SLOW MOTION DRIVE @ £4.50 EACH OR 4 FOR £10.00
WIRE ENDED 10 UF 350 VW @ 3 FOR £1.00
SMALL 3 TO 12 VOLT MOTORS @ 3 FOR £1.00
TRANSISTORS BF200 @ 20 FOR £1.00
SOLDER- IN FEED THRUS 6.8 PF @ 6 FOR £1.00,1000 PF @ 6 
FOR £1.00
VALVE PLUGS NO COVERS B7G @ 50P,B9A @ 50P,OCTAL @ 50P
PHILIPS CONCENTRIC TRIMMERS 30 PF @ 3 FOR £1.00
POWER TRANSISTORS AL103 @ 6 FOR £1.00, 2N6496 @ 6 FOR 
£1.00, 2N5039 @ 6 FOR £1.00, 2N3054 @ 8 FOR £1.00
www.zyra.org.uk/birkett.htm
 
S U P P L I E R S  O F  E L E C T R O N I C  C O M P O N E N T S
Visit our website and order on-line at
Web: www.bowood-electronics.co.uk
or send large letter stamp for catalogue
E-mail: sales@bowood-electronics.co.uk
Contact: Will Outram
Unit 10, Boythorpe Business Park, Dock Walk,
Boythorpe, Chesterfield S40 2QR
 Telephone: 01246 200222

42  
Practical Wireless February 2018
Tim Kirby, G4VXE, Willowside, Bow Bank, Longworth OX13 5ER ● E-mail: tim@g4vxe.com  ● Twitter: g4vxe 
World of VHF with Tim Kirby G4VXE
T
ypically, when we think 
about moonbounce (earth-
moon-earth, EME) contacts, 
we think of very high power 
being needed as well as huge 
antenna systems. Until recently, it would 
have been very hard to envisage a UK 
Foundation licensee being able to make 
a successful EME contact, running a 
genuine 10W.
Excitingly though, with the availability of 
digital signal processing and some excellent 
software, along with some well-equipped 
stations around the world with skilled, 
enthusiastic and patient operators, the pos-
sibilities are much better.
It was with great pleasure then, that I 
heard from our good friends at the Essex 
DX Group about a recent 70cm (432MHz) 
EME contact made by Dorothy Stanley 
M6EBQ using Tom Hackett’s M0ABA sta-
tion, Fig. 1. The gear was 10W from a Yaesu 
FT-857 into a DG7YBN design 17-element 
Yagi. 
Tom M0ABA takes up the story. “I started 
watching the HB9Q logger for activity at my 
moonrise. Conditions were ‘interesting’ with 
some heavy fading. While I was waiting for 
Dorothy and her husband Richard to arrive, 
I decided to ‘warm up the frequency’ with 
Bernd DL7APV, running 5W into the 17-ele-
ment Yagi. After about 20 minutes, I got the 
all important OOO report but, unfortunately, 
conditions didn’t allow us to complete the 
contact. Maybe another time!
“Once Dorothy arrived, she started to call 
DL7APV and after a few sequences, Bernd 
reported that he was hearing someone 
replying to his CQs. After a few more CQs, 
Dorothy and the team were very excited 
to see M6EBQ DL7APV JO62 OOO on 
the screen! After repeating RO a couple of 
times, the rest of the QSO went through. 
Bernd closed the contact by sending ‘TNX 
QSO −22’!” 
Considering that WSJT will decode sig-
nals down to −29 or −30 (this ﬁ gure repre-
sents the signal strength in decibels relative 
to the noise level), this shows that there was 
plenty of signal to spare. Tom says that the 
best report he’d had with the Yagi before, 
when testing at higher power, was −24.
Congratulations to Dorothy on mak-
ing what we think is the ﬁ rst successful 
EME contact by a UK Foundation licensee 
(unless you know differently!). Congratula-
tions to Tom M0ABA as well, for hosting 
another really inspirational piece of VHF/
UHF operating. Both the team at the Essex 
DX Group and I hope that more people will 
be encouraged to have a go at some simple 
EME operating. If you do, please let me 
know how you get on.
A New Satellite to Play With: AO-91
After a successful launch a few days earlier, 
the Fox-1B satellite, now known as AO-91, 
was released for general usage on the US 
Thanksgiving holiday. We’ve got lots of 
information about what’s been happening 
with it in our satellite news this month, but 
sufﬁ ce to say that it’s probably the easiest 
satellite to listen to. If you want to prove 
it, listen to the 145.960MHz downlink fre-
quency when the satellite is around (or just 
leave your set monitoring, or scanning the 
channel) and whether you’re using a collin-
ear, a beam or even a simple handheld and 
rubber duck antenna, you’ll almost certainly 
hear something. On one pass over London, 
just after the satellite was launched, I heard 
signals on my Radiooddity GD-77 dual-
band DMR handheld (using the FM mode, 
of course) with the squelch on! It’s loud. The 
uplink is on 435.250MHz, where you will 
have to adjust your transmit frequency to 
compensate for Doppler shift. Start off on 
435.240, then 435.245, 435.250 at closest 
approach, 435.255 and then 435.260MHz 
as the satellite goes away over the horizon.
The 6m Band
Peter Taylor EA8/G8BCG has been con-
centrating on 6m EME from his QTH in IL39 
where, he says, he discovered that despite 
having a minimum horizon elevation of 16° 
at moonrise and a ﬁ xed horizontal Yagi, he 
can work EME beaming into the ground! On 
November 5th, Peter worked JG2BRI and 
ZS6NK for two new initial contacts from 
EA8, followed by more initial contacts over 
the next week, including ES6EQ (DXCC 100 
from EA8, well done!), OH7KM, VP8WOS 
Fig. 1: A screenshot of the record breaking 432MHz moonbounce contact between M6EBQ and DL7APV.
Moonbounce with 10W
Tim Kirby G4VXE asks, “Can a Foundation licensee 
make a moonbounce contact using only 10 watts?” 
There is all the usual news too.

February 2018 Practical Wireless 	
43
(Chris G3WOS for DXCC 101), W9JN, 
JA7QVI, OH6MIK and JG1TSG. 
Here at G4VXE, I’ve had FT8 running 
most of the time and managed a nice 
‘tropo’ contact with G3YQC (IO82). In early 
December, I’ve been monitoring MSK144 
on the band – initially with short reflections 
from stations such as GM3NKG (IO85) and 
then today, December 9th, worked HG5OGI 
(JN97) and S59SV (JN76). It’s always fun 
to make these contacts using the simple 
V2000 vertical. 
The 2m Band
Jef Van Raepenbusch ON8NT (Aalter) has 
been operating OP8NT during November, 
commemorating World War 1. He says that 
he didn’t have so much time to operate as 
normal because, “I was involved in the set-
ting up and running of an exhibition on ‘the 
history of Radio Communication in the first 
World War’ together with the local heritage 
society, city council and local parish in the 
Saint Mary Church in Maria-Aalter.
“Next to the exhibition we also had a 
stand of our local radio club UBA-ALT under 
the slogan “Communicate worldwide with-
out the help of the internet, become a ham 
operator!”
“We had a functioning WSPR station 
(5W) on HF and an indoor antenna. Also on 
display was my 5-element LPDA antenna for 
satellite work together with my ID-51 port-
able radio.
“We guided classes of youngsters and 
teachers from the local schools around the 
exhibition and our stand. One young girl 
of around 12 years asked me, “Can you 
really talk to astronauts in the ISS with that 
antenna?” and her eyes were blinking...
“Youngsters also got an exercise for 
the classroom and at home to look for 
our special event station OP0PPY, Fig. 2, 
on wsprnet.org to see where our station 
was received... Afterwards we got positive 
feedback from teachers who were combin-
ing this exercise with geography and maths. 
The youngsters were really surprised and 
excited that a small transmitter in their local 
church was received worldwide!”
On the 2m band, Jef found condi-
tions excellent on November 1st, working 
2W0JYN (IO83), M0CGL (JO03), M5AEH 
(JO02) and F6HPP/) (JN19). During the 
UK Activity Contest on November 7th, Jef 
found conditions poor with a number of 
stations heard but not worked. He did work 
M0DXR/P (JO01), G4ZTR (JO01), G4LDL/P 
(IO91), G4ODA (IO92) and G6UBM (JO01).
It’s always good to hear from Derek 
Brown G8ECI (Lincolnshire) who writes, 
“I’ve been quite active in the recent 2m UK 
Activity contests and 144MHz AFS. Not too 
many stations worked but if I can hear them, 
I can work them, proving that the new an-
tenna farm is working as expected. I may be 
losing up to 3dB of my transmit power in the 
quite long feeder runs, around 40m to the 
antennas, so am seriously thinking of getting 
the old DK1OF single 4CX250B amplifier 
down from the shelf where it has sat for the 
last 17 years! I just need to gingerly apply 
mains power to it, to reform the smoothers 
and the like. That will bring my power back 
to 300W at the amplifier. Perhaps 4CX250Bs 
are old hat nowadays but I just don’t feel 
comfortable laying out for a solid-state 
power amplifier when I have 300W already 
proven and working.
“Highlights of the stations worked in the 
two contests: GI4SNA, GW8JLY, GW8ASD 
and many others, in a very obstructed direc-
tion from my QTH, as is most of the main-
land UK, with rising ground to 300ft ASL 
within a few miles. In the other direction, I 
worked OZ1BEF in JO46 with 59 reports 
both ways”.
Peter G8BCG had some excellent EME 
contacts on the band from his Cornish QTH, 
including YC2MDU, W5ADD, F6HEO, NH6Y, 
KL7UW, N0AKC, ZS5LEE, W7JW, W8KEN, 
SK5AA, JH1PFP, VK5APN, F6HVK, EW7AW, 
OK1UGA, RW3PX, DL6SH, JF3MKC, F8DO, 
V31EME, OH6ZZ, DL9DBJ, K0TPP, ZL3NW 
(Peter’s best DX on 2m), W8TN, KB7IJ, 
OH6UW and OK1VRY. Peter had some 
lovely feedback from Rich KB7IJ, “I’ve 
never seen a better signal from a single Yagi 
station!”. Peter says that his single Inno-
vAntennas 12-element LFA Yagi obviously 
works. Well done – some amazing DX there, 
Peter. 
The 70cm Band
During the UK 432MHz Activity Contest on 
Fig. 2: The station at OP0PPY, commemorating World War 1.
Fig. 3: A nice shot of CT1FJC’s new balcony antenna system for satellites.

44 	
Practical Wireless February 2018
World of VHF
November 14th, Jef OP8NT worked G3XDY 
(JO02), G3PYE/P (JO02), G4FEV (IO92) and 
G4ODA (IO92).
Satellites
Jef OP8NT monitored two ISS ARISS con-
tacts during the month, one on November 
3rd, conducted by Paulo IZ0JPA in Italian 
and one on November 30th, again with 
Paulo IZ0JPA operating, this time in English. 
On November 3rd, Jef worked CT1FJC 
(IM57) through AO-85.
Kevin Hewitt M0GTD writes, “I spent 
most of November in Chatham, Kent. During 
my stay I received telemetry from RadFxSat 
(Fox-1B) shortly after launch. I was using an 
Icom IC-271 with a crossed dipole for the 
WX band mounted in the loft and the audio 
connected to a PC running FoxTelem. A few 
days later I was monitoring 145.960MHz 
and heard a digitised voice announce ‘Fox-1 
Safe Mode’. The ISS detector Pro Android 
App was quick to provide preliminary pass 
data after launch and pass predictions once 
orbit was established. I also tried monitoring 
AO-85 for SSTV images on experimenters 
Wednesday and only heard a digitised voice 
announce ‘Fox-1’.”
Back in Gibraltar, where Kevin operates 
as ZB2GI, he continues, “I attempted to 
operate via RadFxSat (Fox-1B) designated 
AO-91 and the westerly pass was very 
busy with stations in Portugal, Italy, Spain 
and England all easily received on the very 
strong 2m downlink. The Portuguese sta-
tion dominated the pass and I was unable 
to complete a contact. The ARISS MAI-75 
Slow Scan system in the Russian Service 
Module of the ISS transmitted SSTV im-
ages on December 6th and 7th. The PD120 
RS0ISS SSTV images depicted Russian 
Cosmonautic anniversaries. I received six 
full and three partial images, twice receiv-
ing two full images on the same pass. My 
setup comprised an FT-817 connected via 
a data interface to a notebook PC running 
MMSSTV and a manually tracked 2m/70cm 
log periodic. The FT-817 signal meter was 
full scale during the passes. ISS detector 
Pro Android App provided pass predica-
tions and the direction/elevation to point the 
antenna”.
Mark Marment CT1FJC (Algarve) hasn’t 
had so much time for operating this month 
but has made some nice contacts, Fig. 3, 
including CT8/DL7VTX (HM58), MI6GTY 
(IO64), 2M0SQL (IO87) and CU2ZG (HM77) 
using the FM satellites as well as M0NPT 
(IO92), G0ABI (IO80) and GM4ZJI (IO86) 
among others through FO-29.
Patrick Stoddard WD9EWK (Phoe-
nix) writes, “the launch of AO-91 was the 
big thing for satellite operators in the past 
month. It fixed the shortcomings in the 
uplink receiver on AO-85, and has been 
worked by many operators with HTs, rub-
ber duck antennas (duckies), and milliwatt 
power levels − even down to 50mW from 
a Kenwood TH-D72, or 100mW from a 
Yaesu VX-3. Over here, I have heard many 
operators who are giving satellite operating 
a try for the first time and others who were 
active years ago when AO-27 and AO-51 
were on the air. The footprint, larger than 
we currently have with AO-85 or SO-50, has 
also helped to increase activity. From my 
front yard, I have made AO-91 QSOs when 
the satellite was only 3° to 5° above the 
horizon – a good demonstration of how well 
the satellite’s uplink receiver works, coupled 
with the downlink transmitter operating at 
500mW to almost 700mW on 145.960MHz.
“Once AO-91 was opened up to 
amateurs on Thanksgiving Day here in the 
USA (November 23rd), the daytime passes 
have been busy. The larger footprint means 
that more stations in the continental USA 
and Canada were able to work stations 
in Central America and even the northern 
parts of South America. The recent HC8LUT 
Galapagos DXpedition included AO-91 with 
other satellites they worked, making more 
operators happy with FM satellite QSOs. 
By comparison, the night time passes have 
been less crowded and these have been 
times for many to experiment with less-than-
ideal stations.
“I have done a fair bit of late-night 
experimenting, starting with the four-day 
Thanksgiving holiday weekend. Here is my 
list of radio/antenna combinations I have 
used with AO-91:
• Icom IC-2730 and Elk log periodic (full-
duplex, also varying transmit power)
• Kenwood TH-D72 and Elk log periodic 
(full-duplex)
• Kenwood TH-D74 and MFJ 2m/70cm long 
duckie
• Wouxun KG-UV9D and MFJ 2m/70cm 
long duckie (full-duplex)
• Yaesu VX-3 and Elk log periodic
• Yaesu VX-3 and MFJ 2m/70cm long 
duckie (varying transmit power between 
100mW & 1W)
• Baofeng UV-5R and Diamond SRJ77CA 
long duckie
“I have also worked some AO-91 passes 
with combinations of two radios – for ex-
ample, my IC-2730 and SDRplay RSP1 
connected through a diplexer to my Elk log 
periodic, or a TH-D74 for the uplink and 
a 30-year-old Kenwood TH-215 for the 
downlink − using long duckies on each HT. 
Hearing the AO-91 downlink with HTs and 
their standard duckies also works on higher 
passes and I have seen some reports of 
QSOs being made that way. As with AO-
85, the Chinese-made HTs that advertise 
crossband or full-duplex operation appear 
to work fine with AO -91. I have already tried 
my Wouxun KG-UV9D and I expect the oth-
ers that I successfully tested with AO-85 in 
2015, including the Wouxun KG-UV8D and 
Anytone TERMN-8R - would also work fine 
with AO-91 full-duplex.
“I had an AMSAT table at the Supersti-
tion ‘Superfest Hamfest’, not far from my 
house, on December 2nd. Since AO-85’s 
launch in 2015, followed by the recent AO-
91 launch, satellites were a popular topic at 
this Hamfest. I had some demonstrations 
during the Hamfest on different satellites, 
including these two and others such as 
FO-29 and CAS-4B. Hams watching my 
demonstrations were able to listen to AO-85 
and AO-91 on their own HTs, or on some 
HTs I had at my table. I still had an external 
speaker connected to the radios I used for 
the demonstrations, but it is always better 
when the hams are able to hear the FM sat-
ellite downlinks on their own equipment.
“Besides the AO-91 excitement, we have 
had some SSTV from the ISS. The MAI-75 
test didn’t cover passes over Arizona but 
there was some worldwide ARISS SSTV 
before the MAI-75 test. I recorded the trans-
missions with my TH-D74, then transferred 
the recordings from the HT to my tablet and 
decoded them using RX-SSTV. I had some 
really good pictures, including one when 
the ISS passed directly over my head on a 
Wednesday evening pass during the trans-
mission. The daytime passes I monitored 
had some noise, which came from a Russian 
voice announcing where the ISS was pass-
ing over at that moment. Those announce-
ments weren’t present in the transmissions I 
heard in the evening.”
Graham Jones G3VKV (Cheltenham) 
has been using AO-91 too, for some nice 
contacts. On November 30th, Graham 
worked N1AIA in Maine on a sub-2° eleva-
tion pass and on December 8th, he worked 
N1AIA again as well as TF8KY.
Finally
Thanks for all your news this month. I must 
say it’s full of the sort of operating that fas-
cinates me – making me want to go outside 
(it’s currently −2°C here), assemble some an-
tennas and point them at the sky! I hope you 
want to go outside and put antennas up too 
– but don’t freeze! See you next month. 

February 2018 Practical Wireless  
45
DCA75
Online upgradeable
Great for testing, identifying and measuring a huge range of discrete 
semiconductor devices such as transistors, MOSFETs, diodes, 
IGBTs, LEDs and much more!
- Graphics display shows you
  detailed component schematics. 
- Connect any way round!
- Built-in USB offers amazing PC
  based features too such as curve
  tracing and analysis in Excel. 
- PC software on a USB flash drive. 
- Includes Alkaline AAA battery,
  universal test probes and comprehensive printed user guide.
Advanced Semiconductor
Analyser and Curve Tracer
£111.00
£92.50+VAT
“A very capable analyser”
£99.90
with discount!
electronic design ltd
® 10% Online Discount for Practical Wireless Readers!
Use code: PW10 during checkout
 peakelec.co.uk     01298 70012 (+44 1298 70012)
UK designed and manufactured
UK delivery
£4.80inc VAT
LCR45
Ideal for hobbysists and professionals
The latest version of our popular LCR meter not only identifies 
and measures your passive components (Inductors, Capacitors 
and Resistors) but also measures complex impedance, magnitude 
of impedance with phase and admittance too!
Auto and Manual test modes allow you to select the test 
frequency and component type.
- Continuous fluid measurements.
- Improved measurement  resolution: (<0.2 H, <0.2pF).
- Test frequencies: DC, 1kHz, 15kHz, 200kHz.
- Measure the true impedance of speakers
   and more.
- Great for hobbyists
   and professionals.
ì
LCR and Impedance Meter
with Auto and Manual modes
Limited time offer. It’s only possible to show summary specifications, ask if you’d like detailed data. Further information is also available on our website. Product price refunded if not happy.
£81.00
with discount!
£90.00
£75.00+VAT
 
All items shipped from our UK factory. Prices exclude p&p. 
www.sotabeams.co.uk 
Tel: 01625-501643 
 
• 
Increase your SSB 
DX potential! 
 
• 
Up to 6dB apparent 
gain 
 
£39.95 kit 
 
£52.00 built and tested 
Speech Compressor 
for the FT-817 
Customer comments... 
 
“a must for all 817 users” 
 
“a worthwhile addition” 
 
“very punchy audio” 
 
“thrilled with this upgrade” 

46  
Practical Wireless February 2018
● E-Mail: practicalwireless@warnersgroup.co.uk
Data Modes with Mike Richards G4WNC
T
his is obviously a good 
time of year for new 
receivers because we had 
the Airspy HF+ last month 
and we have a new release 
from SDRplay with the RSP-1A (Radio 
Spectrum Processor), Fig. 1. As you can 
guess from the name, this is the successor 
to the original RSP-1 that was launched 
back in 2014. Not only does the RSP-1A 
offer some very useful improvements but 
they have been able to reduce the price to 
just under £100! Here’s a quick run through 
some of the changes.
Most of the budget SDR receiv-
ers employ a similar architecture with 
an analogue tuner followed by the ADC 
(Analogue to Digital Converter) to digitise 
the signal. From a listener’s viewpoint, one 
of the main beneﬁ ts of SDRs is their ability 
to display a spectrum view of entire band 
segments. However, the snag with this is 
the requirement to pass a wide band of 
RF through the preampliﬁ er and mixing 
stages. That leaves the system open to all 
manner of problems, if there are any strong 
signals around. If any signals drive the 
front-end or the mixer into non-linearity, 
spurious products will be generated and 
these will pass to the mixer to create a 
confused soup of signals, many of which 
were generated within the radio rather than 
being received off-air. To help moderate 
the ill effects, designers employ software-
switched preselection ﬁ lters to help control 
the range of frequencies presented to the 
mixer. The RSP-1 tackled this problem 
with eight band ﬁ lters but the new RSP-1A 
has 11 ﬁ lter bands, all of which use higher 
order ﬁ lters, so they are sharper. The main 
ﬁ lters are supplemented by user-controlled 
notch ﬁ lters to attenuate the strong signals 
in the MW, VHF/FM and DAB bands. RF 
gain control in the RSP-1 was limited to 
switching the RF ampliﬁ er on/off, which 
was too coarse an adjustment. The RSP-
1A uses a new front-end architecture with 
a useful ten-step gain adjustment that is a 
signiﬁ cant improvement.
In a further attempt to control spurious 
signals, the plastic case of the RSP-1A 
has a conductive coating to provide some 
additional screening. If you’re into very low 
frequency monitoring, you’ll be pleased to 
hear that coverage is now continuous from 
1kHz right through to 2GHz. The RSP-
1A also adds a bias-T power feed that’s 
switchable in software. This is very useful 
for monitoring the higher frequency bands 
where masthead preampliﬁ ers are often 
essential.
The sharp eyed may also notice that 
the ADC resolution has increased from 
12-bit to 14-bit in the RSP-1A. This is 
made possible thanks to the availability 
of a previously undocumented feature of 
the decimator in the RSP-1A’s sigma-delta 
ADC. The extra resolution is only available 
when tuning below 6MHz and is automati-
cally activated. In practice, you are unlikely 
to notice much difference, unless you hap-
pen to live in an area with a very low HF 
noise ﬂ oor. Another very welcome change 
is the inclusion of a TCXO (Temperature 
Compensated Crystal Oscillator). This is 
a 0.5ppm device that can be adjusted to 
0.01ppm using the SDR software. When 
used with SDRplay’s, SDRuno software, 
the RSP-1A can be used as a measur-
ing receiver with an accuracy of around 
±1dB and a readout in dBm in 50Ω. This 
is a very clever adaptation of the software 
that employs look-up tables that store the 
gain proﬁ le of all the RSP-1 and 2 receiv-
ers. I measured the accuracy when I last 
reviewed SDRuno and I also checked that 
it works properly with the RSP-1A.
So, if you’re in the market for a 1kHz 
to 2GHz budget SDR, you really ought 
to consider the RSP-1A. It retails at just 
£99.60 inclusive of VAT and DHL delivery. 
The RSP-1A is available directly from SDR-
play or from many popular radio suppliers.
Spy Server Enhancements
I’ve mentioned the developing story of Spy 
Server several times in this column and 
the software continues to evolve. With the 
release of some pre-production Airspy HF+ 
receivers and further development of the 
Fig. 1: The new SDRplay RSP-1A.
A New SDRplay
Mike Richards G4WNC has news of a new release from SDRplay, enhancements to Spy 
Server and some thoughts about measuring SDR performance.

February 2018 Practical Wireless  
47
Spy Server software, a new server page 
has been added to the Airspy web site. 
You can ﬁ nd the site here: 
https://airspy.com/spy-servers 
When using Spy Servers with SDR 
Sharp you can enter the web address of 
the remote server and control their receiver 
using SDR Sharp. There are a few limita-
tions and you will see that some receivers 
are locked to a speciﬁ c band. You will also 
ﬁ nd that even with the free tuning stations, 
the centre frequency is locked whenever 
two or more people connect. This is be-
cause it’s not possible to have two or more 
people control the same hardware. As 
well as a good opportunity to test the Spy 
Server technology, the servers give you the 
opportunity to try the new Airspy HF+ as 
well as other receivers in the Airspy range.
Here’s a step-by-step guide to using a 
remote Spy Server:
Download and install the latest version 
of SDR Sharp:
www.airspy.com/download
Run SDR Sharp.
In the Source drop-down menu select 
Spy Server.
Immediately below the Source drop-
down, you should see URL entry panel 
(Fig. 2). Enter the URL of the server you 
want to connect to using this format:
sdr://airspy.pi-hacks.com:5555
Make sure that Use full IQ is unticked 
and use the default setting for Bandwidth 
and IQ Format.
Start SDR Sharp using the Play button 
in the top left corner.
That should start the connection and 
you should see the display come to life. 
You can start tuning around and setting 
the receive mode and so on in the same 
way as when you’re connected to a local 
receiver. If you get stuttering audio or FFT 
display, that’s a sign that the internet link 
can’t support the required data rate. There 
are a few things you can do to reduce the 
data rate demand as follows:
Set the IQ format to a lower setting. 
The order from high to low is: Float 32-bit, 
PCM 24-bit, PCM 16-bit and PCM 8-bit.
Try reducing the Bandwidth setting.
If that doesn’t ﬁ x the stuttering, you 
need to improve your internet speed. If 
your computer is Wi-Fi connected, try 
moving closer to the router because con-
nection speed is directly related to Wi-Fi 
signal strength. A much faster alternative 
is to use an Ethernet connection to your 
router. If that doesn’t ﬁ x it, you could try 
some network diagnostics to see whether 
you can pinpoint the root cause. There 
are lots of network tools out there but a 
favourite of mine is Ping Plotter Free. As 
you can guess by the name, this is a free 
version, so it has a limited set of tools, but 
they are ﬁ ne for our purposes. Ping Plotter 
works by sending out ping requests to 
the target server and measures both the 
overall response time and plots the perfor-
mance of the intermediate nodes. This will 
quickly identify any problem spots on the 
route. If you can’t ﬁ nd an easy solution for 
the connection, then you should probably 
move on and try using a different server.
www.pingplotter.com/products/free.
html
SDR Performance Measurement
With the rapid spread of SDR technology 
there has been much debate about the 
best way to measure the performance of 
SDRs. Because the architecture of SDRs 
is so radically different to the traditional 
superhet-based receivers many of the 
measurements we have become familiar 
with are not very useful for SDRs. A classic 
example is the third order intercept, which 
is a calculated ﬁ gure that is only meaning-
ful for analogue receivers. I’ve read several 
papers on the subject and one measure-
ment system is becoming increasing 
favoured and that is Noise Power Ratio 
or NPR. I remember this from my distant 
past when I used to work on transmission 
networks with Post Ofﬁ ce Telephones (now 
BT). 
In the 1960s and 70s all the long-dis-
tance trunk circuits used a Frequency Divi-
sion Multiplex technique to squeeze lots 
of 4kHz-wide telephone channels down 
a single coaxial cable. The basic building 
block was called a Group and comprised 
twelve 4kHz wide channels in a frequency 
band of 60-108kHz, Fig. 3. These could 
then be combined into a Supergroup 
that carried ﬁ ve Groups (60 channels) in 
a band 312-552kHz. A further develop-
ment combined 15 Supergroups into a 
Hypergroup with 900 channels (312kHz-
Fig. 2: SDR Sharp Spy Server entry.
12 x 4kHz
Channels
Group
60-108kHz
12 x 4kHz
Channels
Group
60-108kHz
Supergroup
312-552kHz
Supergroup
312-552kHz
5 groups
15 supergroups
Hypergroup
900 channels
312kHz-4.096MHz
Coax
trunk cable
Spy Server 
URL entry
Fig. 3: Telecoms FDM communications link.

48  
Practical Wireless February 2018
Data Modes
4.096MHz). To support transmission over 
long distances, the combined RF spectrum 
used ampliﬁ ers (known as repeaters) to 
boost the signal strength. The quality of 
these ampliﬁ ers was critical to the overall 
performance of the link, so they needed 
to be very low-noise, highly linear devices. 
Any intermodulation in the ampliﬁ er would 
trigger the generation of spurious signals 
that would appear in the channels as 
noise. Because the channels were likely 
to be heavily used, a simple measurement 
technique was required to show how much 
noise would be introduced into an empty 
channel if the loading on the other chan-
nels was increased. 
The solution was to use a test signal 
that comprised a Gaussian noise source 
ﬁ ltered to the same bandwidth as the link 
under test, but with a switchable, narrow, 
notch ﬁ lter that was slightly wider than 
one of the 4kHz channels, Fig. 4. The 
Gaussian noise level is gradually increased 
and measurements taken from the target 
channel with the notch on and off. When 
the notched noise ﬂ oor of the test channel 
starts to rise, the ratio between the power 
with the notch out and with the notch in 
are recorded and become the noise power 
ratio for that system, Fig. 5. Although de-
veloped many years ago, this test is ideal 
for SDR receivers because it helps to dem-
onstrate how good the receiver is when 
trying to receive a weak signal in among 
lots of strong signals, such as during a 
contest or working DX on 40m in the even-
ing. When testing an SDR with a spectrum 
display, the NPR can be read directly from 
the screen. Just gradually increase the ap-
plied noise signal while tuned to the notch 
frequency. As soon as the noise starts to 
increase in the notch, the NPR is the ratio 
between the signal level in the notch and 
the noise power outside the notch, Fig. 6.
As far as a practical measurement 
system is concerned, there are a couple of 
approaches that I’m currently researching. 
The ﬁ rst is an analogue design based on 
a wideband RF noise source with ana-
logue notch ﬁ lters. I’ve found one design 
on the web but the hard part is produc-
ing a notch depth of around 90dB with a 
bandwidth of around 10kHz! This requires 
a very high-Q multi-stage notch ﬁ lter using 
ceramic resonators or crystals. An alterna-
tive approach is to go digital and generate 
Gaussian noise in software. This could 
then be applied to a digital bandpass ﬁ lter 
followed by a digital notch. I’ve also seen 
a suggestion that many random carriers 
could be used instead of the Gaussian 
noise. This would negate the need for a 
deep notch because carriers would not 
be generated for the test frequencies. I 
suspect the digital route is the best way 
forward and I’m currently experimenting 
with my Red Pitaya board because it has 
fast DACs (Digital to Analogue Converters) 
and a good-sized FPGA (Field Program-
mable Gate Array). Watch this space or my 
website (below) for more information.
g4wnc.com
Fig. 6: SDR NPR measurement.
Frequency
Amplitude
Measurement bandwidth
10kHz
0dB
At least -90dB
Measurement
notch
Frequency
Amplitude
Measurement bandwidth
0dB
Measurement
notch
Gaussian
noise
Noise
power
ratio
(dB)
NPR dB
Fig. 4: Gaussian noise with a measurement notch.
Fig. 5: NPR measurement.

February 2018 Practical Wireless  
49
● E-Mail: practicalwireless@warnersgroup.co.uk
What Next? with Colin Redwood G6MXL
Various
This month Colin Redwood G6MXL looks at a variety of topics, 
some of which should appeal to operators, while others will 
hopefully be of interest to those new to construction. 
W
elcome to another 
What Next. This month 
I’m responding to an 
e-mail from a reader 
and then looking at 
the ARRL’s new International Grid Chase, 
which started on January 1st. I’m following 
this with a few observations on the uptake 
of FT8 and its impact on the amount of 
PSK31/63 activity. I’m then moving over to 
the construction side of the hobby with a 
little audio amplifi er kit and, fi nally, I’m in-
cluding some help on identifying the values 
of small ceramic capacitors such as those 
used in the audio amplifi er kit.
Callsign Query
I don’t get many readers’ letters but when 
I do, they often cause me to do some re-
search to make sure that I provide the cor-
rect answer. The e-mail from Martyn Jones 
GW6ITJ is a case in point. Martyn writes, “I 
wonder if you could clear something up for 
me? I have hardly ever operated in England 
but once (many years ago) got derided for 
using GW6ITJ/A in London. However, on 
asking the RSGB they said this was correct. 
I still wonder, though. I think the licence is 
clear to use the given callsign (mine is GW). 
I use 
EA7/GW6ITJ in Spain. Many others closer 
to the borders will have this sorted so a silly 
question but I’ve been told there’s no such 
thing so here goes!”
Broadly speaking, this splits into two 
aspects: complying with your licence condi-
tions and amateur custom and practice. 
I’ll deal with licence conditions fi rst. For a 
while, a few years ago Ofcom appeared 
to want amateurs to adopt the practice of 
using the same callsign no matter where 
they operated from in the UK and Crown 
Dependencies (Isle of Man, Channel Is-
lands). The overwhelming voice of amateurs 
persuaded them to change their minds and 
section 2.44 of the current Ofcom guidance, 
URL below, from July 2017 is absolutely 
clear that the correct regional secondary lo-
cator must be used according to where the 
station is being operated from (thus GW6ITJ 
in Martyn’s case from Wales but GM6ITJ if 
in Scotland, for example).
https://tinyurl.com/y7eeshkr
So that takes care of the licence condi-
tions but what of amateur custom and 
practice? I suspect nearly all amateurs 
would fi nd it very strange to encounter a 
GW (or 2W or MW) prefi x when a station 
is operated anywhere other than in Wales. 
In my experience, amateurs use the prefi x 
of the country from which they are operat-
ing so G (or 2E or M) in England, GW (or 
2W or MW) in Wales and so on. When I 
checked the prefi xes used in the Practical 
Wireless 144MHz QRP Contest a few years 
ago, without exception both entrants and 
the stations they worked all used prefi xes 
that refl ected the country from which they 
operated. In case you are wondering, I used 
the 6–character locator to check against a 
map. There are several reasons for using 
the prefi x of the country where you are 
operating from. Firstly, on hearing a GW 
(or 2W or MW) prefi x, most amateurs with 
directional antennas would instinctively 
turn their beams towards Wales. Secondly, 
those amateurs who record the country that 
they have worked will assume that working 
a station with a GW (or 2W or MW) prefi x 
means they have worked a station in Wales, 
as will every computer logging program, 
award scheme, electronic QSLing system, 
contest multiplier based on DXCC entities 
and the DX Cluster.
I live in England, so I operate using 
G6MXL while in England. While I was on 
holiday in North Wales in June 2017, I 
operated using GW6MXL/P. As I send and 
receive QSL cards using the QSL bureau, 
I have sent some stamped addressed 
envelopes to both the relevant GW and 
G6 QSL bureau sub-managers. I’ve also 
made sure that my entries on QRZ.COM for 
GW6MXL/P and G6MXL refl ect how I like 
to confi rm contacts. I’ve also set up the ap-
propriate entries on Logbook of the World 
(LoTW), eQSL, and Clublog. I’ve also done 
the same when I have operated abroad.
So, to summarise, Ofcom guidance now 
refl ects what is the normal custom and 
practice of amateurs operating from within 
the UK and Crown Dependencies.
With regard to operating in Spain, Mar-
tyn needs to comply with Spanish Licence 
conditions. So Martyn is correctly prefi xing 
his home callsign with EA7/… which will 
also be recognised as Spain by logging pro-
grams, awards schemes and the like. Note 
that, generally, UK Foundation Licence and 
Intermediate Licences are not acceptable 
for operating abroad.
ARRL International Grid Chase
Throughout 2018, the American Radio 
Relay League (ARRL) is running the ARRL 
International Grid Chase, a special year-
long initiative based on four-character 
locator squares (such as IO82, JO01). Using 
almost any bands and any modes you are 
licensed to use, you make contacts as you 
might normally do, no matter whether they 
are ragchews, nets, DXing, contests or the 
latest datamodes. Unless you are actually 
participating in a contest, there’s no need to 
call CQ Contest or exchange serial numbers 
or similar. Just operate as you would have 
done anyway and upload your log to LoTW. 
Because LoTW knows your locator and 
the locator of the station you have worked, 
you’ll get a credit for each locator square 
you work where the station you worked has 
also uploaded their log to LoTW.
It doesn’t cost anything to sign up 
and use LoTW. I described the process 
in the December 2014 issue of PW. Don’t 
forget that if you operate from a variety of 
locations (perhaps some favourite hilltop 
locations, another part of the British Isles or 
abroad), then you’ll need to make sure that 
the appropriate callsigns and locations are 
set up in the TQSL program used to submit 
logs to LoTW, so that the correct locator is 
associated with each log that you submit.
The main exclusions from the ARRL 
International Grid Chase are the 60m band 
(and, it appears, 4m, which is not available 
in the USA) and terrestrial repeater con-
tacts. Satellite contacts certainly do count, 
as do all the main HF/VHF/UHF/SHF bands. 
All the usual modes count too − SSB, CW, 
FM, and data modes, including FT8. Don’t 
forget to download any updates to TQSL if 
you are prompted, so that it accepts all the 

50 	
Practical Wireless February 2018
latest modes.
There are several ways to find your 
locator. I think that the most reliable one for 
European stations to use is at:
http://qthlocator.free.fr/index.php 
PSK vs. FT8
Since its arrival in mid-2017, my impression 
is that many amateurs have switched to us-
ing FT8 rather than PSK31/PSK63 for many 
of their data mode activities. It has got to 
the point where it would be easy to get the 
impression that the lack of PSK signals on 
some bands might indicate that the band 
is closed. It was brought home to me one 
December morning. After I had a worked a 
string of stations on 30m (10.136MHz) using 
FT8, both European and some DX (Japan) 
using a typical ‘back-garden’ trapped 
dipole antenna and a few Watts, I moved up 
to 10.14MHz, to find the band was almost 
devoid of PSK31/63 activity. 
There are many amateurs who prefer 
the flexible nature of PSK contacts and the 
fact that even with the use of macros there 
is some variety between stations in what 
is sent and exchanged (PSK was always 
designed to be a ‘chat’ mode, which FT8 
absolutely is not). I acknowledge the advan-
tages of FT8 and the ease with which DX 
can be worked using it. However, it would 
be a pity if we all just use FT8 without using 
some of the other data modes. 
Audio Amplifier Kit
Tex Swann G1TEX, until recently PW’s 
technical editor, gave me a little audio 
amplifier kit to try, Fig. 1. It’s based around 
the popular LM386 integrated circuit and 
obtainable from a number of internet 
sources for between about £1 and £3. 
Search for LM386 amplifier kit on either of 
the websites below and you’ll find numer-
ous listings. It is clear that there are some 
small variations in the layout and compo-
nents supplied. I also purchased a kit from 
a different source from Tex, which omitted 
the volume control knob but included an 
extra LED, so I would certainly urge readers 
to carefully check that they have a full set of 
components!
www.aliexpress.com
www.ebay.co.uk
The kits are supplied with a small printed 
circuit board (PCB, about 37mm x 41mm – 
sizes vary) but with no documentation what-
soever and do not include a loudspeaker. 
However, the PCBs are well-labelled, Fig. 
2, and with a little thought and care, it is 
possible to work out which components 
go where. To help readers, Table 1 shows 
the component list but note that some kits 
are supplied with different value resistors. 
It requires a supply of between 3 and 12V 
DC (centre pin on the socket is positive). 
Having checked a datasheet for the LM386, 
it is clear that the design maximum voltage 
is 12V DC, so I would suggest avoiding us-
ing it with 13.8V supplies. There is a 3.5mm 
jack socket for the audio input.
In reality there is some flexibility with this 
10kΩ variable resistor
1kΩ resistor 
10Ω or 4.7kΩ resistor
0.1μF ceramic capacitor (marked 104)
0.1μF ceramic capacitor (marked 104)
3mm Red LED
10μF capacitor
100μF capacitor
1000μF capacitor 
3.5mm jack audio socket (Input)
PCB x 1
6 pins (for output, DC, input)
LM386 + IC socket
DC socket
Table 1: Typical components used in the audio amplifier kits.
Fig. 2: An example of the audio amplifier kits based around the LM386.
Fig. 3: The well-labelled PCB makes for easy 
construction (note layout varies between suppliers).
What Next?

February 2018 Practical Wireless 	
51
kit, allowing you to choose to connect the DC supply either via the 
supplied socket or via supplied pins on the board. Likewise, you can 
choose whether to use the 3.5mm jack socket for the audio input or 
the supplied pins on the board. This flexibility may prove useful to 
those who want to incorporate the board into other equipment or to 
use it as a free-standing item. One application might be for several 
of these to each drive a separate headphone socket for a club Field 
Day event. This way each operator can set the volume level to suit 
their personal tastes. If you plan to use more than one kit, I would 
suggest getting them from the same supplier so that they have the 
same layout and components. 
With regard to the construction, I would strongly suggest start-
ing with the small components such as the resistors and ceramic 
capacitors because some of the larger components, in particular the 
volume control, almost cover one of the resistors in some versions 
of the PCB, Fig. 3. The PCB clearly shows the orientation of the 
three electrolytic capacitors, the IC socket and the LM386 itself. The 
longer lead on the LED is the anode (positive).
Ceramic Capacitors 
Identifying the values of small ceramic capacitors, Fig. 4, such as 
those used in the audio amplifier kit can sometimes be a little dif-
ficult. A number of different ways of identifying the value have been 
used over the years. Three digit numbers are very often encountered 
these days. The first two digits are the value, while the last digit is 
the number of zeros that follow the value. So a capacitor with 224 
will have a value of 220,000pF (or 220nF), while 472 will be 4,700pF 
(or 4.7nF) and 103 will be 10,000pF (or 10nF). The link below takes 
you to a website that has lots of additional information, including 
images of various capacitor types.
https://tinyurl.com/y9kwdv4q
Fig. 3: The fixed resistor needs to be fitted before the volume control. Fig. 4: Two small ceramic 0.1μF capacitors labelled 104.
DG8SAQ VNWA 3EC/3 
  
 Vector Network Analyzer
    
  
Covers 1 kHz - 1.3 GHz
 with a dynamic range of 
  90dB to 500 MHz  and >50dB to 1.3 GHz
 
● S-parameter, S11, S12, S21, S22, VSWR, Smith Chart & Component values
● Time Domain - Distance to Fault Measurements - Network Matching tool 
● Easy Installation - Windows 10, 8, 7, Vista (64 and 32 bit), XP  supported
● Free Software & Helpfile:  http:/sdr-kits.net/DG8SAQ/VNWA-installer.exe
 
  
   
  
www.SDR-Kits.net
 
 
SDR-Kits Office 11, Hampton Park West, Melksham,SN12 6LH UK VAT reg GB979776427
  
   
VNWA 3E/3 - Synthesizer & VFO kits - Silicon Labs Si570 to 1.4 GHz - RF Transistors 
Webshop Orders only – Paypal or Pro-Forma Invoice
  Chosen by discerning Radio Amateurs
Universities and Professionals Worldwide!
After-Sales Customer & Technical Support 
                                
 
 
 
VNWA 3 with 3pcs Male Amphenol Calibration Kit  
RG223 Coax Cable + USB Lead £422.40
 
  
    
+ p&p
● 1kHz to 2000MHz continuous coverage 
● 14-bit ADC silicon technology
● 11 high-selectivity front-end preselection filters
● RF shielding layer inside case
+ p&p
  
New! SDRplay RSP1A
 
£89.95
e-mail: info@sdr-kits.net Prices shown incl VAT - p&p extra
+ p&p
Precision Frequency 
Clock for the VNW3E  
and many other Shack 
Applications
  
    
 
GPS Disciplined
  Reference Oscillator  
  
 
               
£149.95
Only £150
    1kHz-2GHz Wideband SDR Rx 
+p&p
RSP2:
●  Programmable Freq 
450Hz-800MHz 
 
    
●  Stability 1 ppb 1E-9    
    
D
VV
90d
Af
●  Light & Portable 
 
    
VNWA 3EC in Presentation Case +4pcs Calibration 
Kit of Rosenberger parts  
Step-by-Step Guided Measurements Book 
£570.00 + p&p
£28.75
<60 sec after GPS Lock
QRP 2000 Synth Kit from £25 
R3500D ARDF Rx Kit  £30.60
PAOKLT VFO Kit from £40 
Silicon Labs Si570CAC £12.30
Mitsubishi RD16HHF1 £4.80
+ p&p
RSP2 Pro: Fitted in sturdy metal case for 
improved RF Screening     
             
 £174.95
 New! CS40 40m & 20m 
       SSB Transceiver Kits   
 Only £155 incl SpeakerMike
            
p
y
£8
1kHz-2GHz Wideband S
3 switchable Antenna inputs
14 bits
  SDR
   only    
+p&p

52  
Practical Wireless February 2018
●  E-mail: teleniuslowe@gmail.com
HF Highlights with Steve Telenius-Lowe PJ4DX
G
iven that there were zero 
sunspots for much of 
the month, conditions 
remained generally 
pretty good in November, 
although as expected there wasn’t 
much to work on 10 or 12m. The 
plethora of DXpeditions in October (see 
last month’s HF Highlights) continued in 
November. The two Latvian operators at 
3C1L (Equatorial Guinea), having missed 
their ﬂ ight home at the end of October 
due to a cancelled return ﬂ ight from 
Annobon (3C0L), continued operating 
until November 12th. These operators 
apparently existed entirely without sleep 
because they seemed to be working one 
part of the world or another at all times of 
day or night!
I don’t believe that there have ever 
been four different VK9 operations 
during the same month before: VK9CZ 
(Cocos Keeling), VK9/M0VFC (Norfolk 
Island), VK9MA (Mellish Reef) and VK9AR 
(Ashmore Reef). VK9AR counts as 
mainland Australia for DXCC but was a 
rare IOTA, OC-216. Given the distances 
involved, not all were easy to contact from 
the UK, although VK9CZ (Chris GM3WOJ 
and Keith GM4YXI) had good signals and 
I even worked them from Bonaire on 80m, 
a distance of 18,400km.
Bouvet
It would be remiss of me not to mention 
‘The Big One’: Bouvet Island, 3Y0Z. 
This DXpedition is likely to be one of the 
biggest (and most expensive) ever but its 
sheer scale should provide an opportunity 
for those with ‘average’ stations to make 
a contact with one of the rarest DXCC 
entities. Bouvet is a Norwegian territory 
located deep in the South Atlantic Ocean. 
The (colour) photo of Fig. 1 gives an 
indication of how inhospitable Bouvet 
can be. It’s the most remote island on 
Earth, 1,700km from Antarctica, while the 
nearest inhabited land is Tristan da Cunha, 
2,250km away – and fewer than 300 
people live there.
A team of 20 DXers will activate 3Y0Z 
on all bands from late January for at least 
two weeks (the precise dates are weather 
dependant) with multiple stations, Yagi 
antennas and vertical arrays for the lower-
frequency bands.
Although there have been a few smaller 
operations, the last large-scale activity 
from Bouvet was 3Y5X, Fig. 2, in 1989. If 
you get the opportunity to contact 3Y0Z 
you should, because it could be another 
generation before Bouvet is activated 
again.
FT8 News
In November Tony Usher G4HZW 
operated exclusively using the new 
FT8 digital mode. He says he disagrees 
with our editor’s comments (Keylines, 
December 2017) that FT8 may obviate 
the need for decent antennas and shield 
us from the vagaries and understanding 
of propagation. “FT8 is allowing me to 
explore the possibilities that exist on the 
lower bands after spending so many 
years in the past on 10m and seeing in 
real time propagation changing (using 
PSKreporter)... Hopefully when the 
February edition of PW is published the 
Bouvet expedition will be in full swing. 
They intend to operate FT8 and have 
issued specifi c instructions for the mode; 
nevertheless I predict total chaos!”
www.bouvetdx.org/band-plan-
frequencies
Tony wrote that he had “Just nine 
contacts on 10m, the band was as bad 
as I’ve known it, the only two contacts 
outside EU were PU2RTO (16th) and 
ZS6AMC (22nd). More luck on 40m 
with 178 contacts: seven W, nine JA, 
three CO, four VK plus 9Z4Y, ZL3AAU, 
5T2AI and numerous Europeans. The 
most productive time of the day was the 
hour around local sunrise when greyline 
enhancement gave me the ZL and JA 
contacts. I’ve not managed any west 
coast US stations yet, but I believe as we 
advance into the winter they do come 
through on 40m at dusk.”
Bob Cox G3PLP has just completed 
Worked All States using FT8. “I had my 
fi rst FT8 contact in July 2017 and my 
fi rst USA FT8 contact with N3YZ (MD) 
on August 5th. Exactly three months 
Bouvet, FT8 and More
Steve Telenius-Lowe PJ4DX reports on a month replete with DXpedition activity 
and a major contest as well as looking forward to what may prove to be the most 
expensive DXpedition ever.
Fig. 1: Bouvet Island, as photographed from the RRS Ernest Shackleton in December 2011 (Photo: François Guerraz, Wikipedia).

February 2018 Practical Wireless 	
53
Fig. 2: 3Y5X QSL from Bouvet Island, 1989.
later a contact with WG7H (NV) gave me 
USA state number 50 on FT8, the last 
ones confirmed on LoTW that same day, 
November 5th, thanks to a rapid upload by 
WG7H. Most contacts were on 14074kHz 
using a 2-element wire delta loop fixed 
towards the west coast. The most difficult 
states were WH7AA (HI), NL7ER (AK) and 
ND0B (ND).” Congratulations to Bob on 
what may well be a first, at least from the 
UK.
Readers’ News
Carl Gorse 2E0HPI is another who has 
been using FT8. From home, he worked 
ZB3M on 40m and YV5DRN and 4Z9III 
on 20m, plus ZL3JAS on 20m SSB when 
portable using an MFJ-1979 quarter-wave 
vertical. Carl celebrated his birthday with 
a visit to Blackpool, where he joined Dave 
G4AKC. “We set up around 500 yards 
apart and managed to work PY7BTC, 
VK7ROY, VK7GG and VK7JON using the 
Alpha Loop on 20m SSB and ZL3OZ using 
Dave’s equipment and vertical. I later went 
to the Ribble estuary and worked around 
75 contacts on 20 and 40m SSB.” While 
in Blackpool, Carl operated from two rare 
Worked All Britain (WAB) squares, SD22 
and SD23, which are only accessible at 
low tide, Fig. 3, walking 2.5 miles out to 
sea with his transceiver and Alpha Loop 
antenna. During the month Carl worked 
two new DXCC entities, taking his total 
on QRP to 101. On November 25th he 
became 2M0HPI/P to activate two new 
GMFF sites, GMFF-0100 Berwickshire 
SSSI coast, where he made 147 contacts 
on 40 and 20m, and GMFF-0099 
Burnmouth SSSI, also on the coast, from 
where he made 61 contacts. Finally, Carl 
reported that he has been appointed the 
GxFF coordinator for the World-Wide 
Flora and Fauna programme, covering 
the UK, Crown Dependencies and British 
Overseas Territories. He and Adrian 
M0PAI are planning to develop the GxFF 
programme further to encourage greater 
activity.
Martin Juhe M0XJP recently visited 
Malcolm G0UYN on the Isle of Wight. “At 
86 years old he is still climbing high trees 
erecting antennas, Fig. 4. Unfortunately, 
his beam was down because the 60ft 
pump-up mast has been returned to Clark 
Masts on the island for an overhaul, so all I 
had available to use was the 138ft end-fed 
Zepp with open-wire feeder. This worked 
very well and I thought band conditions 
were quite good, which was a surprise. 
I was able to use Malcolm’s FT-1000D 
and FTdx9000, so this made operating a 
pleasure. Malcolm was using one of his 
Collins KWM-2A transceivers from time 
to time while I was there. He has much 
Collins equipment and uses items in 
rotation to keep them all in condition – the 
valves kept the shack warm!”
The 3C1L DXpedition proved elusive 
to Victor Brand G3JNB last month but 
was eventually worked on 17m CW and, 
three days later, on 30m. He says VK9MA 
opened with a wonderful S7 signal on 30m 
but became unworkable after a coronal 
mass ejection hit and poor conditions set 
in. However, the 9U4M (Burundi) team 
provided Victor with a good 17m contact. 
Later the VP2MDL (Montserrat) DXpedition 
was logged on a near silent band and then 
J5T (Bubaque Island AF-020, Guinea-
Bissau) as conditions recovered. On the 
21st, the J5T group were excellent on 15m 
Fig. 3: Carl 2E0HPI operating from 2.5 miles out 
to sea – at low tide, fortunately!
Fig. 4: That’s 86-year old Malcolm G0UYN up the 
tree, erecting an antenna.
Fig. 5: Making a final approach to Brussels 
airport over the Hexbeam at OS8D.

54 	
Practical Wireless February 2018
HF Highlights
and Victor spent ages calling but could not 
get through, and their split stations were 
mostly inaudible. “So I went off for half an 
hour and came back to work them third 
call. A simple routine that can be most 
effective.” As darkness fell, his patience 
was rewarded with 3XY3D (Guinea) on 
20m. After chasing for ages, they sent 
“QRX 30min”. Victor pottered about the 
shack, heard them call and minutes later 
they were in the log. Finally, Victor says he 
was “stirred, but not shaken” to contact 
Daniel Craig ZF2MJ (Cayman Islands) on 
17m CW and asks if he had really worked 
James Bond? No, Victor, when home this 
Daniel Craig is N6MJ!
New reporter Mike Pemberton G4DDL 
wrote about his activity in the CQWW 
CW contest on November 25/26th. “I was 
pleased to manage three QSOs with PJ4Y 
on 80, 40 and 20m. I worked quite a few 
Caribbean stations over the weekend, 
many of them on 80 and 40m. I was 
pleased with my results because I worked 
61 countries on 40m and 51 on 80m in 
about 22 hours of operation. I worked 
77 countries in all. Not too bad with only 
100W and some very low wire antennas, 
all I can easily manage in a small housing 
estate garden... It is quite surprising what 
can be achieved with low power and 
simple antennas. Not much worked to the 
east but I did reel in 9M2CNC at the end 
of the contest on 40m.” Mike concluded 
by saying he had worked three ATNOs (All 
Time New Ones) in 2017 – J5, 3C and V3 
(Belize) – to take his DXCC total to 250.
J5 was also an ATNO for David Smith 
M0OSA/M, who says he did not spend 
much time on the air but still managed J5T 
on both 15 and 20m. He wrote, “I must 
congratulate the Italian team for picking 
my 50W SSB signal out of the pile-up after 
only a few calls on both bands.” David 
operates mobile near Huddersfield using 
a Yaesu FT-857D to an Outback 2000 
mobile antenna. He added that he also 
heard TO2SP (St Barthelemy) on 17m but, 
unfortunately, they were unable to hear 
him.
Etienne Vrebos OS8D/ON8DN 
(Brussels, Fig. 5) said November was “a 
very good month in DXCC activities for 
me, with some ATNOs.” The best of his 
log (which is all SSB because “I think that 
voice communication is the only real one 
that really counts as real!”) is shown in the 
band reports.
Terry Martin M0CLH worked most of 
the DX that was going (see band reports) 
and commented “The journey towards 
winter does indeed seem to herald the 
return to some decent propagation. A 
short dabble in the CQWW CW contest 
produced a few new slots followed by an 
ATNO in Guyana (8R1/AG6UT).”
Owen Williams G0PHY reported 
November as being “a good month for 
DX with a number of DXpeditions, giving 
rise to contacts on 14, 18 and 21MHz. 
The best DX was at the start of the month 
with a 21MHz contact with VK9CZ” (an 
ATNO for Owen). Owen worked 9U4M 
on 15m and J5T on 15, 17 and 20m: 
“When these guys go on DXpeditions 
they are always very active and the instant 
display of their online log is a great idea,” 
Owen commented. The Polish TO2SP 
DXpedition also yielded contacts on 15, 
17 and 20m, while 9G5W on 20m was a 
genuine S9 with Owen. “As always there 
were ones that got away. This month they 
were 5K0T on San Andres Island and 
5K1B on Mucura Island, SA-078. With the 
exception of VK9CZ and 9G5W, none of 
the stations was particularly strong: weak 
but workable best describes them.”
Martin Evans GW4TPG built a Battle 
Creek Special, as described by Steve 
VK6VZ in the August 2017 PW, and says 
it’s working well. For those who missed 
the article it’s a trapped vertical antenna 
for 40, 80 and 160m, although Martin will 
add the 160m section later, “when the 
weather improves in the Spring and the 
neighbours are more used to a 50ft mast 
in the garden.” He adds that “the SWR 
bandwidth is fantastic on 80m compared 
with my old HF2V, which really was only 
good for about 50kHz. At last I can use 
the whole of 80m without an ATU.” Martin 
was another to work some ATNOs in 
November: 9U4M and VK9/M0VFC.
Kevin Hewitt M0GTD (aka ZB2GI) 
spent most of November in Chatham and 
describes his highlights as operating FT8 
on 80m, working back to the Rock on 
SSB, receiving the ZB2BU 30m WSPR 
beacon, Fig. 6 – and listening to Radio 
Caroline test transmissions on 648kHz.
Band Reports
Carl 2E0HPI was busy on FT8: 40m FT8: 
SM7EGM. 30m FT8: E73DN. 20m SSB: 
CG3ZN, W2/CT1GIF. 20m FT8: TA3AHJ, 
YC0OSX. 17m FT8: OF5FP.
Etienne OS8D reported 40m SSB: 
5K0T, TO2SP. 20m SSB: 5K0T, 5V7SM, 
9U4M, J5T, JA8COE, LU8EEM, RI1ANC, 
S01A, TO2SP, UN8CWA, VK7HCK, 
VP2MDL, YV5ENI, Z81D. 17m SSB: 3C1L, 
4J4K, 5V7SM, 9U4M, CX3AT, DS3EXX, 
EX8M, FR4OO, HK3C, J5T, PZ5RA, 
S01WS, TI8II, TO2SP, UN7TE, VK9CZ, 
VP2MDL, YV5ENI, ZD7FT. 15m SSB: 
3B8HC, 9U4M, A5A, CO6HLP, J5T, J88HF, 
S01WS, TR8CA, UN7NU, VK2XZ, VK9CZ, 
ZD8AC. 12m SSB: J5T.
Terry M0CLH reports the following. 40m 
FT8: BG8IXQ, DU1/JH1FNS, JL1SAM. 
40m SSB: AM3MDV. 20m CW: 3C1L, 
6Y3M, 9M2CNC, J5T, J68GD, TO2SP, 
TR8CA, VP2MDL. 20m FT8: 5T1A. 20m 
RTTY: J5T. 20m SSB: 9G5W, J5T, TO2SP, 
VP2MDL. 17m CW: 9U4M, J5T, PJ4/
DL5CW, TO2SP, VP2MDL. 17m FT8: 
5K0T, CO3LF, CP6CL, HK7JA, VK2QV. 
17m RTTY: 8R1/AG6UT. 17m SSB: J5T, 
J68GD, TO2SP. 15m CW: 6Y0AE, 9U4M, 
J5T, J68GD, PJ4A, PY2XB, V26K, V47T, 
VP2MDL. 15m FT8: A92AA, HC7AE, 
LU9DO, VK2NSS, VK6ADF, YB9GWR, 
ZR6DX, ZZ2Z. 15m RTTY: 9U4M. 15m 
SSB: J5T, VK9CZ. 12m CW: 3C1L, 3XY3D, 
VP2MDL. 12m FT8: C93PA, CE2AWW, 
ZS1AGF. 12m SSB: J5T. 10m CW: VK9CZ, 
10m FT8: VK6XN.
Martin GW4TPG reports 80m SSB: 
J5T. 80m CW: 6Y0W, 9Y4/VE3EY, PJ2T, 
PJ4Y, PZ5V, TI7W, V47T, ZF9CW. 40m 
CW: VP2MDL. 30m CW: 3C1L, 4U1ITU, 
J5T. 20m CW: 9U4M, VK9/M0VFC. 17m 
CW: 3C1L, 3XY3D, 9U4M, PJ4/DH8BQA, 
VP2MDL. 17m RTTY: 9U4M. 15m CW: 
9U4M, VK9CZ. 12m CW: 3C1L, J5T.
Kevin M0GTD used a Kenwood TS-440 
to a 5m vertical wire via a 9:1 balun to 
work, on 80m FT8: 5P1KZX, UA6HGM. 
20m and 17m SSB: EA7JNC, ZB2BU, 
ZB2JK.
Signing Off
My thanks to all contributors. Please send 
all input for this column to teleniuslowe@
gmail.com by the 1st of the month 
(February 1st for the April issue, March 1st 
for the May magazine). 73, Steve PJ4DX.
Fig. 6: Kevin M0GTD 30m WSPR reception screen shot.

February 2018 Practical Wireless 	
55
• E-mail: chris@lorek.co.uk
Buying Second-hand by Chris Lorek G4HCL
B
ack in 1981, Yaesu 
launched what must have 
been one of their most 
popular transceivers of 
all time, the FT-290R 
Mk1 self-contained 2m multimode, 
Fig. 1. It proved to be an ideal starter rig 
for numerous new ‘Class B’ amateurs, 
many whom had started out by operating 
on the 27MHz Citizens Band and had 
progressed to licensed amateur radio. A 
typical second-hand price at this time is 
in the region of £80, a significant saving 
compared with current multimodes.
I fondly remember each working day 
in the early morning in the early 1980s, 
being in my kitchen with the kettle boiling 
and having a regular morning contact on 
2m FM simplex with a lady amateur in 
the same East Anglian village, who was 
also making a cuppa for herself and her 
husband while using her FT-290R Mk1 
on the kitchen work surface. She also 
came into the hobby from Citizens Band. 
The rig was available with a leatherette 
carrying case and shoulder strap and, 
as such, was often called the ‘Electric 
Handbag’ by some of its users! It measures 
150x58x195mm and weighs around 1.3kg 
plus the weight of any internal batteries 
that you may fit. Due to its portability, many 
of these transceivers were and still are 
used as self-contained ‘hilltop’ radios by 
amateurs, and they are an ideal rig for use 
in the annual summer PW 144MHz QRP 
contest.
I detailed the FT-290 series in general 
a few years ago in this PW column and 
received an extremely good response 
from readers. However, many readers 
asked for more information on the FT-
290R Mk1, particularly on how to add a 
CTCSS encoder because several amateurs 
who contacted me said that, in this day 
and age, for 2m FM operation through 
repeaters, it was virtually an essential. 
Also, details of the DC connector, which 
has caught many out in the past. So here’s 
an updated feature on this transceiver by 
popular request, which I hope will also be 
of interest to newer readers.
Features
The FT-290R Mk1 is a tough and rugged 
transportable 2m CW/SSB/AM/FM 
transceiver, with a power output of 2.5W 
and with a switchable low power of 0.8W 
across 144-146MHz. It can be run from a 
set of eight internal alkaline or rechargeable 
C-sized cells or from an external 8.5-15.2V 
DC power supply via the small coaxial 
DC socket on the side of the transceiver. 
There’s a severe word of warning here, 
even at this early stage of this feature. The 
DC connector uses the outer sleeve of the 
mating plug as positive DC, and the inner 
as negative DC, unlike the vast majority 
of DC leads nowadays. Be sure you don’t 
make a potentially very expensive mistake! 
Also, if you have a disconnected DC power 
lead, that the connector outer doesn’t 
touch the chassis of any other equipment 
that you’re using from the same shack or 
mobile DC power supply.
As well as selectable 12.5kHz and 
25kHz FM channel steps, the radio offers 
100Hz and 1kHz steps on CW and SSB, 
ten memory channels plus a priority 
channel, two VFOs, a backlit digital display, 
an analogue S-meter and RF power output 
meter and a built-in telescopic antenna 
on the front panel. The VFOs and memory 
channels can be scanned for activity. 
There’s a noise blanker selectable from 
the front panel to help reduce electrical 
car ignition noise. If you’re buying from 
‘across the pond’ (the USA), check the 
FM channel steps because they are 5kHz 
and 10kHz in models sold there. However, 
if you’re handy with a soldering iron or 
know someone who is, these can easily 
be changed to UK steps by resoldering a 
few internal PCB links. There’s now plenty 
of information on the internet for this. As 
well as the telescopic whip, there’s also an 
SO-239 socket on the rear panel to allow 
you to plug in an external antenna. For CW 
operation, a rear panel socket is provided 
for connecting a Morse key.
The Yaesu FT-290R
Fig. 1: The Yaesu FT-290 Mk1.
This month Chris Lorek G4HCL revisits the hugely popular Yaesu FT-290R Mk1 2m multimode transceiver.

56  
Practical Wireless February 2018
Other Bands and Models
As well as the 2m model, you may come 
across the FT-790R Mk1, which, as you 
may have guessed, is the 70cm (430-
440MHz) version. Another rarer fi nd, most 
likely because 6m wasn’t available in the 
UK at the time of launch, is the FT-690R 
Mk1, which covers the 6m band of 50-
54MHz. Later models included a Mk2 
version. 
Indeed, I have an FT-290R Mk2 here 
in my shack and I plan for this to be the 
subject of a further column in its own right 
in the near future. However, here I’ll just be 
concentrating on expanded details on the 
FT-290R Mk1.
Add-on CTCSS FM Encoder
To the best of my knowledge Yaesu didn’t 
offer an optional internal CTCSS (sub-tone) 
encoder for repeater access in European 
models for this transceiver. Instead, a 
built-in 1750Hz toneburst is included 
because this was the standard method of 
FM repeater access at the time. Because 
it’s a discontinued transceiver, you may 
well fi nd it hard to obtain a Yaesu CTCSS 
module over here, although if you buy an 
FT-290 from the US, do check whether one 
is fi tted (but see my note above regarding 
FM channel spacing). However, a number 
of add-on CTCSS encoders are available. 
One compact unit from the UK that will fi t 
nicely into the FT-290R Mk1 comes from 
G8TMV, Fig. 2:
www.tuckley.org/ctcss
The tone encoder will generate any of 
the standard CTCSS tones used by the 
UK repeater system and many of the ones 
used in Europe. Each time the ‘Up’ push-
button is pressed the encoder moves to 
the next tone in the sequence. The ‘Down’ 
button steps in the opposite direction. Each 
time a new tone is selected, and at power 
up, the LED annunciates the code letter for 
the tone in Morse code. A particular tone 
can be made the default by pressing and 
holding the ‘Up’ push-button until the LED 
ﬂ ashes once, useful for your ‘home’ area. 
This stores the currently selected value in 
the microcontroller non-volatile memory 
so that it will be used the next time the 
encoder is powered up.
Note that this isn’t a simple plug-in. 
You’ll need to fi t it using some electronic 
wiring skills but there’s a useful guide;
https://billingtonrepairs.wordpress.
com/modiﬁ cations/ctcss-for-the-yaesu-
ft290r-mk1
Expansion to 144-148MHz
Given that our 2m band now goes up to 
147MHz for suitably licensed UK amateurs, 
here’s a simple method of expanding the 
tuning range to 144-148MHz. Remove 
the battery compartment and slide out 
the power board to allow access to the 
microprocessor board. Two tinned copper 
wire jumpers are visible on this board, 
next to the microprocessor. One is easy to 
see and the other is not because it is next 
to the main board. Cut the jumper that 
is diffi cult to see. If the wrong jumper is 
cut, then the frequency display will not be 
correct when the unit is powered up. 
Fig. 2: The G8TMV CTCSS PCB.
Fig. 3: The Microset 2m 30W in-line linear ampliﬁ er and receive preampliﬁ er.

February 2018 Practical Wireless 	
57
An Overview of RFI
Receive Preamplifier
One of the most common, and useful, modifications by previous 
owners is the fitting of a receive preamplifier. The UK firm of muTek 
manufactured a compact preamplifier specifically designed for 
fitment into the FT-290R Mk1, and this is sometimes, arguably in-
correctly, described as a ‘muTek front end’. Yet it’s very worthwhile 
having.
External Transmit Amplifier
To boost the 2.5W transceiver output power for base or mobile use, 
many amateurs use an in-line RF-switched linear amplifier, typically 
a 25-30W type, and this can be a useful extra if your seller has one 
of these included in the sale. Some of them also have a switchable 
receive preamplifier built in, which could obviate the need for an 
internal muTek receiver preamplifier if you’ll only use the transceiver 
for base and mobile work rather than out portable. The accompa-
nying photo, Fig. 3, shows the 30W amplifier I use with my own 
FT-290R. This also includes a switchable low-noise GaAsFET 
preamplifier.
Microphone Connections
If you find your transceiver doesn’t come with a microphone, or 
yours is damaged, here are the connections for the 7-pin micro-
phone connector: Pin 1 − ground and mic screen, Pin 2 – Transmit 
audio, Pin 3 – PTT, Pin 4 – 5V output (note that this can only pro-
vide up to a few milliamps, for an electret microphone, for exam-
ple), Pin 5 – Speaker, Pin 6 − Up scan, and Pin 7 − Down scan. The 
pin numbers are given on the in-line socket. 
Common Faults
Here are a few things to look out for, and their possible cures, if 
you’re buying a second-hand FT-290R Mk1:
Broken Telescopic Whip: The telescopic whip is easily broken 
but can easily be replaced. Just check prior to purchase. Note that 
if you’re using an external antenna via the rear panel coaxial con-
nector, this whip should be fully pushed in because it forms part of 
the PA tuning network.
Front Panel Display Bulb: The digital frequency incandescent 
display bulb is the most common failure in these transceivers. If 
you’re not going to use it in adverse lighting conditions, there’s no 
need to worry about this and the replacement is rather a complex 
bit of work. Instead of trying to replace the bulb, I’d advise carrying 
a small LED torch if you’ll be using the radio out portable at night!
Battery Overcharging: If you fit internal rechargeable batteries 
and you plug in an external unregulated current DC supply, the in-
ternal batteries can sometimes become overcharged and, in some 
cases, these could get extremely hot or even destroy themselves, 
along with possible damage to the transceiver circuitry. This can 
happen if you’re using a non-Yaesu supplied DC input plug that 
isn’t the right length or diameter. A correct DC plug into the FT-
290R socket will disconnect this external connection to the internal 
batteries when it’s plugged in. With an incorrect plug, though, the 
batteries may not be disconnected when the external DC supply is 
plugged in. The cure is to use the correct size of plug!
Intermittent Tuning: Intermittent tuning is usually caused by the 
‘Step’ switch. A burst of electrical switch cleaner on this (please, 
not WD40 or similar!) will usually provide a cure. Likewise, for tun-
ing ‘jumps’.
No Transmit Power Output: If it is not the power amplifier (which 
is the most likely cause), then with a lack of power output, check 
diode D24 in the antenna switching circuit. Check for coil L2012 
physically shorting to the copper screen and also check the driver 
transistor Q2021 and associated resistor R69.
Receive and Transmit Off-Frequency: If this is just a small 
amount such as one or two kilohertz, then you can realign the PLL 
local oscillator. However, if the radio is several kilohertz off fre-
quency, such as 10kHz or more, then check the PLL local oscillator 
crystal X02 which is 18.7414MHz.
FM Transmit off frequency: If it’s only on FM transmit that the 
radio is off frequency, then realign the FM TX oscillator coil L1002. 
However, if the frequency error is significant, then check crystal 
X1001.
User Manual and Circuit Diagrams
You’ll find that the manual and circuit diagrams are available for 
download from the internet, as with most radios nowadays. How-
ever, if you’d like a PDF copy by e-mail, just get in touch and I’ll be 
pleased to oblige and include user operating instructions, circuit 
details and diagrams, alignment details and component layouts: 
chris@lorek.co.uk
I hope the above proves useful to readers who are looking for 
an economic but well-performing 2m multimode. The Mk1 was 
superseded by the FT290R Mk2 some years later. That one is 
almost a completely different rig, albeit the same size and with the 
same general specifications. (It uses a set-top BNC for a portable 
antenna rather than a telescopic whip. So don’t be misled when 
purchasing. The Mk2 is a newer radio but somewhat more expen-
sive than the Mk1.). I’ll see you in next month’s PW with a further 
Emerging Technology feature. 
Shortwave Shop
Suppliers of Alinco, AOR, bhi, Butternut, Comet, Cushcraft, Diamond, 
GRE, Hustler, Hi-Gain, ICOM, Kent, KENWOOD, JRC, MAXON, MFJ, Mirage, 
MOTOROLA, Opto, Pro-Am, Radio Works, SSB Electronics, SGC, Tokyo, 
Tonna, Vectronics, Watson, YAESU, Yupiteru.
Call the Shortwave Shop on 01202 490099 
or e-mail sales@shortwave.co.uk to order
Zeacombe House, Blackerton Cross, East Anstey, Tiverton, Devon, EX16 9JU
Phone/Fax: 01202 490099  
Amateur
Shortwave
Marine
Security
Airband
p
SECONDHAND 
PRODUCTS 
AVAILABLE
Antennas
WE HAVE MOVED
Ample parking.
Web: http://www.shortwave.co.uk

58  
Practical Wireless February 2018
• E-mail: practicalwireless@warnersgroup.co.uk
SEAnet Convention by Don Field G3XTT
T
he South East Asia net 
(SEAnet) started some 
50 years ago, mainly as 
a health and safety net 
for that part of the world. 
It met daily on 14320kHz and, over the 
years, was able to help in a number of 
situations, not just in passing on messages 
but in providing critical information. For 
example, Dr KN Singh 9M2KN, who I met 
at this year’s Convention, was telling me 
how from time to time he would provide 
medical ‘consultations’ and advice to 
seafarers who were remote from any 
medical help.
The net controllers became very expe-
rienced with respect to radio propagation 
in the area covered by the net and would 
be careful to take callers in sequence 
according to the progress of propagation 
with time.
After a few years, the net controllers 
and participants, scattered across the 
nations of Southeast Asia and Oceania, 
knowing each other simply as a familiar 
voice on the radio, felt a need to meet face 
to face. Hence was born the SEAnet Con-
vention. 2017 was the 45th running of the 
Convention. There is no formal organising 
body but, remarkably, given the logistics 
of organising a Convention of perhaps 100 
people from maybe 20 nations or more, 
volunteers have always stepped forward. 
The event takes place in a different coun-
try each year and, to avoid last-minute 
panics as to who will organise it next, ven-
ues are always decided upon two years in 
advance. This year, for the fi rst time, the 
Convention was organised remotely in that 
a group of Indian SEAnet enthusiasts had 
volunteered to put together a Convention 
in Cambodia. The venue was suggested 
by previous participants but with no resi-
dent active radio amateurs in Cambodia 
and no national radio society, this remote 
organisation was appropriate. The 2018 
Convention, in contrast, will be held in 
Indonesia under the auspices of the very 
strong Indonesian national radio society 
ORARI. The following year, the venue will 
be Johor Bahru in Malaysia or on a cruise 
ship operating from Singapore, just across 
the Straits.
Unlike the sort of radio Conventions 
many PW readers will be familiar with, 
SEAnet, partly as a result of its origins and 
partly because of the culture in Southeast 
Asia, is very much a social occasion, 
with participation by a number of wives, 
partners and other family members. Great 
friendships have been formed over the 
years and many of the attendees see the 
event as one of the highpoints of their an-
nual diary.
That said, they very much welcome 
newcomers and it was made clear when I 
enquired about attending that this would 
be entirely appropriate. I had been hoping 
to go to for some time, having heard about 
it from others who had been, such as our 
own columnist Steve Telenius-Lowe 
PJ4DX who lived in Sabah, Malaysia 
for a number of years and operated as 
9M6DXX. I had also, for more than 40 
SEAnet Convention & CQWW 
Contesting from HS0ZAR
Don at Angkor Thom.
PW’s editor Don Field G3XTT reports on his recent trip to SE Asia.

February 2018 Practical Wireless  
59
years since fi rst reading about it, wanted 
to visit the Angkor Wat and other temples 
in that complex, and such a visit was on 
the Convention programme so I could kill 
two birds with one stone. What’s more, 
the Convention would take place just 
one week before the CQ Worldwide CW 
Contest, one of my favourite operating 
events, and I hoped to join a contest team 
somewhere in that part of the world, which 
fortunately turned out to be possible.
The Convention was held in the Sokha-
lay Angkor Resort and Spa in Siem Reap 
and I travelled there by Qatar Airways 
to Bangkok and then by Air Asia (Asia’s 
answer to Ryanair, I guess) to Siem Reap 
where I was met by the hotel transport. 
The hotel itself proved to be excellent and 
very charming with beautiful grounds char-
acterised by lush vegetation and ponds full 
of fi sh.
Radio Programme
Saturday morning was taken up with a 
programme of radio-related talks. Thida 
Denpruektham HS1ASC spoke about 
amateur radio at the World Scout Jam-
boree. As I mentioned in last month’s 
Jamboree on the Air report, I was interest-
ed, particularly as an ex-Scout myself, to 
discover that the Scout movement is thriv-
ing in many Southeast Asian countries, 
actively encouraged by their governments 
who believe that such youth movements 
are an important part of young people’s 
development. Events such as the World 
Scout Jamboree are an ideal occasion to 
showcase amateur radio Thai amateurs 
rose to the occasion in 2017. 
I made a short presentation about the 
November 2016 ZL7G Chatham Islands 
expedition in which I was involved and 
which I wrote up in the February 2017 
issue of PW. On this occasion, unlike at 
UK radio clubs when I have given the 
presentation, I focused more on the history 
and culture of the islands, albeit with an 
overview of the radio side.
Allan Papworth G3WUW (and many 
overseas callsigns) spoke about his life 
in the radio industry, a career which drew 
very much on his amateur radio back-
ground and connections. Allan worked 
for many years for Wood & Douglas, who 
many readers will remember for their ama-
teur radio kits. He also worked throughout 
the Middle East and Asia, largely in the de-
fence industry, and had some entertaining 
stories related to, for example, fi tting radio 
gear to noisy and vibration-prone Russian 
tanks favoured by various Middle Eastern 
militaries. Allan was, in the past, a regular 
participant in SEAnet on the 20m band. 
These days, in retirement, he and his wife 
Rosemary divide their time between sum-
mers in the UK and winters in Florida, from 
where he remains active on amateur radio.
Visits Programme
On the fi rst afternoon we were taken by 
Tuk-Tuk to the centre of Siem Reap. I had 
no wish to explore the markets but ended 
up visiting a Buddhist Temple and also the 
Siem Reap Killing Fields site from the grim 
days of the Pol Pot regime. Any of you 
who saw the recent BBC series about the 
Mekong River will recall what a sobering 
and moving memorial this is.
The following day we visited Angkor 
Wat in the Morning and the Angkor Tom 
and Ta Phrom temples in the afternoon. 
There are around 90 temples in the Siem 
Reap area, designated as a World Herit-
age site. Many are still being explored, 
having been subsumed in vegetation over 
hundreds of years. Most changed between 
Hinduism and Buddhism, sometimes 
several times, over the course of their 
active use – the history is fascinating, as 
Traditional Cambodian dancers.
SEAnet delegates line up for an offi cial photo.

60 	
Practical Wireless February 2018
SEAnet Convention
is the scale of the buildings and the whole 
complex.
Saturday Banquet
There was a formal banquet on the Satur-
day evening, with delegates encouraged 
to wear their national dress as appropriate. 
Perhaps not unexpectedly, the Indian la-
dies stole the show in their beautiful saris!
Open Forum
The daily SEAnet no longer takes place, 
partly because other reliable means of 
communication are now widely available 
and partly because propagation is not so 
reliable at this point in the sunspot cycle. 
However, during the open discussion on 
the Sunday morning there was a call for 
the net to be reinstated if at all possible. In 
any case, many of the participants remain 
ready and willing to carry out disaster or 
similar communications should the need 
arise and, in India in particular, the role 
of radio amateurs in emergency com-
munications is well recognised, espe-
cially after the major tsunami of 2004, 
when communication with the Andaman 
Islands (belonging to India) was possible 
only because there was a team of radio 
amateurs on the islands at the time of the 
emergency.
Other topics of discussion included the 
annual SEAnet contest and how to attract 
and sustain the interest of youngsters in 
the SEAnet movement.
All in all, I thoroughly enjoyed my first 
SEAnet Convention. It was great to meet 
a wide selection of fascinating radio 
amateurs from so many countries, to learn 
about the similarities and differences in the 
hobby in their various parts of the world, 
to see some sights that had been on my 
bucket list for so long and to enjoy the 
general hospitality, cuisine and ambience. 
My only disappointment was that the 
organisers had failed to get a temporary 
radio licence in order to set up a station 
for visitors to use. I wasn’t the only one to 
feel this and there was general agreement 
in the open forum that this should be a key 
aspect of future Conventions as, I gather, it 
had been in the past.
And so to Thailand
After the formal close of the Convention, I 
travelled back to Thailand and met up that 
evening with Bob 5B4AGN (G3ZEM) and 
Andy G3AB who, like me, were destined 
for the HS0ZAR contest team. After a cou-
ple of days rest and relaxation, we joined 
Tony HS0ZDX (G4UAV) and John W2YR 
for an evening dinner and the following 
morning headed to the contest site, some 
four hours’ drive from Bangkok, collecting 
Dietmar DL3DXX en route. Dietmar was 
on his way home from the VK9MA Mellish 
Reef expedition – some people can’t seem 
to get enough radio!
Our host for the contest, Stig LA7JO, 
is married to a Thai and has a home near 
Phai Mai, some 200 miles or so from 
Bangkok where he has gradually built 
up an effective contest station that now 
boasts four towers, with the tallest some 
40m high. Antennas include a two-element 
quad for the 40m band, high dipoles for 
160 and 80m and a selection of mono-
band and triband Yagis for the higher 
bands. The station equipment is based 
on the venerable but effective Yaesu 
FT-2000 at each operating position (two 
run stations and one multiplier station 
for this particular contest) plus a variety 
of amplifiers. Some of the equipment is 
Stig’s while some is loaned by the visiting 
operators. Automatic antenna selection 
means that either of the two run stations 
can select any antenna but with a lockout 
to prevent the two stations selecting the 
same antenna. (We were participating in 
the so-called Multi-Two category where 
two signals are allowed throughout the 
contest – this is a great category because 
usually there is more than one band open 
at a time but mounting a full multi-multi 
effort – six bands simultaneously – is a 
major effort and can be frustrating if some 
bands only open sporadically over the 
contest weekend). 
The rules of the contest specify a maxi-
mum number of band changes per hour 
and the scoring system is based on points 
per contact (one for same continent, three 
per other continent) multiplied by the total 
of countries and CQ zones contacted 
on each band. It’s vital to catch all those 
multipliers and this is where the multi-
plier station comes in. The contest then 
becomes a team effort with the operators 
on the three stations working in harmony 
with each other, keeping an eye on evolv-
ing propagation to decide when to change 
bands, swing the antenna towards another 
part of the world and so on in order to 
maximise the score.
One technical development that many 
stations have employed in recent years is 
the ability to run more than one band at a 
time on a single triband antenna. In Stig’s 
case, there is a Force 12 C31XR triband 
antenna, which both run stations can, 
should it be necessary, use simultaneously 
while running a kilowatt. This is achieved 
with the use of a high-power triplexer and 
bandpass filters from 4O3A. It’s really quite 
remarkable. Why would we want to do 
that, given that monoband antennas are 
also available for each band? Quite simply, 
there may be times when, for example, 
a band is open simultaneously to both 
Europe and Japan, which from Thailand 
are on beam headings 90° or so apart. It 
then becomes useful to be able to switch 
instantly from one direction to the other, 
depending on who calls following a CQ or 
previous QSO.
Champ E21EIC at HS0ZAR with Fred K3ZO in the 
background.
Some of the HS0ZAR antennas.
One of the failed amplifiers after internal arcing.

February 2018 Practical Wireless  
61
We were truly an international team of 
operators. I’ve mentioned team mem-
bers from the UK, Germany, the USA, 
Norway and Cyprus. There were also a 
Malaysian amateur, a Swede and several 
Thai amateurs, including one young lady, 
already a competent Morse operator. In 
fact, amateur radio has grown hugely in 
Thailand in recent years and much of the 
credit must go to Champ E21EIC who 
readers may recall also featured in Chris 
Burger ZS6EZ’s article in the October 
2016 issue of PW. I fi rst met Champ in 
2006 in Brazil when he was a sponsored 
youth participant in the World Radiosport 
Team Championship. Champ received 
fi nancial support to attend Brazil from the 
YASME Foundation and, as Fred K3ZO 
put it to me, that’s an investment that has 
paid off many times over.
Talking about Fred. I have known him 
for many years and it was a joy to see him 
again. Fred’s career was in the US foreign 
service and those with a long memory will 
recall his fi rst overseas assignment in the 
Dominican Republic as HI8XAL. He later 
operated as LU5HFI from Argentina and 
it was in South America that he was shot 
in the line of duty, for which he received a 
Presidential letter of commendation. He 
is, though, perhaps best remembered for 
his years in Thailand where he operated 
as HS1ABD and HS5ABD. He eventually 
married a Thai lady and although, sadly, 
she passed away a few years ago, he 
retains an affection for the country and 
is very much involved with Stig’s contest 
station. Fred was due to celebrate his 80th 
birthday so we had a pre-contest birthday 
celebration and, for the contest itself, used 
Fred’s current Thai callsign HS0ZAR. There 
is, by the way, an excellent interview with 
Fred that appeared in the ARRL’s National 
Contest Journal in 2015 and is available 
on the web:
http://ncjweb.com/features/sepoct-
15feat.pdf
Propagation from Thailand
One of the joys of operating from different 
locations around the world, apart from the 
social aspects of working with fellow radio 
amateurs of different nationalities, is to 
experience local propagation. A few years 
ago I was part of the 9K2HN contest team 
from Kuwait that set a new multi-multi 
record in this same contest. Operating 
from Thailand, though, was very different. 
Europe is something like twice as far away 
compared with Kuwait and this is a chal-
lenge. It’s possible to work Japan more or 
less round the clock on most bands but 
Japanese contacts count for just one point 
each. Europe is very much more diffi cult, 
with short openings and weak signals. 
This is why a big station helps but, quite 
frankly, a contester in Cyprus, for example, 
also counting as Asia, can probably work 
three point European contacts all day and 
night with a simple wire antenna and low 
power.
Anyway, we persevered. Most of our 
operating was with shifts of four hours 
– this allows time to get into the groove 
of operating the contest − the logging pro-
gram, copying callers without really having 
to think about it, thinking about the stra-
tegic decisions of when to run, when to 
chase multipliers and so on – without be-
ing at the operating position long enough 
to start tiring . We had, as always seems 
to the case, a few equipment failures and 
station interactions. Our ‘engineer’ Sam 
SM3DYU worked tirelessly to keep on top 
of these, changing out amplifi ers on the ﬂ y, 
for example. It’s all part of the fun!
Our fi nal total, subject to checking by 
the contest adjudicators, was just shy of 
5,400 contacts (of which 79 were with 
the UK, although only Full licensees from 
what I can determine) and a claimed score 
of just over 7 million points. On the CQ 
Contest claimed scores page, that puts 
us as 35th in the World in our category 
but second in Asia, which goes to show 
how tough it is from that continent. By 
the standards of a similar station located 
just outside Europe or North America this 
is a long way from earth shattering but is 
respectable in the circumstances.
Final Thoughts
I realise this article must have seemed 
more of a travelogue than the usual run 
of PW articles but, that said, it’s also an 
indication of how amateur radio can open 
doors and let you see ‘real life’, rather than 
just as a more typical tourist, in distant 
parts of the world. This is an aspect of the 
hobby I enjoy more and more as the years 
go by .  
HS0ZAR team photo in the shack.
They call this wireless?

62 	
Practical Wireless February 2018
Bootcamps, 
Bootcamps!
Roger Cooke G3LDI has news of two more very 
successful Bootcamps, along with some other Morse-
related snippets.
A
s I promised regarding 
the Essex CW ARC 
Bootcamp, here is a 
longer report on that 
event. Event it was! Andy 
G0IBN had a large number attend so it 
looks as though Bootcamps are becoming 
very popular. Andy and Dean G4WQI’s 
report follows:
Prior Preparation Prevents Poor 
Performance
ECWARC (Essex CW ARC) certainly 
proved the above adage correct. After 
extensive preparation, their first CW Boot 
Camp at Witham, Essex, turned out to be 
an outstanding performance. It was kindly 
sponsored by Martin Lynch & Sons, who 
donated two PK-4 Electronic Keyers.
(I can see we are missing something 
here in Norfolk! Having started Bootcamps 
a few years ago, I think we should pinch 
a leaf from Andy’s book. Perhaps getting 
some sponsorship would help with attend-
ance – G3LDI)
On arrival, attendees were booked in, 
given a certificate of attendance, a pro-
gramme of the day’s events and a sheet of 
interesting CW information they could refer 
to at a later date. 
During the introductory speech, a prize 
was offered for the candidate who had 
travelled the farthest. This turned out to 
be John M6KET, who had travelled all the 
way from Redditch. He was presented with 
one of the PK-4 keyers.
After this, three different CW speed 
groups were organised − slow, medium 
and fast. In hindsight we should have had 
a beginners’ table. We had one operator 
who was a complete beginner and two 
others who were confident at 5WPM but 
no faster. We had prepared three tables, 
one for the slow operator, around 10WPM, 
one for speeds around 15 to 20WPM and 
the third table for the fast operators.
This was no easy task. Each table 
needed mains power, an oscillator − some-
times two − with headphones and keying 
connections for approximately 10 or 12 
operators on each table.
During the next 90 minutes every at-
tendee was assessed for both sending and 
receiving. Each was critiqued on formation 
of characters, spacing, sending style and 
so on. For receiving, speed was gradu-
ally increased and many found that this 
technique helped them to receive at higher 
speeds.
A coffee break followed, which was 
particularly enjoyed because it was ac-
companied by three large and delicious 
homemade cakes. These didn’t last the 
day out! My wife, Isobel, had made a 
cream and jam sponge with two iced fruit 
loaves − they did not last very long!! 
(So something of our ideas was used! 
Cake always welcome!)
When visiting clubs and giving talks I 
am often asked how to set up a straight 
key. This may seem basic but it is surpris-
ing how many keys I see with far too much 
tension, which produces very poor CW. 
When I have explained how to adjust the 
spacing and tension − the latter slightly 
different for everyone − it is surprising how 
the Morse improves.
Talks and demonstrations were given 
on straight, single lever, twin lever and bug 
keys. Many had never seen or operated 
the different keys on display − they were 
very impressed. Touch and twin-paddle 
keys were explained and how to operate a 
paddle key Iambically, also the differences 
between Iambic A and Iambic B.
Instructors were changed around at 
midday to reassess everyone and to give 
the attendees a chance to work with an 
experienced operator, asking questions if 
they had any problems.
At 1pm many had an unexpected treat. 
ECWARC had provided hot soup, sausage 
rolls, beef crunchies and chipolatas, as 
well as a never-ending supply of tea and 
coffee. 
l E-mail: roger@g3ldi.co.uk 
Morse Mode with Roger Cooke G3LDI

February 2018 Practical Wireless 	
63
For those interested in construction a 
talk was given on how to make a low-cost 
device to measure the Morse speed of a 
paddle key.
There are many very good logging and 
contest programs available but the contest 
and station logging systems, N1MM+ and 
Logger32, used by Dean and Andy, were 
demonstrated.
The afternoon coffee break was fol-
lowed by a combined receiving session 
for all attendees, starting at 5WPM and 
gradually increasing to around 35WPM. 
Everyone appeared to enjoy this test of 
their receiving skills.
A radio station had been set up for 
those who wanted a break from CW. An 
ECWARC committee member was avail-
able to guide and instruct. Two members 
were delighted with their time on the key. 
One had his first QSO on the air, another 
logged only his second on-air CW QSO 
and they were both very pleased with their 
day.
RSGB Morse tests were carried out 
at 20WPM for three attendees with two 
passes.
Every attendee said how much they 
enjoyed the day and how much they 
got out of it personally. Essex CW ARC 
were delighted to be able to impart their 
knowledge and experience to others and, 
hopefully, help to raise operating standards 
on the amateur bands.
We would like to think the idea of hav-
ing a CW Boot Camp will spread to other 
clubs. The enthusiasm of those attending 
was certainly worth all the effort. 
https://sites.google.com/site/essexcw
All I can say is Wow! Andy’s visit to 
NARC and our Bootcamp certainly hit 
home and if this idea spread across the 
UK, it could become a standard way of an 
enjoyable approach to tutoring. Our hobby 
is about communications. Not a lot of that 
goes on these days with the advent of 
FT8 hitting the ground running. Not much 
information exchange there! However, 
these weekends would certainly be grist to 
the mill in encouraging the newcomer to 
the hobby to learn Morse and widen his or 
her horizons.
Norfolk Bootcamp
Here in Norfolk, the autumn Bootcamp 
took place in November and we had 16 
attend ours. It was held as before at my 
QTH, using three rooms for three sepa-
rate classes. We had the usual supply of 
cakes, sausage rolls, apple strudel and so 
on. I don’t quite know how the Essex club 
fitted so much into their day! We had no 
time to take any pictures on this occasion. 
However, with our attendance up again, I 
think the Bootcamp idea is a really good 
one. Why not try it in your Club? It does 
take some organising but it’s well worth it 
judging by comments from students from 
both Bootcamps. 
If you would like any information on 
organising your own Bootcamp, please 
e-mail either myself or Andy and I am 
sure we can help you have a fun and 
worthwhile weekend. I’ve included some 
photos from the Essex event to give you 
an impression.
Dust Cover
Have you ever wanted a simple dust cover 
for your key? Dick G3WRJ sent in this 
idea. All you have to do is go into Wait-
rose. Dick says: “It is a Waitrose profiterole 
dessert. I bought it as part of ‘meal deal’ 
but I’m sure they can be bought separate-
ly. Almost a perfect fit for a Begali Blade 
straight key. Two small slots for the handle 
and the lead and no dust!” See the picture.
It does pay to keep dust away from a 
Morse key. I clean my contacts the way I 
was taught when I was first licensed. Sim-
ply insert a piece of dry paper between the 
contacts, close semi-tightly and drag the 
paper out again, complete with a covering 
of dust.
GB2CW
Bob Houlston G4PVB e-mailed me this 
week: “I resumed my Winter time GB2CW 
broadcasts last night and I’m pleased to 
tell you that Steve Roderick received me 
on his SDR and Hugo M6HBX was in full 
contact using his handheld transceiver. I’m 
finding that my GB2CW activity is most 
appreciated at the club and I’m delighted 
to be doing something beneficial for our 
hobby”. 
More satisfied customers! Keep up the 
good work. We can use all the tutors we 
can get. Please keep your comments and 
news coming! 73 and may the Morse be 
with you. Roger G3LDI. 

64 	
Practical Wireless February 2018
Send your letters to: 
Practical Wireless Letters, Warners Group Publishing 
West Street, Bourne, Lincs PE10 9PH 
E-mail: practicalwireless@warnersgroup.co.uk
Letters
Please note: The opinions expressed in any letter published in PW are those of the named correspondent whose letter has been published and they don’t necessarily reflect the opinions of the editorial staff or Warners Group. Editor
Nomenclature
Dear Don,
I read the letter (December 2017) 
from Andy G3PKW with interest, 
since I am also a bit of a stickler 
about Americanisms drifting into 
the traditional English language. 
I must admit, though, that the 
French have a tougher time 
keeping English words out of 
their beautiful language.
I have two broad comments 
on the Antenna vs. Aerial 
nomenclature. The first is that I 
believe Antenna is a better word 
than Aerial, which means ‘up in 
the air’. If you look at a blown-up 
photograph of an insect, you can 
see the similarity, and also the 
fact that the insect’s antennae 
are used to pick up information. 
Furthermore, I recall, at a meeting 
many years ago, the chairman’s 
comments about a colleague 
who just woke up, “Ah James, I 
see that your antennae are up”, 
when James suddenly became 
‘tuned in’ to the matter being 
debated.
Also, while mulling over which 
word was better, I then read 
another letter you published 
in the same issue that I found 
intriguing, namely ‘An Unusual 
QSO’. This was reporting a 
QSO with an American soldier 
in Vietnam who had managed 
to load up a coil of wire on the 
ground.  Not exactly ‘aerial’ 
but also I admit, not like an 
insect’s antenna either. (I also 
love reading anything written by 
Harry Leeming, and anything 
about a KWM-2, one of which I 
have, but rarely use on transmit 
since I don’t have a decent aerial/
antenna to go into the ‘ANT’ 
socket).
The second comment is that 
in my view, amateur radio in 
an international activity, rather 
than an English activity, so 
we should use words, within 
reason, that are in common 
use internationally. I suspect 
‘antenna’ wins in this respect.
As a bit of a digression, while 
on the international theme, I was 
brought up in Northern Ireland 
in the 1960s and it was rare to 
meet anyone who came from 
more than seven miles away and 
rarer still to meet someone from 
‘the other side’. How wonderful 
it was to communicate with 
or listen to people from many 
different countries, at no cost 
(phone calls to the US then were 
about £1 a minute). Furthermore, 
I found that the amateurs I met 
were much more open-minded 
than the non-amateurs I knew 
well. They also did not care 
about race, nationality or religion 
– we were all the same, with our 
common love of radio (and a 
desire to get the best out of the 
gear we have).
Nigel Patterson G3YDT
Maidenhead, Berks.
Editor’s comment: Thanks 
Nigel, it’s good to hear from 
you. Here at PW we will certainly 
stick with our long-established 
style of using the term antenna 
but there’s no need to worry 
about us drifting into such 
Americanisms as tube rather 
than valve or aluminum rather 
than aluminium! Your comment 
about radio amateurs being more 
open-minded and international 
in their outlook than many 
members of society strikes a 
chord though – I do agree and 
I hope that internationalism is 
reflected in my SEAnet report in 
this issue. I can’t resist a short 
anecdote here. Early one Sunday 
morning some years ago, a 
knock on the door and a very 
embarrassed-looking English 
gent along with a Japanese man. 
English gent says something 
along the lines of, “Very sorry 
to bother you but I’m taking my 
Japanese colleague back to the 
airport and he saw your antenna 
and insisted we stop and say 
hello”. Of course, it turned out 
the Japanese gentleman was a 
radio amateur and he and I were 
soon comparing notes about our 
radio activities (and, of course, 
having the inevitable photograph 
together!). Meanwhile, reserved 
English businessman looking 
suitably nonplussed!
APRS
Dear Don, 
We’re about to set up Pi based 
iGates here in SE Cornwall, so 
found the article (Data Modes) 
in December’s issue useful. 
However APRS can do far 
more than report your position 
(albeit that this is its most widely 
recognised capability). Automatic 
Packet Reporting System is what 
the acronym stands for. See the 
site below for more background.
www.g4ilo.com/aprs.html
Keith Harris G1FMU  
(Cornwall Raynet)
Callington, Cornwall
Various from 
G4PVB
Dear Don,
Tony 2E0WAP of Verulam ARC 
has found a new digital mode 
called SIM31 with SIM standing 
for Structured Integrated 
Message. It uses BPSK phase 
modulation and in operation 
is a cross between the PSK31 
and JT65 modes. SIM31 was 
developed by Nizar Ben Rejeb 
of Tunisia. The software is freely 
available from the web page 
below. My thanks to Ralph 
G1BSZ, editor of the VARC 
newsletter, for drawing attention 
to this.
www.on4nb.be/sim31.htm
On another matter, we often 
store components secured with 
elastic rubber bands. But not 
those such as switches that may 
have with silver electrical contact.
Silver contacts may be 
‘sulfurated’ by contacting with 
rubber bands. Source:
tinyurl.com/sulfuration2
And yet another topic: 
Charging leisure (not car) 
batteries maybe of interest to 
your readers via the link below. 
As we enter winter, don’t forget 
that a deeply discharged battery 
can freeze. It happened to my 
dad’s car battery and seemingly 
took an age to restore.
www.
campingandcaravanningclub.
co.uk/AdvicePdfs/
Datasheet-36.pdf
Finally, André Skarzynski 
M0JEK of Verulam ARC said, 
“I’ve set all my power supplies 
to 13·5V”. At first I was outraged 
with this – heretical! Surely the 
conventional wisdom is 13·8V, 
I mused, but then it all made 
sense. I have noticed that my 
power supply voltage may vary 
plus/minus a few tenths of a volt 
over time so, erring on the side of 
caution, I too now set my PSU to 
13·5V. I’d welcome the thoughts 
of others on this matter.
Bob Houlston G4PVB
St Albans
Editor’s comment: It’s always 
good to hear from you Bob. With 
regard to new digital modes, the 
problem seems to be that there is 
a new one every week (almost!). 
Some catch on (FT8 being 
the most recent and extreme 
example) while others never 
achieve the necessary critical 
mass of users to survive, other 
than perhaps between a few 
dedicated supporters.

JANUARY 2018
January 14th (Sunday)
The Red Rose Winter Rally
The West Manchester Radio Club 
will be holding its Red Rose Winter 
Rally at the George H Carnall 
Leisure Centre, Kingsway Park, 
Urmston, Manchester M41 7FJ, 
just off Junction 9 of the M60, 
opposite the Trafford Centre. The 
venue is all on one level, with a huge 
car park, café area and facilities 
for the disabled. The doors will 
open at 11am and there will be the 
usual trade stands, components, 
a Bring & Buy, an RSGB bookstall 
and special interest groups. For 
further information, please see the 
information on the Club’s website or 
contact the Rally Manager.
John
Tel: 07870 161 953
www.wmrc.co.uk
January 27th (Saturday)
The Horncastle Radio Rally
The Horncastle Radio Rally will 
be held at Banovallum School, 
Horncastle, Lincolnshire LN9 6DA, 
with access via the Mareham Road 
entrance. There will be free on-site 
parking and admission will cost 
£2.00. In addition to trade stands, 
there will be all the usual attractions, 
including bacon butties. This is an 
indoor event and will be all on one 
level.
Tony G3ZPU
Tel: 01507 527 835
E-mail:  
tony.nightingale@yahoo.co.uk
FEBRUARY
February 3rd (Saturday)
The Reading DX Meeting
The Reading International Radio 
Group will be meeting in Room 3 at 
the Reading International Solidarity 
Centre (RISC), 35-39 London Street, 
Reading RG1 4PS. The Meeting 
will take place between 2.30pm 
and 5pm and offer an opportunity 
for those interested in listening to 
broadcasters from around the world 
on the short wave, medium wave 
and FM bands to get together.
Mike Barraclough
Tel: 01462 643 899
E-mail:  
barraclough.mike@gmail.com
February 4th (Sunday)
The Canvey Radio & 
Electronics Rally
The South Essex Amateur Radio 
Society will be hosting the 33rd 
Canvey Radio & Electronics Rally at 
The Paddocks Community Centre, 
Long Road, Canvey Island, Essex 
SS8 0JA (the southern end of A130). 
The doors will open at 10.30am. 
There will be free parking, trade 
stands, freshly made refreshments 
(including the famous Canvey Radio 
Rally bacon rolls) and facilities for 
the disabled.
Vic Rogers G6BHE
Tel: 07957 461694
E-mail: nvr1945@btinternet.com
www.southessex-ars.co.uk
February 9th, 10th and 11th 
(Friday/Sunday)
The Orlando HamCation
The 72nd Orlando HamCation 
will be held at the Central Florida 
Fairgrounds and Expo Park, 4603 
West Colonial Drive, Orlando, 
Florida 32808. The doors will be 
open from 9am to 5pm on the Friday 
and Saturday and 9am to 2pm on 
Sunday. Admission for all three 
days will cost US$17.00 (for tickets 
purchased at the gate) or US$15.00 
(if purchased online or via mail order 
by 31st December 2017). There will 
be talk-in, free car parking, trade 
stands, a swap meet, tailgate sale, 
forums, special interest groups, 
family attractions and a prize draw.
www.hamcation.com
February 10th (Saturday)
Ballymena ARC Rally
The Ballymena ARC Rally will take 
place at the Ahoghill Community 
Centre, 80 Cullybackey Road 
Ahoghill BT42 1LA. Doors are open 
10.30am. There will be traders, B&B, 
refreshments, raffle and more. 
Hugh Kernohan GI0JEV
Tel: 028 2587 1481
E-mail: HKernohan@aol.com 
http://gi3fff.synthasite.com/
programme.php
February 11th (Sunday)
The Harwell Radio &  
Electronics Rally
The Harwell Amateur Radio 
Society will be holding a Radio & 
Electronics Rally at Didcot Leisure 
Centre, Mereland Road, Didcot, 
Oxfordshire OX11 8AY. The doors 
will be open between 10am and 
3pm and admission will cost £3.00 
(children under 12 free). There will 
be talk-in on 145.550MHz (G3PIA), 
free parking, trade stands, special 
interest groups and RSGB bookstall. 
Refreshments available all day.
Ann, G8NVI
E-mail:  
ann.stevens@btinternet.com
www.g3pia.net/radio-electronics-
rally 
February 18th (Sunday)
Audiojumble
Audiojumble. Billed as “the UK’s 
largest second-hand and vintage 
hi-fi event”, Audiojumble will be held 
at The Angel Leisure Centre, Angel 
Lane, Tonbridge, Kent TN9 1SF. 
Please see the event website for 
details of the cost of admission for 
standard and early entry. Items on 
sale will include vintage and modern 
hi-fi, valve amplifiers, transistor 
amplifiers, speakers, turntables, 
tuners, tape recorders, CD players, 
records, components, books and 
vintage radios.
www.audiojumble.co.uk
February 18th (Sunday)
The RadioActive Fair
The RadioActive Fair, promoted by 
the Mid Cheshire Amateur Radio 
Society, will be held at Nantwich 
Civic Hall, 4 Market Street, 
Nantwich, Cheshire CW5 5DG. The 
doors will open at 10.30am. There 
will be free parking, trade stands, 
a Bring & Buy, an RSGB bookstall, 
raffle, catering and facilities for the 
disabled.
Stuart Jackson
Tel. 07880 732 534
www.radioactivefair.co.uk  
February 25th (Sunday)
The BRATS Medway Radio Rally
The Bredhurst Receiving and 
Transmitting Society will be hosting 
the BRATS Medway Radio Rally at 
The Victory Academy, Magpie Hall 
Road, Chatham, Kent ME4 5JB, just 
off the M2 at Junction 3. The doors 
will be open between 10am (9.30am 
for disabled visitors) and 2pm and 
admission will cost £2.50. There will 
be talk-in on 145.550MHz (GB4RRR) 
free parking and trade stands. On-
site catering is available. Traders will 
have access to the venue from 6am.
Hugh H, G0BRC
Tel. 07825 838 877
E-mail: secretary@brats-qth.org
www.brats-qth.org
February 25th (Sunday)
Pencoed ARC Table Top Sale
The Pencoed ARC Table Top 
Sale takes place at the Pencoed 
Rugby Football Club, The Verlands, 
Felindre Road, Pencoed CF35 5PB. 
Doors open at 8am for sellers and 
10am for buyers, entry is £2. Tables 
are £10 each, on a first come first 
served basis. Refreshments are 
available on site. 
Madeline Roberts 
Tel: 0773 837 5775
MARCH
March 4th (Sunday)
The Exeter Radio &  
Electronics Rally
The Exeter Radio & Electronics 
Rally will be held at America Hall, 
De La Rue Way, Pinhoe, Exeter 
EX4 8PW. The doors will open at 
10.30am (10.15am for disabled 
visitors) and admission will cost 
£2.00. There will be trade stands, a 
Bring & Buy (items can be booked in 
from 10.15am) and catering will be 
available.
Pete G3ZVI
Tel: 07714 198 374
E-mail: g3zvi@yahoo.co.uk
March 4th (Sunday)
The Grantham ARC Radio and 
Electronic Rally
The Grantham ARC Radio and 
Electronics Rally will be held at 
Grantham West Community Centre, 
Trent Road, Grantham, Lincolnshire 
NG31 7XQ and admission will cost 
£3,00. There will be talk-in, on-site 
parking, traded stands, special 
interest groups an RSGB bookstall 
and facilities for the disabled.  
Kevin G6SSN
Tel: 07793 142 483
E-mail: g6ssn@btinternet.com
www.garc.org.uk
March 11th (Sunday)
Dover Radio Rally
The Dover Radio Rally will take 
place at Whitfield Village Hall, 
Sandwich Road, Whitfield, Dover 
CT16 3LY. Doors open at 10am. 
Traders’ access is from 7.30am. 
The auction starts at 12.30pm. 
The rally ends at 1pm. Entrance 
price for visitors is £2.00. Talk in on 
GB3KS. There will be a Bring & Buy 
table, if you have any items you wish 
to sell, please bring them along, 
10% of the sale price will go to the 
Dover Radio club funds. A Selection 
of hot and cold refreshments will be 
available as well as good parking 
facilities.
Aaron Coote 2E0FQR, M0IER
Tel: 0771 465 4267
Email: aaroncoote@hotmail.co.uk
Website: www.darc.org.uk
March 25th (Sunday)
Callington Radio Rally
The Callington Radio Rally, 
organised jointly by the Devon and 
Cornwall Repeater Group and the 
Callington Amateur Radio Society, 
will be held at Callington Town Hall, 
Callington, Cornwall PL17 7BD. 
The doors will open at 10am and 
admission is £2.00. There will be 
ample free car parking adjacent to 
the venue, trade stands, a Bring and 
Buy (10% commission) and on-site 
catering. 
Roger 2E0YPH 
Tel: 07854 088 882 
E-mail: 2e0rph@gmail.com
Send all your rally info to Georg Wiessala: 
E-mail: wiessala@hotmail.com
Plan your rally visits with our comprehensive list of forthcoming events. RadioUser will be attending events marked with an asterisk* – come along to 
our stand for great deals on subscriptions to Practical Wireless and RadioUser. Club Secretaries and Event Organisers: please send us details of your 
events if you would like them to be mentioned here. 
Rallies
February 2018 Practical Wireless 	
65

Classified Adverts
DISCLAIMER Some of the products offered for sale in advertisements in this magazine may have been obtained from abroad or from unauthorised 
sources. Practical Wireless advises readers contemplating mail order to enquire whether the products are suitable for use in the UK and have full after-
sales back-up available. The publishers of Practical Wireless wish to point out that it is the responsibility of readers to ascertain the legality or otherwise 
of items offered for sale by advertisers in this magazine.
For Sale
Antennas
Valves
Please photocopy this form or write on a separate sheet if you prefer
ORDER FORM FOR CLASSIFIED ADVERTS  
PLEASE WRITE IN BLOCK CAPITALS
The prepaid rate for classified advertisements is 42 pence per word (minimum 12 words), box number 70p extra. Semi-display setting 
£13.90 per single column centimetre (minimum 3cm). Please add 20% VAT to the total. All cheques, postal orders, etc., to be made 
payable to Warners Group Publications. Advertisements, together with remittance, should be sent to the Practical Wireless Classified 
Adverts, Warners Group Publications, West Street, Bourne, Lincs PE10 9PH.
Please insert this advertisement in the ……………………………… issue of Practical Wireless (if you do not specify an issue we will insert it in the next available issue 
of PW) for …… insertion/s. I enclose Cheque/P.O. for £…………(42p per word, 12 minimum, please add 20% VAT to total).
Category heading:.........................................
Name:............................................................
Address:........................................................
......................................................................	
......................................................................
......................................................................
......................................................................
Telephone number: 
......................................................................
VALVES AND ALLIED COMPONENTS IN 
STOCK Ring for free list. Valves/ books/
magazines wanted. Geoff Davies (Radio). 
Tel: 01788 574774.






While prices of goods shown in advertisements 
are correct at the time of going to press, readers 
are advised to check both prices and availability 
of goods with the advertiser before ordering 
from non-current issues of the magazine.
CHECK OUT OUR WEBSITE FOR LOTS 
OF NEW AND EXCITING ITEMS! Windows 
10 ready CAT and programming cables, 
latest version SDR USB sticks, replacement 
microphones, cables and PTTs for studio 
microphones, linear switching cables and much 
more. technofix.uk
CTCSS ENCODER AND DECODER KITS. 
DTMF kits and modules. Pic development kits. 
https://cstech.co.uk 
REPAIRS TO RECEIVERS, TRANSMITTERS 
ETC. New/old, valve/transistor.  
Call 07903 023437 for details. 
Web: www.kent-rigs.co.uk
Repairs
TOP PRICES PAID
FOR ALL YOUR VALVES, TUBES, SEMI-CONDUCTORS AND ICS.
Unit 4, Daux Road, Billingshurst, W. Sussex RH14 9SJ
Tel: 01403 785600 Fax: 01403 785656
www.langrex.co.uk
G4TPH MAGLOOPS Remote tune and manual 
tune models. 40m through 10m, 100 Watts, 
SSB. See PW review on website. Details at 
www.g4tph.com
Please Contact Kristina Green  
for all your advertising enquiries
Tel: 01778 392096
E-mail: kristina.green@warnersgroup.co.uk
Would you like to 
advertise in 
Practical Wireless?
66 	
Practical Wireless February 2018

At the RCF we want to encourage more youngsters 
into radio and electronic engineering.
Engaging young people in radio technology
Go to: www.commsfoundation.org for more information and to make a donation
We award scholarships 
and donate to clubs 
and projects with similar 
aims. To be able to 
continue with this we 
need your help.
WANTED
CIRCUIT DIAGRAM FOR 1947 
HAMBANDER, built by Radiovision in 
Leicester. I want to rebuild this old valve 
receiver in memory of an old friend. 
Tel: Peter 2E0CYS 01793 642775 (Swindon)
Email: pmartin862@btinternet.com
FOR SALE
HEATHER LITE EXPLORER LINEAR 
AMPLIFIER. VGC, fully working, serviced 
recently. Collection in person. £600 ono. 
Tel: 0208 6895149 (Croydon)
TEN-TEC SCOUT MODULES for 
80/40/30/20/17/15/12/10 metres.
Will not split. Asking £100 for
the lot. Ross Bradshaw G4DTD 
Tel: 01726 891320
KME80 4M 10W TRX £30
INTEK HR-2800 AM-FM 20w £40
Pofung 300MHz TRX £20
KL35 Power Amp £10
SWR Meters plus other parts £10 
p&p not included or buyer collects.
M3EHA Tel: 01606 597342
Send your advert to 
Bargain Basement, 
Practical Wireless, 
Warners Group Publications, 
West Street, 
Bourne, Lincs PE10 9PH.
Bargain Basement adverts now cost £5 per advert (subscribers still free) and will also be published in RadioUser, our sister magazine, unless requested otherwise.
Bargain Basement
We know a lot of people use the internet for second-hand sales nowadays but this is
a free service for subscribers and very cheap otherwise so please USE IT OR LOSE IT.
Don’t forget to make cheques and postal orders payable to Warners Group Publications.
Please write your advert clearly in BLOCK CAPITALS up to a maximum of 30 
words, plus 12 words for your contact details on the form provided and send 
it together with your payment of £5 (subscribers can place their advert free of 
charge as long as they provide their subs number or mailing label). Cheques 
should be made payable to Warners Group Publishing, credit card payments 
also accepted. Please help us to help you by preparing your advert carefully. 
Any advert which contains ?? marks indicates that the advertising dept. could 
not read/interpret the wording.
Advertisements from traders or for equipment that is illegal to possess, use 
or which cannot be licensed in the UK, will not be accepted. 
No responsibility will be taken for errors and no correspondence will be 
entered into on any decision taken by the Editor on any of these conditions. 
You should state clearly in your advert whether equipment is professionally 
built, home-brewed or modified. The Publishers of Practical Wireless wish to 
point out that it is the responsibility of the buyer to ascertain the suitability of 
goods offered for purchase.
February 2018 Practical Wireless  
67
                         Please insert this advertisement in the next available issue of Practical Wireless.
 For Sale 
 Wanted 
 Exchange
PLEASE NOTE: as a security measure, you must include your house number and postcode.
Name ........................................................................................
Address ....................................................................................
..................................................................................................
................................................ Post code .................................
Telephone Number ...................................................................
CARD NUMBER
Signature....................................................   Security number
Switch issue number (if on card) ..............................................................
Start date of card .............................  Expiry date of card .......................
My Subs Number is................................................(or send mailer label)
CONTACT DETAILS FOR ADVERT. Please only write in the contact details you wish to be published 
(30)
PW & RU
PW ONLY
Last three digits on the back of the card
Please make any cheques or Postal Orders for advertisments payable to Warners Group Publications.
Bargain Basement order form
ONLY
£5

Radio Book Store
Order form on page 70
 
 
Pages 
Price
SCANNING & FREQUENCY GUIDES
● SCANNERS 7 B Robertson & P Rouse  ....................................245 
£9.95
ANTENNAS/PROPAGATION
● AN INTRODUCTION TO ANTENNA MODELLING
 
Steve Nichols G0KYA (RSGB) ..........................................................80 
£9.99
● NOVEL ANTENNAS Steve Telenius-Lowe PJ4DX (RSGB)..............192 
£14.99
● ANTENNAS MASTERED Peter Dodd G3LDO (RSGB)..............288 
£14.99
● STEALTH ANTENNAS 2 (RSGB) ...............................................208 
£14.99
● RSGB ANTENNA FILE (RSGB) ..................................................288 
£14.99
● HF ANTENNAS FOR EVERYONE (RSGB) ................................336 
£14.99
● BUILDING SUCCESSFUL HF ANTENNAS (RSGB) ............................ 224 
£14.99
● HF ANTENNA COLLECTION Edited by Erwin David G4LQI 
 
(RSGB) ........................................................................................233 
£19.95
BEGINNERS/LICENCE/MANUALS
● HF SSB DX BASICS Steve Telenius-Lowe, 9M6DXX (RSGB) ...........96 
£8.99
● RADIO PROPAGATION EXPLAINED Steve Nichols G0KYA ..........128 
£12.99
● HAMSAT (RSGB) ........................................................................128 
£9.99
● GETTING STARTED IN AMATEUR RADIO (RSGB)...........................96 
£8.99
● ADVANCE! THE FULL LICENCE MANUAL
 
Alan Betts G0HIQ & Steve Hartley G0FUW (RSGB) ...................104 
£11.99
● AMATEUR RADIO EXAM SECRETS 
 
Alan Betts G0HIQ (RSGB) ....................................................................... 104 
£12.99
●  FOUNDATION LICENCE NOW! 5th Edition
 
Alan Betts G0HIQ (RSGB) ............................................................32 
£4.99
● HF AMATEUR RADIO 2nd Ed. Ian Poole G3YWX (RSGB) .......144 
£12.99
● INTERMEDIATE LICENCE – BUILDING ON THE FOUNDATION 
 
4th Edition Steve Hartley G0FUW (RSGB) ..................................76 
£6.99
● LOW STOCK MORSE CODE FOR RADIO AMATEURS (RSGB) 32 inc. CD £8.99
● LOW STOCK SECRET OF LEARNING MORSE CODE 
 
Mark Francis (Spa) ........................................................................84 
£6.95
DESIGN & CONSTRUCTION
● HOMEBREW COOKBOOK (RSGB) ..........................................208 
£12.99
● CIRCUIT OVERLOAD (RSGB) ...................................................504 
£18.99
● THE ART OF SOLDERING R Brewster (Babani) .........................84 
£3.99
● BUILDING A TRANSCEIVER 
 
E Skelton EI9GQ & E Richards G4LFM (RSGB) .........................176 
£12.99
SHACK ESSENTIALS
● RTTY/PSK31 for Radio Amateurs  Roger Cooke G3LDI (RSGB) .............48 
£7.99
● LOW STOCK RSGB AMATEUR RADIO OPERATING MANUAL 
 
8th edition (RSGB)  ................................................................................240 
£16.99
● NEW DELUXE LOGBOOK & DIARY 2017 (RSGB) .....................80 
£4.99
● NEW HART REVIEWS (RSGB) ............................................................ 192 
£12.99
● RSGB PREFIX GUIDE 12th edition (RSGB) ................................80 
£9.99
● SIX & FOUR Don Field G3XTT (RSGB) ............................................. 288 
£13.99
● AMATEUR RADIO ASTRONOMY 2nd Edition 
 
J Fielding (RSGB) .......................................................................384 
£16.99
● AMATEUR RADIO ESSENTIALS G Brown (RSGB) ..................288 
£25.99
QRP
● QRP BASICS George Dobbs G3RJV (RSGB) ............................204 
£14.99
RESTORING OLD
RADIO SETS  
For many, there is nothing more charming than an old broadcast 
receiver glowing away in a substantial wooden or Bakelite case. 
However, these are now a rarity and it is much more likely that old 
radio sets will be non-working curios found at car boot sales in a 
dusty, unloved condition. Restoring Old Radio Sets is a book that 
sets out to provide a step-by-step guide to bringing an old set back 
to life, getting it working properly and restoring its looks.
PRICE: £8.99 PLUS P&P.
ck
AN INTRODUCTION TO 
ANTENNA MODELLING
For many years, the only way for most radio amateurs to work out 
how well an antenna design would work was to build it and ﬁ nd 
out. The arrival of computer based antenna modelling programmes 
has changed this. This book looks at the Free MMANA-GAL 
antenna modelling program that will let you design and optimise a 
whole host of antennas and all on your PC.
PRICE: £9.99 PLUS P&P.
ut
es
a
This is the 72nd edition of World Radio TV Handbook and this great directory continues 
to offer the most comprehensive guide to broadcasting on the planet. With the help of an 
international network of contributors they again provide the most up-to-date information on 
mediumwave, shortwave and FM broadcasts and broadcasters available in any publication.
●  Articles on topics of great interest to professionals, listeners and dxers alike including 
articles on Anipodean Journey, Receiving Noise, Radio Romania International, A New 
Voice of Hope and Radio Voices from the South Seas.
●  Reviews of the latest receivers and equipment
●  Maps fully updated showing global SW transmitter sites
●  The Features section provides colour pages giving articles, radio reviews, propagation 
predictions, and colour maps
●  National Radio – The world’s national radio services, and the broadcasters, listed by 
country
●  International Radio – Full broadcaster details and the winter SW frequencies as supplied 
by the broadcasters together with an expanded Clandestine section
●  Frequency Lists MW frequency lists by region; international and domestic SW broadcasts 
by frequency; international broadcasts in English, French, German, Portuguese and 
Spanish by UTC; DRM broadcasts
●  Television – Details of the broadcasters arranged alphabetically by country
●  Reference – International and Domestic SW Transmitter sites, Standard Time and 
Frequency Transmissions, DX Club information, Internet resources and other essential 
information
All of this for just £35.00 plus p&p
World
Radio TV 
Handbook 2018
NEW
TITLE
ADDED!
68  
Practical Wireless February 2018

VHF & HIGHER
● MICROWAVE KNOW HOW Andy Barter G8ATD (RSGB) .........192 
£12.99
HISTORICAL
● THE VINTAGE RIG GUIDE Steve White G3ZVW............................80 
£5.99
CRYSTAL SETS 
● THE VOICE OF THE CRYSTAL H Peter Friedrichs ......................185 
£11.95
ELECTRONICS
● LOW STOCK COMPUTERS IN AMATEUR RADIO
 
with CD (RSGB) ..........................................................................256 
£14.99
● TEST EQUIPMENT FOR THE RADIO AMATEUR (RSGB) .......250 
£14.99
BINDERS
● PRACTICAL WIRELESS OR RADIOUSER. .........................................£10.00
ACRCHIVE CDS NOW AVAILABLE
The archive sets are each on a single optical disc and provided in a searchable portable document
format (PDF). It’s ideal for any computer running a PDF reader program – there should be no problems!
RADIOUSER 2016 ARCHIVE ..................................................................£14.99
PRACTICAL WIRELESS 1965-1969 ARCHIVE ...................................£24.99
PRACTICAL WIRELESS 1970-1974 ARCHIVE ...................................£24.99
PRACTICAL WIRELESS 2010-2014 ARCHIVE ...................................£24.99
RADIOUSER 2011-2015 ARCHIVE .......................................................£24.99
PRACTICAL WIRELESS 2015 ARCHIVE ..............................................£14.99
RADIOUSER 2015 ARCHIVE ..................................................................£14.99
IN THE SHOP .............................................................................................£14.99
DATA MODES ............................................................................................£14.99
CARRYING ON THE PRACTICAL WAY ..................................................£14.99
PRACTICAL WIRELESS 1975-1979 ARCHIVE ...................................£24.99 
PRACTICAL WIRELESS 1980-1984 ARCHIVE ...................................£24.99 
PRACTICAL WIRELESS 2014 ARCHIVE ..............................................£14.99 
RADIOUSER 2014 ARCHIVE ..................................................................£14.99 
PRACTICAL WIRELESS 1985-1989 ARCHIVE ...................................£24.99 
ANTENNA COLLECTION ARCHIVE .......................................................£14.99 
PRACTICAL WIRELESS 1990-1994 ARCHIVE ...................................£24.99 
PRACTICAL WIRELESS 2013 ARCHIVE ..............................................£14.99 
RADIOUSER 2013 ARCHIVE ..................................................................£14.99 
PRACTICAL WIRELESS 1995-1999 ARCHIVE ...................................£24.99 
PRACTICAL WIRELESS 2012 ARCHIVE ..............................................£14.99 
RADIOUSER 2012 ARCHIVE ..................................................................£14.99 
PRACTICAL WIRELESS 2000-2004 ARCHIVE ...................................£24.99 
PRACTICAL WIRELESS 2011 ARCHIVE ..............................................£14.99 
PRACTICAL WIRELESS 2010 ARCHIVE ..............................................£14.99 
PRACTICAL WIRELESS 2005-2009 ARCHIVE ...................................£24.99 
RADIOUSER 2011 ARCHIVE ..................................................................£14.99 
RADIOUSER 2006-2010 ARCHIVE .......................................................£24.99
RADIOUSER 2017 ARCHIVE ..................................................................£14.99
PRACTICAL WIRELESS 2017 ARCHIVE ..............................................£14.99 
 
 
Pages 
Price
THE VINTAGE RIG GUIDE  
Amateur radio equipment saw great changes from the 1960s 
onwards with the arrival of solid-state designs and there is 
much superb equipment from the latter decades of the 20th 
century available in the second-hand market. This brand new 
publication focuses on the amateur radio equipment from 
theses decades in the same format as the The Rig Guide, 
describing the basic information about the equipment, along 
with when it was ﬁ rst made and what it may be worth. 
Price: £5.99 plus p&p.
RADIO PROPAGATION EXPLAINED  
Understanding radio propagation is essential for anyone with 
an interest in radio communications who wants to know how 
signals travel from A to B. Written by acknowledged expert 
Steve Nichols G0KYA, Radio Propagation Explained provides 
everything you need to know about this fascinating topic. 
Price: £12.99 plus p&p.
HF SSB DX BASICS  
Contacting far ﬂ ung parts of the world (DX) on the High 
Frequencies (HF) on single side-band (SSB) is one of the 
enduring fascinations of amateur radio. HF SSB DX Basics 
provides a practical guide to making the most of this endlessly 
fascinating area of operation. 
Price: £8.99 plus p&p.
RTTY/PSK31 FOR RADIO AMATEURS 
Data modes appear to be a daunting prospect to newly 
licensed radio amateurs but they do not have to be. This book 
is a practical guide to the two most popular data modes, RTTY 
and PSK31. However, RTTY /PSK31 for Radio Amateurs does 
carry a warning: Buying this book may lead to an enjoyment 
of RTTY, PSK31 (and Data modes in general) which is highly 
addictive! 
Price: £7.99 plus p&p.
GETTING STARTED IN AMATEUR RADIO
If you want to know something about the hobby or are newly 
licensed or are even just looking for something different, 
Getting Started in Amateur Radio provides the answers. What 
about receiving digital images from the International Space 
Station? Or talking to friends around the world via satellite? 
Or perhaps being able to help out during natural disasters? All 
of these things are possible with amateur radio and Getting 
Started in Amateur Radio details these and many other 
possibilities. £8.99
THE VOICE OF THE CRYSTAL
185 pages of practical information on the fabrication of 
electronic components suitable for use in building crystal 
radio sets. Basic theory and simple analysis are combined 
with dozens of examples of historical practice, work by 
contemporary experimenters and construction details for many 
instruments fabricated by the author himself. £11.95
CARRYING ON THE PRACTICAL WAY 
20 years of projects in practical wireless
Since 1996, there has been an ongoing series of small practical 
projects in Practical Wireless magazine. The Rev. George 
Dobbs G3RJV has been the mainstay of this series by far, 
having written around 95% of the articles that appeared up to 
date. Therefore, as a tribute to George’s love of the hobby and 
to the other authors who take over the task of demonstrating 
that building your own projects is easier than you might think, 
we’ve collated them into one electronic archive. 
Because of the wide-ranging subjects it’s not easy to catalogue 
them because there are around 230 articles to browse through. 
Of necessity, some are similar in nature but all are unique in 
showing how easy it can be to create small circuits that can 
be coupled together to produce receivers, transmitters, test 
equipment or just plain novelties to amuse. Nevertheless, all 
are part of the self-training aspect of the hobby. £14.99
HARRY LEEMING’S IN THE SHOP
A collection of Harry’s long running In The Shop series in PW. 
Find hints, tips and anecdotes about customers that Harry met 
while running Holdings HiFi Audio, an amateur radio shop. If 
you’ve got an older Yaesu transceiver, this is the CD-ROM for 
you with some 300 searchable pages. £14.99
MIKE RICHARDS’ DATA MODES
Since he started his regular column some years ago, Mike 
Richards G4WNC has explained the many data modes using 
a computer with your radio. They’re all here, but these are not 
the only computer related topics Mike has covered. Find out 
how to use the Raspberry Pi, a £25 Linux computer or create 
projects using the Arduino system. All this in 178 searchable 
pages. £14.99
February 2018 Practical Wireless  
69

Book Store
HOW TO ORDER
Please note that, for a short time, orders are only being taken by post but watch this space for our new website - coming soon!
order form
Photocopies are acceptable
Please try to order from an
up-to-date magazine to ensure 
correct prices and availability.
02/18
....................................................................... Price (£) ..............................
....................................................................... Price (£) ..............................
....................................................................... Price (£) ..............................
....................................................................... Price (£) ..............................
Postage & Packing charges:
Please remember to add P&P to your order.                                                                                 
UK: £3.50 P&P Europe: £7.00 Rest of World: £11.00
Total cost of order including postage .....Price (£)..............................
Payment Details. Please note: For security purposes, you must include 
your house number and postcode.
Name .............................................................................................................
Address .........................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................
...........................................................Postcode ............................................
 Yes I am happy to receive special offers by post
Telephone (Daytime)  ......................................................................................
 Yes I am happy to receive telephone calls about special offers
Items...
Payment by:   Cheque payable to
Warners Group Publications OR
 
 Please charge my credit/debit card:
Card Number: .............................................................
Security code .............................................................
Start Date ..............................Exp date ......................
Issue Number .............................................................
Signature ...............................Date .............................
Please return this order form to: Book Store, Marketing 
Department, Practical Wireless, Warners Group 
Publications, The Maltings, West Street, Bourne, 
Lincolnshire PE10 9PH. Please note that all payments 
must be made in Sterling, cash not accepted.
Pre-order your Practical Wireless & RadioUser
2017 ARCHIVES
JUST £14.99 EACH, PLUS P&P
Delivery expected before 31st January 2018
Book Store enquiries
Please contact Katherine Brown 
with all your Book Store enquiries
Tel: 01778 395092
E-mail: katherine.brown@warnersgroup.co.uk
70  
Practical Wireless February 2018

MISSED AN ISSUE?
Digital magazines are just a click away
Get your favourite magazine on your
mobile, tablet or PC quickly and easily
February 2018 Practical Wireless  
71

RadioUser January 2018  
72
SUBSCRIBE TO
FROM JUST £11
Britain’s best-selling Amateur Radio magazine with monthly reviews on the latest 
radios and test equipment, exclusive features, club events listings and much more!
Subscribe www.webscribe.co.uk/magazine/pw
or call us today 01442 820580. Subscribe to digital www.pocketmags.com 
Terms and conditions £11 payable by quarterly direct debit (UK only). Subscription hotline open 9am – 5pm Monday – Friday. 
by quarterly direct debit
£11
by annual Credit/Cheque
£44
10%
SAVE
UP TO
RSGB Convention
Our report on another 
successful event
The Yaesu 
FT-70DE
A FULL INDEX OF ALL THE 2017 FEATURES
December 2017 
£3.99 ISSN 0141-0857
Display until 14th December 2017 
RSGB Convention
● Carrying on the Practical Way - A Yagi for the 17m Band ● What Next? - Amateur TV
NOW IN 
OUR 86th 
YEAR!
HF Highlights
The Wonderloop 750
& Widebander Mk 2 
put to the test
We look at a new handheld 
designed for System Fusion
GB1BOB
commemorates
the Battle
of Britain
h Wonderloop 750
The Wonderloop 750
T
75
The Wonderloop 750
WONDER WAND
NEWARK HAMFEST
OUR ANNUAL REPORT
e Yaes
The
FT-70D
FT
A FULL INDEX OF ALL THE 2017 FEA
new hand
We look at a n
System Fu
designed for S
the Bat
of Brit
Also 
available
digitally

IN THE UK’S BEST AND ONLY INDEPENDENT 
AMATEUR RADIO MAGAZINE
THE UK’S BEST AND ONLY INDEPEND
IN THE UK’S BEST AND ONLY INDEPENDENT
Coming
next month
Review – The WSPRlite Flexi
Tim Kirby G4VXE looks at the WSPRlite 
Flexi from SOTAbeams.
Doing it by Design
Eric Edwards GW8LJJ describes an 
efﬁ cient high-quality AM transceiver for 
the 60m band.
Valve & Vintage
In the centenary year of the 
development of the superhet, Dr 
Bruce Taylor HB9ANY relates 
how one remarkable amateur 
revolutionis ed the art of radio.
Carrying on the Practical Way
Tony Jones G7ETW follows 
up his Morse sender project 
(November 2017) with an 
Arduino-based Morse reader.
What Next
Colin Redwood G6MXL 
reviews the BITX 40m SSB 
Transceiver kit.
There are all your other 
regular columns too, 
including HF Highlights, 
World of VHF, 
Emerging Technology, 
Making Waves and 
Data Modes.
MARCH 2018 ISSUE 
ON SALE 8TH FEBRUARY 2018
AT ALL GOOD NEWSAGENTS
Current issues are available direct for 
the cover price (post free). Please see 
the Book Store pages for ordering information
January 2018
Available from all good 
newsagents. Price £3.99
ON
SALE
NOW
incorporating Radio Active
the new Short Wave Magazine
The ICOM IC-R8600 Wideband Receiver   In his review, Keith 
Rawlings G4MIU offers an in-depth assessment of the technical 
speciﬁ cations, key features and advanced capabilities of the new 
ﬂ agship receiver from ICOM. 
Scanning Scene Scanmeister Bill Robertson provides hints and 
tips for wireless remote scanning in and around your home and 
looks at a type of radio that could be said to be out of this world. 
The ELAD FDM DUOr Multi-Use Receiver Former RU editor Andy 
Thomsett re-examines the  ELAD FDM DUOr multi-use receiver 
from the point of view of its software capabilities, its versatility and 
its practicability for the hobby monitor.  
Sky High Godfrey Manning evaluates the use of selected radio 
communications as aids to aviation, surveys good practice, 
covers callsigns and offers some operational and frequency 
updates.  
Fifty Years of BBC Colour TV Keith Hamer and Garry Smith return 
with a mini-series in which they remind us of one of the more 
signiﬁ cant media anniversaries of 2017.
 Maritime Matters Robert Connolly weighs up minimum 
speciﬁ cations for non-GMDSS maritime VHF equipment, relives 
the recent hurricane Ophelia and undertakes some equipment 
comparisons.
Digital Radio  New regular columnist Kevin Ryan looks at weather 
and DAB reception, assesses smaller DAB trials and reports 
on issues of coverage, audiences and services in this sector of 
digital radio. 
Radio Museums 1 (UK)   Without any claim to comprehensiveness, 
David Harris and Georg Wiessala offer a short table of 
historical sites and museums in the UK dedicated to radio history, 
technology and design. 
Book Review  Avid radio book reader David Harris reviews a 
fascinating, updated, biographical account of the life of Michael 
Faraday by Professor Iwan Rhys Morus. 
Airband News David Smith reviews potential cyber-threats to 
aircraft and reports on ground-breaking remote-control tower 
technology in the UK, before updating readers on routes and 
arrival procedures. 
DXTV, FM & Satellite News Keith Hamer and Garry Smith 
demonstrate the truly global nature of their hobby, delineating TV 
and FM DXing successes during October and using contributions 
from readers around the world.
LM&S Broadcast Matters Chrissy Brand checks back in from a 
visit to the Woofferton SW transmitter site, looks at global radio 
stations’ QSL policies and reacts to readers’ reception reports on 
short and medium wave.
Decode Mike Richards covers more of the aspects and 
workings of the Weak Signals Propagation Reporter system, 
including its WSJT-X component.
News & Products Key developments in the radio and podcasting 
industries, resources for you to explore, frequency schedules and 
new radio and SDR equipment to explore. 
Comms from Europe Our man in Hungary, Simon Parker, caps 
off this year by investigating emerging technology, assessing 
antennas and sampling dealers, clubs and networks in the CB 
community.
Off the Record Oscar the Engineer observes a very short-lived 
transmission from Radio Caroline and envisages some changes 
to his column for the coming year. 
Radio Websites Chrissy Brand surveys the key results of the 
recent Radio and Internet (RAIN) summit in London, reads 
some unusual, radio-themed, novels and chooses festive radio 
programming online.  
Software Spot This month, QSP73 Services offers a quick-and-
not-so-dirty guide to some new digital data modes in amateur 
radio, before offering access to a wide range of corresponding 
decoding software. 
RadioUser is Published by:
Warners Group Publications Ltd
West Street, Bourne, Lincs. PE10 9PH
Tel: 01778 391000
February 2018 Practical Wireless  
73
The publishers reserve the right to change content according to circumstances.

Having trouble ﬁ nding Practical Wireless?
✁
The best way to ensure you receive every issue 
of Practical Wireless and/or RadioUser is to place 
an order with your local newsagent. Once set up, 
your copy of Practical Wireless and/or RadioUser 
will be held for you to collect, saving you the 
time and the frustration of having to search the 
newstand. Some newsagents may even offer a 
home delivery service making it even easier to 
obtain your copy. So don’t miss an issue, simply 
complete the form opposite and take to your local 
newsagent today.
Keep a look out for the 
logo and next time you 
visit your newsagent 
remember to Just 
Ask! about obtaining 
copies of your chosen 
magazines.
Please reserve/deliver* a copy of . ..................................................on a regular basis,
commencing with the ......................................................issue. *delete as appropriate
Title/Mr/Mrs/Ms .............................
First name .............................................Surname .........................................................
Address .........................................................................................................................
 ......................................................................................................................................
 ..............................................................................Postcode .........................................
Daytime Telephone No:  ................................................................................................
Specialist Dealers
Practical Wireless
A wonderful selection of radio
based books are available
We can also supply a copy of most individual
reviews that you may have read in past editions
of Practical Wireless and RadioUser
See the Book Store pages in this issue for ordering information
Mid Glamorgan
SANDPIPER 
AERIAL 
TECHNOLOGY
Unit 5, Enterprise House
Cwmbach Industrial Estate, Aberdare
Mid Glamorgan CF44 0AE
Tel: (01685) 870425 Fax:(01685) 876104
A full range of transmitting & receiving antennas 
available for the amateur commercial market.
www.sandpiperaerials.co.uk
e-mail: sales@sandpiperaerials.co.uk
Scotland
Advertisers index
Allport Communications ..........................................74
Birkett, J ..................................................................41
Bowood Electronics ................................................41
Lam Communications .............................................29
Langrex ....................................................................66
Lindars Radios ........................................................74
Martin Lynch & Sons .............................37, 38, 39, 75
Moonraker ...................................................20, 21, 22
Nevada ...............................................................32,33
Practical Wireless – coming next month .................73
Radio Communications Foundation ........................67
RadioUser ................................................................73
Sandpiper Aerial Technology ...................................74
SDR Kits ..................................................................51
Short Wave UK ........................................................57
Sotabeams ........................................................45, 66
technoﬁ x ..................................................................66
Tennamast ...............................................................74
Waters & Stanton ..............................................2, 3, 4
Yaesu UK Ltd ...........................................................76
74  
Practical Wireless February 2018
Somerset 
LINDARS RADIOS
ʻA Modern Company With 
Old Fashioned Valuesʼ
USED AMATEUR 
RADIO EQUIPMENT 
PURCHASED AND SOLD
www.AmateurRadioSales.co.uk
01935 474265
Suffolk
www.itender.co
Monthly communications tenders!
Ex Police Service
General comms company stock
Contact: 07788 498962 
Please Contact Kristina Green 
for all your advertising enquiries
Tel: 01778 392096
E-mail: kristina.green@warnersgroup.co.uk
Would you like to advertise
in Practical Wireless?



