
Pre-Calculus 
Know-It-ALL

About the Author
Stan Gibilisco is an electronics engineer, researcher, and mathematician 
who has authored a number of titles for the McGraw-Hill Demystified series, 
along with more than 30 other books and dozens of magazine articles. His 
work has been published in several languages.

Pre-Calculus 
Know-It-ALL
Stan Gibilisco
New York  Chicago  San Francisco  Lisbon  London  Madrid
Mexico City  Milan  New Delhi  San Juan  Seoul
Singapore  Sydney  Toronto

Copyright © 2010 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under the United States
Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a
database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
ISBN: 978-0-07-162709-2
MHID: 0-07-162709-X
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN: 978-0-07-162702-3, MHID: 0-07-162702-2.
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a 
trademarked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of
infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions, or for use in 
corporate training programs. To contact a representative please e-mail us at bulksales@mcgraw-hill.com.
Information contained in this work has been obtained by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) from sources
believed to be reliable. However, neither McGraw-Hill nor its authors guarantee the accuracy or completeness of any informa-
tion published herein, and neither McGraw-Hill nor its authors shall be responsible for any errors, omissions, or damages 
arising out of use of this information. This work is published with the understanding that McGraw-Hill and its authors are 
supplying information but are not attempting to render engineering or other professional services. If such services are required,
the assistance of an appropriate professional should be sought.
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors reserve all rights in and to
the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store
and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative
works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill’s
prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly 
prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WAR-
RANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM
USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA
HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR 
PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your
requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be liable to you
or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom.
McGraw-Hill has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall
McGraw-Hill and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that
result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This 
limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or 
otherwise.
TERMS OF USE

To Emma, Samuel, Tony, and Tim

This page intentionally left blank 

Preface  xi
Acknowledgments  xiii
Part 1  Coordinates and Vectors  1
 1 Cartesian Two-Space  3
How It’s Assembled  3
Distance of a Point from Origin  8
Distance between Any Two Points  12
Finding the Midpoint  15
Practice Exercises  18
 2 A Fresh Look at Trigonometry  21
Circles in the Cartesian Plane  21
Primary Circular Functions  23
Secondary Circular Functions  30
Pythagorean Extras  33
Practice Exercises  36
 3 Polar Two-Space  37
The Variables  37
Three Basic Graphs  40
Coordinate Transformations  45
Practice Exercises  52
vii
Contents
vii

 4 Vector Basics  55
The “Cartesian Way”  55
The “Polar Way”  62
Practice Exercises  71
 5 Vector Multiplication  73
Product of Scalar and Vector  73
Dot Product of Two Vectors  79
Cross Product of Two Vectors  82
Practice Exercises  88
 6 Complex Numbers and Vectors  90
Numbers with Two Parts  90
How Complex Numbers Behave  95
Complex Vectors  101
Practice Exercises  109
 7 Cartesian Three-Space  111
How It’s Assembled  111
Distance of Point from Origin  116
Distance between Any Two Points  120
Finding the Midpoint  122
Practice Exercises  126
 8 Vectors in Cartesian Three-Space  128
How They’re Defined  128
Sum and Difference  134
Some Basic Properties  138
Dot Product  141
Cross Product  144
Some More Vector Laws  146
Practice Exercises  150
 9 Alternative Three-Space  152
Cylindrical Coordinates  152
Cylindrical Conversions  156
Spherical Coordinates  159
Spherical Conversions  164
Practice Exercises  171
10 Review Questions and Answers  172
Part 2  Analytic Geometry  209
11 Relations in Two-Space  211
What’s a Two-Space Relation?  211
What’s a Two-Space Function?  216
viii
Contents

Contents
ix
Algebra with Functions  222
Practice Exercises  227
12 Inverse Relations in Two-Space  229
Finding an Inverse Relation  229
Finding an Inverse Function  238
Practice Exercises  247
13 Conic Sections  249
Geometry  249
Basic Parameters  253
Standard Equations  258
Practice Exercises  263
14 Exponential and Logarithmic Curves  266
Graphs Involving Exponential Functions  266
Graphs Involving Logarithmic Functions  273
Logarithmic Coordinate Planes  279
Practice Exercises  283
15 Trigonometric Curves  285
Graphs Involving the Sine and Cosine  285
Graphs Involving the Secant and Cosecant  290
Graphs Involving the Tangent and Cotangent  296
Practice Exercises  302
16 Parametric Equations in Two-Space  304
What’s a Parameter?  304
From Equations to Graph  308
From Graph to Equations  314
Practice Exercises  318
17 Surfaces in Three-Space  320
Planes  320
Spheres  324
Distorted Spheres  328
Other Surfaces  337
Practice Exercises  343
18 Lines and Curves in Three-Space  345
Straight Lines  345
Parabolas  350
Circles  357
Circular Helixes  363
Practice Exercises  370

x
Contents
19 Sequences, Series, and Limits  373
Repeated Addition  373
Repeated Multiplication  378
Limit of a Sequence  382
Summation “Shorthand”  385
Limit of a Series  388
Limits of Functions  390
Memorable Limits of Series  394
Practice Exercises  396
20 Review Questions and Answers  399
Final Exam  436
Appendix A  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 1-9  466
Appendix B  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19  514
Appendix C  Answers to Final Exam Questions  578
Appendix D  Special Characters in Order of Appearance  579
Suggested Additional Reading  581
Index  583

xi
Preface
This book is intended to complement standard pre-calculus texts at the high-school, trade-school, 
and college undergraduate levels. It can also serve as a self-teaching or home-schooling supplement. 
Prerequisites include beginning and intermediate algebra, geometry, and trigonometry. Pre-Calculus 
Know-It-ALL forms an ideal “bridge” between Algebra Know-It-ALL and Calculus Know-It-ALL.
This course is split into two major sections. Part 1 (Chapters 1 through 10) deals with coordi-
nate systems and vectors. Part 2 (Chapters 11 through 20) is devoted to analytic geometry. Chapters 
1 through 9 and 11 through 19 end with practice exercises. They’re “open-book” quizzes. You may 
(and should) refer to the text as you work out your answers. Detailed solutions appear in Appendi-
ces A and B. In many cases, these solutions don’t represent the only way a problem can be figured 
out. Feel free to try alternatives!
Chapters 10 and 20 contain question-and-answer sets that finish up Parts 1 and 2, respectively. 
These chapters aren’t tests. They’re designed to help you review the material, and to strengthen your 
grasp of the concepts.
A multiple-choice Final Exam concludes the course. It’s a “closed-book” test. Don’t look back 
at the chapters, or use any other external references, while taking it. You’ll find these questions more 
general (and easier) than the practice exercises at the ends of the chapters. The exam is meant to 
gauge your overall understanding of the concepts, not to measure how fast you can perform calcula-
tions or how well you can memorize formulas. The correct answers are listed in Appendix C.
I’ve tried to introduce “mathematicalese” as the book proceeds. That way, you’ll get used to the 
jargon as you work your way through the examples and problems. If you complete one chapter a 
week, you’ll get through this course in a school year with time to spare, but don’t hurry. Proceed at 
your own pace.
Stan Gibilisco

This page intentionally left blank 

xiii
Acknowledgments
I extend thanks to my nephew Tony Boutelle, a technical writer based in 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, who offered insights and suggestions from the 
viewpoint of the intended audience, and found a few arithmetic errors be-
fore they got into print!
  I’m also grateful to Andrew A. Fedor, M.B.A., P.Eng (afedor@look.ca), a 
freelance consultant from Hampton, Ontario, Canada, for his proofreading 
help. Andrew has often provided suggestions for my existing publications 
and ideas for new ones.

This page intentionally left blank 

Pre-Calculus 
Know-It-ALL

This page intentionally left blank 

1
PART
1
Coordinates and Vectors

This page intentionally left blank 

If you’ve taken a course in algebra or geometry, you’ve learned about the graphing system 
called Cartesian (pronounced “car-TEE-zhun”) two-space, also known as Cartesian coordinates
or the Cartesian plane. Let’s review the basics of this system, and then we’ll learn how to cal-
culate distances in it.
How It’s Assembled
We can put together a Cartesian plane by positioning two identical real-number lines so they 
intersect at their zero points and are perpendicular to each other. The point of intersection is 
called the origin. Each number line forms an axis that can represent the values of a mathemati-
cal variable.
The variables
Figure 1-1 shows a simple set of Cartesian coordinates. One variable is portrayed along a hori-
zontal line, and the other variable is portrayed along a vertical line. The number-line scales are 
graduated in increments of the same size.
Figure 1-2 shows how several ordered pairs of the form (x,y) are plotted as points on the 
Cartesian plane. Here, x represents the independent variable (the “input”), and y represents 
the dependent variable (the “output”). Technically, when we work in the Cartesian plane, the 
numbers in an ordered pair represent the coordinates of a point on the plane. People sometimes 
say or write things as if the ordered pair actually is the point, but technically the ordered pair 
is the name of the point.
Interval notation
In pre-calculus and calculus, we’ll often want to express a continuous span of values that a 
variable can attain. Such a span is called an interval. An interval always has a certain minimum 
value and a certain maximum value. These are the extremes of the interval. Let’s be sure that 
3
CHAPTER 
1
Cartesian Two-Space

4
Cartesian Two-Space
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
Negative
independent-
variable
axis
Positive
dependent-
variable
axis
Positive
independent-
variable
axis
Negative
dependent-
variable
axis
Figure 1-1  The Cartesian plane consists of two real-
number lines intersecting at a right angle, 
forming axes for the variables.
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
(–4, 5)
(4, 3)
(–5, –3)
(1, –6)
Ordered pairs
are of
the form (x, y)
Origin = (0, 0)
Figure 1-2  Five ordered pairs (including the origin) 
plotted as points on the Cartesian plane. The 
dashed lines are for axis location reference.

you’re familiar with standard interval terminology and notation, so it won’t confuse you later 
on. Consider these four situations:
0 < x < 2
−1 ≤y < 0
4 < z ≤ 8
−p ≤q ≤p
These expressions have the following meanings, in order:
• The value of x is larger than 0, but smaller than 2.
• The value of y is larger than or equal to −1, but smaller than 0.
• The value of z is larger than 4, but smaller than or equal to 8.
• The value of q is larger than or equal to −p, but smaller than or equal to p.
The first case is an example of an open interval, which we can write as
x ∈ (0,2)
which translates to “x is an element of the open interval (0,2).” Don’t mistake this open 
interval for an ordered pair! The notations look the same, but the meanings are completely 
different. The second and third cases are examples of half-open intervals. We denote this type 
of interval with a square bracket on the side of the included value and a rounded parenthesis 
on the side of the non-included value. We can write
y ∈ [−1,0)
which means “y is an element of the half-open interval [−1,0),” and
z ∈ (4,8]
which means “z is an element of the half-open interval (4,8].” The fourth case is an example of 
a closed interval. We use square brackets on both sides to show that both extremes are included. 
We can write this as
q ∈ [−p,p]
which translates to “q is an element of the closed interval [−p,p].”
Relations and functions
Do you remember the definitions of the terms relation and function from your algebra courses? 
(If you read Algebra Know-It-All, you should!) These terms are used often in pre-calculus, so 
it’s important that you be familiar with them. A relation is an operation that transforms, or 
maps, values of a variable into values of another variable. A function is a relation in which there 
is never more than one value of the dependent variable for any value of the independent vari-
able. In other words, there can’t be more than one output for any input. (If a particular input 
How It’s Assembled  5

6  Cartesian Two-Space
produces no output, that’s okay.) The Cartesian plane gives us an excellent way to illustrate 
relations and functions.
The axes
In a Cartesian plane, both axes are linear, and both axes are graduated in increments of the 
same size. On either axis, the change in value is always directly proportional to the physical 
displacement. For example, if we travel 5 millimeters along an axis and the value changes by 
1 unit, then that fact is true everywhere along that axis, and it’s also true everywhere along the 
other axis.
The quadrants
Any pair of intersecting lines divides a plane into four parts. In the Cartesian system, these 
parts are called quadrants, as shown in Fig. 1-3:
• In the first quadrant, both variables are positive.
• In the second quadrant, the independent variable is negative and the dependent variable 
is positive.
• In the third quadrant, both variables are negative.
• In the fourth quadrant, the independent variable is positive and the dependent variable 
is negative.
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
First
quadrant
Second
quadrant
Third
quadrant
Fourth
quadrant
x
y
I
II
III
IV
Figure 1-3  The Cartesian plane is divided into 
quadrants. The first, second, third, and 
fourth quadrants are sometimes labeled I, II, 
III, and IV, respectively.

The quadrants are sometimes labeled with Roman numerals, so that
• Quadrant I is at the upper right
• Quadrant II is at the upper left
• Quadrant III is at the lower left
• Quadrant IV is at the lower right
If a point lies on one of the axes or at the origin, then it is not in any quadrant.
Are you confused?
Why do we insist that the increments be the same size on both axes in a Cartesian two-space 
graph? The answer is simple: That’s how the Cartesian plane is defined! But there are other 
types of coordinate systems in which this exactness is not required. In a more generalized 
system called rectangular coordinates or the rectangular coordinate plane, the two axes can be 
graduated in divisions of different size. For example, the value on one axis might change by 
1 unit for every 5 millimeters, while the value on the other axis changes by 1 unit for every 
10 millimeters.
Here’s a challenge!
Imagine an ordered pair (x,y), where both variables are nonzero real numbers. Suppose that you’ve 
plotted a point (call it P) on the Cartesian plane. Because x ≠ 0 and y ≠ 0, the point P does not lie 
on either axis. What will happen to the location of P if you multiply x by −1 and leave y the same? 
If you multiply y by −1 and leave x the same? If you multiply both x and y by −1?
Solution
If you multiply x by −1 and do not change the value of y, P will move to the opposite side of the 
y axis, but will stay the same distance away from that axis. The point will, in effect, be “reflected” 
by the y axis, moving to the left if x is positive to begin with, and to the right if x is negative to 
begin with.
• If P starts out in the first quadrant, it will move to the second.
• If P starts out in the second quadrant, it will move to the first.
• If P starts out in the third quadrant, it will move to the fourth.
• If P starts out in the fourth quadrant, it will move to the third.
If you multiply y by −1 and leave x unchanged, P will move to the opposite side of the x axis, but 
will stay the same distance away from that axis. In a sense, P will be “reflected” by the x axis, mov-
ing straight downward if y is initially positive and straight upward if y is initially negative.
• If P starts out in the first quadrant, it will move to the fourth.
• If P starts out in the second quadrant, it will move to the third.
• If P starts out in the third quadrant, it will move to the second.
• If P starts out in the fourth quadrant, it will move to the first.
How It’s Assembled  7

8  Cartesian Two-Space
If you multiply both x and y by −1, P will move diagonally to the opposite quadrant. It will, in 
effect, be “reflected” by both axes.
• If P starts out in the first quadrant, it will move to the third.
• If P starts out in the second quadrant, it will move to the fourth.
• If P starts out in the third quadrant, it will move to the first.
• If P starts out in the fourth quadrant, it will move to the second.
If you have trouble envisioning these point maneuvers, draw a Cartesian plane on a piece of graph 
paper. Then plot a point or two in each quadrant. Calculate how the x and y values change when you 
multiply either or both of them by −1, and then plot the new points.
Distance of a Point from Origin
On a straight number line, the distance of any point from the origin is equal to the absolute 
value of the number corresponding to the point. In the Cartesian plane, the distance of a 
point from the origin depends on both of the numbers in the point’s ordered pair.
An example
Figure 1-4 shows the point (4,3) plotted in the Cartesian plane. Suppose that we want to find 
the distance d of (4,3) from the origin (0,0). How can this be done?
We can calculate d using the Pythagorean theorem from geometry. In case you’ve forgotten 
that principle, here’s a refresher. Suppose we have a right triangle defined by points P, Q, and 
R. Suppose the sides of the triangle have lengths b, h, and d as shown in Fig. 1-5. Then
b 2 + h 2 = d  2
We can rewrite this as
d = (b 2 + h 2)1/2
where the 1/2 power represents the nonnegative square root. Now let’s make the following 
point assignments between the situations of Figs. 1-4 and 1-5:
• The origin in Fig. 1-4 corresponds to the point Q in Fig. 1-5.
• The point (4,0) in Fig. 1-4 corresponds to the point R in Fig. 1-5.
• The point (4,3) in Fig. 1-4 corresponds to the point P in Fig. 1-5.
Continuing with this analogy, we can see the following facts:
• The line segment connecting the origin and (4,0) has length b = 4.
• The line segment connecting (4,0) and (4,3) has height h = 3.
• The line segment connecting the origin and (4,3) has length d (unknown).

The side of the right triangle having length d is the longest side, called the hypotenuse. Using 
the Pythagorean formula, we can calculate
d = (b 2 + h 2)1/2 = (42 + 32)1/2 = (16 + 9)1/2 = 251/2 = 5
We’ve determined that the point (4,3) is 5 units distant from the origin in Cartesian coordi-
nates, as measured along a straight line connecting (4,3) and the origin.
2
6
–2
–4
–6
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
(4, 0)
What’s the
distance d ?
(4, 3)
d
Figure 1-4  We can use the Pythagorean theorem to find 
the distance d of the point (4,3) from the 
origin (0,0) in the Cartesian plane.
Figure 1-5 The Pythagorean theorem for right triangles.
Distance of a Point from Origin  9

10  Cartesian Two-Space
The general formula
We can generalize the previous example to get a formula for the distance of any point from the 
origin in the Cartesian plane. In fact, we can repeat the explanation of the previous example 
almost verbatim, only with a few substitutions.
Consider a point P with coordinates (xp,yp). We want to calculate the straight-line distance 
d of the point P from the origin (0,0), as shown in Fig. 1-6. Once again, we use the Pythago-
rean theorem. Turn back to Fig. 1-5 and follow along by comparing with Fig. 1-6:
• The origin in Fig. 1-6 corresponds to the point Q in Fig. 1-5.
• The point (xp,0) in Fig. 1-6 corresponds to the point R in Fig. 1-5.
• The point (xp,yp) in Fig. 1-6 corresponds to the point P in Fig. 1-5.
The following facts are also visually evident:
• The line segment connecting the origin and (xp,0) has length b = xp.
• The line segment connecting (xp,0) and (xp,yp) has height h = yp.
• The line segment connecting the origin and (xp,yp) has length d (unknown).
The Pythagorean formula tells us that
d = (b 2 + h 2)1/2 = (xp
2 + yp
2)1/2
x
y
(xp, 0)
What’s the
distance d ?
Point P
(xp, yp)
d
Figure 1-6  Using the Pythagorean theorem, we can 
derive a formula for the distance d of a 
generalized point P = (xp,yp) from the origin.

That’s it! The point (xp,yp) is (xp
2 + yp
2)1/2 units away from the origin, as we would measure it 
along a straight line.
Are you confused?
You might ask, “Can the distance of a point from the origin ever be negative?” The answer is no. 
If you look at the formula and break down the process in your mind, you’ll see why this is so. 
First, you square xp, which is the x coordinate of P. Because xp is a real number, its square must 
be a nonnegative real. Next, you square yp, which is the y coordinate of P. This result must also 
be a nonnegative real. Next, you add these two nonnegative reals, which must produce another 
nonnegative real. Finally, you take the nonnegative square root, getting yet another nonnegative 
real. That’s the distance of P from the origin. It can’t be negative in a Cartesian plane whose axes 
represent real-number variables.
Here’s a challenge!
Imagine a point P = (xp,yp) in the Cartesian plane, where xp ≠ 0 and yp ≠ 0. Suppose that P is d
units from the origin. What will happen to d if you multiply xp by −1 and leave y unchanged? If 
you multiply yp by −1 and leave x unchanged? If you multiply both xp and yp by −1?
Solution
This is a three-part challenge. Let’s break each part down into steps and apply the distance formula 
in each case.
In the first situation, we change the x coordinate of P to its negative. Let’s call the new point Px−.
Its coordinates are (−xp,yp). Let dx− be the distance of Px− from the origin. Plugging the values into the 
formula, we obtain
dx−= [(−xp)2 + yp
2]1/2 = [(−1)2xp
2 + yp
2]1/2 = (xp
2 + yp
2)1/2 = d
In the second situation, we change the y coordinate of P to its negative. This time, let’s call the new 
point Py−. Its coordinates are (xp,−yp). Let dy− represent the distance of Py− from the origin. Plugging the 
values into the formula, we obtain
dy−= [(xp)2 + (−yp)2]1/2 = [xp
2 + (−1)2yp
2]1/2 = (xp
2 + yp
2)1/2 = d
In the third case, we change both the x and y coordinates of P to their negatives. We can call 
the new point Pxy− with coordinates (−xp,−yp). If we let dxy− represent the distance of Pxy− from the 
origin, we have
dxy−= [(−xp)2 + (−yp)2]1/2 = [(−1)2xp
2 + (−1)2yp
2]1/2 = (xp
2 + yp
2)1/2 = d
  We’ve shown that we can negate either or both of the coordinate values of a point in the Cartesian 
plane, and although the point’s location will usually change, its distance from the origin will always 
stay the same.
Distance of a Point from Origin  11

12  Cartesian Two-Space
Distance between Any Two Points
The distance between any two points on a number line is easy to calculate. We take the abso-
lute value of the difference between the numbers corresponding to the points. In the Cartesian 
plane, each point needs two numbers to be defined, so the process is more complicated.
Setting up the problem
Figure 1-7 shows two generic points, P and Q, in the Cartesian plane. Their coordinates are
P = (xp,yp)
and
Q = (xq,yq)
Suppose we want to find the distance d  between these points. We can construct a triangle by 
choosing a third point, R (which isn’t on the line defined by P and Q) and then connecting P, Q,
and R by line segments to get a triangle. The shape of triangle PQR depends on the location of R. If 
we choose certain coordinates for R, we can get a right triangle with the right angle at vertex R.
With the help of Fig. 1-7, it’s easy to see what the coordinates of R should be. If I travel 
“straight down” (parallel to the y axis) from P, and if you travel “straight to the right” (parallel to the 
Figure 1-7  We can find the distance d between two 
points P = (xp,yp) and Q = (xq,yq) by choosing 
point R to get a right triangle, and then 
applying the Pythagorean theorem.

x axis) from Q, our paths will cross at a right angle when we reach the point whose coordinates 
are (xp,yq). Those are the coordinates that R must have if we want the two sides of the triangle to 
be perpendicular there.
Are you confused?
“Wait!” you say. “Isn’t there another point besides R that we can choose to create a right triangle 
along with points P and Q?” Yes, there is. The situation is shown in Fig. 1-8. If I go “straight up” 
(parallel to the y axis) from Q, and if you go “straight to the left” (parallel to the x axis) from P,
we will meet at a right angle when we reach the coordinates (xq,yp). In this case, we might call 
the right-angle vertex point S. We won’t use this geometry in the derivation that follows. But we 
could, and the final distance formula would turn out the same.
Figure 1-8  Alternative geometry for finding the 
distance between two points. In this case, 
the right angle appears at point S.
Dimensions and “deltas”
Mathematicians use the uppercase Greek letter delta (Δ) to stand for the phrase “the difference 
in” or “the difference between.” Using this notation, we can say that
• The difference in the x values of points R and Q in Fig. 1-7 is xp −xq, or Δx. That’s the 
length of the base of a right triangle.
• The difference in the y values of points P and R is yp −yq, or Δy. That’s the height of a 
right triangle.
Distance between Any Two Points  13

14  Cartesian Two-Space
We can see from Fig. 1-7 that the distance d between points Q and P is the length of the hypot-
enuse of triangle PQR. We’re ready to find a formula for d using the Pythagorean theorem.
The general formula
Look back once more at Fig. 1-5. The relative positions of points P, Q, and R here are similar 
to their positions in Fig. 1-7. (I’ve set things up that way on purpose, as you can probably 
guess.) We can define the lengths of the sides of the triangle in Fig. 1-7 as follows:
• The line segment connecting points Q and R has length b = Δx = xp −xq.
• The line segment connecting points R and P has height h = Δy = yp −yq.
• The line segment connecting points Q and P has length d (unknown).
The Pythagorean formula tells us that
d = (b 2 + h 2)1/2 = (Δx 2 + Δy 2)1/2 = [(xp −xq)2 + (yp −yq)2]1/2
An example
Let’s find the distance d between the following points in the Cartesian plane, using the for-
mula we’ve derived:
P = (−5,−2)
and
Q = (7,3)
Plugging the values xp = −5, yp = −2, xq = 7, and yq = 3 into our formula, we get
d = [(xp −xq)2 + (yp −yq)2]1/2 = [(−5 − 7)2 + (−2 − 3)2]1/2
= [(−12)2 + (−5)2]1/2 = (144 + 25)1/2 = 1691/2 = 13 
Here’s a challenge!
It’s reasonable to suppose that the distance between two points shouldn’t depend on the direction 
in which we travel. But if you’re a “show-me” person (as a mathematician should be), you might 
demand proof. Let’s do it!
Solution
When we derived the distance formula previously, we traveled upward and to the right in Fig. 1-7 
(from Q to P). When we work with directional displacement, it’s customary to subtract the start-
ing-point coordinates from the finishing-point coordinates. That’s how we got
Δx = xp −xq

and
Δy = yp −yq
If we travel downward and to the left (from P to Q), we get
Δ*x = xq −xp
and
Δ*y = yq −yp
when we subtract the starting-point coordinates from the finishing-point coordinates. These new 
“star deltas” are the negatives of the original “plain deltas” because the subtractions are done in 
reverse. If we plug the “star deltas” straightaway into the derivation for d we worked out a few 
minutes ago, we can maneuver to get
d = (Δ*x 2 + Δ*y 2)1/2 = [(−Δx)2 + (−Δy)2]1/2 = [(−1)2Δx 2 + (−1)2Δy 2]1/2
= (Δx 2 + Δy 2)1/2 = [(xp −xq)2 + (yp −yq)2]1/2
That’s the same distance formula we got when we went from Q to P. This proves that the direction of 
travel isn’t important when we talk about the simple distance between two points in Cartesian coordi-
nates. (When we work with vectors later in this book, the direction will matter. Directional distance is 
known as displacement.)
Finding the Midpoint
We can find the midpoint between two points on a number line by calculating the arithmetic
mean (or average value) of the numbers corresponding to the points. In Cartesian xy coordi-
nates, we must make two calculations. First, we average the x values of the two points to get 
the x value of the point midway between. Then, we average the y values of the points to get 
the y value of the point midway between.
A “mini theorem”
Once again, imagine points P and Q in the Cartesian plane with the coordinates
P = (xp,yp)
and
Q = (xq,yq)
Suppose we want to find the coordinates of the midpoint. That’s the point that bisects a straight 
line segment connecting P and Q. As before, we start out by choosing the point R “below and 
Finding the Midpoint  15

16  Cartesian Two-Space
to the right” that forms a right triangle PQR, as shown in Fig. 1-9. Imagine a movable point M
that we can slide freely along line segment PQ. When we draw a perpendicular from M to side 
QR, we get a point Mx. When we draw a perpendicular from M to side RP, we get a point My.
Consider the three right triangles MQMx, PMMy, and PQR. The laws of basic geometry 
tell us that these triangles are similar, meaning that the lengths of their corresponding sides 
are in the same ratios. According to the definition of similarity for triangles, we know the fol-
lowing two facts:
• Point Mx is midway between Q and R if and only if M is midway between P and Q.
• Point My is midway between R and P if and only if M is midway between P and Q.
Now, instead of saying that M stands for “movable point,” let’s say that M stands for “mid-
point.” In this case, the x value of Mx (the midpoint of line segment QR) must be the x value of 
M, and the y value of My (the midpoint of line segment RP) must be the y value of M.
The general formula
We’ve reduced our Cartesian two-space midpoint problem to two separate number-line mid-
point problems. Side QR of triangle PQR is parallel to the x axis, and side RP of triangle PQR
is parallel to the y axis. We can find the x value of Mx by averaging the x values of Q and R.
When we do this and call the result xm, we get
xm = (xp + xq)/2
x
y
(xp, yp)
Point P
(xq, yq)
Point Q
(xp, yq)
Point R
Point M
Point My
Point Mx
Point M lies midway
between points
P and Q
What are the
coordinates of M ?
Figure 1-9  We can calculate the coordinates of the 
midpoint of a line segment whose endpoints 
are known.

In the same way, we can calculate the y value of My by averaging the y values of R and P. Call-
ing the result ym, we have
ym = (yp + yq)/2
We can use the “mini theorem” we finished a few moments ago to conclude that the coordi-
nates of point M, the midpoint of line segment PQ, are
(xm,ym) = [(xp + xq)/2,(yp + yq)/2]
An example
Let’s find the coordinates (xm,ym) of the midpoint M between the same two points for which 
we found the separation distance earlier in this chapter:
P = (−5,−2)
and
Q = (7,3)
When we plug xp = −5, yp = −2, xq = 7, and yq = 3 into the midpoint formula, we get
(xm,ym) = [(xp + xq)/2,(yp + yq)/2] = [(−5 + 7)/2,(−2 + 3)/2]
= (2/2,1/2) = (1,1/2) 
Are you a skeptic?
It seems reasonable to suppose the midpoint between points P and Q should not depend on 
whether we go from P to Q or from Q to P. We can prove this by showing that for all real numbers 
xp, yp, xq, and yq, we have
[(xp + xq)/2,(yp + yq)/2] = [(xq + xp)/2,(yq + yp)/2]
This demonstration is easy, but let’s go through it step-by-step to completely follow the logic. For 
the x coordinates, the commutative law of addition tells us that
xp + xq = xq + xp
Dividing each side by 2 gives us
(xp + xq)/2 = (xq + xp)/2
For the y coordinates, the commutative law says that
yp + yq = yq + yp
Finding the Midpoint  17

18  Cartesian Two-Space
Again dividing each side by 2, we get
(yp + yq)/2 = (yq + yp)/2
We’ve shown that the coordinates in the ordered pair on the left-hand side of the original equation 
are equal to the corresponding coordinates in the ordered pair on the right-hand side. The ordered 
pairs are identical, so the midpoint is the same in either direction.
Are you confused?
To find a midpoint of a line segment in Cartesian two-space, you simply average the coordinates 
of the endpoints. This method always works if the midpoint lies on a straight line segment between 
the two endpoints. But you might wonder, “How can we find the midpoint between two points 
along an arc connecting those points?” In a situation like that, we must determine the length of 
the arc. Depending on the nature of the arc, that can be fairly hard, very hard, or almost impos-
sible! Arc-length problems are beyond the scope of this book, but you’ll learn how to solve them 
in Calculus Know-It-All.
Here’s a challenge!
Consider two points in the Cartesian plane, one of which is at the origin. Show that the coordi-
nate values of the midpoint are exactly half the corresponding coordinate values of the point not 
on the origin.
Solution
We can plug in (0,0) as the coordinates of either point in the general midpoint formula, and work 
things out from there. First, let’s suppose that point P is at the origin and the coordinates of point 
Q are (xq,yq). Then xp = 0 and yp = 0. If we call the coordinates of the midpoint (xm,ym), we have
(xm,ym) = [(xp + xq)/2,(yp + yq)/2] = [(0 + xq)/2,(0 + yq)/2]
= (xq/2,yq/2)
Now, let Q be at the origin and let the coordinates of P be (xp,yp). In that case, we have
(xm,ym) = [(xp + xq)/2,(yp + yq)/2] = [(xp + 0)/2,(yp + 0)/2]
= (xp/2,yp/2)
Practice Exercises
This is an open-book quiz. You may (and should) refer to the text as you solve these problems. 
Don’t hurry! You’ll find worked-out answers in App. A. The solutions in the appendix may not 
represent the only way a problem can be figured out. If you think you can solve a particular 
problem in a quicker or better way than you see there, by all means try it!

2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
(–4, 5)
(–5, –3)
(1, –6)
Origin = (0, 0)
Figure 1-10 Illustration for Problems 1 through 7.
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
(–4, 5)
(–5, –3)
(1, –6)
Origin = (0, 0)
L
M
N
Figure 1-11 Illustration for Problems 8 through 10.
Practice Exercises  19

20  Cartesian Two-Space
 1. What are the x and y coordinates of the points shown in Fig. 1-10?
 2. Determine the distance of the point (−4,5) from the origin in Fig. 1-10. Using a 
calculator, round off the answer to three decimal places.
 3. Determine the distance of the point (−5,−3) from the origin in Fig. 1-10. Using a 
calculator, round it off to three decimal places.
 4. Determine the distance of the point (1,−6) from the origin in Fig. 1-10. Using a 
calculator, round it off to three decimal places.
 5. Determine the distance between the points (−4,5) and (−5,−3) in Fig. 1-10. Using a 
calculator, round it off to three decimal places.
 6. Determine the distance between the points (−5,−3) and (1,−6) in Fig. 1-10. Using a 
calculator, round it off to three decimal places.
 7. Determine the distance between the points (1,−6) and (−4,5) in Fig. 1-10. Using a 
calculator, round it off to three decimal places.
 8. Determine the coordinates of the midpoint of line segment L in Fig. 1-11. Express the 
values in fractional and decimal form.
 9. Determine the coordinates of the midpoint of line segment M in Fig. 1-11. Express the 
values in fractional and decimal form.
 10. Determine the coordinates of the midpoint of line segment N in Fig. 1-11. Express the 
values in fractional and decimal form.

Trigonometry (or “trig”) involves the relationships between angles and distances. Traditional 
texts usually define the trigonometric functions of an angle as ratios between the lengths of the 
sides of a right triangle containing that angle. If you’ve done trigonometry with triangles, get 
ready for a new perspective!
Circles in the Cartesian Plane
In Cartesian xy coordinates, circles are represented by straightforward equations. The equation 
for a particular circle depends on its radius, and also on the location of its center point.
The unit circle
In trigonometry, we’re interested in the circle whose center is at the origin and whose radius 
is 1. This is the simplest possible circle in the xy plane. It’s called the unit circle, and is repre-
sented by the equation
x 2 + y 2 = 1
The unit circle gives us an elegant way to define the basic trigonometric functions. That’s why 
these functions are sometimes called the circular functions. Before we get into the circular 
functions themselves, let’s be sure we know how to define angles, which are the arguments
(or inputs) of the trig functions.
Naming angles
Mathematicians often use Greek letters to represent angles. The italic, lowercase Greek letter 
theta is popular. It looks like an italic numeral 0 with a horizontal line through it (q). When 
writing about two different angles, a second Greek letter is used along with q. Most often, it’s 
the italic, lowercase letter phi. This character looks like an italic lowercase English letter o with 
a forward slash through it (f).
21
CHAPTER
2
A Fresh Look at Trigonometry

Sometimes the italic, lowercase Greek letters alpha, beta, and gamma are used to repre-
sent angles. These, respectively, look like the following symbols: a, b, and g. When things 
get messy and there are a lot of angles to talk about, numeric subscripts may be used with 
Greek letters, so don’t be surprised if you see text in which angles are denoted q1, q2, q3, and 
so on. If you read enough mathematical papers, you’ll eventually come across angles that are 
represented by other lowercase Greek letters. Angle variables can also be represented by more 
familiar characters such as x, y, or z. As long as we know the context and stay consistent in a 
given situation, it really doesn’t matter what we call an angle.
Radian measure
Imagine two rays pointing outward from the center of a circle. Each ray intersects the circle 
at a point. Suppose that the distance between these points, as measured along the arc of the 
circle, is equal to the radius of the circle. In that case, the measure of the angle between the 
rays is one radian (1 rad). There are always 2p rad in a full circle, where p (the lowercase, 
non-italic Greek letter pi) stands for the ratio of a circle’s circumference to its diameter. The 
number p is irrational. Its value is approximately 3.14159.
Mathematicians prefer the radian as a standard unit of angular measure, and it’s the unit 
we’ll work with in this course. It’s common practice to omit the “rad” after an angle when we 
know that we’re working with radians. Based on that convention:
• An angle of p /2 represents 1/4 of a circle
• An angle of p represents 1/2 of a circle
• An angle of 3p /2 represents 3/4 of a circle
• An angle of 2p represents a full circle
An acute angle has a measure of more than 0 but less than p /2, a right angle has a measure 
of exactly p /2, an obtuse angle has a measure of more than p /2 but less than p, a straight 
angle has a measure of exactly p, and a reflex angle has a measure of more than p but less 
than 2p.
Degree measure
The angular degree (°), also called the degree of arc, is the unit of angular measure familiar to 
lay people. One degree (1°) is 1/360 of a full circle. You probably know the following basic 
facts:
• An angle of 90° represents 1/4 of a circle
• An angle of 180° represents 1/2 of a circle
• An angle of 270° represents 3/4 of a circle
• An angle of 360° represents a full circle
An acute angle has a measure of more than 0 but less than 90°, a right angle has a measure 
of exactly 90°, an obtuse angle has a measure of more than 90° but less than 180°, a straight 
angle has a measure of exactly 180°, and a reflex angle has a measure of more than 180° but 
less than 360°.
22
A Fresh Look at Trigonometry

Are you confused?
If you’re used to measuring angles in degrees, the radian can seem unnatural at first. “Why,” 
you might ask, “would we want to divide a circle into an irrational number of angular parts?” 
Mathematicians do this because it nearly always works out more simply than the degree-measure 
scheme in algebra, geometry, trigonometry, pre-calculus, and calculus. The radian is more natural 
than the degree, not less! We can define the radian in a circle without having to quote any num-
bers at all, just as we can define the diagonal of a square as the distance from one corner to the 
opposite corner. The radian is a purely geometric unit. The degree is contrived. (What’s so special 
about the fraction 1/360, anyhow? To me, it would have made more sense if our distant ancestors 
had defined the degree as 1/100 of a circle.)
Here’s a challenge!
The measure of a certain angle q is p /6. What fraction of a complete circular rotation does this 
represent? What is the measure of q in degrees?
Solution
A full circular rotation represents an angle of 2p. The value p /6 is equal to 1/12 of 2p. Therefore, the 
angle q represents 1/12 of a full circle. In degree measure, that’s 1/12 of 360°, which is 30°.
Primary Circular Functions
Let’s look again at the equation of a unit circle in the Cartesian xy plane. We get it by adding 
the squares of the variables and setting the sum equal to 1:
x 2 + y 2 = 1
Imagine that q is an angle whose vertex is at the origin, and we measure this angle in a coun-
terclockwise sense from the x axis, as shown in Fig. 2-1. Suppose this angle corresponds to a 
ray that intersects the unit circle at a point P, where
P = (x0,y0)
We can define the three basic circular functions, also called the primary circular functions, of q
in a simple way. But before we get into that, let’s extend our notion of angles to include nega-
tive values, and also to deal with angles larger than 2p.
Offbeat angles
In trigonometry, any direction angle, no matter how extreme, can always be reduced to some-
thing that’s nonnegative but less than 2p. Even if the ray OP in Fig. 2-1 makes more than 
one complete revolution counterclockwise from the x axis, or if it turns clockwise instead, its 
Primary Circular Functions  23

24  A Fresh Look at Trigonometry
direction can always be defined by some counterclockwise angle of least 0 but less than 2p
relative to the x axis.
Think of this situation another way. The point P must always be somewhere on the circle, 
no matter how many times or in what direction the ray OP rotates to end up in a particular 
position. Every point on the circle corresponds to exactly one nonnegative angle less than 2p
counterclockwise from the x axis. Conversely, if we consider the continuous range of angles 
going counterclockwise over the half-open interval [0,2p), we can account for every point on 
the circle.
Any offbeat direction angle such as −9p /4 can be reduced to a direction angle that mea-
sures at least 0 but less than 2p by adding or subtracting some whole-number multiple of 2p.
But we must be careful about this. A direction angle specifies orientation only. The orienta-
tion of the ray OP is the same for an angle of 3p as for an angle of p, but the larger value carries 
with it the idea that the ray (also called a vector) OP has rotated one and a half times around, 
while the smaller angle implies that it has undergone only half of a rotation. For our purposes 
now, this doesn’t matter. But in some disciplines and situations, it does!
Negative angles are encountered in trigonometry, especially in graphs of functions. Multi-
ple revolutions of objects are important in physics and engineering. So if you ever hear or read 
about an angle such as −p /2 or 5p, you can be confident that it has meaning. The negative 
value indicates clockwise rotation. An angle larger than 2p indicates more than one complete 
rotation counterclockwise. An angle of less than −2p indicates more than one complete rota-
tion clockwise.
y
x
Unit
circle
x0, y0)
(
P
O
Each
axis division
is 1/4 unit
Figure 2-1
The unit circle, whose equation is 
x2 + y2 = 1, can serve as the basis for 
defining trigonometric functions. 
In this graph, each axis division 
represents 1/4 unit.

The sine function
Look again at Fig. 2-1. Imagine that ray OP points along the x axis, and then starts to rotate 
counterclockwise at steady speed around its end point O, as if that point is a mechanical bear-
ing. The point P, represented by coordinates (x0,y0), therefore revolves around O, following 
the unit circle.
Imagine what happens to the value of y0 (the ordinate of point P) during one complete 
revolution of ray OP. The ordinate of P starts out at y0 = 0, then increases until it reaches y0 = 1 
after P has gone 1/4 of the way around the circle (that is, the ray has turned through an angle 
of p /2). After that, y0 begins to decrease, getting back to y0 = 0 when P has gone 1/2 of the 
way around the circle (the ray has turned through an angle of p ). As P continues in its orbit, 
y0 keeps decreasing until the value of y0 reaches its minimum of −1 when P has gone 3/4 of 
the way around the circle (the ray has turned through an angle of 3p /2). After that, the value 
of y0 rises again until, when P has gone completely around the circle, it returns to y0 = 0 for 
q = 2p.
The value of y0 is defined as the sine of the angle q. The sine function is abbreviated as sin, 
so we can write
sin q = y0
Circular motion
Imagine that you attach a “glow-in-the-dark” ball to the end of a string, and then swing the 
ball around and around at a steady rate of one revolution per second. Suppose that you make 
the ball circle your head so the path of the ball lies in a horizontal plane. Imagine that you 
are in the middle of a flat, open field at night. The ball describes a circle as viewed from high 
above, as shown in Fig. 2-2A. If a friend stands far away with her eyes exactly in the plane 
of the ball’s orbit, she sees a point of light that oscillates back and forth, from right-to-left
and left-to-right, along what appears to be a straight-line path (Fig. 2-2B). Starting from its 
rightmost apparent position, the glowing point moves toward the left for 1/2 second, speed-
ing up and then slowing down; then it reverses direction; then it moves toward the right for 
Ball
Ball
String
You
Top view
Side view
A
B
Figure 2-2  Orbiting ball and string. 
At A, as seen from above; 
at B, as seen edge-on.
Primary Circular Functions  25

26  A Fresh Look at Trigonometry
1/2 second, speeding up and then slowing down; then turns around again. As seen by your 
friend, the ball reaches its extreme rightmost position at 1-second intervals, because its orbital 
speed is one revolution per second.
The sine wave
If you graph the apparent position of the ball as seen by your friend with respect to time, the result 
is a sine wave, which is a graphical plot of a sine function. Some sine waves “rise higher and lower” 
(corresponding to a longer string), some are “flatter” (the equivalent of a shorter string), some are 
“stretched out” (a slower rate of revolution), and some are “squashed” (a faster rate of revolution). 
But the characteristic shape of the wave, known as a sinusoid, is the same in every case.
You can whirl the ball around faster or slower than one revolution per second, thereby 
altering the frequency of the sine wave: the number of times a complete wave cycle repeats 
within a specified interval on the independent-variable axis. You can make the string longer 
or shorter, thereby adjusting the amplitude of the wave: the difference between the extreme 
values of its dependent variable. No matter what changes you might make of this sort, the 
sinusoid can always be defined in terms of a moving point that orbits a central point at a con-
stant speed in a perfect circle.
If we want to graph a sinusoid in the Cartesian plane, the circular-motion analogy can 
be stated as
y = a sin bq
where a is a constant that depends on the radius of the circle, and b is a constant that depends 
on the revolution rate. The angle q is expressed counterclockwise from the positive x axis. 
Figure 2-3 illustrates a graph of the basic sine function; it’s a sinusoid for which a = 1 and b = 1, 
and for which the angle is expressed in radians.
–3p
3p
3
2
1
–1
–2
–3
sin q
q
Figure 2-3  Graph of the sine function for 
values of q between −3p and 3p.
Each division on the horizontal axis 
represents p /2 units. Each division on 
the vertical axis represents 1/2 unit.

The cosine function
Look again at Fig. 2-1. Imagine, once again, a ray OP running outward from the origin 
through point P on the circle. Imagine that at first, the ray points along the x axis, and then it 
rotates steadily in a counterclockwise direction.
Now let’s think about what happens to the value of x0 (the abscissa of point P) during one 
complete revolution of ray OP. It starts out at x0 = 1, then decreases until it reaches x0 = 0 when 
q = p /2. Then x0 continues to decrease, getting down to x0 = −1 when q = p. As P continues 
counterclockwise around the circle, x0 increases. When q = 3p /2, we get back up to x0 = 0. 
After that, x0 increases further until, when P has gone completely around the circle, it returns 
to x0 = 1 for q = 2p.
The value of x0 is defined as the cosine of the angle q. The cosine function is abbreviated 
as cos, so we can write
cos q = x0
The cosine wave
Circular motion in the Cartesian plane can be defined in terms of the cosine function by 
means of the equation
y = a cos bq
where a is a constant that depends on the radius of the circle, and b is a constant that depends 
on the revolution rate, just as is the case with the sine function. The angle q is measured or 
defined counterclockwise from the positive x axis, as always.
The shape of a cosine wave is exactly the same as the shape of a sine wave. Both waves are 
sinusoids. But the entire cosine wave is shifted to the left by 1/4 of a cycle with respect to the 
sine wave. That works out to an angle of p /2. Figure 2-4 shows a graph of the basic cosine 
–3p
3p
3
2
1
–1
–2
–3
cos q
q
Figure 2-4  Graph of the cosine function for 
values of q between −3p and 3p.
Each division on the horizontal 
axis represents p /2 units. Each 
division on the vertical axis 
represents 1/2 unit.
Primary Circular Functions  27

28  A Fresh Look at Trigonometry
function; it’s a cosine wave for which a = 1 and b = 1. Because the cosine wave in Fig. 2-4 has the 
same frequency but a difference in horizontal position compared with the sine wave in Fig. 2-3, 
the two waves are said to differ in phase. For those of you who like fancy technical terms, a phase 
difference of 1/4 cycle (or p /2) is known in electrical engineering as phase quadrature.
The tangent function
Once again, refer to Fig. 2-1. The tangent (abbreviated as tan) of an angle q can be defined 
using the same ray OP and the same point P = (x0,y0) as we use when we define the sine and 
cosine functions. The definition is
tan q = y0/x0
We’ve seen that sin q = y0 and cos q = x0, so we can express the tangent function as
tan q = sin q / cos q
The tangent function is interesting because, unlike the sine and cosine functions, it 
“blows up” at certain values of q. This is shown by a graph of the function (Fig. 2-5). Whenever 
x0 = 0, the denominator of either quotient above becomes 0, so the tangent function is not 
defined for any angle q such that cos q = 0. This happens whenever q is a positive or negative 
odd-integer multiple of p /2.
–3p
3p
3
2
1
–1
–2
–3
tan q
q
Figure 2-5  Graph of the tangent function for values 
of q between −3p and 3p. Each division 
on the horizontal axis represents p /2
units. Each division on the vertical axis 
represents 1/2 unit.

Singularities
When a function “blows up” as the tangent function does at all the odd-integer multiples of 
p /2, we say that the function is singular for the affected values of the input variable. Such a 
“blow-up point” is called a singularity.
If you’ve read books or watched movies about space travel and black holes, maybe you’ve 
seen or heard the term space-time singularity. That’s a place where all the familiar rules of the 
universe break down. In a mathematical singularity, things aren’t quite so dramatic, but 
the output value of a function becomes meaningless. In Fig. 2-5, the singularities are denoted 
by vertical dashed lines. The dashed lines themselves are known as asymptotes.
Inflection points
Midway between the singularities, the graph of the tangent function crosses the q axis, and 
the sense of the curvature changes. Below the q axis, the curves are always concave to the 
right and convex to the left. Above the q axis, the curves are always concave to the left and 
convex to the right. Whenever we have a point on a curve where the sense of the curvature 
reverses, we call that point an inflection point or a point of inflection. (Some texts spell the 
word “inflexion.”)
Lots of graphs have inflection points. If you’re astute, you’ll look back in this chapter and 
notice that the sine and cosine waves also have them. From your algebra courses, you might 
also remember that the graphs of many higher-degree polynomial functions have inflection 
points.
Are you confused?
Some students wonder if there’s a way to define a function at a singularity. If you scrutinize 
Fig. 2-5 closely, you might be tempted to say that
tan (p /2) = ±∞
where the symbol ±∞ means positive or negative infinity. The graph suggests that the output of the 
tangent function might attain values of infinity at the singular input points, doesn’t it? It’s an 
interesting notion; the problem is that we don’t have a formal definition for infinity as a number. 
Mathematicians have found it difficult, over the generations, to make up a rigorous, workable 
definition for infinity as a number.
Some mathematicians have grappled with the notion of infinity and come up with a way of 
doing arithmetic with it. Most notable among these people was Georg Cantor, a German math-
ematician who lived from 1845 to 1918. He discovered the apparent existence of “multiple infini-
ties,” which he called transfinite numbers. If you’re interested in studying transfinite numbers, try 
searching the Internet using that term as a phrase.
Here’s a challenge!
Figure out the value of tan (p /4). Don’t do any calculations. You should be able to infer this on 
the basis of geometry alone.
Primary Circular Functions  29

30  A Fresh Look at Trigonometry
Solution
Draw a diagram of a unit circle, such as the one in Fig. 2-1, and place ray OP so that it subtends 
an angle of p /4 with respect to the x axis. (That’s exactly “northeast” if the positive x axis goes 
“east” and the positive y axis goes “north.”) Note that the ray OP also subtends an angle of p /4 
with respect to the y axis, because the x and y axes are mutually perpendicular (oriented at an angle 
of exactly p /2 with respect to each other), and p /4 is half of p /2. Every point on the ray OP is 
equally distant from the x and y axes, including the point (x0,y0) where the ray intersects the circle. 
It follows that x0 = y0. Neither of them is equal to 0, so you know that y0/x0 = 1. According to the 
definition of the tangent function, you can conclude that
tan (p /4) = y0/x0 = 1
Secondary Circular Functions
The three primary circular functions, as already defined, form the cornerstone of trigonom-
etry. Three more circular functions exist. Their values represent the reciprocals of the values of 
the primary circular functions.
The cosecant function
Imagine the ray OP in Fig. 2-1, oriented at a certain angle q with respect to the x axis, pointing 
outward from the origin, and intersecting the unit circle at P = (x0,y0). The reciprocal of the 
ordinate, 1/y0, is defined as the cosecant of the angle q. The cosecant function is abbreviated 
as csc, so we can write
csc q = 1/y0
Because y0 is the value of the sine function, the cosecant is the reciprocal of the sine. For any 
angle q, the following equation is always true as long as sin q ≠ 0:
csc q = 1/sin q
The cosecant of an angle q is undefined when q is any integer multiple of p. That’s because 
the sine of any such angle is 0, which would make the cosecant equal to 1/0. Figure 2-6 is a 
graph of the cosecant function for values of q between −3p and 3p. The vertical dashed lines 
denote the singularities. There’s also a singularity along the y axis.
The secant function
Consider the reciprocal of the abscissa, that is, 1/x0, in Fig. 2-1. This value is the secant of the 
angle q. The secant function is abbreviated as sec, so we can write
sec q = 1/x0
The secant of an angle is the reciprocal of the cosine. When cos q ≠ 0, the following equation 
is true:
sec q = 1/cos q
The secant is undefined for any positive or negative odd-integer multiple of p /2. Figure 2-7 is 
a graph of the secant function for values of q between −3p and 3p. Note the input values for 
which the function is singular (vertical dashed lines).

–3p
3p
3
2
1
–1
–2
–3
csc q
q
Figure 2-6  Graph of the cosecant function for 
values of q between −3p and 3p.
Each division on the horizontal axis 
represents p /2 units. Each division on 
the vertical axis represents 1/2 unit.
–3p
3p
1
sec q
–1
q
Figure 2-7  Graph of the secant function for 
values of q between −3p and 3p.
Each division on the horizontal axis 
represents p /2 units. Each division on 
the vertical axis represents 1/2 unit.
Secondary Circular Functions  31

32  A Fresh Look at Trigonometry
The cotangent function
Now let’s think about the value of x0/y0 at the point P where the ray OP crosses the unit circle. 
This ratio is called the cotangent of the angle q. The cotangent function is abbreviated as cot, 
so we can write
cot q = x0/y0
Because we already know that cos q = x0 and sin q = y0, we can express the cotangent function 
in terms of the cosine and the sine:
cot q = cos q/sin q
The cotangent function is also the reciprocal of the tangent function:
cot q = 1/tan q
Whenever y0 = 0, the denominators of all three quotients above become 0, so the cotangent 
function is not defined. Singularities occur at all integer multiples of p. Figure 2-8 is a graph 
of the cotangent function for values of q between −3p and 3p. Singularities are, as in the other 
examples here, shown as vertical dashed lines.
–3p
3p
3
2
1
–1
–2
–3
cot q
q
Figure 2-8  Graph of the cotangent function for values 
of q between −3p and 3p. Each division 
on the horizontal axis represents p /2 units. 
Each division on the vertical axis represents 
1/2 unit.

Are you confused?
Now that you know how the six circular functions are defined, you might wonder how you can 
determine the output values for specific inputs. The easiest way is to use a calculator. This ap-
proach will usually give you an approximation, not an exact value, because the output values of 
trigonometric functions are almost always irrational numbers. Remember to set the calculator to 
work for inputs in radians, not in degrees!
The values of the sine and cosine functions never get smaller than −1 or larger than 1. The 
values of the other four functions can vary wildly. Put a few numbers into your calculator and see 
what happens when you apply the circular functions to them. When you input a value for which 
a function is singular, you’ll get an error message on the calculator.
Here’s a challenge!
Figure out the value of cot (5p /4). As in the previous challenge, you should be able to solve this 
problem entirely with geometry.
Solution
As you did before, draw a unit circle on a Cartesian coordinate grid. This time, orient the ray OP
so that it subtends an angle of 5p /4 with respect to the x axis. (That’s exactly “southwest” if the 
positive x axis goes “east” and the positive y axis goes “north.”) Every point on OP is equally distant 
from the x and y axes, including (x0,y0) where the ray intersects the circle. You can see that x0 = y0
and both of them are negative, so the ratio x0/y0 must be equal to 1. According to the definition 
of the cotangent function, you can therefore conclude that
cot (5p /4) = 1
Pythagorean Extras
The Pythagorean theorem for right triangles, which we reviewed in Chap. 1, can be extended 
to cover three important identities (equations that always hold true) involving the circular 
functions.
Pythagorean identity for sine and cosine
The square of the sine of an angle plus the square of the cosine of the same angle is always 
equal to 1. We can write this fact as
(sin q)2 + (cos q)2 = 1
When the value of a trigonometric function is squared, the exponent 2 is customarily placed 
after the abbreviation of the function and before the input variable, so the parentheses can be 
eliminated from the expression. In that format, the above equation is written as
sin2 q + cos2 q = 1
Pythagorean Extras  33

34  A Fresh Look at Trigonometry
y
x
Unit
circle
cos q
sin q
Length =
1 unit
q
Figure 2-9  This drawing can help show that 
sin2 q + cos2 q = 1 when 0 < q < p /2. 
Pythagorean identity for secant and tangent
The square of the secant of an angle minus the square of the tangent of the same angle is 
always equal to 1, as long as the angle is not an odd-integer multiple of p /2. We write this as
sec2 q − tan2 q = 1
Pythagorean identity for cosecant and cotangent
The square of the cosecant of an angle minus the square of the cotangent of the same angle is 
always equal to 1, as long as the angle is not an integer multiple of p. We write this as
csc2 q − cot2 q = 1
Are you confused?
You’ve probably seen the above formula for the sine and cosine in your algebra or trigonometry 
courses. If you haven’t seen the other two formulas, you might wonder where they come from. 
They can both be derived from the first formula using simple algebra along with the facts we’ve 
reviewed in this chapter. You’ll get a chance to work them out in Problems 9 and 10, later. 
Here’s a challenge!
Use a drawing of the unit circle to show that sin2 q + cos2 q = 1 for angles q greater than 0 and less 
than p /2. (Here’s a hint: A right triangle is involved.)
Solution
Figure 2-9 shows the unit circle with q defined counterclockwise between the x axis and a ray 
emanating from the origin. When the angle is greater than 0 but less than p /2, a right triangle 

is formed, with a segment of the ray as the hypotenuse. The length of this segment is equal to 
the radius of the unit circle. This radius, by definition, is 1 unit. According to the Pythagorean 
theorem for right triangles, the square of the length of the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the 
squares of the lengths of the other two sides. It is easy to see that the lengths of these other two 
sides are sin q and cos q. Therefore,
sin2 q + cos2 q = 1
Here’s another challenge!
Use another drawing of the unit circle to show that sin2 q + cos2 q = 1 for angles q greater than 
3p /2 and less than 2p. (Here’s a hint: This range of angles is equivalent to the range of angles 
greater than −p /2 and less than 0.)
Solution
Figure 2-10 shows how this can be done. Draw a mirror image of Fig. 2-9, with the angle q
defined clockwise instead of counterclockwise. Again, you get a right triangle with a hypot-
enuse 1 unit long, while the other two sides have lengths of sin q and cos q. This triangle, 
like all right triangles, obeys the Pythagorean theorem. As in the previous challenge, you end 
up with
sin2 q + cos2 q = 1
y
x
Unit
circle
cos q
sin q
Length =
1 unit
q
Figure 2-10  This drawing can help show that 
sin2 q + cos2 q = 1 when 3p /2 < q < 2p.
Pythagorean Extras  35

36  A Fresh Look at Trigonometry
Practice Exercises
This is an open-book quiz. You may (and should) refer to the text as you solve these problems. 
Don’t hurry! You’ll find worked-out answers in App. A. The solutions in the appendix may not 
represent the only way a problem can be figured out. If you think you can solve a particular 
problem in a quicker or better way than you see there, by all means try it!
 1.  Approximately how many radians are there in 1°? Use a calculator and round the 
answer off to four decimal places, assuming that p ≈ 3.14159.
 2.  What is the angle in radians representing 7/8 of a circular rotation counterclockwise? 
Express the answer in terms of p, not as a calculator-derived approximation.
 3.  What is the angle in radians corresponding to 120° counterclockwise? Express the 
answer in terms of p, not as a calculator-derived approximation.
 4.  Suppose that the earth is a perfectly smooth sphere with a circumference of 40,000 
kilometers (km). Based on that notion, what is the angular separation (in radians) 
between two points 1000 /p km apart as measured over the earth’s surface along the 
shortest possible route?
 5.  Sketch a graph of the function y = sin x as a dashed curve in the Cartesian xy plane. 
Then sketch a graph of y = 2 sin x as a solid curve. How do the two functions compare?
 6.  Sketch a graph of the function y = sin x as a dashed curve in the Cartesian xy plane. 
Then sketch a graph of y = sin 2x as a solid curve. How do the two functions compare?
 7. The secant of an angle can never be within a certain range of values. What is that range?
 8.  The cosecant of an angle can never be within a certain range of values. What is that 
range?
 9. The Pythagorean formula for the sine and cosine is
sin2 q + cos2 q = 1
 
 From this, derive the fact that
sec2 q − tan2 q = 1
 10. Once again, consider the formula
sin2 q + cos2 q = 1
 
 From this, derive the fact that
csc2 q − cot2 q = 1

The Cartesian plane isn’t the only tool for graphing on a flat surface. Instead of moving right-left 
and up-down from the origin, we can travel in a specified direction straight outward from the 
origin to reach a desired point. The direction angle is expressed in radians with respect to a 
reference axis. The outward distance is called the radius. This scheme gives us polar two-space
or the polar coordinate plane.
The Variables
Figure 3-1 shows the basic polar coordinate plane. The independent variable is portrayed as 
an angle q relative to a ray pointing to the right (or “east”). That ray is the reference axis. The 
dependent variable is portrayed as the radius r from the origin. In this way, we can define 
points in the plane as ordered pairs of the form (q,r).
The radius
In the polar plane, the radial increments are concentric circles. The larger the circle, the greater 
the value of r. In Fig. 3-1, the circles aren’t labeled in units. We can imagine each concentric 
circle, working outward, as increasing by any number of units we want. For example, each 
radial division might represent 1, 5, 10, or 100 units. Whatever size increments we choose, we 
must make sure that they stay the same size all the way out. That is, the relationship between 
the radius coordinate and the actual radius of the circle representing it must be linear.
The direction
As pure mathematicians, we express polar-coordinate direction angles in radians. We go coun-
terclockwise from a reference axis pointing in the same direction as the positive x axis normally 
goes in the Cartesian xy plane. The angular scale must be linear. That is, the physical angle on 
the graph must be directly proportional to the value of q.
37
CHAPTER 
3
Polar Two-Space

Strange values
In polar coordinates, it’s okay to have nonstandard direction angles. If q ≥ 2p, it represents 
at least one complete counterclockwise rotation from the reference axis. If the direction angle 
is q < 0, it represents clockwise rotation from the reference axis rather than counterclockwise 
rotation.
We can also have negative radius coordinates. If we encounter some point for which we’re 
told that r < 0, we can multiply r by −1 so it becomes positive, and then add or subtract p to 
or from the direction. That’s like saying “Proceed 10 km due east” instead of “Proceed −10 km 
due west.”
Which variable is which?
If you read a lot of mathematics texts and papers, you’ll sometimes see ordered pairs for polar 
coordinates with the radius listed first, and then the angle. Instead of the form (q,r), the 
ordered pairs will take the form (r,q). In this scheme, the radius is the independent variable, 
and the direction is the dependent variable. It works fine, but it’s easier for most people to 
imagine that the radius depends on the direction.
Think of an old-fashioned radar display like the ones shown in war movies made in the 
middle of the last century. A bright radial ray rotates around a circular screen, revealing targets 
at various distances. The rotation continues at a steady rate; it’s independent. Target distances 
are functions of the direction. Theoretically, a radar display could work in the opposite sense 
with an expanding bright circle instead of a rotating ray, and all of the targets would show up 
38
Polar Two-Space
Figure 3-1  The polar coordinate plane. Angular 
divisions are straight lines passing 
through the origin. Each angular 
division represents p/6 units. Radial 
divisions are circles.

in the same places. But that geometry wasn’t technologically practical when radar sets were 
first designed, and it was never used. Let’s use the (q,r) format for ordered pairs, where q is the 
independent variable and r is the dependent variable.
Are you confused?
You ask, “How we can write down relations and functions intended for polar coordinates as 
opposed to those meant for Cartesian coordinates?” It’s simple. When we want to denote a relation 
or function (call it f ) in polar coordinates where the independent variable is q and the dependent 
variable is r, we write
r = f (q)
We can read this out loud as “r equals f of q.” When we want to denote a relation or function (call 
it g) in Cartesian coordinates where the independent variable is x and the dependent variable is y,
we can write
y = g (x)
We can read this out loud as “y equals g of x.”
Here’s a challenge!
Provide an example of a graphical object that represents a function in polar coordinates when 
q is the independent variable, but not in Cartesian xy coordinates when x is the independent 
variable.
Solution
Consider a polar function that maps all inputs into the same output, such as
f (q) = 3
Because f (q) is another way of denoting r, this function tells us that r = 3. The graph is a circle with 
a radius of 3 units. In Cartesian coordinates, the equation of the circle with radius of 3 units is
x 2 + y 2 = 9
(Note that 9 = 32, the square of the radius.) If we let y be the dependent variable and x be the 
independent variable, we can rearrange this equation to get
y = ±(9 −x 2)1/2
We can’t claim that y = g (x) where g is a function of x in this case. There are values of x (the 
independent variable) that produce two values of y (the dependent variable). For example, if x = 0, 
then y = ±3. If we want to say that g is a relation, that’s okay; but g is not a function.
The Variables  39

40  Polar Two-Space
Three Basic Graphs
Let’s look at the graphs of three generalized equations in polar coordinates. In Cartesian coordi-
nates, all equations of these forms produce straight-line graphs. Only one of them does it now!
Constant angle
When we set the direction angle to a numerical constant, we get a simple polar equation of 
the form
q = a
where a is the constant. As we allow the value of r to range over all the real numbers, the graph 
of any such equation is a straight line passing through the origin, subtending an angle of a
with respect to the reference axis. Figure 3-2 shows two examples. In these cases, the equations 
are
q = p /3
and
q = 7p /8
0
p/2
p
q = 7p/8
q = p/3
3p/2
Figure 3-2  When we set the angle constant, the graph is a 
straight line through the origin. Here are two 
examples.

Constant radius
Imagine what happens if we set the radius to a numerical constant. This gives us a polar equation 
of the form
r = a
where a is the constant. The graph is a circle centered at the origin whose radius is a, as shown 
in Fig. 3-3, when we allow the direction angle q to rotate through at least one full turn of 2p.
If we allow the angle to span the entire set of real numbers, we trace around the circle infinitely 
many times, but that doesn’t change the appearance of the graph.
Angle equals radius times positive constant
Now let’s investigate a more interesting situation. Figure 3-4 shows an example of what hap-
pens in polar coordinates when we set the radius equal to a positive constant multiple of the 
angle. We get a pair of “mirror-image spirals.”
To see how this graph arises, imagine a ray pointing from the origin straight out toward 
the right along the reference axis (labeled 0). The angle is 0, so the radius is 0. Now suppose 
the ray starts to rotate counterclockwise, like the sweep on an old-fashioned military radar 
screen. The angle increases positively at a constant rate. Therefore, the radius also increases at 
a constant rate, because the radius is a positive constant multiple of the angle. The resulting 
0
3p/2
r = a
p/2
p
Figure 3-3  When we set the radius constant, the 
graph is a circle centered at the origin. 
In this case, the radius is an arbitrary 
value a.
Three Basic Graphs  41

42  Polar Two-Space
graph is the solid spiral. The pitch (or “tightness”) of the spiral depends on the value of the 
constant a in the equation
r = aq
Small positive values of a produce tightly curled-up spirals. Larger positive values of a produce 
more loosely pitched spirals.
Now suppose that the ray starts from the reference axis and rotates clockwise. At first, the 
angle is 0, so the radius is 0. As the ray turns, the angle increases negatively at a constant rate. 
That means the radius increases negatively at a constant rate, too, because we’re multiplying 
the angle by a positive constant. We must plot the points in the exact opposite direction from 
the way the ray points. When we do that, we get the dashed spiral in Fig. 3-4. The pitch is the 
same as that of the heavy spiral, because we haven’t changed the value of a. The entire graph 
of the equation consists of both spirals together.
Angle equals radius times negative constant
Figure 3-5 shows an example of what happens in polar coordinates when we set the radius 
equal to a negative constant multiple of the angle. As in the previous case, we get a pair of 
spirals, but they’re “upside-down” with respect to the case when the constant is positive. To see 
0
3p/2
Negative
angle,
negative
radius
Positive
angle,
positive
radius
p/2
p
Figure 3-4  When we set the radius equal to a positive 
constant multiple of the angle, we get a pair of 
spirals.

how this works, you can trace around with rotating rays as we did in Fig. 3-4. Be careful with 
the signs and directions! Remember that negative angles go clockwise, and negative radii go in 
the opposite direction from the way the angle is defined.
Are you confused?
Look back at Fig. 3-2. If you ponder this graph for awhile, you might suspect that the indicated 
equations aren’t the only ones that can represent these lines. You might ask, “If we allow r to range 
over all the real numbers, both positive and negative, can’t the line for q = p /3 also be represented 
by other equations such as q = 4p /3 or q = −2p /3? Can’t the line representing the q = 7p /8 also be 
represented by q = 15p /8 or q = −p /8?” The answers to these questions are “Yes.” When we see an 
equation of the form q = a representing a straight line through the origin in polar coordinates, we 
can add any integer multiple of p to the constant a, and we get another equation whose graph is the 
same line. In more formal terms, a particular line q = a through the origin can be represented by
q = kp a
where k is any integer and a is a real-number constant.
0
3p/2
Positive
angle,
negative
radius
Negative
angle,
positive
radius
p
p/2
Figure 3-5  When we set the radius equal to a negative 
constant multiple of the angle, we get a 
pair of spirals “upside-down” relative to 
those for a positive constant multiple of the 
angle. Illustration for Problem 4.
Three Basic Graphs  43

44  Polar Two-Space
Here’s a challenge!
What’s the value of the constant, a, in the function shown by the graph of Fig. 3-4? What’s the 
equation of this pair of spirals? Assume that each radial division represents 1 unit.
Solution
Note that if q = p, then r = 2. You can solve for a by substituting this number pair in the general 
equation for the pair of spirals. Plugging in the numbers (q,r) = (p,2), proceed as follows:
r = aq
2 = ap
2 /p = a
Therefore, a = 2 /p, and the equation you seek is
r = (2/p )q
If you don’t like parentheses, you can write it as
r = 2q /p
Here’s another challenge!
What is the polar equation of a straight line running through the origin and ascending at an angle 
of p /4 as you move to the right, with the restriction that 0 ≤q < 2p ? If you drew this line on a stan-
dard Cartesian xy coordinate grid instead of the polar plane, what equation would it represent?
Solution
Two equations will work here. They are
q = p /4
and
q = 5p /4
Keep in mind that the value of r can be any real number: positive, negative, or zero.
First, look at the situation where q = p /4. When r > 0, you get a ray in the p /4 direction. 
When r < 0, you get a ray in the 5p /4 direction. When r = 0, you get the origin point. The union 
of these two rays and the origin point forms the line running through the origin and ascending at 
an angle of p /4 as you move toward the right.
Now examine events with the equation q = 5p /4. When r > 0, you get a ray in the 5p /4 direc-
tion. When r < 0, you get a ray in the p /4 direction. When r = 0, you get the origin point. The 
union of the two rays and the origin point forms the same line as in the first case. In the Cartesian 
xy plane, this line would be the graph of the equation y = x.

Coordinate Transformations
We can convert the coordinates of any point from polar to Cartesian systems and vice versa. 
Going from polar to Cartesian is easy, like floating down a river. Getting from Cartesian to 
polar is more difficult, like rowing up the same river. As you read along here, refer to Fig. 3-6, 
which shows a point in the polar grid superimposed on the Cartesian grid.
Polar to Cartesian
Suppose we have a point (q,r) in polar coordinates. We can convert this point to Cartesian 
coordinates (x,y) using the formulas
x = r cos q
and
y = r sin q
0
p
p/2
3p/2
y
x
P
r
q
Figure 3-6  A point plotted in both polar and Cartesian 
coordinates. Each radial division in the polar grid 
represents 1 unit. Each division on the x and y axes of 
the Cartesian grid also represents 1 unit. The shaded 
region is a right triangle x units wide, y units tall, and 
having a hypotenuse r units long.
Coordinate Transformations  45

46  Polar Two-Space
To understand how this works, imagine what happens when r = 1. The equation r = 1 in polar 
coordinates gives us a unit circle. We learned in Chap. 2 that when we have a unit circle in the 
Cartesian plane, then for any point (x,y) on that circle
x = cos q
and
y = sin q
Suppose that we double the radius of the circle. This makes the polar equation r = 2. The 
values of x and y in Cartesian coordinates both double, because when we double the length of 
the hypotenuse of a right triangle (such as the shaded region in Fig. 3-6), we also double the 
lengths of the other two sides. The new triangle is similar to the old one, meaning that its sides 
stay in the same ratio. Therefore
x = 2 cos q
and
y = 2 sin q
This scheme works no matter how large or small we make the circle, as long as it stays centered 
at the origin. If r = a, where a is some positive real number, the new right triangle is always 
similar to the old one, so we get
x = a cos q
and
y = a sin q
If our radius r happens to be negative, these formulas still work. (For “extra credit,” can you 
figure out why?)
An example
Consider the point (q,r) = (p,2) in polar coordinates. Let’s find the (x,y) representation of this 
point in Cartesian coordinates using the polar-to-Cartesian conversion formulas
x = r cos q
and
y = r sin q
Plugging in the numbers gives us
x = 2 cos p = 2 × (−1) = −2
and
y = 2 sin p = 2 × 0 = 0
Therefore, (x,y) = (−2,0).

Cartesian to polar: the radius
Figure 3-6 shows us that the radius r from the origin to our point P = (x,y) is the length of the 
hypotenuse of a right triangle (the shaded region) that’s x units wide and y units tall. Using the 
Pythagorean theorem, we can write the formula for determining r in terms of x and y as
r = (x 2 + y 2)1/2
That’s straightforward enough. Now it’s time to work on the more difficult conversion: find-
ing the polar angle for a point that’s given to us in the Cartesian xy plane.
The Arctangent function
Before we can find the polar direction angle for a point that’s given to us in Cartesian coor-
dinates, we must be familiar with an inverse trigonometric function known as the Arctangent,
which “undoes” the work of the tangent function. (The capital “A” is not a typo. We’ll see why 
in a minute.) Consider, for example, the fact that
tan (p /4) = 1
A true function that “undoes” the tangent must map an input value of 1 in the domain to an 
output value of p /4 in the range, but to no other values. In fact, no matter what we input to 
the function, we must never get more than one output.
To ensure that the inverse of the tangent behaves as a true function, we must restrict its 
range (output) to an open interval where we don’t get any redundancy. By convention, math-
ematicians specify the open interval (−p /2,p /2) for this purpose. When mathematicians make 
this sort of restriction in an inverse trigonometric function, they capitalize the “first letter” in 
the name of the function. That’s a “code” to tell us that we’re working with a true function, 
and not a mere relation. Some texts use the abbreviation tan−1 instead of Arctan to represent 
the inverse of the tangent function. We won’t use this symbol here because some readers might 
confuse it with the reciprocal of the tangent, which is the cotangent, not the Arctangent!
If you’re curious as to what the Arctangent function looks like when graphed, check out 
Fig. 3-7. This graph consists of the principal branch of the tangent function, tipped on its side 
and then flipped upside-down. Compare Fig. 3-7 with Fig. 2-5 on page 28. The principal 
branch of the tangent function is the one that passes through the origin.
Once we’ve made sure we won’t run into any ambiguity, we can state the above fact using 
the Arctangent function, getting
Arctan 1 = p /4
For any real number u except odd-integer multiples of p /2 (for which the tangent function is 
undefined), we can always be sure that
Arctan (tan u) = u
Going the other way, for any real number v, we can be confident that
tan (Arctan v) = v
Coordinate Transformations  47

48  Polar Two-Space
Cartesian to polar: the angle
We now have the tools that we need to determine the polar angle q for a point on the basis of 
its Cartesian coordinates x and y. We already know that
x = r cos q
and
y = r sin q
As long as x ≠ 0, it follows that
y/x = (r sin q)/(r cos q) = (r/r)(sin q)/(cos q)
 
= (sin q)/(cos q) = tan q
Simplifying, we get
tan q = y/x
–p
3
2
1
–2
–3
y
x
–1
–p/2
p/2
p
Figure 3-7  A graph of the Arctangent function. The 
domain extends over all the real numbers. 
The range is restricted to values larger than 
−p /2 and smaller than p /2. Each division 
on the y axis represents p /6 units.

If we take the Arctangent of both sides, we obtain
Arctan (tan q ) = Arctan ( y/x)
which can be rewritten as
q = Arctan (y/x)
Suppose the point P = (x,y) happens to lie in the first or fourth quadrant of the Cartesian 
plane. In this case, we have
−p /2 < q < p /2
so we can directly use the conversion formula
q = Arctan ( y/x)
If P = (x,y) is in the second or third quadrant, then we have
p /2 < q < 3p /2
That’s outside the range of the Arctangent function, but we can remedy this situation if we 
subtract p from q. When we do this, we bring q into the allowed range but we don’t change 
its tangent, because the tangent function repeats itself every p radians. (If you look back at 
Fig. 2-5 again, you will notice that all of the branches in the graph are identical, and any two 
adjacent branches are p radians apart.) In this situation, we have
q − p = Arctan ( y/x)
which can be rewritten as
q = p + Arctan ( y/x)
Now we’re ready to derive specific formulas for q in terms of x and y. Let’s break the scenario 
down into all possible general locations for P = (x,y), and see what we get for q in each case:
P at the origin. If x = 0 and y = 0, then q is theoretically undefined. However, let’s 
assign q a default value of 0 at the origin. By doing that, we can “fill the hole” that would 
otherwise exist in our conversion scheme.
P on the +x axis. If x > 0 and y = 0, then we’re on the positive x axis. We can see from 
Fig. 3-6 that q = 0.
P in the first quadrant. If x > 0 and y > 0, then we’re in the first quadrant of the 
Cartesian plane where q is larger than 0 but less than p /2. We can therefore directly 
apply the conversion formula
q = Arctan ( y/x)
Coordinate Transformations  49

50  Polar Two-Space
P on the +y axis. If x = 0 and y > 0, then we’re on the positive y axis. We can see from 
Fig. 3-6 that q = p /2.
P in the second quadrant. If x < 0 and y > 0, then we’re in the second quadrant of the 
Cartesian plane where q is larger than p /2 but less than p . In this case, we must apply 
the modified conversion formula
q = p + Arctan ( y/x)
P on the -x axis. If x < 0 and y = 0, then we’re on the negative x axis. We can see from 
Fig. 3-6 that q = p.
P in the third quadrant. If x < 0 and y < 0, then we’re in the third quadrant of the 
Cartesian plane where q is larger than p but less than 3p /2, so we apply the modified 
conversion formula
q = p + Arctan ( y/x)
P on the -y axis. If x = 0 and y < 0, then we’re on the negative y axis. We can see from 
Fig. 3-6 that q = 3p /2.
P in the fourth quadrant. If x > 0 and y < 0, then we’re in the fourth quadrant of the 
Cartesian plane where q is larger than 3p /2 but smaller than 2p. That’s the same thing 
as saying that −p /2 < q < 0. We’ll get an angle in that range if we apply the original 
conversion formula
q = Arctan ( y/x)
 
In the interest of elegance, we’d like the angle in the polar representation of a point 
to always be nonnegative but less than 2p. We can make this happen by adding in a 
complete rotation of 2p to the basic conversion formula, getting
q = 2p + Arctan ( y/x)
 
We have taken care of all the possible locations for P. A summary of the nine-part 
conversion formula that we’ve developed is given in the following table.
q = 0
At the origin
q = 0
On the +x axis
q = Arctan ( y/x)
In the first quadrant
q = p /2
On the +y axis
q = p + Arctan ( y/x)
In the second quadrant
q = p
On the −x axis
q = p + Arctan ( y/x)
In the third quadrant
q = 3p /2
On the −y axis
q = 2p + Arctan ( y/x)
In the fourth quadrant

An example
Let’s convert the Cartesian point (−5,−12) to polar form. Here, x = −5 and y = −12. When we 
plug these numbers into the formula for r, we get
r = [(−5)2 + (−12)2]1/2 = (25 + 144)1/2 = 1691/2 = 13
Our point is in the third quadrant of the Cartesian plane. To find the angle, we should use 
the formula
q = p + Arctan ( y/x)
When we plug in x = −5 and y = −12, we get
q = p + Arctan [(−12)/(−5)] = p + Arctan (12/5)
That is a theoretically exact answer, but it’s an irrational number. A calculator set to work in 
radians (not degrees) tells us that
Arctan (12/5) ≈ 1.1760
rounded off to four decimal places. (Remember that the “wavy” equals sign means “is approxi-
mately equal to.”) If we let p ≈ 3.1416, also rounded off to four decimal places, we get
q ≈ 3.1416 + 1.1760 ≈ 4.3176
The polar equivalent of (x,y) = (−5,−12) is therefore (q,r) ≈ (4.3176,13), where q is approxi-
mated to four decimal places and r is exact.
Are you confused?
If the foregoing angle-conversion formula derivation baffles you, don’t feel bad. It’s complicated! 
If you don’t grasp it to your satisfaction right now, set it aside for awhile. Read it again tomorrow, 
or the day after that. You might want to make up some problems with points in all four quadrants 
of the Cartesian plane, and then use these formulas to convert them to polar form. As you work 
out the arithmetic, you’ll gain a better understanding of how (and why) the formulas work.
Here’s a challenge!
Find the distance d in radial units between the points P = (p,3) and Q = (p /2,4) in polar coordi-
nates, where a radial unit is equal to the radius of a unit circle centered at the origin.
Solution
Let’s convert the polar coordinates of P and Q to Cartesian coordinates, and then employ the 
Cartesian distance formula to determine how far apart the two points are. Let’s call the Cartesian 
versions of the points
P = (xp,yp)
Coordinate Transformations  51

52  Polar Two-Space
and
Q = (xq,yq)
For P, we have
xp = 3 cos p = 3 × (−1) = −3
and
yp = 3 sin p = 3 × 0 = 0
The Cartesian coordinates of P are therefore (xp,yp) = (−3,0). For Q, we have
xq = 4 cos p /2 = 4 × 0 = 0
and
yq = 4 sin p /2 = 4 × 1 = 4
The Cartesian coordinates of Q are therefore (xq,yq) = (0,4). Using the Cartesian distance formula, 
we obtain
d = [(xp −xq)2 + ( yp −yq)2]1/2 = [(−3 − 0)2 + (0 − 4)2]1/2
 
= [(−3)2 + (−4)2]1/2 = (9 + 16)1/2 = 251/2 = 5
We’ve found that the points P = (p,3) and Q = (p /2,4) are precisely 5 radial units apart in the 
polar coordinate plane.
Practice Exercises
This is an open-book quiz. You may (and should) refer to the text as you solve these problems. 
Don’t hurry! You’ll find worked-out answers in App. A. The solutions in the appendix may not 
represent the only way a problem can be figured out. If you think you can solve a particular 
problem in a quicker or better way than you see there, by all means try it!
 1.  Is the relation q = p /4 a function in polar coordinates, where q is the independent 
variable and r is the dependent variable? Why or why not? Is q = p /2 a function in the 
same polar system? Why or why not?
 2.  Suppose that we draw the lines representing the polar relations q = p /4 and q = p /2 
directly onto the Cartesian xy plane, where x is the independent variable and y is 
the dependent variable. Do either of the resulting graphs represent functions in the 
Cartesian coordinate system? Why or why not?

 3.  Imagine a circle centered at the origin in polar coordinates. The equation for the circle 
is r = a, where a is a real-number constant. What other equation, if any, represents the 
same circle?
 4.  In Fig. 3-5 on page 43, suppose that each radial increment is p units. What’s the value 
of the constant a in this case? What’s the equation of the pair of spirals? (Here are a 
couple of reminders: The radial increments are the concentric circles. The value of a in 
this situation turns out negative.)
 5.  Figure 3-8 shows a line L and a circle C in polar coordinates. Line L passes through 
the origin, and every point on L is equidistant from the horizontal and vertical axes. 
Circle C is centered at the origin. Each radial division represents 1 unit. What’s the 
polar equation representing L when we restrict the angles to positive values smaller than 
2p? What’s the polar equation representing C? (Here’s a hint: Both equations can be 
represented in two ways.)
 6.  When we examine Fig. 3-8, we can see that L and C intersect at two points P and Q.
What are the polar coordinates of P and Q, based on the information given in Problem 5? 
(Here’s a hint: Both points can be represented in two ways.)
0
p
p/2
3p/2
Line L
Circle C
Intersection
point P
Intersection
point Q
Figure 3-8  Illustration for Problems 5 through 10. 
Each radial division is 1 unit.
Practice Exercises  53

54  Polar Two-Space
 7.  Solve the system of equations from the solution to Problem 5, verifying the polar 
coordinates of points P and Q in Fig. 3-8.
 8.  Based on the information given in Problem 5, what are the Cartesian xy-coordinate 
equations of line L and circle C in Fig. 3-8?
 9.  Solve the system of equations from the solution to Problem 8 to determine the 
Cartesian coordinates of the intersection points P and Q in Fig. 3-8.
 10.  Based on the polar coordinates of points P and Q in Fig. 3-8 (the solutions to Problems 
6 and 7), use the conversion formulas to derive the Cartesian coordinates of those two 
points.

We can define the length of a line segment that connects two points, but the direction is 
ambiguous. If we want to take the direction into account, we must make a line segment into 
a vector. Mathematicians write vector names as bold letters of the alphabet. Alternatively, a 
vector name can be denoted as a letter with a line or arrow over it.
The “Cartesian Way”
In diagrams and graphs, a vector is drawn as a directed line segment whose direction is por-
trayed by putting an arrow at one end. When working in two-space, we can describe vectors 
in Cartesian coordinates or in polar coordinates. Let’s look at the “Cartesian way” first.
Endpoints, locations, and notations
Figure 4-1 shows four vectors drawn on a Cartesian coordinate grid. Each vector has a begin-
ning (the originating point) and an end space (the terminating point). In this situation, any of 
the four vectors can be defined according to two independent quantities:
• The length (magnitude)
• The way it points (direction)
It doesn’t matter where the originating or terminating points actually are. The important 
thing is how the two points are located with respect to each other. Once a vector has been 
defined as having a specific magnitude and direction, we can “slide it around” all over the 
coordinate plane without changing its essential nature. 
We can always think of the originating point for a vector as being located at the 
coordinate origin (0,0). When we place a vector so that its originating point is at (0,0), 
we say that the vector is in standard form. The standard form is convenient in Cartesian 
55
CHAPTER 
4
Vector Basics

coordinates, because it allows us to uniquely define any vector as an ordered pair cor-
responding to
• The x coordinate of its terminating point (x component)
• The y coordinate of its terminating point (y component)
Figure 4-2 shows the same four vectors as Fig. 4-1 does, but all of the originating points have 
been moved to the coordinate origin. The magnitudes and directions of the corresponding 
vectors in Figs. 4-1 and 4-2 are identical. That’s how we can tell that the vectors a, b, c, and d
in Fig. 4-2 represent the same mathematical objects as the vectors a, b, c, and d in Fig. 4-1.
Cartesian magnitude
Imagine an arbitrary vector a in the Cartesian xy plane, extending from the origin (0,0) to the 
point (xa,ya) as shown in Fig. 4-3. The magnitude of a (which can be denoted as ra, as |a|, or 
as a) can be found by applying the formula for the distance of a point from the origin. We 
learned that formula in Chap. 1. Here it is, modified for the vector situation:
ra = (xa
2 + ya
2)1/2
56
Vector Basics
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
4
a
b
c
d
Figure 4-1  Four vectors in the Cartesian plane. In each 
case, the magnitude corresponds to the 
length of the line segment, and the direction 
is indicated by the arrow.

2
4
6
–4
–6
4
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
(–4, 5)
(4, 3)
(–5, –3)
(1, –6)
Vectors are
denoted as
ordered pairs
a
b
c
d
Figure 4-2  These are the same four vectors as shown in 
Fig. 4-1, positioned so that their originating 
points correspond to the coordinate origin 
(0,0).
(xa, ya)
xa
a
x
y
ya
ra
= (xa
2 + ya
2)1/2
Magnitude = ra
Figure 4-3  The magnitude of a vector can be 
defined as its length in the Cartesian 
plane.
The “Cartesian Way”  57

58  Vector Basics
Cartesian direction
Now let’s think about the direction of a, as shown in Fig. 4-4. We can denote it as an angle qa
or by writing dir a. To define qa in terms of its terminating-point coordinates (xa,ya), we must 
go back to the polar-coordinate direction-finding system  in Chap. 3. The following table has 
those formulas, modified for our vector situation.
qa = 0
When xa = 0 and ya = 0 
so a terminates at the origin
qa = 0
When xa > 0 and ya = 0
so a terminates on the +x axis
qa = Arctan ( ya/xa)
When xa > 0 and ya > 0
so a terminates in the ﬁ rst quadrant
qa = p /2
When xa = 0 and ya > 0
so a terminates on the +y axis
qa = p + Arctan ( ya/xa)
When xa < 0 and ya > 0
so a terminates in the second quadrant
qa = p
When xa < 0 and ya = 0
so a terminates on the −x axis
qa = p + Arctan ( ya/xa)
When xa < 0 and ya < 0
so a terminates in the third quadrant
qa = 3p /2
When xa = 0 and ya < 0
so a terminates on the −y axis
qa = 2p + Arctan ( ya/xa)
When xa > 0 and ya < 0
so a terminates in the fourth quadrant
Figure 4-4  The direction of a vector can be 
defined as its angle, in radians, going 
counterclockwise from the positive x
axis in the Cartesian plane.

Cartesian vector sum
Let’s consider two arbitrary vectors a and b in the Cartesian plane, in standard form with 
terminating-point coordinates
a = (xa,ya)
and
b = (xb,yb)
We calculate the sum vector a + b by adding the x and y terminating-point coordinates sepa-
rately and then combining the sums to get a new ordered pair. When we do that, we get
a + b = [(xa + xb),(ya + yb)]
This sum can be illustrated geometrically by constructing a parallelogram with the two vec-
tors a and b as adjacent sides, as shown in Fig. 4-5. The sum vector, a + b, corresponds to the 
directional diagonal of the parallelogram going away from the coordinate origin.
(x b, yb)
b
xa, ya)
(
a
a + b
x
y
Sum of
a and b
runs along
diagonal
of parallelogram
(xa+xb , ya+yb)
) (
[
]
qb
qa
Figure 4-5  We can determine the sum of two 
vectors a and b by finding the 
directional diagonal of a parallelogram 
with a and b as adjacent sides.
The “Cartesian Way”  59

60  Vector Basics
An example
Consider two vectors in the Cartesian plane. Suppose they’re both in standard form. (From 
now on, let’s agree that all vectors are in standard form so they “begin” at the coordinate ori-
gin, unless we specifically state otherwise.) The vectors are defined according to the ordered 
pairs
a = (4,0)
and
b = (3,4)
In this case, we have xa = 4, xb = 3, ya = 0, and yb = 4. We find the sum vector by adding the 
corresponding coordinates to get
a + b = [(xa + xb),(ya + yb)] = [(4 + 3),(0 + 4)] = (7,4)
Cartesian negative of a vector
To find the Cartesian negative of a vector, we take the additive inverses (that is, the negatives) 
of both coordinate values. Given the vector
a = (xa,ya)
its Cartesian negative is
−a = (−xa,−ya)
The Cartesian negative of a vector always has the same magnitude as the original, but points 
in the opposite direction.
Cartesian vector difference
Suppose that we want to find the difference between the two vectors
a = (xa,ya)
and
b = (xb,yb)
by subtracting b from a. We can do this by finding the Cartesian negative of b and then adding 
−b to a to get
 
a − b = a + (−b) = {[(xa + (−xb)],[(ya + (−yb)]}
 
= [(xa −xb),(ya −yb)]

We can skip the step where we find the negative of the second vector and directly subtract 
the coordinate values, but we must be sure we keep the vectors and coordinate values in the 
correct order if we take that shortcut.
An example
Let’s look again at the same two vectors for which we found the Cartesian sum a few moments 
ago:
a = (4,0)
and
b = (3,4)
As before, we have xa = 4, xb = 3, ya = 0, and yb = 4. We can find a − b by taking the differences of 
the corresponding coordinates, as long as we keep the vectors in the correct order. Then we get
a − b = [(xa −xb),(ya −yb)] = [(4 − 3),(0 − 4)] = (1,−4)
Are you confused?
If you have trouble with the notion of a vector, here are three real-world examples of vector 
quantities in two dimensions. If you like, draw diagrams to help your mind’s eye envision what’s 
happening in each case:
• When the wind blows at 5 meters per second from east to west, you can say that the magnitude 
of its velocity vector is 5 and the direction is toward the west. In Cartesian coordinates where 
the +x axis goes east, the +y axis goes north, the −x axis goes west, and the −y axis goes south, 
you would assign this vector the ordered pair (−5,0).
• When you push on a rolling cart with a force of 10 newtons toward the north, you’re applying 
a force vector to the cart with a magnitude of 10 and a direction toward the north. In Cartesian 
coordinates where the +x axis goes east, the +y axis goes north, the −x axis goes west, and the 
−y axis goes south, you would assign this vector the ordered pair (0,10).
• When you accelerate a car at 5 feet per second per second in a direction somewhat to the east of 
north, the magnitude of the car’s acceleration vector is 5 and the direction is somewhat to the east 
of north. A “neat” situation of this sort occurs when the x (or eastward) component is 3 and the 
y (or northward) component is 4, so you get the ordered pair (3,4). These components form the 
two shorter sides of a 3:4:5 right triangle whose hypotenuse measures 5 units (the magnitude).
Here’s a challenge!
Show that Cartesian vector addition is commutative. That is, show that for any two vectors a and 
b expressed as ordered pairs in the Cartesian plane,
a + b = b + a
The “Cartesian Way”  61

62  Vector Basics
Solution
This fact is easy, although rather tedious, to demonstrate rigorously. (In pure mathematics, the 
term rigor refers to the process of proving something in a series of absolutely logical steps. It has 
nothing to do with the physical condition called rigor mortis.) We must define the two vectors 
by coordinates, and then work through the arithmetic with those coordinates. Let’s call the two 
vectors
a = (xa,ya)
and
b = (xb,yb)
As defined earlier in this chapter, the Cartesian sum a + b is
a + b = [(xa + xb),(ya + yb)]
Using the same definition, the Cartesian sum b + a is
b + a = [(xb + xa),(yb + ya)]
All four of the coordinate values xa, xb, ya, and yb are real numbers. We know from basic algebra 
that addition of real numbers is commutative. Therefore, we can reverse both of the sums in the 
elements of the ordered pair above, getting
b + a = [(xa + xb),(ya + yb)]
That’s the ordered pair that defines a + b. We have just shown that
a + b = b + a
for any two Cartesian vectors a and b.
The “Polar Way”
In the polar coordinate plane, we draw a vector as a ray going straight outward from the origin 
to a point defined by a specific angle and a specific radius. Figure 4-6 shows two vectors a and 
b with originating points at (0,0) and terminating points at (qa,ra) and (qb,rb), respectively.
Polar magnitude and direction
The magnitude and direction of a vector a = (qa,ra) in the polar coordinate plane are defined 
directly by the coordinates. The magnitude is ra, the straight-line distance of the terminat-
ing point from the origin. The direction angle is qa, the angle that the ray subtends in a 

counterclockwise sense from the reference axis (labeled 0 here). By convention, we restrict the 
vector magnitude and direction to the ranges
ra ≥ 0
and
0 ≤qa < 2p
If a vector’s magnitude is 0, then the direction angle doesn’t matter; the usual custom is to set 
it equal to 0.
Special constraints
When defining polar vectors, we must be more particular about what’s “legal” and what’s 
“illegal” than we were when defining polar points in Chap. 3. With polar vectors:
• We don’t allow negative magnitudes
• We don’t allow negative direction angles
• We don’t allow direction angles of 2p  or larger
These constraints ensure that the set of all polar-plane vectors can be paired off in a one-to-one
correspondence (also called a bijection) with the set of all Cartesian-plane vectors.
qa
b
0
3p/2
a
(
(qa, ra)
qb
p/2
qb, rb)
p
Figure 4-6  Vectors in the polar plane are defined by 
ordered pairs for their terminating points, 
denoting the direction angle (relative 
to the reference axis marked 0) and the 
radius (the distance from the origin).
The “Polar Way”  63

64  Vector Basics
Polar vector sum
If we have two vectors in polar form, their sum can be found by following these steps, in 
order:
 1. Convert both vectors to Cartesian coordinates
 2. Add the vectors the Cartesian way
 3. Convert the Cartesian vector sum back to polar coordinates
Let’s look at the situation in more formal terms. Suppose we have two vectors expressed in 
polar form as
a = (qa,ra)
and
b = (qb,rb)
To convert these vectors to Cartesian coordinates, we can use formulas adapted from the 
polar-to-Cartesian conversion we learned in Chap. 3. The modified formulas are
(xa,ya) = [(ra cos qa),(ra sin qa)]
and
(xb,yb) = [(rb cos qb),(rb sin qb)]
Once we have obtained the Cartesian ordered pairs, we add their elements individually to 
get
a + b = [(xa + xb),(ya + yb)]
Let’s call this Cartesian sum vector c, and say that
c = a + b = [(xa + xb),(ya + yb)] = (xc,yc)
To convert c from Cartesian coordinates into polar coordinates, we can use the formulas given 
earlier in this chapter for the magnitude and direction angle of a vector in the xy plane. If we 
call the magnitude rc and the direction angle qc, we can write down the polar coordinates of 
sum vector as
c = (qc, rc)
An example
Let’s find the polar sum of the vectors
a = (p /4,2)

and
b = (7p /4,2)
Using the formulas for conversion stated earlier in this chapter, we find that the Cartesian 
equivalents are
a = {[2 cos (p /4)],[2 sin (p /4)]}
and
b = {[2 cos (7p /4)],[2 sin (7p /4)]}
From trigonometry, we (hopefully) recall that the cosines and sines of these particular angles 
have values that are easy to denote, even though they’re irrational:
 
cos (p /4) = 21/2/2
 
sin (p /4) = 21/2/2
 
cos (7p /4) = 21/2/2
 
sin (7p /4) = −21/2/2
Substituting these values in the ordered pairs for the Cartesian vectors, we get
a = [(2 × 21/2/2),(2 × 21/2/2)] = (21/2,21/2)
and
b = {(2 × 21/2/2),[(2 × (−21/2/2)]} = (21/2,−21/2)
When we add these Cartesian vectors, we obtain
a + b = {(21/2 + 21/2),[21/2 + (−21/2)]} = [(2 × 21/2),0]
Let’s call this sum vector c = (xc,yc). Then we have
xc = 2 × 21/2
and
yc = 0
Using the Cartesian-to-polar conversion formulas, we get
qc = 0
and
rc = (xc
2 + yc
2)1/2 = [(2 × 21/2)2 + 02]1/2 = 2 × 21/2
The “Polar Way”  65

66  Vector Basics
Putting these coordinates into an ordered pair, we derive our final answer as
a + b = [0,(2 × 21/2)]
That’s the polar sum of our original two polar vectors. The first coordinate is the angle in 
radians. The second coordinate is the magnitude in linear units.
Polar vector difference
When we want to subtract a polar vector from another polar vector, we follow these steps in 
order:
 1. Convert both vectors to Cartesian coordinates
 2. Find the Cartesian negative of the second vector
 3. Add the first vector to the negative of the second vector the Cartesian way
 4. Convert the resultant back to polar coordinates
Once again, imagine that we have
a = (qa,ra)
and
b = (qb,rb)
The Cartesian equivalents are
(xa,ya) = [(ra cos qa),(ra sin qa)]
and
(xb,yb) = [(rb cos qb),(rb sin qb)]
We find the Cartesian negative of b as
−b = (−xb,−yb)
The difference vector a − b is therefore
 
a − b = a + (−b) = {[(xa + (−xb)],[(ya + (−yb)]}
 
= [(xa −xb),(ya −yb)]
Let’s call this difference vector d. We can say that
d = a − b = [(xa −xb),(ya −yb)] = (xd,yd)
We can skip the step where we find the Cartesian negative of the second vector and directly 
subtract the coordinate values, but we must take special care to keep the vectors and coordinate 

values in the correct order if we do it that way. To convert d from Cartesian coordinates into 
polar coordinates, we can take advantage of the same formulas that we use to complete the 
process of polar vector addition.
Polar negative of a vector
Once in awhile, we’ll want to find the negative of a vector the polar way. To do that, we reverse 
its direction and leave the magnitude the same. We can do this by adding p  to the angle if it’s 
at least 0 but less than p to begin with, or by subtracting p if it’s at least p  but less than 2p to 
begin with. In formal terms, suppose we have a polar vector
a = (qa,ra)
If 0 ≤qa < p, then the polar negative is
−a = [(qa + p ),ra]
If p ≤qa < 2p, then the polar negative is
−a = [(qa −p ),ra]
An example
Let’s find the polar difference a − b between the vectors
a = (p /4,2)
and
b = (7p /4,2)
In the addition example we finished a few minutes ago, we found that the Cartesian ordered 
pairs for these vectors are
a = (21/2,21/2)
and
b = (21/2,−21/2)
The negative of b is
−b = (−21/2,21/2)
When we add a to −b, we get
a + (−b) = {[21/2 + (−21/2)],(21/2 + 21/2)} = [0,(2 × 21/2)]
The “Polar Way”  67

68  Vector Basics
That’s the same as a − b. Let’s call this Cartesian difference vector d = (xd,yd). Then
xd = 0
and
yd = 2 × 21/2
Using the Cartesian-to-polar conversion table, we can see that
qd = p /2
and
rd = (xd
2 + yd
2)1/2 = [02 + (2 × 21/2)2]1/2 = 2 × 21/2
The polar ordered pair is therefore
a − b = [(p /2),(2 × 21/2)]
The first coordinate is the angle in radians. The second coordinate is the magnitude in linear 
units.
Are you confused?
By now you might wonder, “What’s the difference between a polar vector sum and a Cartesian 
vector sum? Or a polar vector negative and a Cartesian vector negative? Or a polar vector differ-
ence and a Cartesian vector difference? If we start with the same vector or vectors, shouldn’t we get 
the same vector when we’re finished calculating, whether we do it the polar way or the Cartesian 
way?” That’s an excellent question. The answer is yes. The mathematical methods differ, but the 
resultant vectors are equivalent whether we work them out the polar way or the Cartesian way.
Here’s a challenge!
Draw polar coordinate diagrams of the vector addition and subtraction facts we worked out in 
this section. 
Solution
The original two polar vectors were
a = (qa,ra) = (p /4,2)
and
b = (qb,rb) = (7p /4,2)

We found their polar sum to be
a + b = [0,(2 × 21/2)]
and their polar difference to be
a − b = [(p /2),(2 × 21/2)]
When we converted the two vectors to Cartesian form, we got
a = (21/2,21/2)
and
b = (21/2,−21/2)
We found their Cartesian sum to be
a + b = [(2 × 21/2),0]
and their Cartesian difference to be
a − b = [0,(2 × 21/2)]
We can illustrate the original vectors, the vector sum, the negative of the second vector, and the 
vector difference in four diagrams:
• Figure 4-7 shows the polar sum, including a, b, and a + b.
Figure 4-7  Polar sum of two vectors. Each radial 
division represents 1/2 unit.
The “Polar Way”  69

70  Vector Basics
• Figure 4-8 shows the polar difference, including a, b, −b, and a − b.
• Figure 4-9 shows the Cartesian sum, including a, b, and a + b.
0
3p/2
a = (p/4, 2)
= (7p/4, 2)
b
a – b = a + (–b) = [p/2, (2 × 21/2)]
-b
This vector
is converted to
Cartesian form in
the subtraction process
p
p/2
Figure 4-8  Polar difference between two vectors. Each radial 
division represents 1/2 unit.
x
y
a + b = [(2 × 21/2), 0]
a = (21/2, 21/2)
= (21/2, -21/2)
b
Each axis
division is
1/2 unit
Figure 4-9  Cartesian sum of two vectors. Each axis 
division represents 1/2 unit.

• Figure 4-10 shows the Cartesian difference, including a, b, −b, and a − b.
x
y
a = (21/2, 21/2)
= (21/2, –21/2)
b
–b = (–21/2, 21/2)
a – b = a + (–b) = [0, (2 × 21/2)]
Each axis
division is
1/2 unit
Figure 4-10.   Cartesian difference between two vectors. Each 
axis division represents 1/2 unit.
Practice Exercises
This is an open-book quiz. You may (and should) refer to the text as you solve these problems. 
Don’t hurry! You’ll find worked-out answers in App. A. The solutions in the appendix may not 
represent the only way a problem can be figured out. If you think you can solve a particular 
problem in a quicker or better way than you see there, by all means try it!
 1.  Consider two vectors a and b in the Cartesian plane, with coordinates defined as follows:
a = (−3,6)
and
b = (2,5)
Work out, in strict detail, the Cartesian vector sums a + b, b + a, a − b, and b − a.
 2.  A vector is defined as the zero vector (denoted by a bold numeral 0) if and only if its 
magnitude is equal to 0. In the Cartesian plane, the zero vector is expressed as the 
ordered pair (0,0). Show that when a vector is added to its Cartesian negative in either 
order, the result is the zero vector.
Practice Exercises  71

72  Vector Basics
 3.  Imagine two arbitrary vectors a and b in the Cartesian plane, with coordinates defined 
as follows:
a = (xa,ya)
 
 and
b = (xb,yb)
 
 Show that the vector b − a is the Cartesian negative of the vector a − b.
 4. Find the Cartesian sum of the vectors
a = (4,5)
 
 and
b = (−2,−3)
 
 Compare this with the sum of their negatives
−a = (−4,−5)
 
 and
−b = (2,3)
 5.  Prove that Cartesian vector negation distributes through Cartesian vector addition. 
That is, show that for two Cartesian vectors a and b, it’s always true that
−(a + b) = −a + (−b)
 6. Find the polar sum of the vectors
a = (p /2,4)
 
 and
b = (p,3)
 7. Find the polar negative of the vector a + b from the solution to Problem 6. 
 8. Find the polar negatives −a and −b of the vectors stated in Problem 6.
 9.  Find the polar sum of the vectors −a and −b from the solution to Problem 8. Compare 
this with the solution to Problem 7.
 10. Find the polar differences a − b and b − a between the vectors stated in Problem 6.

We’ve seen how vectors add and subtract in two dimensions. In this chapter, we’ll learn how 
to multiply a vector by a real number. Then we’ll explore two different ways in which vectors 
can be multiplied by each other.
Product of Scalar and Vector
The simplest form of vector multiplication involves changing the magnitude by a real-number 
factor called a scalar. A scalar is a one-dimensional quantity that can be positive, negative, or 
zero. If the scalar is positive, the vector direction stays the same. If the scalar is negative, the 
vector direction reverses. If the scalar is zero, the vector disappears.
Cartesian vector times positive scalar
Imagine a standard-form vector a in the Cartesian xy plane, defined by an ordered pair whose 
coordinates are xa and ya, so that
a = (xa,ya)
Suppose that we multiply a positive scalar k+ by each of the vector coordinates individually, 
getting two new coordinates. Mathematically, we write this as
k+a = (k+ xa,k+ ya)
This vector is called the left-hand Cartesian product of k+ and a. If we multiply both original 
coordinates on the right by k+ instead, we get
ak+ = (xak+,yak+)
73
CHAPTER 
5
Vector Multiplication

That’s the right-hand Cartesian product of a and k+. The individual coordinates of k+a and ak+
are products of real numbers. We learned in pre-algebra that real-number multiplication is 
commutative, so it follows that
k+a = (k+ xa,k+ya) = (xak+,yak+) = ak+
We’ve just shown that multiplication of a Cartesian-plane vector by a positive scalar is com-
mutative. We don’t have to worry about whether we multiply on the left or the right; we can 
simply talk about the Cartesian product of the vector and the positive scalar.
An example
Figure 5-1 illustrates the Cartesian vector (−1,−2) as a solid, arrowed line segment. If we mul-
tiply this vector by 3 on the left, we get
3 × (−1,−2) = {[3 × (−1)],[3 × (−2)]} = (−3,−6)
If we multiply the original vector by 3 on the right, we get
(−1,−2) × 3 = [(−1 × 3)],(−2 × 3)] = (−3,−6)
The new vector is shown as a dashed, gray, arrowed line segment pointing in the same direc-
tion as the original vector, but 3 times as long.
74
Vector Multiplication
Figure 5-1  Cartesian products of the scalars 3 and −3
with the vector (−1,−2).

Cartesian vector times negative scalar
Now suppose we want to multiply a by a negative scalar instead of a positive scalar. Let’s call 
the scalar k−. The left-hand Cartesian product of k− and a is
k−a = (k−xa,k−ya)
The right-hand Cartesian product is
ak−= (xak−,yak−)
As with the positive constant, the commutative property of real-number multiplication tells 
us that
k−a = (k− xa,k−ya) = (xak−,yak−) = ak−
We don’t have to worry about whether we multiply on the left or the right. We get the same 
result either way.
An example
Once again, look at Fig. 5-1 with the vector (−1,−2) shown as a solid, arrowed line segment. 
When we multiply it by the scalar −3 on the left, we obtain
−3 × (−1,−2) = {[−3 × (−1)],[ −3 × (−2)]} = (3,6)
Multiplying by the scalar on the right, we get
(−1,−2) × (−3) = {[−1 × (−3)],[−2 × (−3)]} = (3,6)
This result is shown as a dashed, gray, arrowed line segment pointing in the opposite direction 
from the original vector, and 3 times as long.
Polar vector times positive scalar
Imagine some vector a in the polar-coordinate plane whose direction angle is qa and whose 
magnitude is ra. If it’s in standard form, we can express it as the ordered pair
a = (qa,ra)
When we multiply a on the left by a positive scalar k+, the angle remains the same, but the 
magnitude becomes k+ra. This gives us the left-hand polar product of k+ and a, which is
k+a = (qa,k+ra)
If we multiply a on the right by k+, we get the right-hand polar product of a and k+, which is
ak+ = (qa,rak+)
Product of Scalar and Vector  75

76  Vector Multiplication
Because real-number multiplication is commutative, we know that
k+a = (qa,k+ra) = (qa,rak+) = ak+
As in the Cartesian case, we don’t have to worry about whether we multiply on the left or the 
right. The polar product of the vector and the positive scalar is the same either way.
An example
In Fig. 5-2, the polar vector (7p /4,3/2) is shown as a solid, arrowed line segment. When we 
multiply this vector by 3 on the left, we get
3 × (7p /4,3/2) = [7p /4,(3 × 3/2)] = (7p /4,9/2)
Multiplying by 3 on the right yields
(7p /4,3/2) × 3 = {7p /4,[(3/2) × 3]} = (7p /4,9/2)
This polar product vector is represented by a dashed, gray, arrowed line segment pointing in 
the same direction as the original vector, but 3 times as long.
Polar vector times negative scalar
Again, consider our polar vector a = (qa,ra). Suppose that we want to multiply a on the left by 
a negative scalar k−. It’s tempting to suppose that we can leave the angle the same and make 
Figure 5-2  Polar products of the scalars 3 and −3 with 
the vector (7p /4,3/2). Each radial division 
represents 1 unit.

the magnitude equal to k−ra. But that gives us a negative magnitude, which is forbidden by 
the rules we’ve accepted for polar vectors. The proper approach is to multiply the original 
vector magnitude ra by the absolute value of k−. In this situation, that’s −k−. Then we reverse 
the direction of the vector by either adding or subtracting p to get a direction angle that’s 
nonnegative but smaller than 2p. We define the result as the left-hand polar product of k− and 
a, and write it as
k−a = [(qa + p ),(−k−ra)]
if 0 ≤qa < p, and
k−a = [(qa −p ),(−k−ra)]
if p ≤qa < 2p. Because k− is negative, −k− is positive; therefore −k−ra is positive, which ensures 
that our scalar-vector product has positive magnitude. If we multiply a on the right by k−, we 
get the right-hand polar product of a and k−, which is
ak−= [(qa + p ),ra(−k−)]
if 0 ≤qa < p, and
ak−= [(qa −p ),ra(−k−)]
if p ≤qa < 2p. As before, k− is negative so −k− is positive; that means ra(−k−) is positive, ensur-
ing that our vector-scalar product has positive magnitude. The commutative law assures us 
that for any negative scalar k− and any polar vector a, it’s always true that 
k−a = ak−
As before, we can leave out the left-hand and right-hand jargon, and simply talk about the 
polar product of the vector and the scalar.
An example
Look again at Fig. 5-2. When we multiply the original polar vector (7p /4,3/2) by −3 on the 
left, we get
−3 × (7p /4,3/2) = [(7p /4 −p),(3 × 3/2)] = (3p /4,9/2)
Multiplying the original polar vector by −3 on the right yields
(7p /4,3/2) × (−3) = {(7p /4 −p),[(3/2) × 3]} = (3p /4,9/2)
This result is shown as a dashed, gray, arrowed line segment pointing in the opposite direction 
from the original vector, and 3 times as long.
Product of Scalar and Vector  77

78  Vector Multiplication
Are you confused?
You ask, “What happens when our positive scalar k+ is between 0 and 1? What happens when our 
negative scalar k− is between −1 and 0? What do we get if the scalar constant is 0?” If 0 < k+ < 1, 
the product vector points in the same direction as the original, but it’s shorter. If −1 < k−< 0, the 
product vector points in the opposite direction from the original, and it’s shorter. If we multiply a 
vector by 0, we get the zero vector. In all of these cases, it doesn’t matter whether we work in the 
Cartesian plane or in the polar plane.
Here’s a challenge!
Prove that the multiplication of a Cartesian-plane vector by a positive scalar is left-hand distribu-
tive over vector addition. That is, if k+ is a positive constant, and if a and b are Cartesian-plane 
vectors, then
k+(a + b) = k+a + k+b
Solution
At first glance, this might seem like one of those facts that’s intuitively obvious and difficult to 
prove. But all we have to do is work out some arithmetic with fancy characters. Let’s start with
k+(a + b)
where k+ is a positive real number, a = (xa,ya), and b = (xb,yb). We can expand the vector sum into 
an ordered pair, writing the above expression as
k+(a + b) = k+[(xa + xb),(ya + yb)]
The definition of left-hand scalar multiplication of a Cartesian vector tells us that we can rewrite 
this as 
k+(a + b) = {[k+(xa + xb)],[k+(ya + yb)]}
In pre-algebra, we learned that real-number multiplication is left-hand distributive over real-num-
ber addition, so we can morph the above equation to get
k+(a + b) = [(k+xa + k+xb),(k+ya + k+yb)]
Let’s set this equation aside for a little while. We shouldn’t forget about it, however, because we’re 
going to come back to it shortly.
 Now, instead of the product of the scalar and the sum of the vectors, let’s start with the sum of 
the scalar products
k+a + k+b
We can expand the individual vectors into ordered pairs to get
k+a + k+b = k+(xa,ya) + k+(xb,yb)

The definition of left-hand scalar multiplication lets us rewrite this equation as 
k+a + k+b = (k+xa,k+ya) + (k+xb,k+yb)
According to the definition of the Cartesian sum of vectors, we can add the elements of these 
ordered pairs individually to get a new ordered pair. That gives us
k+a + k+b = [(k+xa + k+xb),(k+ya + k+yb)]
Take a close look at the right-hand side of this equation. It’s the same as the right-hand side of the 
equation we put into “brain memory” a minute ago. That equation was
k+(a + b) = [(k+xa + k+xb),(k+ya + k+yb)]
Taken together, the above two equations show us that
k+(a + b) = k+a + k+b
Dot Product of Two Vectors
Mathematicians define two ways in which a vector can be multiplied by another vector. The sim-
pler operation is called the dot product and is symbolized by a large dot (•). Sometimes it’s called 
the scalar product because the end result is a scalar. Some texts refer to it as the inner product.
Cartesian dot product
Suppose we’re given two standard-form vectors a and b in Cartesian coordinates, defined by 
the ordered pairs
a = (xa,ya)
and
b = (xb,yb)
The Cartesian dot product a • b is the real number we get when we multiply the x values by 
each other, multiply the y values by each other, and then add the two results. The formula is
a • b = xaxb + yayb
An example
Consider two standard-form vectors in the Cartesian xy plane, given by the ordered pairs
a = (4,0)
Dot Product of Two Vectors  79

80  Vector Multiplication
and
b = (3,4)
In this case, xa = 4, xb = 3, ya = 0, and yb = 4. We calculate the dot product by plugging the 
numbers into the formula, getting
a • b = (4 × 3) + (0 × 4) = 12 + 0 = 12
Polar dot product
Now let’s work in the polar-coordinate plane. Imagine two vectors defined by the ordered pairs
a = (qa,ra)
and
b = (qb,rb)
Let q b −qa be the angle between vectors a and b, expressed in a rotational sense starting at a
and finishing at b as shown in Fig. 5-3. We calculate the polar dot product a • b by multiplying 
the magnitude of a by the magnitude of b, and then multiplying that result by the cosine of 
q b −qa to get
a • b = rarb cos (q b −qa)
0
3p/2
(qb, rb)
(qa, ra)
b
a
p/2
qb–qa
p
Figure 5-3  To find the polar dot product of two 
vectors, we must know the angle 
between them as we rotate from the 
first vector (in this case a) to the 
second vector (in this case b).

An example
Suppose that we’re given two vectors a and b in the polar plane, and told that their coordinates are
 
a = (p /6,3)
b = (5p /6,2)
In this situation, ra = 3, rb = 2, qa = p /6, and qb = 5p /6. We have
qb −qa = 5p /6 −p /6 = 2p /3
Therefore, the dot product is
a • b = rarb cos (qb −qa) = 3 × 2 × cos (2p /3)
= 3 × 2 × (−1/2) = −3
Are you confused?
Do you wonder if the dot product of two polar-plane vectors is always equal to the dot product 
of the same vectors in the Cartesian plane when expressed in standard form? The answer is yes. 
Let’s find out why.
Here’s a challenge!
Prove that for any two vectors a and b in two-space, the polar dot product a • b is the same as the 
Cartesian dot product a • b when both vectors are in standard form.
Solution
We will start with the polar versions of the vectors, calling them
a = (qa,ra)
and
b = (qb,rb)
Let’s convert these vectors to Cartesian form. We can use the formulas for conversion of points 
from polar to Cartesian coordinates (from Chap. 3). When we apply them to vector a, we get
xa = ra cos qa
and
ya = ra sin qa
so the standard Cartesian form of the vector is
a = [(ra cos qa),(ra sin qa)]
Dot Product of Two Vectors  81

82  Vector Multiplication
When we apply the same conversion formulas to b, we obtain
 
xb = rb cos qb
and
 
yb = rb sin qb
so the standard Cartesian form is
b = [(rb cos qb),(rb sin qb)]
The Cartesian dot product of the two vectors is
a • b = xaxb + yayb
Substituting the values we found for the individual vector coordinates, we get
a • b = (ra cos qa)(rb cos qb) + (ra sin qa)(rb sin qb)
 
= rarb (cos qa cos qb + sin qa sin qb)
As we think back to our trigonometry courses, we recall that there’s a trigonometric identity telling 
us how to expand the cosine of the difference between two angles. When we name the angles so 
they apply to our situation here, that formula becomes
cos (qb −qa) = cos qa cos qb + sin qa sin qb
We can substitute the left-hand side of this identity in the last part of the long equation we got a 
minute ago for the dot product, obtaining
a • b = rarb cos (qb −qa)
This is the formula for the polar dot product! We’ve taken the polar versions of a and b, found their 
Cartesian dot product, and then found that it’s identical to the polar dot product. We can now say, 
Quod erat demonstradum. That’s Latin for “Which was to be proved.” Some mathematicians write the 
abbreviation for this expression, “QED,” when they’ve finished a proof.
Cross Product of Two Vectors
The more complicated (and interesting) way to multiply two vectors by each other gives us 
a third vector that “jumps” out of the coordinate plane. This operation is known as the cross 
product. Some mathematicians call it the vector product. The cross product of two vectors a
and b is written as a × b.

Polar cross product
Imagine two arbitrary vectors in the polar-coordinate plane, expressed in standard form as 
ordered pairs
a = (qa,ra)
and
b = (qb,rb)
The magnitude of a × b is always nonnegative by default, and is easy to define. When a and 
b are in standard form, the originating point of a × b is at the coordinate origin, so all three 
vectors “start” at the same spot. The direction of a × b is always along the line passing through 
the origin at a right angle to the plane containing a and b. But it’s quite a trick to figure out 
in which direction the cross vector product points along this line!
Suppose that the difference qb −qa between the direction angles is positive but less than
p, as shown in the example of Fig. 5-4. If we start at vector a and rotate until we get to vector b,
we turn through an angle of qb −qa. To calculate the magnitude of a × b (which we will denote 
... straight
toward us
b
0
p/2
3p/2
a
(qb, rb)
(qa, ra)
Cross product
a ë b points ...
0 < qb – qa < p
p
Figure 5-4  If qa < qb and the two angles differ by 
less than p, then a × b points straight 
toward us as we look down on the plane 
containing a and b.
Cross Product of Two Vectors  83

84  Vector Multiplication
as ra×b), we multiply the original vector magnitudes by each other, and then multiply by the 
sine of the difference angle. Mathematically,
ra×b = rarb sin (q b −qa)
In a situation of the sort shown in Fig. 5-4, the vector a × b points from the coordinate origin 
straight out of the page toward us.
If qb −qa is larger than p, then things get a little bit complicated. To be sure that we assign 
the correct direction to the vector a × b, we must always rotate counterclockwise, and we’re 
never allowed to turn through more than a half circle. Figure 5-5 shows an example. We rotate 
through one full circular turn minus qb −qa, so the difference angle is
2p − (qb −qa)
which can be more simply written as
2p + qa −qb
In a situation like this, a × b points straight away from us.
0
p/2
3p/2
(qa, ra)
(qb, rb)
b
a
Cross product
a ë b points ...
... straight
away from us
2p + qa –qb
p < qb – qa < 2p
p
Figure 5-5  If qa < qb and the two angles differ by more 
than p, then a × b points straight away 
from us as we look down on the plane 
containing a and b.

If the vectors a and b point in exactly the same direction or in exactly opposite directions, 
then qb −qa = 0 or qb −qa = p. In these cases, the cross product is the zero vector. We’ll see 
why in the next “challenge.”
An example
Consider the following two polar vectors a and b in standard form:
 
a = (p /4,7)
and
 
b = (p,6)
Let’s find the cross product, a × b. We have
qb −qa = p −p /4 = 3p /4
Because 0 < qb −qa < p, we know that a × b points toward us. Its magnitude is
ra×b = rarb sin (qb −qa) = 7 × 6 × sin (3p /4)
 
= 7 × 6 × (21/2/2) = 21 × 21/2
Another example
Now let’s look at these two polar vectors a and b in standard form and find their cross product 
a × b:
 
a = (p /4,7)
and
b = (7p /4,6)
This time, p < qb −qa < 2p, so a × b points away from us. To calculate the magnitude, we 
consider the difference angle to be
2p + qa −qb = 2p + p /4 − 7p /4 = p /2
Therefore
ra×b = rarb sin (2p + qa −qb) = 7 × 6 × sin (p /2)
 
= 7 × 6 × 1 = 42
Cross Product of Two Vectors  85

86  Vector Multiplication
Are you confused?
We haven’t discussed how to directly calculate the cross product of two Cartesian-plane vectors. 
There’s a way to do it, but we must know how to work with vectors in Cartesian three-space. We’ll 
learn those techniques in Chap. 8. Meanwhile, we can indirectly find the cross product of two 
Cartesian-plane vectors by converting them both to polar form and then finding their cross prod-
uct the polar way.
Are you still confused?
Here’s a game that can help you find the direction of the cross product a × b (in that order) 
between two vectors a and b. It involves some maneuvers with your right hand. Some mathemati-
cians, engineers, and physicists call this the right-hand rule for cross products.
 If 0 < qb −qa < p (as in Fig. 5-4), point your right thumb out as if you’re making a thumbs-up 
sign. Curl your fingers in the counterclockwise rotational sense from a to b. Your thumb will point 
in the general direction of a × b. If the page on which the vectors are printed is horizontal, your 
thumb should point straight up.
 If p < qb −qa < 2p (as in Fig. 5-5), curl your right-hand fingers in the clockwise rotational 
sense from a to b. If the page on which the vectors are printed is horizontal, you’ll have to twist 
your wrist in a clumsy fashion so that your thumb points straight down in the general direction 
of a × b.
 Remember that a × b always comes out of the origin precisely perpendicular to the plane contain-
ing a and b.
Here’s a challenge!
A few moments ago, it was mentioned that if two vectors point in the same direction or in op-
posite directions, then their cross product is the zero vector. Prove it!
Solution
First, consider two vectors a and b that have the same direction angle q but different magnitudes 
ra and rb, so that
a = (q,ra)
and
b = (q,rb)
The magnitude of a × b is
ra×b = rarb sin (q −q) = rarb sin 0 = rarb × 0 = 0
Whenever a vector has a magnitude of zero, then it’s the zero vector by definition, so
a × b = 0

Now look at the case where a and b have angles that differ by p, so they point in opposite direc-
tions. As before, you can assign the coordinates
a = (q,ra)
Two possibilities exist for the direction angle of a. You can have
0 ≤q < p
or
p ≤q < 2p
If 0 ≤q < p, then
b = [(q + p),rb]
and the magnitude of a × b is
ra×b = rarb sin [(q + p) −q] = rarb sin p = rarb × 0 = 0
Therefore
a × b = 0
If p ≤q < 2p, then
b = [(q −p),rb]
In this case, the magnitude of a × b is
ra×b = rarb sin [(q −p) −q] = rarb sin (−p) = rarb × 0 = 0
so again,
a × b = 0
Here’s an “extra credit” challenge!
Prove that the cross product of two vectors is anticommutative. That is, show that for any two 
polar-plane vectors a and b, the magnitudes of a × b and b × a are the same, but they point in 
opposite directions.
Solution
You’re on your own. That’s what makes this is an “extra credit” problem!
Cross Product of Two Vectors  87

88  Vector Multiplication
Practice Exercises
This is an open-book quiz. You may (and should) refer to the text as you solve these problems. 
Don’t hurry! You’ll find worked-out answers in App. A. The solutions in the appendix may not 
represent the only way a problem can be figured out. If you think you can solve a particular 
problem in a quicker or better way than you see there, by all means try it!
 1.  Consider two standard-form vectors a and b in the Cartesian plane, represented by the 
ordered pairs
a = (5,−5)
 
 and
b = (−5,5)
 
 Calculate and compare the Cartesian products 4a and −4b.
 2.  Convert the original two vectors from Problem 1 into polar form. Then calculate and 
compare the polar products 4a and −4b.
 3.  Prove that the multiplication of a standard-form vector by a positive scalar is right-hand 
distributive over Cartesian-plane vector subtraction. That is, if k+ is a positive constant, 
and if a and b are vectors in the xy plane, then
(a −b)k+ = ak+ −bk+
 4. Consider two standard-form vectors a and b in the Cartesian plane, represented by
 
a = (4,4)
 
 and
b = (−7,7)
 
 Calculate and compare the Cartesian dot products a • b and b • a.
 5.  Convert the original two vectors from Problem 4 into polar form. Then calculate and 
compare the polar dot products a • b and b • a.
 6.  Prove that the dot product is commutative for standard-form vectors in the Cartesian plane.
 7. Prove that the dot product is commutative for vectors in the polar plane.
 8. Prove that  if k+ is a positive constant, and if a and b are standard-form vectors in  
 
 
 Cartesian or polar two-space, then
k+a • k+b = k+
2(a • b)
 
 Demonstrate the Cartesian case first, and then the polar case.

 9. Consider the two polar vectors
 
a = (p /3,4)
 
 and
 
b = (3p /2,1)
 
 Determine the polar cross product a × b.
 10. Consider the two polar vectors
 
a = (p,8)
 
 and
b = (7p /6,5)
 
 Determine the polar cross product a × b.
Practice Exercises  89

If you’ve had a comprehensive algebra course such as the predecessor to this book, Algebra 
Know-It-All, then you’ve been exposed to imaginary numbers and complex numbers. In this 
chapter, we’ll take a closer look at how these quantities behave.
Numbers with Two Parts
A complex number consists of two components, the real part and the imaginary part. Com-
plex numbers can be defined as ordered pairs and mapped one-to-one onto the points of a 
coordinate plane. They can also be represented as vectors.
The unit imaginary number
The set of imaginary numbers arises when we ask, “What is the square root of a negative real 
number?” This question poses a mystery to anyone who is familiar only with the real numbers. 
Unless we come up with some new sort of quantity, we have to say, “It’s undefined.”
In order to define the square root of a negative real number, mathematicians invented the 
unit imaginary number, called it i, and defined it on the basis of the equation
i 2 = −1
Once they had set down this rule, mathematicians explored how this strange new number 
behaved, and a new branch of number theory evolved.
Engineers and physicists use j instead of i to denote the unit imaginary number. That’s 
what we’ll use, because the lowercase italic i is found in other mathematical contexts, particu-
larly in sequences and series. The unit imaginary number j is equal to the positive square root 
of −1. That is,
j = (−1)1/2
When we use the symbol j to represent the unit imaginary number, we can also call it the j
operator, a term commonly used by engineers.
CHAPTER 
6
Complex Numbers and Vectors
90

The set of imaginary numbers
We can multiply j by any real number, known as a real-number coefficient, and the result is an 
imaginary number. The real coefficient is customarily written after j if it is positive or 0, and 
after −j if it is negative. Examples are
 
j3 = j × 3 = 3 × j
 
−j5 = j × (−5) = −5 × j
 
−j2 /3 = j × (−2 /3) = −2 /3 × j
 
j0 = j × 0 = 0 × j = 0
The set of all possible real-number multiples of j composes the set of imaginary numbers. For 
practical purposes, the elements of this set can be depicted along a number line corresponding 
one-to-one with the real-number line. By convention, the imaginary-number line is oriented 
vertically, as shown in Fig. 6-1.
When either j or −j is multiplied by 0, the result is equal to the real number 0. There-
fore, the intersection of the sets of imaginary and real numbers contains one element, 
namely, 0.
Negative-imaginary numbers
Positive-imaginary numbers
j 8
j 6
j 4
j 2
j 0
–j 2
–j 4
–j 6
–j 8
Center of continuous line
Figure 6-1  Imaginary numbers 
can be depicted as 
points on a vertical 
line. As we go upward, 
we get more positive-
imaginary numbers; 
as we go downward, 
we get more negative-
imaginary numbers.
Numbers with Two Parts  91

92  Complex Numbers and Vectors
Complex numbers
When we add a real number to an imaginary number, we get a complex number. The general 
form for a complex number is
a + jb
where a and b are real numbers. If the real-number coefficient of j happens to be negative, 
then its absolute value is written following j, and a minus sign is used instead of a plus sign in 
the composite expression. So instead of
a + j(−b)
we should write
a −jb
Individual complex numbers can be depicted as points on a Cartesian coordinate plane as shown 
in Fig. 6-2. The intersection point between the real- and imaginary-number lines corresponds 
j 8
j 6
j 4
j 2
–j 2
–j 4
–j 6
–j 8
2
4
6
8
–8
–6
–4
–2
Real part
positive,
imaginary part
positive
Real part
negative,
imaginary part
positive
Real part
negative,
imaginary part
negative
Real part
positive,
imaginary part
negative
Figure 6-2  Complex numbers can be depicted as 
points on a plane, which is defined by the 
intersection of perpendicular real- and 
imaginary-number lines.

to 0 on the real-number line and j0 on the imaginary-number line. This plane is called the 
Cartesian complex-number plane.
An example
If the imaginary part of a complex quantity is 0, we have a pure real quantity. When the real 
part of a complex quantity is 0 and the imaginary part is something other than j0, we have 
a pure imaginary quantity. Figure 6-3 shows nine complex numbers plotted as points on the 
Cartesian complex-number plane, as follows.
• 0 + j0, whose ordered pair is (0,j0) and which is equal to the pure real 0 and the pure 
imaginary j0.
• 5 + j0, whose ordered pair is (5,j0) and which is equal to the pure real 5.
• 0 + j7, whose ordered pair is (0,j   7) and which is equal to the pure imaginary j7.
• −2 + j0, whose ordered pair is (−2,j0) and which is equal to the pure real −2.
• 0 −j8, whose ordered pair is (0,−j8) and which is equal to the pure imaginary −j8.
• 7 + j6, whose ordered pair is (7,j6).
• −8 + j5, whose ordered pair is (−8,j5).
• −5 −j5, whose ordered pair is (−5,−j5).
• 3 −j7, whose ordered pair is (3,−j7).
j8
j6
j4
j2
– j2
–j 4
– j6
– j8
2
4
6
8
–8
–6
–4
–2
7 + j6
–5 – j5
–8 + j5
3 – j 7
0 + j0 = 0
5 + j0 = 5
0– j8 = –j8
–2 + j0 = –2
0 + j 7 = j7
Figure 6-3  Some points in the Cartesian complex-number 
plane.
Numbers with Two Parts  93

94  Complex Numbers and Vectors
Are you confused?
We have learned that (−1)1/2 = j. You might now ask, “What about the square root of a negative real 
number other than −1, such as −4 or −100?” The positive square root of any negative real number 
is equal to j times the positive square root of the absolute value of that real number. For example,
(−4)1/2 = j × 41/2 = j2
and
(−100)1/2 = j × 1001/2 = j10
We can also have negative square roots of negative reals. That’s because −j is not the same quantity 
as j. (You’ll get a chance to prove this fact in Problem 1 at the end of this chapter.) Negating the 
above examples, we get
−(−4)1/2 = −j × 41/2 = −j2
and
−(−100)1/2 = −j × 1001/2 = −j10
Here’s a challenge!
Demonstrate what happens when −j is raised to successively higher positive-integer powers.
Solution
Keep in mind that −j is the negative square root of −1, which is −(−1)1/2. By definition, we know 
that j 2 = −1, so we can calculate the square of −j as
 
(−j)2 = (−1 × j)2
 
= (−1)2 × j2
 
= 1 × j2
 
= 1 × (−1)
 
= −1
Now for the cube:
 
(−j)3 = (−j)2 × (−j)
 
= −1 × (−j)
 
= j

The fourth power:
 
(−j)4 = (−j)3 × (−j)
 
= j × (−j)
 
= −j2
 
= −(−1)
 
= 1
The fifth power:
 
(−j)5 = (−j)4 × (−j)
 
= 1 × (−j)
 
= −j
The sixth power:
 
(−j)6 = (−j)5 × (−j)
 
= −j × (−j)
= (−j)2
 
= −1
Can you see what will happen if we keep going like this, increasing the integer power by 1 over and 
over? We’ll cycle endlessly through −j, −1, j, and 1. If you grind things out, you’ll see that j 7 = j,
j 8 = 1, j 9 = −j, j 10 = −1, and so on. In general, if n is a positive integer, then
(−j)n = (−j)n+ 4
How Complex Numbers Behave
Complex numbers have properties that resemble those of the real numbers to some extent. 
But there are some major differences as well. Let’s review the basic operations involving com-
plex numbers, in case you’ve forgotten them. As we go along, we’ll imagine two arbitrary 
complex numbers
a + jb
and
c + jd
where a, b, c, and d are real numbers, and j = (−1)1/2.
How Complex Numbers Behave  95

96  Complex Numbers and Vectors
Complex number sum
When we want to find the sum of two complex numbers, we add the real and imaginary 
parts independently to get the real and imaginary components of the result. The general 
formula is
(a + jb) + (c + jd) = (a + c) + j(b + d)
Complex number difference
We can find the difference between two complex numbers if we multiply the second complex 
number by −1, and then add it to the first complex number. The general formula is
 
(a + jb) − (c + jd) = (a + jb) + [−1(c + jd)]
 
= (a −c) + j(b −d)
Complex number product
When we want to multiply two complex numbers by each other, we can treat them individu-
ally as binomials. We multiply the binomials and then simplify their product, remembering 
that j 2 = −1. The general formula works out as
 
(a + jb)(c + jd) = ac + jad + jbc + j 2bd
 
= (ac −bd) + j(ad + bc)
Complex number ratio
Suppose that we want to find the ratio (quotient) of two complex numbers
(a + jb) / (c + jd)
Multiplying both the numerator and the denominator by (c −jd), we obtain
[(a + jb)(c −jd )] / (c + jd)(c −jd )
which multiplies out to
(ac −jad + jbc −j 2bd) / (c 2 −jcd + jcd −j 2d 2)
This expression can be simplified to
[(ac + bd) + j (bc −ad)] / (c 2 + d 2)
When we separate out the real and imaginary parts, we get
[(ac + bd) / (c 2 + d 2)] + j [(bc −ad) / (c2 + d 2)]

The square brackets, while technically superfluous, are included to visually set apart the real 
and imaginary parts of the result. We have just derived a general complex-number ratio for-
mula that we can always use:
(a + jb)/(c + jd)
= [(ac + bd)/(c 2 + d 2)] + j [(bc −ad)/(c 2 + d 2)]
For this formula to work, the denominator must not be equal to 0 + j0. That means we can-
not have both c = 0 and d = 0. If both of these coefficients are 0, then we end up dividing by 0. 
That operation, unlike the square root of a negative real, remains undefined, at least as far as 
this book is concerned!
Complex number raised to positive-integer power
If a + jb is a complex number and n is a positive integer, then (a + jb)n is the result of multiply-
ing (a + jb) by itself n times.
Complex conjugates
Suppose we encounter two complex numbers that have the same coefficients, but opposite 
signs between the real and imaginary parts, as in
a + jb
and
a −jb
We call any two such quantities complex conjugates. They have some interesting properties. 
When we add a complex number to its conjugate, we get twice the real coefficient. In general, 
we have
 (a + jb) + (a −jb) = 2a
When we multiply a complex number by its conjugate, we get the sum of the squares of the 
coefficients. In general, we have
(a + jb)(a −jb) = a2 + b2
Complex conjugates are often encountered in engineering. They’re especially useful in alternating- 
current (AC) circuit, radio-frequency (RF) antenna, and transmission-line theories.
Sum example
Let’s find the sum of the two complex numbers 5 + j4 and 2 −j3. When we add the real parts, 
we get
5 + 2 = 7
How Complex Numbers Behave  97

98  Complex Numbers and Vectors
When we add the imaginary parts, we get
j4 + (−j3) = j1 = j
The sum can be expressed directly as
(5 + j4) + (2 −j3) = 7 + j
The parentheses are not technically necessary, but they help to set the individual complex-
number addends apart on the left-hand side of the equation.
Difference example
To find the difference between 5 + j4 and 2 −j3, we first multiply the second complex quan-
tity by −1. That gives us
−1 × (2 −j3) = −2 + j3
Now we can simply add 5 + j4 and −2 + j3. Adding the real parts, we obtain
5 + (−2) = 3
Adding the imaginary parts gives us
j4 + j3 = j7
The difference can be expressed directly as
(5 + j4) − (2 −j3) = 3 + j7
Product example
Let’s multiply the complex numbers 5 + j4 and 2 −j3 by each other. When we treat them as 
binomials, the problem works out in a straightforward fashion, but we have to be careful with 
the signs. We get
(5 + j4)(2 −j3) = 5 × 2 + 5 × (−j3) + j4 × 2 + j4 × (−j3)
= 10 + (−j15) + j8 + j × (−j) × 4 × 3
= 10 + (−j 7) + 12
= 22 −j7
The product can be expressed directly as
(5 + j4)(2 −j3) = 22 −j 7

Ratio example
When we find the ratio of a complex number to another complex number, we should expect 
some messy arithmetic. Let’s calculate
(5 + j4) / (2 −j3)
Keeping track of the coefficients can be confusing when we use the formula for a ratio. Here’s 
the general formula again:
(a + jb) / (c + jd) = [(ac + bd) / (c2 + d 2)] + j [(bc −ad) / (c2 + d 2)]
The denominator in both addends is c2 + d 2. Here, c = 2 and d = −3, so we have
c 2 + d 2 = 22 + (−3)2 = 4 + 9 = 13
We can substitute 13 for the quantity c 2 + d 2 in our formula, giving us the expression
[(ac + bd) / 13] + j [(bc −ad) / 13]
Knowing that a = 5, b = 4, c = 2, and d = −3, the above equation becomes
[5 × 2 + 4 × (−3)] / 13 + j [4 × 2 − 5 × (−3)] / 13
which works out to
−2/13 + j(23/13)
Our ratio can be expressed directly as
(5 + j4) / (2 −j3) = −2/13 + j(23/13)
Power example
Let’s find the cube of the complex number 2 −j3. We square it first, multiplying by itself to get
 
(2 −j3)(2 −j3) = 2 × 2 + 2 ×(−j3) + (−j3) × 2 + (−j3) × (−j3)
 
= 4 + (−j6) + (−j6) + (−j) × (−j) × 3 × 3
 
= 4 + (−j12) + (−9)
 
= −5 −j12
We multiply this result by the original quantity 2 −j3, obtaining
 
(−5 −j12)(2 −j3) = −5 × 2 + (−5) × (−j3) + (−j12) × 2 + (−j12) × (−j3)
 
= −10 + j15 + (−j24) + (−j) × (−j) × 12 × 3
 
= −10 + (−j9) + (−36)
 
= −46 −j9
How Complex Numbers Behave  99

100  Complex Numbers and Vectors
The cube can be expressed directly as
(2 −j3)3 = −46 −j9
Are you confused?
When working with complex numbers, you should pay close attention to whether or not a nu-
meral after the j operator is a superscript. The two notations are perilously similar! For example, 
if you see
5 + j2
it means 5 plus twice j, which is a complex number that’s neither pure real nor pure imaginary. 
But if you see
5 + j 2
it means 5 plus j squared, which can be simplified to 5 + (−1) or 4, which is pure real.
Here’s a challenge!
Prove that the square of a complex number is equal to the square of the negative of that complex 
number. That is, show that
(a + jb)2 = (−a −jb)2
for all real-number coefficients a and b.
Solution
First, let’s work out the square of a + jb. We get
 
(a + jb)2 = (a + jb)(a + jb)
 
= a2 + jab + jba + j 2b2
 
= a2 + j2ab −b2
 
= a2 −b2 + j2ab
Note that in the final term j2ab, the numeral 2 is a multiplier, not an exponent! Now let’s find 
the square of −a −jb. This is a “nightmare of negatives,” so we must be careful with the signs. We 
have
 
(−a −jb)2 = (−a −jb)(−a −jb)
 
= (−a)2 + (−a)(−jb) + (−jb)(−a) + (−jb)2

 
= a2 + jab + jba + (−j)2b2
 
= a2 + j2ab −b2
 
= (a2 −b2) + j2ab
That’s exactly what we got when we squared a + jb. Therefore, we’ve shown that
(a + jb)2 = (−a −jb)2
Complex Vectors
We’ve seen how points can be represented as standard-form vectors in the Cartesian or polar 
coordinate planes. Because complex numbers can be plotted as points in a plane, it’s tempt-
ing to think that we might portray them as vectors. We can; and when we do, things can get 
mighty interesting. 
Cartesian model
When we want to represent a complex quantity as a vector in the Cartesian complex-number 
plane, we draw an arrowed line segment from the origin to the point representing the quantity. 
Figure 6-4 shows a few examples.
j 8
j 6
j 4
j 2
–j 4
–j 6
–j 8
2
4
6
8
–8
–6
–4
7 + j6
–5 – j5
–8 + j5
3 – j 7
5 + j 0 = 5
0 + j 7 = j7
Figure 6-4  Some vectors in the Cartesian complex-number 
plane.
Complex Vectors  101

102  Complex Numbers and Vectors
Polar model
Any vector in the Cartesian plane can also be represented as a vector in the polar coordinate 
plane. Figure 6-5 shows the vectors from Fig. 6-4 plotted on the polar plane. The radial incre-
ments (shown as concentric circles) are the same size as the horizontal- and vertical-axis incre-
ments in the Cartesian plane of Fig. 6-4 (that is, 1 unit). The polar scheme is not as common 
as the Cartesian scheme. But it’s equally valid if we restrict the direction angles to positive 
values less than 2p, and if we forbid negative vector magnitudes.
The vectors in Fig. 6-5 theoretically represent the same complex numbers as those in 
Fig. 6-4. But the polar coordinates for a complex number differ from the Cartesian coordinates. 
The polar coordinates reflect the direction angle and magnitude of a vector, not the real and 
imaginary components. We can calculate the direction angle and magnitude of the polar vec-
tor if we know the real and imaginary parts of the equivalent complex number. We can also go 
the other way, and figure out the real and imaginary parts of the complex number if we know 
the polar vector direction angle and magnitude.
Cartesian-to-polar complex vector conversion
Imagine a complex number t = a + jb, represented as a vector tc in the Cartesian complex-
number plane, extending from the origin to the point (a,jb). We can derive the magnitude r
of the equivalent polar vector tp by applying the Pythagorean distance formula to get
r = (a2 + b2)1/2
Figure 6-5  Complex numbers can be portrayed as 
vectors in the polar plane. Each radial 
division represents 1 unit. Cartesian 
coordinates are shown here. The polar 
coordinates are entirely different!

To determine the direction angle q of the polar vector tp, we modify the polar-coordinate 
direction-finding system. Here’s what we get. As we did in the Cartesian-to-polar coordinate-
conversion scheme, we define q = 0 by default when we’re at the origin. That way, we get a 
one-to-one correspondence between the set of Cartesian vectors and the set of polar vectors. 
(Keep that in mind, because we’ll keep doing this whenever the situation comes up!)
q = 0 
by default
When a = 0 and jb = j0
that is, at the origin
q = 0
When a > 0 and jb = j0
q = Arctan (b/a)
When a > 0 and jb > j0
q = p /2
When a = 0 and jb > j0
q = p + Arctan (b/a)
When a < 0 and jb > j0
q = p
When a < 0 and jb = j0
q = p + Arctan (b/a)
When a < 0 and jb < j0
q = 3p /2
When a = 0 and jb < j0
q = 2p + Arctan (b/a)
When a > 0 and jb < j0
Polar-to-Cartesian complex vector conversion
We can always convert a polar complex vector tp into a Cartesian complex vector tc that por-
trays a complex number a + jb in the familiar form. If we have
tp = (q,r)
then the Cartesian vector equivalent is
tc = [(r cos q ), j(r sin q )]
which represents the complex number
a + jb = r cos q + j(r sin q )
The parentheses are not strictly necessary here, but they keep the real and imaginary compo-
nents clearly separated.
Absolute value
We can find the absolute value of a complex number a + jb, written | a + jb |, by calculating 
the magnitude of its vector. In the Cartesian complex plane, going from the origin (0,0) to 
the point (a,jb), we have 
| a + jb | = (a2 + b2)1/2
as shown in Fig. 6-6. In the polar plane, the absolute value of a complex vector is the vector 
radius r.
Complex Vectors  103

104  Complex Numbers and Vectors
Complex vector sum and difference
When we want to add or subtract two complex vectors, we can work on the Cartesian real and 
imaginary parts separately. If the vectors are presented to us in polar form, we should convert 
them to Cartesian form and then add. We can always convert the resultant back to polar form 
after we’re done with the addition process.
To find the difference between two complex vectors, we must be sure they’re both in Car-
tesian form before we do any calculations. Once the vectors are in the Cartesian form, we take 
the negative of the second vector by negating both of its coordinates. Then we add the two 
resulting vectors. Again, if we want, we can convert the resultant back to polar form.
Are you confused?
You may ask, “Why isn’t the addition and subtraction of polar coordinates directly done when 
we want to add or subtract complex vectors?” That’s a good question. We can try to define vector 
sums and differences this way (adding or subtracting the polar angles and radii separately, for 
example), and we’ll get output numbers when we grind out the arithmetic. But those numbers 
don’t coincide with the geometric definitions of vector addition and subtraction. They don’t give
us the correct complex-number sums or differences. It’s hard to say what those output numbers 
really mean, even though the idea is interesting! We should use Cartesian coordinates when we add 
or subtract complex vectors. We should use polar coordinates when we want to multiply or divide 
them.
Polar complex vector product
When we want to multiply two complex-number vectors, neither the dot product nor the 
cross product will give us the proper results. We must invent a new vector operation! Here’s 
how it works.
 1.  We add the direction angles of the original two vectors to get the direction angle 
of the product vector.
 2.  If we end up with a direction angle larger than 2p, then we subtract 2p to get the 
correct angle for the product vector.
x
jy
a + jb
a
b
a + jb
=
a2 + b2
(
)
1/2
|
|
= vector magnitude
Figure 6-6  The absolute value of 
a complex number is 
the magnitude of its 
vector.

 3.  We multiply the original vector magnitudes by each other to get the magnitude of 
the product vector.
Polar complex vector ratio
When we want to find the ratio of two complex numbers, we can go through the complex 
vector product process “inside-out.” Again, there are three steps.
 1.  We subtract the direction angle of the denominator vector from the direction 
angle of the numerator vector to get the direction angle of the ratio vector.
 2.  If we end up with a negative direction angle, then we add 2p to get the correct 
angle for the ratio vector.
 3.  We divide the magnitude of the numerator vector by the magnitude of the 
denominator vector to get the magnitude of the ratio vector.
Polar complex vector power
When we want to raise a complex number to a positive-integer power, we multiply the polar 
angle by that positive integer, and then take the power of the magnitude. If the angle of our 
resulting vector is 2p or larger, we subtract whatever multiple of 2p is necessary to bring the 
angle into the range where it’s positive but less than 2p.
Absolute-value vector example
There are infinitely many vectors that represent complex numbers having an absolute 
value of 6. All the vectors have magnitudes of 6, and they all point outward from the origin. 
Figure 6-7 shows a few such vectors.
j 4
j 2
– j 2
– j 4
2
4
x
jy
Set of all points
corresponding to
| x + jy | = 6
–4
–2
Figure 6-7
There are infinitely many complex 
numbers with an absolute value of 6. 
They all terminate on a circle of radius 
6, centered at the origin.
Complex Vectors  105

106  Complex Numbers and Vectors
Polar complex vector product example
Figure 6-8 shows the polar complex vectors (p /6,1/2) and (2p /3,4/5), along with their product. 
Each radial division is 0.1 unit. When we add the angles, we get
p /6 + 2p /3 = 5p /6
When we multiply the magnitudes, we get
1/2 × 4/5 = 2/5
so the product vector is (5p /6,2/5).
Polar complex vector ratio example
Figure 6-9 shows the ratio of the polar complex vectors (7p /4,8) and (p,2). Each radial division 
is 1 unit. When we subtract the angles, we get
7p /4 −p = 3p /4
0
p/2
3p/2
Add the angles ...
... and multiply
the magnitudes
(p/6, 1/2)
(5p/6, 2/5)
Product =
(2p/3, 4/5)
p
Figure 6-8  Product of the polar complex vectors (p /6,1/2) and 
(2p /3,4/5). Each radial division represents 0.1 unit.

When we divide the magnitudes, we get
8/2 = 4
so the ratio vector is (3p /4,4).
De Moivre’s theorem
The above schemes for finding products, ratios, and powers of polar complex numbers can 
be summarized in a famous theorem attributed to the French mathematician Abraham De 
Moivre, (pronounced “De Mwahvr”), who lived during the late 1600s and early 1700s. This 
theorem can be found in two different versions, depending on which text you consult.
The first, and more general, version of De Moivre’s theorem involves products and ratios. 
Suppose we have two polar complex numbers c1 and c2, where
c1 = r1 cos q1 + j(r1 sin q1)
and
c2 = r2 cos q2 + j(r2 sin q2)
0
3p/2
(7p/4, 8)
(p, 2)
Subtract the angles ...
the magnitudes
... and divide
(3p/4, 4)
Ratio =
p
p/2
Figure 6-9  Ratio of the polar complex vector (7p /4,8) to the polar 
complex vector (p,2). Each radial division represents 
1 unit.
Complex Vectors  107

108  Complex Numbers and Vectors
where r1 and r2 are real-number polar magnitudes, and q1 and q2 are real-number polar direc-
tion angles in radians. Then the product of c1 and c2 is
c1c2 = r1r2 cos (q1 + q2) + j [r1r2 sin (q1 + q2)]
If r2 is nonzero, the ratio of c1 to c2 is
c1/c2 = (r1/r2) cos (q1 −q2) + j [(r1/r2) sin (q1 −q2)]
The second, and more commonly known, version of De Moivre’s theorem can be derived 
from the first version. Suppose that we have a complex number c such that
c = r cos q + j(r sin q)
where r is the real-number polar magnitude and q is the real-number polar direction angle. 
Also suppose that n is an integer. Then c to the nth power is
cn = rn cos (nq) + j[rn sin (nq)]
I recommend that you enter this version of De Moivre’s theorem into your “brain storage,” 
and save it there forever!
Are you confused?
Do you wonder why we haven’t described how to find a root of a complex vector? You might 
think, “It ought to be simple, just like finding a power backward. Can’t we divide the polar angle 
by the index of the root, and then take the root of the magnitude?” That’s a good question. Doing 
that will indeed give us a root. But there are often two or more complex roots for any given com-
plex number. We’re about to see an example of this.
Here’s a challenge!
Cube the polar complex vectors (2p /3,1) and (4p /3,1). Here’s a warning: The solution might 
come as a surprise! What do you suppose these results imply?
Solution
To cube a polar complex vector, we multiply the direction angle by 3 (the value of the exponent) 
and cube the magnitude. Let’s do this with the vectors we’ve been given here. In the case of 
(2p /3,1)3, we get an angle of
(2p /3) × 3 = 2p
That’s outside the allowed range of angles, but if we subtract 2p, we get 0, which is okay. We get 
a magnitude of 13 = 1. Now we know that
(2p /3,1)3 = (0,1)

where the first coordinate represents the direction angle in radians, and the second coordinate 
represents the magnitude. If we draw this vector on a polar graph, we can see that this is the polar 
representation of the complex number 1 + j0, which is equal to the pure real number 1. (If you 
like, you can use the conversion formulas to prove it.) In the case of (4p /3,1)3, we get the direction 
angle
(4p /3) × 3 = 4p
That’s outside the allowed range of angles, but if we subtract 2p twice, then we get an angle of 0, 
and that’s allowed. As before, we get a magnitude of 13 = 1. Now we know that
(4p /3,1)3 = (0,1)
where, again, the first coordinate represents the direction angle in radians, and the second coordi-
nate represents the magnitude. This is the same as the previous result. It’s the polar representation 
of 1 + j0, which is the pure real number 1. We’ve found two cube roots of 1 in the realm of the 
complex numbers. Neither of these roots show up when we work with pure real numbers exclusively. 
There are three different complex cube roots of 1! They are
• The pure real number 1
• The complex number corresponding to the polar vector (2p /3,1)
• The complex number corresponding to the polar vector (4p /3,1)
Practice Exercises
This is an open-book quiz. You may (and should) refer to the text as you solve these problems. 
Don’t hurry! You’ll find worked-out answers in App. A. The solutions in the appendix may not 
represent the only way a problem can be figured out. If you think you can solve a particular 
problem in a quicker or better way than you see there, by all means try it!
 1.  Prove that −j is not equal to j, even though, when squared, they both give us −1. Here’s 
a hint: Use the tactic of reductio ad absurdum, where a statement is proved by assuming 
its opposite and then deriving a contradiction from that assumption.
 2.  Show that the reciprocal of j is equal to its negative; that is,  j −1 = −j.
 3. Find the sum and difference of the complex numbers −3 + j4 and 1 + j5.
 4.  Find the ratio of the generalized complex conjugates a + jb and a −jb. That is, work out 
a general formula for
(a + jb) / (a −jb)
 
 where a and b are both nonzero real numbers.
 5.  Prove that if we take any two complex conjugates and square them individually, 
the results are complex conjugates. In other words, show that for all real-number 
coefficients a and b, (a + jb)2 is the complex conjugate of (a −jb)2.
Practice Exercises  109

110  Complex Numbers and Vectors
 6.  Find the polar product of the polar complex vectors (p /4,21/2) and (3p /4,21/2). Then 
convert this product vector to Cartesian form and write down the “real-plus-imaginary” 
complex number that it represents.
 7.  Convert the polar complex vectors (p /4,21/2) and (3p /4,21/2) to the complex numbers 
they represent in “real-plus-imaginary” form. Multiply these numbers and compare with 
the solution to Problem 6.
 8.  Look at the results of the last “challenge,” where we found these three cube roots of 1:
• The pure real number 1
• The complex number corresponding to the polar vector (2p /3,1)
• The complex number corresponding to the polar vector (4p /3,1)
 
  Convert the polar vectors (2p /3,1) and (4p /3,1) to their “real-plus-imaginary” 
complex-number forms.
 9.  Graph the three cube roots of 1 as polar complex vectors. Label them as ordered pairs in 
the form (q,r), where q is the direction angle and r is the magnitude.
 10.  Graph the three cube roots of 1 as Cartesian complex vectors. Label them as complex 
numbers in the form a + jb, where a and b are real numbers. Also graph the unit circle, 
and note that the vectors all terminate on that circle.

We can create three-dimensional graphs by adding a third axis perpendicular to the familiar x
and y axes of the Cartesian plane. The new axis, usually called the z axis, passes through the 
xy plane at the origin, giving us Cartesian three-space or Cartesian xyz space.
How It’s Assembled
Cartesian three-space has three real-number lines positioned so they all intersect at their zero 
points, and so each line is perpendicular to the other two. The point where the axes intersect 
constitutes the origin. Each axis portrays a real-number variable.
Axes and variables
Figure 7-1 is a perspective drawing of a Cartesian xyz space coordinate system. In a true-to-life 
three-dimensional portrayal, the positive x axis would run to the right, the negative x axis 
would run to the left, the positive y axis would run upward, the negative y axis would run 
downward, the positive z axis would project out from the page toward us, and the negative 
z axis would project behind the page away from us.
In Cartesian three-space, the axes are all linear, and they’re all graduated in increments of 
the same size. For any axis, the change in value is always directly proportional to the physical 
displacement. If we move 3 millimeters along an axis and the value changes by 1 unit, then 
that’s true all along the axis, and it’s also true everywhere along both of the other axes. If the 
divisions differ in size between the axes, then we have rectangular three-space, but not true 
Cartesian three-space.
Cartesian three-space is often used to graph relations and functions having two independent 
variables. When this is done, x and y are usually the independent variables, and z is the dependent 
variable, whose value depends on both x and y.
CHAPTER 
7
Cartesian Three-Space
111

112  Cartesian Three-Space
Biaxial planes
Cartesian three-space contains three flat biaxial (two-axis) planes that intersect along the coor-
dinate axes.
• The xy plane contains the axes for the variables x and y.
• The xz plane contains the axes for the variables x and z.
• The yz plane contains the axes for the variables y and z.
You’ll see three rectangles in Fig. 7-2, one parallel to each of the three biaxial planes. Look 
closely at how these rectangles are oriented. They can help you envision the orientations of 
the three biaxial planes in space. Each of the three biaxial planes is perpendicular to both of 
the others.
Are you astute?
Figure 7-2 shows an alternative perspective on Cartesian three-space, in which we’re looking “up” 
toward the xz plane from somewhere near the negative y axis. There’s a difference between the apparent
positions of the axes in Fig. 7-2 as compared with their positions in Fig. 7-1, but the orientations of the 
three axes are the same with respect to each other. You should get used to seeing Cartesian three-space 
from various points of view. I’ll switch points of view often to keep you thinking!
+x
+y
+z
–x
–y
–z
Figure 7-1  A pictorial rendition of Cartesian three-space. 
In this view, the x axis increases positively from 
left to right, the y axis increases positively from 
the bottom up, and the z axis increases positively 
from far to near.

Points and ordered triples
Figure 7-3 shows two specific points P and Q, plotted in Cartesian three-space. We’ve returned 
to the perspective of Fig. 7-1, with the positive z axis coming out of the page toward us. A 
point can always be denoted as an ordered triple in the form (x,y,z), according to the following 
scheme:
• The x coordinate represents the point’s projection onto the x axis.
• The y coordinate represents the point’s projection onto the y axis.
• The z coordinate represents the point’s projection onto the z axis.
We get the projection of a point onto an axis by drawing a line from that point to the 
axis, and making sure that the line intersects that axis at a right angle. If this notion 
gives you trouble, you can think of the x, y, and z values for a particular point in the 
following way:
• The x coordinate is the point’s perpendicular displacement (positive, negative, or zero) 
from the yz plane.
• The y coordinate is the point’s perpendicular displacement (positive, negative, or zero) 
from the xz plane.
• The z coordinate is the point’s perpendicular displacement (positive, negative, or zero) 
from the xy plane.
+x
–x
+z
–z
+y
–y
Rectangle parallel
to xz plane
Rectangle parallel
to yz plane
Rectangle parallel
to xy plane
Figure 7-2  Cartesian three-space contains the xy, xz, and 
yz planes. This drawing shows rectangles parallel to 
each of these three biaxial planes. Note the difference 
in the point of view between this illustration and 
Figure 7-1.
How It’s Assembled  113

114  Cartesian Three-Space
In Fig. 7-3, the coordinates of point P are (–5,–4,3), and the coordinates of point Q are 
(3,5,–2). As the system is portrayed here, we can get to point P from the origin by making the 
following moves in any order:
• Go 5 units in the negative x direction (straight to the left).
• Go 4 units in the negative y direction (straight down).
• Go 3 units in the positive z direction (straight out of the page).
We can get from the origin to point Q by doing the following moves in any order:
• Go 3 units in the positive x direction (straight to the right).
• Go 5 units in the positive y direction (straight up).
• Go 2 units in the negative z direction (straight back behind the page).
If we were looking at the coordinate grid from a different viewpoint (that of Fig. 7-2, for 
example), our movements would look different, but the points and their coordinates would 
be the same.
A note for the picayune
An ordered triple represents the coordinates of a point in three-space, not the geometric point 
itself. But we may talk or write as if an ordered triple actually is a point, just as we sometimes 
think of a certain person when we read a name. That’s okay, as long as we’re aware of the 
semantical difference between the name and the point.
P
(–5, –4, 3)
Q
(3, 5, –2)
+x
+y
+z
–x
–y
–z
Each axis
increment
is 1 unit
Figure 7-3  Two points in Cartesian three-space, along 
with the corresponding ordered triples of the 
form (x,y,z). On all three axes, each increment 
represents 1 unit. Here, we’ve gone back to the 
point of view shown in Figure 7-1.

Are you confused?
Some people have trouble envisioning three-dimensional situations “in the mind’s eye.” If 
you’re having problems understanding exactly how the three axes should relate in Cartesian 
three-space, here’s a “pool rule” for the orientation of the axes. Imagine the origin of the system 
resting on the surface of a swimming pool. Suppose that we align the positive x axis so that it 
runs along the water surface, pointing due east. Once we’ve done that, the other axes are oriented 
as follows:
• Negative values of x are west of the origin.
• Positive values of y are north of the origin.
• Negative values of y are south of the origin.
• Positive values of z are up in the air.
• Negative values of z are under the water.
You can look at the coordinate axes from any point you want, whether on the surface, in the sky, 
or under the water. No matter how your view of the system changes, the actual orientation of the 
axes with respect to each other always stays the same. This relative axis orientation is important. If 
it’s not strictly followed, we’ll get into trouble when we work with graphs and vectors in Cartesian 
three-space.
Here’s a challenge!
Imagine an ordered triple (x,y,z) where all three variables are nonzero real numbers. Suppose that 
you’ve plotted a point P in xyz space. Because x ≠ 0, y ≠ 0, and z ≠ 0, the point P doesn’t lie on 
any of the axes. What will happen to the location of P if you
• Multiply x by −1 and leave y and z the same?
• Multiply y by −1 and leave x and z the same?
• Multiply z by −1 and leave x and y the same?
Solution
Here’s what will take place in each of these three situations. You can use Fig. 7-2 as a visual aid. If 
you’re a computer whiz, maybe you can program your machine to create an animated display for 
each of these three processes:
• If you multiply x by −1 and do not change the values of y or z, then point P will move parallel 
to the x axis to the opposite side of the yz plane, but P will end up at the same distance from 
the yz plane as it was before.
• If you multiply y by −1 and do not change the values of x or z, then point P will move parallel 
to the y axis to the opposite side of the xz plane, but P will end up at the same distance from 
the xz plane as it was before.
• If you multiply z by −1 and do not change the values of x or y, then point P will move parallel 
to the z axis to the opposite side of the xy plane, but P will end up at the same distance from 
the xy plane as it was before.
How It’s Assembled  115

116  Cartesian Three-Space
Distance of Point from Origin
In Cartesian three-space, the distance of a point from the origin depends on all three of the 
coordinates in the ordered triple representing the point. The formula for this distance resembles 
the formula for the distance of a point from the origin in Cartesian two-space.
The general formula
It’s not difficult to derive a general formula for the distance of a point from the origin in 
Cartesian three-space, as long as we’re willing to use our “spatial mind’s eye.” Suppose we 
name the point P, and assign it the coordinates
P = (xp,yp,zp)
Figure 7-4A shows this situation, along with a point P* = (xp,yp,0), which is the projection of 
P onto the xy plane. We’ve moved again back to the perspective of Fig. 7-2, looking in toward 
the origin from somewhere far out in space near the negative y axis. To find the distance of P*
from the origin, we can work entirely in the xy plane. This gives us a two-dimensional distance 
problem, which we learned how to handle in Chap. 1. Let’s call the distance of P* from the 
origin by the name a. Using the formula we learned in Chap. 1 for the distance of a point from 
the origin in Cartesian xy plane, we have
a = (xp
2 + yp
2)1/2
P
(xp, yp, zp)
(xp, yp, 0)
P*
First, we find the
distance from the origin
to P*, and call it a
a
+x
–x
+z
–z
+y
–y
Figure 7-4A  Finding the distance of point P from the origin: step 1.

This completes the first step in a three-phase process. Figure 7-4B shows the second step. 
Here, we find the distance between P* and P. Let’s call that distance b. It’s the perpendicular 
distance of P from the xy plane, which is simply the coordinate value zp. Therefore, we have
b = zp
That’s the end of the second step. In Fig. 7-4C, the distance from the origin to P is labeled 
c. Note that we now have a right triangle with sides of lengths a, b, and c. The right angle is 
between the sides whose lengths are a and b. The Pythagorean theorem therefore allows us to 
make the claim that
a2 + b2 = c2
Substituting the previously determined values for a and b into this formula gives us
[(xp
2 + yp
2)1/2]2 + zp
2 = c2
which simplifies to
xp
2 + yp
2 + zp
2 = c2
P
(xp, yp, zp)
b
Second, we find the
distance from P*
to P, and call it b
P*
(xp, yp, 0)
a
+x
–x
+z
–z
+y
–y
Figure 7-4B Finding the distance of point P from the origin: step 2.
Distance of Point from Origin  117

118  Cartesian Three-Space
When we switch the right-hand and left-hand sides of this equation and then take the 1/2 
power of both sides, we get the formula we’ve been looking for, which is
c = (xp
2 + yp
2 + zp
2)1/2
An example
Let’s find the distance from the origin to the point P = (−5,−4,3) as shown in Fig. 7-3. We 
have xp = −5, yp = −4, and zp = 3. If we call the distance c, then
 
c = (xp
2 + yp
2 + zp
2)1/2
 
= [(−5)2 + (−4)2 + 32]1/2 = (25 + 16 + 9)1/2 = 501/2
Another example
Now let’s find the distance from the origin to Q = (3,5,−2) as shown in Fig. 7-3. This time, 
the coordinates are xq = 3, yq = 5, and zq = −2. We can again call the distance c, so
 
c = (xq
2 + yq
2 + zq
2)1/2
 
= [32 + 52 + (−2)2]1/2 = (9 + 25 + 4)1/2 = 381/2
P
(xp, yp, zp)
b
... and note that
c is the length of
the hypotenuse
of a right triangle!
c
a
Right
angle
Third, we call the
distance from the origin
to P by the name c ...
P*
(xp, yp, 0)
+x
–x
+z
–z
+y
–y
Figure 7-4C Finding the distance of point P from the origin: step 3.

Are you confused?
You might ask, “Can the distance of a point from the origin in Cartesian three-space ever be undefined? 
Can it ever be negative?” The answers are no, and no! Imagine a point P in Cartesian three-space— 
anywhere you want—with the coordinates (xp,yp,zp). To find the distance of P from the origin, you 
start by squaring xp, which is the x coordinate of P. Because xp is a real number, its square is a nonnega-
tive real. Then you square yp, which is the y coordinate of P. This result must also be a nonnegative 
real. Then you square zp, which is the z coordinate of P. This square, too, is a nonnegative real. Next, 
you add the three nonnegative reals xp
2, yp
2, and zp
2. That sum must be another nonnegative real. 
Finally, you take the nonnegative square root of the sum of the squares. The nonnegative square root 
of a nonnegative real number is always defined; and it’s never negative itself, of course!
Are you still confused?
The formula we derived here is based on the idea that we start at the origin and go outward to 
point P. If we go inward from P to the origin, the distance is exactly the same. (If we were working 
with vectors, the vector displacements would be negatives of each other, but we’re not there yet.)
Here’s a challenge!
Suppose we’re given a point P = (xp,yp,zp) in Cartesian three-space. Prove that if we negate any one, any 
two, or all three of the coordinates, the resulting point is the same distance from the origin as P.
Solution
For the point P, the distance c from the origin is
c = (xp
2 + yp
2 + zp
2)1/2
The square of any real number is always the same as the square of its negative. That tells us three things:
(−xp)2 = xp
2
(−yp)2 = yp
2
(−zp)2 = zp
2
By substitution, all these quantities are identical:
(xp
2 + yp
2 + zp
2)1/2
[(−xp)2 + yp
2 + zp
2]1/2
[xp
2 + (−yp)2 + zp
2]1/2
[xp
2 + yp
2 + (−zp)2]1/2
[(−xp)2 + (−yp)2 + zp
2]1/2
[(−xp)2 + yp
2 + (−zp)2]1/2
[xp
2 + (−yp)2 + (−zp)2]1/2
[(−xp)2 + (−yp)2 + (−zp)2]1/2
Distance of Point from Origin  119

120  Cartesian Three-Space
These quantities represent the distances of the following points from the origin, respectively:
(xp,yp,zp)
(−xp,yp,zp)
(xp,−yp,zp)
(xp,yp,−zp)
(−xp,−yp,zp)
(−xp,yp,−zp)
(xp,−yp,−zp)
(−xp,−yp,−zp)
That’s all the points we can get, in addition to P itself, by negating any one, any two, or all three 
of the coordinates of P. They’re all the same distance c from the origin, where
c = (xp
2 + yp
2 + zp
2)1/2
Distance between Any Two Points
When we want to determine the distance between any two points in Cartesian three-space, 
we can expand the formula from Cartesian two-space that we learned in Chap. 1 into an extra 
dimension.
The general formula
Imagine two different points in Cartesian three-space, after the fashion of Fig. 7-5. Let’s call 
the points and their coordinates
P = (xp,yp,zp)
and
Q = (xq,yq,zq)
where each coordinate can range over the entire set of real numbers. The distance d between 
these points, as we follow a straight-line path from P to Q, is
d = [(xq −xp)2 + (yq −yp)2 + (zq −zp)2]1/2
If we start at Q and finish at P, we reverse the orders of subtraction, so the formula becomes
d = [(xp −xq)2 + (yp −yq)2 + (zp −zq)2]1/2
We always subtract “starting coordinates” from “finishing coordinates.”

An example
Let’s calculate the distance between the points P = (−5,−4,3) and Q = (3,5,−2), starting at P
and finishing at Q. We subtract the coordinates for P from those for Q in each term. Pairing 
off the coordinates for easy reference, we have
xp = −5  and xq =  3
yp = −4  and yq = 5
zp = 3  and zq = −2
Plugging these values into the formula, we get
 
d = [(xq −xp)2 + (yq −yp)2 + (zq −zp)2]1/2
 
= {[3 − (−5)]2 + [5 − (−4)]2 + (−2 − 3)2}1/2
 
= [82 +  92 + (−5)2]1/2 = (64 + 81 + 25)1/2 = 1701/2
Another example
Now let’s calculate the distance between these same two points, but starting at Q and finishing at 
P. We reverse the orders of the subtractions from the previous example. When we go through 
the arithmetic, we get
 
d = [(xp −xq)2 + (yp −yq)2 + (zp −zq)2]1/2
 
= {(−5 − 3)2 + (−4 − 5)2 + [3 − (−2)]2}1/2
 
= [(−8)2 + (−9)2 + 52]1/2 = (64 + 81 + 25)1/2 = 1701/2
+x
+y
–x
–y
+z
–z
P
(xp, yp, zp)
Q
(xq, yq, zq)
d
What’s the
straight-line distance d
between points
P and Q?
Figure 7-5 Distance between two points in Cartesian three-space.
Distance between Any Two Points  121

122  Cartesian Three-Space
Are you confused?
You are probably not surprised that the distance between P and Q is the same in either direction. 
But you might ask, “Are there any situations where the distance between two points is different 
in one direction than in the other?” The answer is no, such a thing can never happen—as long as 
we always follow the same straight-line path through three-space to get from point to point. Let’s 
prove that the direction doesn’t matter when we want to express the distance between two points 
in space.
Here’s a challenge!
Show that the distance between any two points in Cartesian three-space is the same, whichever 
direction we go.
Solution
It’s sufficient to prove that for all real numbers xp, yp, zp, xq, yq, and zq, it’s always the case that
[(xq −xp)2 + (yq −yp)2 + (zq −zp)2]1/2 = [(xp −xq)2 + (yp −yq)2 + (zp −zq)2]1/2
Because xq −xp and xp −xq are negatives of each other, their squares are equal:
(xq −xp)2 = (xp −xq)2
Because yq −yp and yp −yq are negatives of each other, their squares are equal:
(yq −yp)2 = (yp −yq)2
Because zq −zp and zp −zq are negatives of each other, their squares are equal:
(zq −zp)2 = (zp −zq)2
Based on these three facts, we know that the squared differences on both sides of the original equation 
are equal, no matter what the values of the coordinates might be (as long as they’re all real numbers). 
This tells us that the distance between any two points is the same in either direction.
Finding the Midpoint
We can find the midpoint along a straight-line path between two points in Cartesian three-space 
by averaging the corresponding coordinates.

The general formula
Suppose that we want to find the midpoint M along a straight-line segment connecting 
two points P and Q as shown in Fig. 7-6. We can assign the points the ordered triples
P = (xp,yp,zp)
and
Q = (xq,yq,zq)
Let’s say that the coordinates of the midpoint M are
M = (xm,ym,zm)
We find xm by averaging xp and xq, getting
xm = (xp + xq)/2
We find ym by averaging yp and yq, getting
ym = (yp + yq)/2
+x
+y
–x
–y
+z
–z
P
(xp, yp, zp)
Q
(xq, yq, zq)
M
What are the
coordinates of
point M ?
Point M is midway
between
points P and Q
Figure 7-6  Midpoint of line segment connecting two points in Cartesian 
three-space.
Finding the Midpoint  123

124  Cartesian Three-Space
We find zm by averaging zp and zq, getting
zm = (zp + zq)/2
The coordinates of M in terms of the coordinates of P and Q are therefore
(xm,ym,zm) = [(xp + xq)/2,(yp + yq)/2,(zp + zq)/2]
An example
Let’s find the midpoint between the origin and P = (−5,−4,3) in Cartesian three-space. We can 
use the formula above with Q = (0,0,0). The midpoint M has the coordinates
 
(xm,ym,zm) = [(xp + xq)/2,(yp + yq)/2,(zp + zq)/2]
 
= [(−5 + 0)/2,(−4 + 0)/2,(3 + 0)/2]
 
= (−5/2,−4/2,3/2) = (−5/2,−2,3/2)
Another example
Now let’s find the midpoint between the origin and Q = (3,5,−2). This time, we let P = (0,0,0), 
so the midpoint M has the coordinates
 
(xm,ym,zm) =  [(xp + xq)/2,(yp + yq)/2,(zp + zq)/2]
 
= {(0 + 3)/2,(0 + 5)/2,[(0 + (−2)]/2}
 
= (3/2,5/2,−2/2) = (3/2,5/2,−1)
Still another example
Now let’s work out a tougher problem. Suppose we want to find the coordinates of the mid-
point M between P = (−5,−4,3) and Q = (3,5,−2). Pairing off the coordinates for convenience, 
we have
xp = −5  and xq =  3
yp = −4  and yq = 5
zp = 3  and zq = −2
Plugging the values into the formula and working through the arithmetic, we obtain the 
coordinates of M as
 
(xm,ym,zm) = [(xp + xq)/2,(yp + yq)/2,(zp + zq)/2]
 
= {(−5 + 3)/2,(−4 + 5)/2,[(3 + (−2)]/2}
 
= (−2/2,1/2,1/2) = (−1,1/2,1/2)

Are you a skeptic?
Does it seem obvious that the midpoint between two points, say P and Q, doesn’t depend on 
whether we go from P to Q or from Q to P? That’s indeed the case; but if we demand proof, we 
must show that for real numbers xp, yp, zp, xq, yq, and zq, it’s always true that
[(xp + xq)/2,(yp + yq)/2,(zp + zq)/2] = [(xq + xp)/2,(yq + yp)/2,(zq + zp)/2]
This proof is almost trivial, but it’s good mental exercise to put it down in rigorous form. The 
commutative law for addition of real numbers tells us that
xp + xq = xq + xp
Dividing each side by 2 gives us
(xp + xq)/2 = (xq + xp)/2
Using the same logic with the y and z coordinates, we get
(yp + yq)/2 = (yq + yp)/2
and
(zp + zq)/2 = (zq + zp)/2
Based on these facts, we know that the coordinates on both sides of the original equation are 
identical. It follows that the midpoint along a straight-line segment connecting any two points in 
Cartesian three-space is the same, regardless of which way we go.
Here’s a challenge!
Imagine two points in Cartesian three-space where corresponding coordinates are negatives of 
each other. Show that the midpoint is exactly at the origin.
Solution
We can choose any point P whose coordinates are all real numbers. Let’s suppose that
P = (xp,yp,zp)
Then the coordinates of Q are
Q = (−xp,−yp,−zp)
The coordinates of the midpoint M are
 
(xm,ym,zm) = {[(xp + (−xp)]/2,[(yp + (−yp)]/2,[(zp + (−zp)/2]}
 
= [(xp −xp)/2,(yp −yp)/2,(zp −zp)/2]
 
= (0/2,0/2,0/2) = (0,0,0)
The point (0,0,0) is, of course, the origin of the coordinate system.
Finding the Midpoint  125

126  Cartesian Three-Space
Practice Exercises
This is an open-book quiz. You may (and should) refer to the text as you solve these problems. 
Don’t hurry! You’ll find worked-out answers in App. A. The solutions in the appendix may not 
represent the only way a problem can be figured out. If you think you can solve a particular 
problem in a quicker or better way than you see there, by all means try it!
 1.  What are the individual x, y, and z coordinates of the three points P, Q, and R shown in 
Fig. 7-7?
+x
+y
+z
–x
–y
–z
Each axis
increment
is 1 unit
Q
(–5, 4, 0)
P
(3, –3, 4)
R
(0, 0, 6)
Origin = (0, 0, 0)
L
M
N
Figure 7-7  Illustration for Problems 1 through 10. Each axis division 
represents 1 unit.
 2.  Determine the distance of the point P from the origin in Fig. 7-7. Using a calculator, 
approximate the answer by rounding off to three decimal places.
 3.  Determine the distance of the point Q from the origin in Fig. 7-7. Using a calculator, 
approximate the answer by rounding off to three decimal places.
 4.  Determine the distance of the point R from the origin in Fig. 7-7. This should come 
out exact, so you won’t need a calculator!
 5.  Determine the length of the line segment L in Fig. 7-7. Using a calculator, approximate 
the answer by rounding off to three decimal places.
 6.  Determine the length of the line segment M in Fig. 7-7. Using a calculator, 
approximate the answer by rounding off to three decimal places.

 7.  Determine the length of the line segment N in Fig. 7-7. Using a calculator, approximate 
the answer by rounding off to three decimal places.
 8.  Determine the coordinates of the midpoint of line segment L in Fig. 7-7.
 9.  Determine the coordinates of the midpoint of line segment M in Fig. 7-7.
 10.  Determine the coordinates of the midpoint of line segment N in Fig. 7-7.
Practice Exercises  127

We’ve learned how to work with Cartesian coordinates in two and three dimensions, and 
we’ve learned about vectors in two dimensions. Now it’s time to explore how vectors behave 
in Cartesian xyz space.
How They’re Defined
Imagine two vectors a and b in three-dimensional space. We have infinitely many more direc-
tion possibilities now than we did in two-space! We can denote our vectors as arrowed line 
segments, “starting” at the origin (0,0,0) and “ending” at points (xa,ya,za) and (xb,yb,zb), as 
shown in Fig. 8-1.
Cartesian standard form
In Cartesian xyz space, vectors don’t have to “start” at the coordinate origin, but there are 
advantages to putting them in that form. Any vector in this coordinate system, no matter 
where it “starts” and “ends,” has an equivalent vector whose originating point is at (0,0,0). Such 
a vector is in Cartesian standard form.
Suppose that we have a vector a′ that “starts” at a point P1 and “ends” at another point 
P2, with coordinates as
P1 = (x1,y1,z1)
and
P2 = (x2,y2,z2)
as shown in Fig. 8-2. The standard form of a′, denoted a, is defined by the terminating point 
Pa such that
Pa = (xa,ya,za) = [(x2 −x1),(y2 −y1),(z2 −z1)]
CHAPTER 
8
Vectors in Cartesian Three-Space
128

(xa, ya, za)
a
(xb, yb, zb)
b
+x
+y
+z
–x
–y
–z
Figure 8-1  Two vectors in Cartesian xyz space. This is a perspective 
drawing (as are all three-space renditions in this book). 
In “real life,” both vectors in this particular case would 
project generally toward us.
a
a'
+x
+y
+z
–x
–y
–z
Pa
(xa, ya, za)
P2
(x2, y2, z2)
P1
(x1, y1, z1)
Figure 8-2
Two vectors in Cartesian xyz space. Vector a is in 
standard form because it “begins” at the origin (0,0,0). 
Vector a′ is equivalent to a, because both vectors are 
equally long, and they both point in the same direction.
129

130  Vectors in Cartesian Three-Space
The two vectors a and a′ are equivalent, because they’re equally long and they point in the 
same direction.
Left-hand scalar multiplication
Imagine the vector a in standard form, defined by (xa,ya,za) as shown in Fig. 8-3. Suppose 
that we want to multiply a positive real scalar k+ by the vector a. To do this, we multiply each 
coordinate by k+, getting
k+a = k+(xa,ya,za) = (k+xa,k+ya,k+za)
The direction of our vector a does not change, but it becomes k+ times as long. If we want to 
multiply a negative real scalar k− by a, then we follow the same procedure with that constant, 
obtaining
k−a = k−(xa,ya,za) =  (k−xa,k−ya,k−za)
We’ve just described how to get the left-hand Cartesian product of a vector and a scalar in 
Cartesian xyz space. Whenever we multiply a negative scalar by a vector, we reverse the direc-
tion in which the vector points. We also change its length by a factor equal to the absolute 
value of the scalar.
+x
+y
+z
–x
–y
–z
Vector a
times positive
constant
greater than 1
x
y z
,
,
(
)
a
a
a
Vector a
Vector a
times negative
constant
less than –1
Figure 8-3  Multiplication of a standard-form vector by positive and 
negative real scalars in xyz space.

Right-hand scalar multiplication
Now suppose that we multiply all three of the original vector coordinates on the right by a 
scalar k+. In this case, we get
ak+ = (xak+,yak+,zak+)
That’s the right-hand Cartesian product of a and k+. If we multiply the original vector coordi-
nates on the right by a negative constant k−, we get
ak−= (xak−,yak−,zak−)
That’s the right-hand Cartesian product of a and k−. As you might guess, it doesn’t matter 
whether we multiply a vector by a constant on the left or the right; we get the same result 
either way. Scalar multiplication of a vector is commutative.
Magnitude
Let’s keep thinking about our vector a = (xa,ya,za) in Cartesian xyz space. If we make sure that a
is in standard form, we can calculate its magnitude, which we’ll denote as ra, by finding the dis-
tance of its terminating point from the origin. We learned how to do that in Chap. 7. We get
ra = (xa
2 + ya
2 + za
2)1/2
Here, the r stands for “radius.” In some texts, vector magnitude is denoted by surrounding 
its name with absolute-value signs, or by changing the bold letter to a nonbold italic letter. 
Instead of ra, you might see the magnitude of a written as |a| or a.
Direction
The x, y, and z coordinates contain all the information we need to fully and uniquely define 
the direction of a vector in Cartesian three-space, as long as the vector is in standard form. But 
there’s a more explicit way to do it. We can define the direction of a Cartesian three-space 
vector if we know the measures of the angles qx, qy, and qz that the vector subtends relative 
to the +x, +y, and +z axes, respectively, as shown in Fig. 8-4. These angles, expressed as an 
ordered triple (qx,qy,qz), are called direction angles. For any nonzero vector in xyz space, the 
direction angles are always nonnegative, and they’re never larger than p. That means
0 ≤qx ≤p
0 ≤qy ≤p
0 ≤qz ≤p
When we restrict the angles this way, we don’t have to worry about whether we go clockwise 
or counterclockwise from the axes to the vectors.
An example
Imagine a nonstandard vector c′ in Cartesian three-space. Suppose that the originating point 
is (2,3,−7), and the terminating point is (−1,4, −1). Let’s convert it to standard form, and call 
How They’re Defined  131

132  Vectors in Cartesian Three-Space
the resulting vector c. To get the terminating points of c, we must individually subtract the 
originating coordinates of c′ from the terminating coordinates of c′. The x coordinate of c is
xc = −1 − 2 = −3
The y coordinate of c is
 
yc = 4 − 3 = 1
The z coordinate of c is
zc = −1 − (−7) = −1 + 7 = 6
Therefore, the standard form of c′ is
c = (xc,yc,zc) = (−3,1,6)
Another example
Imagine the standard-form vector a = (2,3,4) in Cartesian xyz space. Suppose that we want to 
find the magnitude of this vector, accurate to three decimal places. We can assign it the coor-
dinates xa = 2, ya = 3, and za = 4. Plugging these values into the magnitude formula, we get
 
|a| = (xa
2 + ya
2 + za
2)1/2 = (22 + 32 + 42)1/2
 
= (4 + 9 + 16)1/2 = 291/2
Figure 8-4
The direction of a vector in Cartesian xyz space is 
defined by the angles that the vector subtends with 
respect to each of the three positive axes.

Are you confused?
You might wonder, “When we want to do operations with vectors that aren’t in standard form, 
must we always convert them to standard form first?” Not always. Sometimes we’ll get a valid 
result from a vector operation if we leave the vector or vectors in nonstandard form. But some-
times our answer will turn out wrong, and sometimes we won’t be able to figure out what to do at 
all. The safest course of action is to do operations on vectors in xyz space only after they’ve been 
converted to standard form.
Here’s a challenge!
Imagine three standard-form vectors a, b, and c in xyz space, defined by ordered triples as
 
a = (4,0,0)
 
b = (0,−5,0)
 
c = (0,0,3)
What are the direction angles of these vectors?
Solution
Figure 8-5 shows this situation. We can see that a lies along the positive x axis, b lies along the 
negative y axis, and c lies along the positive z axis. In Cartesian three-space, each of the coordinate 
Figure 8-5
Three standard-form vectors and their direction angles. 
Each vector lies along one of the coordinate axes.
How They’re Defined  133

134  Vectors in Cartesian Three-Space
axes is perpendicular to the other two. This fact tells us that a subtends an angle of 0 with respect 
to the +x axis, an angle of p /2 with respect to the +y axis, and an angle of p /2 with respect to the 
+z axis. The direction angles of a are therefore
 (qxa,qya,qza) = (0,p /2,p /2)
We know that b subtends an angle of p /2 relative to the +x axis, and an angle of p /2 with respect 
to the +z axis. Because b points along the negative y axis, its angle is p relative to the +y axis. The 
direction angles of b are therefore
 (qxb,qyb,qzb) = (p /2,p,p /2)
Finally, vector c subtends an angle of p /2 against the +x axis, p /2 against the +y axis, and 0 against 
the +z axis, so the direction angles of c are
 (qxc,qyc,qzc) = (p /2,p /2,0)
Remember that these ordered triples contain angle data in radians, not the x, y, and z coordinates for 
the terminating points!
Sum and Difference
When we want to add or subtract two vectors in Cartesian xyz space, we should make certain 
that they’re both in standard form before we do anything else. Once we’ve gotten the vectors 
into standard form so that they both start at the origin, we can simply add or subtract the x,
y, and z coordinates.
Cartesian vector sum
Suppose we have two generic three-space vectors in standard form, represented by ordered 
triples as
a = (xa,ya,za)
and
b = (xb,yb,zb)
Their vector sum is
a + b = [(xa + xb),(ya + yb),(za + zb)]
This sum can be found geometrically by constructing a parallelogram with vectors a and b
as adjacent sides. The sum vector a + b is the diagonal of the parallelogram. An example is 
shown in Fig. 8-6. The figure doesn’t look like a parallelogram because we’re looking at it in 

perspective, and from an oblique angle. All three vectors project generally in our direction; 
that is, they’re all “coming out of the page.”
Cartesian negative of a vector
To find the Cartesian negative of a standard-form vector in xyz space, we take the negatives of 
all three coordinate values. For example, if we have
a = (xa,ya,za)
then the Cartesian negative vector is
−a = (−xa,−ya,−za)
As in two-space, the Cartesian negative of a three-space vector always has the same magnitude 
as the original, but points in the opposite direction.
Cartesian vector difference
Let’s look again at the two generic vectors
a = (xa,ya,za)
+x
+y
+z
–y
–z
a
b
a + b
The four points
lie at the vertices
of a parallelogram
(believe it or not!)
Figure 8-6  Vector addition in Cartesian xyz space. The terminating points 
of the three vectors a, b, and a + b, along with the origin, lie at 
the vertices of a parallelogram. Perspective distorts the view.
Sum and Difference  135

136  Vectors in Cartesian Three-Space
and
b = (xb,yb,zb)
Suppose we want to subtract b from a. We can do this by finding the Cartesian negative of b
and then adding that result to a, getting
a − b = a + (−b) = {[(xa + (−xb)],[(ya + (−yb)],[(za + (−zb)]}
 
= [(xa −xb),(ya −yb),(za −zb)]
We can skip the “find-the-negative” step and simply subtract the coordinate values, but we 
must be sure to keep the coordinates in the correct order if we do it that way.
An example
Let’s look again at the three standard-form vectors that we worked with a few minutes ago. 
They are
 
a = (4,0,0)
 
b = (0,−5,0)
 
c = (0,0,3)
Suppose we want to find the sum vector a + b. We add the x, y, and z coordinates individually 
to get
a + b = (4,0,0) + (0,−5,0) = {(4 + 0),[0 + (−5)],(0 + 0)}
 
= (4,−5,0)
If we add c to the right-hand side of this sum, we get
 (a + b) + c = (4,−5,0) + (0,0,3) = [(4 + 0),(−5 + 0),(0 + 3)]
 
= (4,−5,3)
Another example
Continuing with the same three vectors as previously, let’s find the sum b + c. We add the x,
y, and z coordinates individually to get
b + c = (0,−5,0) + (0,0,3) = [(0 + 0),(−5 + 0),(0 + 3)]
 
= (0,−5,3)
Adding a to the left-hand side of this sum, we obtain
a + (b + c) = (4,0,0) + (0,−5,3) = {(4 + 0),[0 + (−5)],(0 + 3)}
 
= (4,−5,3)

Are you confused?
The previous example might lead you to ask, “Is vector addition associative in xyz space, just as 
real-number addition is associative in ordinary algebra?” The answer is yes. The following proof 
will show you why.
Here’s a challenge!
Show that if a, b, and c are standard-form vectors in Cartesian xyz space, then addition among 
them is associative. That is
(a + b) + c = a + (b + c)
Solution
Let’s begin by assigning generic names to the coordinates of each vector. Using the same style as 
we’ve been working with all along, we can say that
 
a = (xa,ya,za)
 
b = (xb,yb,zb)
 
c = (xc,yc,zc)
When we add a and b using the formula we’ve learned, we get
a + b = [(xa + xb),(ya + yb),(za + zb)]
Adding c to this sum on the right, again using the formula we’ve learned, we obtain
(a + b) + c = {[(xa + xb) + xc],[(ya + yb) + yc],[(za + zb) + zc]}
The associative law for addition of real numbers allows us to regroup each of the three coordinates 
in the ordered triple to get
(a + b) + c = {[xa + (xb + xc)],[ya + (yb + yc)],[za + (zb + zc)]}
By definition, we know that
{[xa + (xb + xc)],[ya + (yb + yc)],[za + (zb + zc)]} = a + (b + c)
By substitution, we have
(a + b) + c = a + (b + c)
Sum and Difference  137

138  Vectors in Cartesian Three-Space
Some Basic Properties
Here are some fundamental laws that apply to vectors and real-number scalars in xyz space. 
We won’t delve into the proofs. Most of these facts are intuitive, and resemble similar laws 
in algebra. We’ve already seen a couple of them, but they’re repeated here so you can use this 
section for reference in the future. Keep in mind that all of these rules assume that the vectors 
are in standard form.
Commutative law for vector addition
When we add any two vectors in xyz space, it doesn’t matter in which order the addition is 
done. The resultant vector is the same either way. If a and b are vectors, then
a + b = b + a
Commutative law for vector-scalar multiplication
When we find the product of a vector and a scalar in xyz space, it doesn’t matter which way 
we do it. If a is a vector and k is a scalar, then
ka = ak
Associative law for vector addition
When we add up three vectors in xyz space, it makes no difference how we group them. If a,
b, and c are vectors, then
(a + b) + c = a + (b + c)
Associative law for vector-scalar multiplication
Suppose that we have two scalars k1 and k2, along with some vector a in Cartesian xyz space. 
If we want to find the product k1k2a, it makes no difference how we group the quantities. We 
can write this rule mathematically as
k1k2a = (k1k2)a = k1(k2a)
Distributive laws for scalar addition
Imagine that we have some vector a in xyz space, along with two real-number scalars k1 and 
k2. We can always be sure that
a(k1 + k2) = ak1 + ak2
and
(k1 + k2)a = k1a + k2a
The first rule is called the left-hand distributive law for multiplication of a vector by the sum 
of two scalars. The second law is called the right-hand distributive law for multiplication of the 
sum of two scalars by a vector.

Distributive laws for vector addition
Suppose we have two vectors a and b in xyz space, along with a real-number scalar k. We can 
always be certain that
k(a + b) = ka + kb
and
(a + b)k = ak + bk
The first rule is called the left-hand distributive law for multiplication of a scalar by the sum 
of two vectors. The second law is called the right-hand distributive law for multiplication of 
the sum of two vectors by a scalar.
Unit vectors
Let’s take a close look at the “structures” of two different vectors a and b in xyz space, both of 
which are expressed in the standard form. Suppose that their coordinates can be written as the 
familiar generic ordered triples
a = (xa,ya,za)
and
b = (xb,yb,zb)
Either of these vectors can be split up into a sum of three component vectors, each of which 
lies along one of the coordinate axes. The component vectors are scalar multiples of mutually 
perpendicular vectors with magnitude 1. We have
 
a = (xa,ya,za)
 
= (xa,0,0) + (0,ya,0) + (0,0,za)
 
= xa(1,0,0) + ya(0,1,0) + za(0,0,1)
and
 
b = (xb,yb,zb)
 
= (xb,0,0) + (0,yb,0) + (0,0,zb)
 
= xb(1,0,0) + yb(0,1,0) + zb(0,0,1)
The three vectors (1,0,0), (0,1,0), and (0,0,1) are called standard unit vectors. (We can call 
them SUVs for short.) It’s customary to name them i, j, and k, such that
 
i = (1,0,0)
 
j = (0,1,0)
 
k = (0,0,1)
Some Basic Properties  139

140  Vectors in Cartesian Three-Space
Figure 8-7 illustrates the coordinates and direction angles of the three SUVs in Cartesian 
three-space, where each axis division represents 1/5 of a unit. Note that each SUV is perpen-
dicular to the other two.
A generic example
Let’s see what happens when we add two generic vectors component-by-component. Again, 
suppose we have
a = (xa,ya,za)
and
b = (xb,yb,zb)
Expressed as sums of multiples of the SUVs, these two vectors are
a = (xa,ya,za) = xai + yaj + zak
Figure 8-7 The three standard unit vectors i, j, and k in Cartesian xyz space.

and
b = (xb,yb,zb) = xbi + ybj + zbk
When we add these components straightaway, we get
a + b = xai + yaj + zak + xbi + ybj + zbk
The commutative law for vector addition allows us to rearrange the addends on the right-
hand side of this equation to get
a + b = xai + xbi + yaj + ybj + zak + zbk
Now let’s use the right-hand distributive law for multiplication of the sum of two scalars by a 
vector to morph the previous equation into
a + b = (xa + xb)i + (ya + yb)j + (za + zb)k
That’s the sum of the original vectors, expressed as a sum of multiples of SUVs.
A specific example
Suppose we’re given a vector b = (−2,3,−7), and we’re told to break it into a sum of multiples 
of i, j, and k. We can imagine i as going 1 unit “to the right,” j as going 1 unit “upward,” and 
k as going 1 unit “toward us.” The breakdown proceeds as follows:
b = (−2,3,−7) = −2 × (1,0,0) + 3 × (0,1,0) + (−7) × (0,0,1)
 
= −2i + 3j + (−7)k = −2i + 3j − 7k
Are you confused?
By now you might wonder, “Must I memorize all of the rules mentioned in this section?” Not neces-
sarily. You can always come back to these pages for reference. But honestly, I recommend that you do 
memorize them. If you take a lot of physics or engineering courses later on, you’ll be glad that you did.
Dot Product
As we’ve been doing throughout this chapter, let’s revisit our generic standard-form vectors in 
xyz space, defined as
a = (xa,ya,za)
Dot Product  141

142  Vectors in Cartesian Three-Space
and
b = (xb,yb,zb)
We can calculate the dot product a • b as a real number using the formula
a • b = xaxb + yayb + zazb
Alternatively, it is
a • b = rarb cos qab
where ra is the magnitude of a, rb is the magnitude of b, and qab is the angle between a and b
as determined in the plane containing them both, rotating from a to b.
An example
Let’s find the dot product of the two Cartesian vectors
a = (2,3,4)
and
b = (−1,5,0)
We can call the coordinates xa = 2, ya = 3, za = 4, xb = −1, yb = 5, and zb = 0. Plugging these 
values into the formula, we get
a • b = xaxb + yayb + zazb = 2 × (−1) + 3 × 5 + 4 × 0
 
= −2 + 15 + 0 = 13
Another example
Suppose we want to find the dot product of the two Cartesian vectors
a = (−4,1,−3)
and
b = (−3,6,6)
This time, we have xa = −4, ya = 1, za = −3, xb = −3, yb = 6, and zb = 6. When we substitute 
these coordinates into the formula, we have
a • b = xaxb + yayb + zazb = −4 × (−3) + 1 × 6 + (−3) × 6
 
= 12 + 6 + (−18) = 0

Are you confused?
Do you wonder how two nonzero vectors can have a dot product of 0? If we look closely at the alterna-
tive formula for the dot product, we can figure it out. That formula, once again, is
a • b = rarb cos qab
The right-hand side of this equation will attain a value of 0 if at least one of the following is 
true:
• The magnitude of a is equal to 0
• The magnitude of b is equal to 0
• The cosine of the angle between a and b is equal to 0
Neither of the vectors in the preceding example has a magnitude of 0, so we must conclude that 
cos qab = 0. That can happen only when a and b are perpendicular to each other, so qab is either p /2 
or 3p /2. In the preceding example, the two vectors
a = (−4,1,−3)
and
b = (−3,6,6)
are mutually perpendicular. That’s not obvious from the ordered triples, is it?
Here’s a challenge!
Show that for any two vectors pointing in the same direction, their dot product is equal to the 
product of their magnitudes. Then show that for any two vectors pointing in opposite directions, 
their dot product is equal to the negative of the product of their magnitudes.
Solution
Imagine two vectors a and b that point in the same direction. In this situation, the angle qab
between the vectors is equal to 0. If the magnitude of a is ra and the magnitude of b is rb, then the 
dot product is
a • b = rarb cos qab = rarb cos 0 = rarb × 1 = rarb
Now think of two vectors c and d that point in opposite directions. The angle qcd between the vec-
tors is equal to p. If the magnitude of c is rc and the magnitude of d is rd, then the dot product is
c • d = rcrd cos qcd = rcrd cos p = rcrd × (−1) = −rcrd
Dot Product  143

144  Vectors in Cartesian Three-Space
Cross Product
The cross product a ë b of two vectors a and b in three-dimensional space can be found 
according to the same rules we learned for finding a cross product in polar two-space. We get 
a vector perpendicular to the plane containing a and b, and whose magnitude ra×b is given by
ra×b = rarb sin qab
where ra is the magnitude of a, rb is the magnitude of b, and qab is the angle between a and b,
expressed in the rotational sense going from a to b.
When we want to figure out a cross product, it’s always best to keep the angle between 
the vectors nonnegative, but not larger than p. That is, we should restrict the angle to the 
following range:
0 ≤qab ≤p
If we look at vectors a and b from some vantage point far away from the plane containing 
them, and if qab turns through a half circle or less counterclockwise as we go from a to b, then 
a ë b points toward us. If qab turns through a half circle or less clockwise as we go from a to b,
then a ë b points away from us. In any case, the cross product vector is precisely perpendicular 
to both the original vectors.
An example
Consider two vectors a and b in three-space. Imagine that they both have magnitude 2, but 
their directions differ by p /6. We can plug the numbers into the formula for the magnitude 
of the cross product of two vectors, and calculate as follows:
ra×b = rarb sin qab = 2 × 2 × sin (p /6) = 4 × 1/2 = 2
If the p /6 angular rotation from a to b goes counterclockwise as we observe it, then a ë b
points toward us. If the p /6 angular rotation from a to b goes clockwise as we see it, then 
a ë b points away from us.
Another example
Now think about two vectors c and d, represented by ordered triples as
c = (1,1,1)
and
d = (−2,−2,−2)
Let’s find the cross product c ë d. From the information we’ve been given, we can see imme-
diately that d = -2c. That means the magnitude of d is twice the magnitude of c, and the two 
vectors point in opposite directions. We can calculate the magnitude rc of vector c as
rc = (12 + 12 + 12)1/2 = (1 + 1 + 1)1/2 = 31/2

and the magnitude rd of vector d as
rd = [(−2)2 + (−2)2 + (−2)2]1/2 = (4 + 4 + 4)1/2 = 121/2
When two vectors point in opposite directions, the angle between them is p, whether we go 
clockwise or counterclockwise. We now have all the information we need to figure out the 
magnitude rc×d of the cross product c ë d using the formula
rc×d = rcrd sin qcd = 31/2 × 121/2 × sin p
 
= 31/2 × 121/2 × 0 = 0
The cross product c ë d is the zero vector, because its magnitude is 0. Although we don’t yet 
have a formula for figuring out cross products directly from ordered triples in xyz space, we 
can infer from this result that
(1,1,1) ë (−2,−2,−2) = (0,0,0)
where the bold times sign (ë) denotes the cross product, not ordinary multiplication.
Are you confused?
The preceding result might make you wonder, “If two vectors point in exactly the same direction 
or in exactly opposite directions is their cross product always the zero vector?” The answer is yes, 
and it doesn’t depend on the magnitudes of the original two vectors. Let’s prove this fact now.
Here’s a challenge!
Show that the cross product of any two vectors that point in the same direction or in opposite 
directions, regardless of their magnitudes, is the zero vector.
Solution
When two vectors a and b point in the same direction, the angle qab between them is 0. In such a 
situation, the magnitude ra×b of the cross product is
ra×b = rarb sin qab = rarb sin 0 = rarb × 0 = 0
Therefore, a ë b = 0, because if a vector has a magnitude of 0, then it’s the zero vector by defini-
tion. When two vectors c and d point in opposite directions, the angle qcd between them is p, so 
the magnitude rc×d of the cross product is
rc×d = rcrd sin qcd = rcrd sin p = rcrd × 0 = 0
Again, we have c ë d = 0 by definition.
Cross Product  145

146  Vectors in Cartesian Three-Space
Some More Vector Laws
Here are some more rules involving vectors. You’ll find these useful for future reference if you 
get serious about higher mathematics, physical science, or engineering.
Commutative law for dot product
When we figure out the dot product of two vectors, it doesn’t matter in which order we work 
it. The result is the same either way. If a and b are vectors in three-space, then
a • b = b • a
Reverse-directional commutative law for cross product
Suppose qab is the angle between two vectors a and b as defined in the plane containing a and 
b, such that 0 ≤qab ≤p, and such that we’re allowed to rotate in either direction. The magni-
tude of the cross-product vector is a nonnegative real number, and is independent of the order 
in which the operation is performed. This can be proven on the basis of the commutative 
property for multiplication of real numbers. We have
ra×b = rarb sin qab
and
rb×a = rbra sin qab = rarb sin qab
The direction of b ë a in space is exactly opposite that of a ë b. Figure 8-8 can help us see why 
this is true when we apply the right-hand rule for cross products (from Chap. 5) both ways.
Figure 8-8  The vector b ë a has the same 
magnitude as vector a ë b, but 
points in the opposite direction.

Distributive laws for dot product over vector addition
Imagine that we have three vectors a, b, and c in three-space. We can always be sure that
a • (b + c) = (a • b) + (a • c)
This fact is called the left-hand distributive law for a dot product over the sum of two vectors. 
It’s also true that
(a + b) • c = (a • c) + (b • c)
which, as you can probably guess, is the right-hand distributive law for the sum of two vectors 
over a dot product.
Distributive laws for cross product over vector addition
Suppose that a, b, and c are vectors in three-space. Then we can always be sure that
a × (b + c) = (a × b) + (a × c)
This property is known as the left-hand distributive law for a cross product over the sum of 
two vectors. A similar rule exists when we cross multiply a sum of vectors on the right. The 
right-hand distributive law for the sum of two vectors over a cross product tells us that
 (a + b) × c = (a × c) + (b × c)
We can expand these rules to pairs of polynomial vector sums, each having n addends (where 
n = 2, n = 3, n = 4, etc.), in the same way as multiplication is distributive with respect to 
addition for polynomials in algebra. For example, for n = 2, we have the cross product of two 
binomial vector sums, getting
(a + b) × (c + d) = (a × c) + (a × d) + (b × c) + (b × d)
In the case of n = 3, the cross product of two trinomial vector sums expands as
(a + b + c) × (d + e + f) = (a × d) + (a × e) + (a × f) + (b × d) + (b × e) + (b × f)
+ (c × d) + (c × e) + (c × f )
Dot product of cross products
Imagine that we have four vectors a, b, c, and d in three-space. We can rearrange a dot product 
of cross products as
(a × b) • (c × d) = (a • c)(b • d) − (a • d)(b • c)
We always end up with a scalar quantity (that is, a real number).
Some More Vector Laws  147

148  Vectors in Cartesian Three-Space
Dot product of mixed vectors and scalars
Suppose that t and u are real numbers, and we have two three-space vectors a and b. We can 
rearrange a dot product of scalar multiples as
ta • ub = tu(a • b)
The result is always a scalar.
Cross product of mixed vectors and scalars
Once again, imagine that t and u are real numbers, and we have two three-space vectors a and 
b. We can rearrange a cross product of scalar multiples as
ta ë ub = tu(a ë b)
The result is always a vector quantity.
Here’s a challenge!
Imagine two vectors in Cartesian xyz space whose coordinates are expressed as
a = (xa,ya,za)
and
b = (xb,yb,zb)
Derive a general expression for a ë b in the form of an ordered triple.
Solution
Let’s go back to the concept of SUVs that we learned earlier in this chapter. These vectors are
 
i = (1,0,0)
 
j = (0,1,0)
 
k = (0,0,1)
Now let’s evaluate and list all the cross products we can get from these vectors. Using the right-
hand rule for cross products (from Chap. 5) along with the formula for the magnitude of the cross 
product of vectors, we can deduce, along with the help of Fig. 8-7 on page 140, that
 
i × j = k
 
j × i = −k
 
i × k = −j
 
k × i = j
 
j × k = i
 
k × j = −i

We can write the cross product a ë b as
 
a ë b = (xa,ya,za) ë (xb,yb,zb)
 
= (xai + yaj + zak) ë (xbi + ybj + zbk)
Using the left-hand distributive law for the cross product over vector addition as it applies to 
trinomials, we can expand this to
a ë b = (xai ë xbi) + (xai ë ybj) + (xai ë zbk) + (yaj ë xbi) + (yaj ë ybj) + (yaj ë zbk)
 
+ (zak ë xbi) + (zak ë ybj) + (zak ë zbk)
With our newfound knowledge of how scalar multiplication and cross products can be mixed (see 
“Cross product of mixed vectors and scalars”), we can morph each of the terms after the equals 
sign to get 
a ë b = xaxb(i ë i) + xayb(i ë j) + xazb(i ë k) + yaxb(j ë i) + yayb(j ë j) + yazb(j ë k)
 
+ zaxb(k ë i) + zayb(k ë j) + zazb(k ë k)
A few moments ago, we proved that we always get the zero vector if we take the cross product of 
any vector with another vector pointing in the same direction. That means the cross product of 
any vector with itself is the zero vector. Because the zero vector has zero magnitude, we get the 
zero vector if we multiply it by any scalar. With all this information in mind, we can rewrite the 
previous equation as
         a × b = 0 + xayb(i × j) + xazb(i × k) + yaxb(j × i) + 0 + yazb(j × k) + zaxb(k × i) + zayb(k × j) + 0
Looking back at the six “factoids” involving pairwise cross products of i, j, and k, and getting rid of the 
zero vectors in the previous equation, we can simplify it to
a ë b = xaybk + xazb(−j) + yaxb(−k) + yazbi + zaxbj + zayb(−i)
Rearranging the signs, we obtain
a ë b = xaybk −xazbj −yaxbk + yazbi + zaxbj −zaybi
This can be morphed a little more, based on rules we’ve learned in this chapter, getting
a ë b = (yazb −zayb)i + (zaxb−xazb)j + (xayb −yaxb)k
This SUV-based equation tells us three things:
• The x coordinate of a ë b is yazb −zayb
• The y coordinate of a ë b is zaxb−xazb
• The z coordinate of a ë b is xayb −yaxb
Some More Vector Laws  149

150  Vectors in Cartesian Three-Space
Knowing these three facts, we can write the x, y, and z coordinates of a ë b as an ordered triple 
to get
a ë b =  [(yazb −zayb),(zaxb−xazb),(xayb −yaxb)]
We’ve found a formula that allows us to directly calculate the cross product of two vectors in xyz
space when we’re given both vectors as ordered triples.
Here’s an extra-credit challenge!
The formulas for the seven laws in this section were stated straightaway. We didn’t show how they 
are derived. If you’re ambitious (and you have a good pen along with plenty of blank sheets of 
paper), derive these seven laws by working out the general arithmetic step by step. Following are 
the names of those laws again, for reference:
• Commutative law for dot product
• Reverse-directional commutative law for cross product
• Distributive laws for dot product over vector addition
• Distributive laws for cross product over vector addition
• Dot product of cross products
• Dot product of mixed vectors and scalars
• Cross product of mixed vectors and scalars
Solution
You’re on your own. That’s why you get extra credit! Here’s a hint: The work is rather tedious, but it’s 
straightforward.
Practice Exercises
This is an open-book quiz. You may (and should) refer to the text as you solve these problems. 
Don’t hurry! You’ll find worked-out answers in App. A. The solutions in the appendix may not 
represent the only way a problem can be figured out. If you think you can solve a particular 
problem in a quicker or better way than you see there, by all means try it!
 1.  Find the magnitude ra of the standard-form vector
a = (8,−1,−6)
 
  in Cartesian xyz space. Assume the values given are exact. Using a calculator, round off 
the answer to three decimal places.
 2.  Imagine a nonstandard vector a′ that originates at (−2,0,4) and terminates at the origin. 
Convert a′ to standard form.
 3.  What’s the standard form of the product 4b′, where b′ originates at (2,3,4) and 
terminates at (6,7,8)? Here’s a hint: Convert b′ to its standard form b first, and then 
multiply that vector by 4.

 4. Consider the two standard-form vectors
a = (−7,−10,0)
 
 and
 
b = (8,−1,−6)
 
 in xyz space. What is their dot product?
 5. Consider the two standard-form vectors
a = (2,6,0)
 
 and
b = (7,4,3)
 
 in xyz space. What is their cross product?
 6.  Imagine two standard-form vectors f and g that point in the same direction in three-
space. Suppose that the magnitude rf of f is equal to 4, and the magnitude rg of g is 
equal to 7. What is f • g?
 7.  Imagine two standard-form vectors f and g that point in opposite directions in three-
space. Suppose that the magnitude rf of vector f is equal to 4, and the magnitude rg of 
vector g is equal to 7. What is f • g?
 8.  Imagine two standard-form vectors f and g that are perpendicular to each other in 
three-space, and we’re looking at them from a point of view such that we see the angle 
going counterclockwise from f to g as p /2. Suppose that the magnitude rf of vector f is 
equal to 4, and the magnitude rg of vector g is equal to 7. What is f • g? What is g • f?
 9.  Imagine two standard-form vectors f and g that are perpendicular to each other in 
three-space, and we’re looking at them from a point of view such that we see the angle 
going counterclockwise from f to g as p /2. Suppose that the magnitude rf of vector f is 
equal to 4, and the magnitude rg of vector g is equal to 7. What is f ë g? What is g ë f?
 10.  Consider two standard-form vectors a and b that both lie in the xy plane within 
Cartesian xyz space. Suppose that a = (2,0,0), so it points along the +x axis. Suppose 
that b has magnitude 2 and rotates counterclockwise in the xy plane, starting at (2,0,0), 
then going around through (0,2,0), (−2,0,0), and (0,−2,0), finally ending up back at 
(2,0,0). Now imagine that we watch all this activity from somewhere high above the 
xy plane, near the +z axis. Describe what happens to the cross product vector a ë b as 
vector b goes through a complete counterclockwise rotation. What will we see if b keeps 
rotating counterclockwise indefinitely?
Practice Exercises  151

We can define the locations of points in three dimensions by methods other than the Cartesian
system. In this chapter, we’ll learn about the two most common alternative coordinate schemes 
for three-space.
Cylindrical Coordinates
Figure 9-1 is a functional diagram of a system of cylindrical coordinates. It’s basically a polar 
coordinate plane of the sort we learned about in Chap. 3, with the addition of a height axis to 
define the third dimension.
How it works
To set up a cylindrical coordinate system, we “paste” a polar plane onto a Cartesian xy plane, 
creating a reference plane. We call the positive Cartesian x axis the reference axis. Imagine a 
point P in three-space, along with its projection point P ′ onto the reference plane. In this 
context, the term “projection” means that P ′ is directly above or below P, so a line connecting 
the two points is perpendicular to the reference plane. We define three coordinates:
• The direction angle, which we call q, is the angle in the reference plane as we turn 
counterclockwise from the reference axis to the ray that goes out from the origin 
through P ′.
• The radius, which we call r, is the straight-line distance from the origin to P ′.
• The height, which we call h, is the vertical displacement (positive, negative, or zero) 
from P ′ to P.
These three coordinates give us enough information to uniquely define the position of P as 
shown in Fig. 9-1. We express the cylindrical coordinates as an ordered triple
P = (q,r,h)
CHAPTER 
9
Alternative Three-Space
152

153
Strange values
We can have nonstandard direction angles in cylindrical coordinates, but it’s best to add or 
subtract whatever multiple of 2p to bring the angle into the preferred range of 0 ≤q < 2p.
If q ≥ 2p, then we’re making at least one complete counterclockwise rotation from the 
reference axis. If q < 0, then we’re rotating clockwise from the reference axis rather than 
counterclockwise.
We can have negative radii, but it’s best to reverse the direction angle if necessary to 
keep the radius nonnegative. We can multiply a negative radius coordinate by −1 so it 
becomes positive, and then add or subtract p to or from the direction angle to ensure that 
0 ≤q < 2p.
The height h can be any real number. We have h > 0 if and only if P is above the reference 
plane, h < 0 if and only if P is below the reference plane, and h = 0 if and only if P is in the 
reference plane.
An example
In the situation shown by Fig. 9-1, the direction angle q appears to be somewhat more than 
p (half of a rotation from the reference axis) but less than 3p /2 (three-quarters of a rotation). 
The radius r is positive, but we can’t tell how large it is because there are no coordinate incre-
ments for reference. The height h is also positive, but again, we don’t know its exact value 
because there are no reference increments.
Figure 9-1  Cylindrical coordinates define points in 
three dimensions according to an angle, a 
radial distance, and a vertical 
displacement.
Cylindrical Coordinates  153

154  Alternative Three-Space
Another example
In Chap. 3, we learned that the equation of a circle in polar two-space is simple; all we have 
to do is specify a radius. If we do the same thing in cylindrical three-space, we get a vertical 
cylinder that’s infinitely tall, with an axis that corresponds to the vertical coordinate axis. 
Figure 9-2 shows what we get when we graph the equation
r = k
in cylindrical three-space, where k is a nonzero constant.
Still another example
If we set the height equal to a nonzero constant in cylindrical coordinates, we get the set of all 
points at a specific distance either above or below the reference plane. That’s always a plane 
parallel to the reference plane. Figure 9-3 is an example of the generic situation where
h = k
In this case, k is a positive real-number constant, but we don’t know the exact value because 
the graph doesn’t show us any reference increments for the height coordinate.
+x
–x
+z
–z
+y
–y
Reference
plane
Cylinder
extends
upward
forever
Cylinder
extends
downward
forever
r = k
Constant radius
Figure 9-2  When we set the radius equal to a constant 
in cylindrical coordinates, we get an 
infinitely tall vertical cylinder whose axis 
corresponds to the vertical axis.

Are you confused?
Some texts will tell you that the cylindrical coordinates of a point are listed in an ordered triple 
with the radius first, then the angle, and finally the height, as
P = (r,q,h)
Don’t let this notational inconsistency baffle you. For any particular set of coordinate values, 
we’re talking about the same point, regardless of the order in which we list them. In this book, we 
indicate the angle before the radius to be consistent with the polar-coordinate system described in 
Chap. 3. When “traveling” from the origin out to some point P in space in the cylindrical system, 
most people find it easiest to think of the reference-plane angle q first (as in “face northwest”), 
then the radius r (as in “walk 40 meters”), and finally the height h (as in “dig down 2 meters to 
find the treasure”). That’s why, in this book, we use the form
P = (q,r,h)
Here’s a challenge!
What do we get if we set the direction angle q equal to a constant in cylindrical coordinates? As 
an example, draw a diagram showing the graph of the equation
q = p /2
+x
–x
+z
–z
+y
–y
Constant
height
h = k
Reference
plane
Plane extends
forever in
all directions
Figure 9-3  When we set the height equal to a constant 
in cylindrical coordinates, we get a plane 
parallel to the reference plane.
Cylindrical Coordinates  155

156  Alternative Three-Space
+z
–z
+x
–x
+y
–y
Reference
plane
Constant
angle
=
/2
Plane
extends
forever in
all directions
p
q
Solution
Let’s think back again to Chap. 3. In polar coordinates, if we set the direction angle equal to a 
constant, we get a line passing through the origin. Cylindrical coordinates are simply a vertical 
extension of polar coordinates, going infinitely upward and infinitely downward. If we hold q
constant in cylindrical coordinates but allow the other coordinates to vary at will, we get a vertical 
plane, which is an infinite vertical extension of a horizontal line. If k is any real-number constant, 
then the graph of
q = k
is a plane that passes through the vertical axis. In the case where q = p /2, that plane also contains the 
ray for the direction angle p /2, as shown in Fig. 9-4.
Figure 9-4  When we set the angle equal to a constant in 
cylindrical coordinates, we get a plane that 
contains the vertical axis.
Cylindrical Conversions
Conversion of coordinate values between cylindrical and Cartesian three-space is just as easy 
as conversion between polar and Cartesian two-space. The only difference is that in three-
space, we add the vertical dimension. In xyz space, it’s z; in cylindrical three-space, it’s h.
Cylindrical to Cartesian
Let’s look at the simplest conversions first. These transformations are like going down a river; 
we can simply “get into the boat” (sharpen our pencils) and make sure we don’t “run aground” 

(make an arithmetic error). Suppose we have a point (q,r,h) in cylindrical coordinates. We can 
find the Cartesian x value of this point using the formula
x = r cos q
The Cartesian y value is
y = r sin q
The Cartesian z value is
z = h
An example
Consider the point (q,r,h) = (p,2,−3) in cylindrical coordinates. Let’s find the (x,y,z) representa-
tion in Cartesian three-space using the preceding formulas. Plugging in the numbers gives us
 
x = 2 cos p = 2 × (−1) = −2
 
y = 2 sin p = 2 × 0 = 0
 
z = h = −3
Therefore, we have the Cartesian equivalent point
(x,y,z) = (−2,0,−3)
Cartesian to cylindrical: finding q
Going from Cartesian to cylindrical coordinates is like navigating up a river. We not only have 
to “go against the current” (do some hard work), but we have to be sure we “take the right 
tributary” (use the correct angle values).
Cartesian-to-cylindrical angle conversion is the same as the Cartesian-to-polar angle con-
version process that we learned in Chap. 3. That was messy, because we had to break the situ-
ation down into nine different ranges for q. In the cylindrical context, the angle-conversion 
process works as follows:
q = 0
by default
When x = 0 and y = 0
that is, at the origin
q = 0
When x > 0 and y = 0
q = Arctan ( y/x)
When x > 0 and y > 0
q = p /2
When x = 0 and y > 0
q = p + Arctan ( y/x)
When x < 0 and y > 0
q = p
When x < 0 and y = 0
q = p + Arctan ( y/x)
When x < 0 and y < 0
q = 3p /2
When x = 0 and y < 0
q = 2p + Arctan ( y/x)
When x > 0 and y < 0
Cylindrical Conversions  157

158  Alternative Three-Space
If you’ve forgotten what the Arctangent function is, and why we use a capital “A” to denote it, 
you can check in Chap. 3 to refresh your memory. Notice that the Cartesian z value is irrel-
evant when we want to find the direction angle in cylindrical coordinates.
Cartesian to cylindrical: finding r
When we want to calculate the r coordinate in cylindrical three-space on the basis of a point 
in Cartesian xyz space, we use the Cartesian two-space distance formula, exactly as we would 
in the polar plane. The radius depends only on the values of x and y; the z coordinate is irrel-
evant. The r coordinate is therefore equal to the distance between the projection point P ′ and 
the origin in the xy plane, which is
r = (x2 + y2)1/2
Cartesian to cylindrical: finding h
When we want to change the Cartesian z value to the cylindrical h value in three-space, we 
can make the direct substitution
h = z
An example
Let’s convert the Cartesian point (x,y,z) = (1,1,1) to cylindrical three-space coordinates. In this 
situation, x = 1 and y = 1. To find the angle, we should use the formula
q = Arctan ( y/x)
because x > 0 and y > 0. When we plug in the values for x and y, we get
q = Arctan (1/1) = Arctan 1 = p /4
When we input the values for x and y to the formula for r, we get
r = (12 + 12)1/2 = 21/2
Because z = 1, we know that
h = z = 1
We’ve just found that the cylindrical equivalent point is
(q,r,h) = (p /4,21/2,1)

Are you confused?
We must pay close attention to the meaning of the radius in cylindrical coordinates. The cylindri-
cal radius goes from the origin to the reference-plane projection of the point whose coordinates we’re 
interested in. It does not go straight through space to the point of interest, which is usually outside 
the reference plane.
Here’s a challenge!
Convert the Cartesian point (x,y,z) = (−5,−12,8) to cylindrical coordinates. Using a calculator, 
approximate all irrational values to four decimal places.
Solution
We have x = −5 and y = −12. To find the angle, we should use the formula
q = p + Arctan ( y/x)
because x < 0 and y < 0. When we plug in x = −5 and y = −12, we get
q = p + Arctan [(−12)/(−5)] = p + Arctan (12/5)
That is a theoretically exact answer, but it’s an irrational number. A calculator set to work in radians 
(not degrees) allows us to approximate this to four decimal places as
q ≈ 4.3176
When we input x = −5 and y = −12 to the formula for r, we get
r = [(−5)2 + (−12)2]1/2 = (25 + 144)1/2 = 1691/2 = 13
Because z = 8, we know that
h = z = 8
We’ve found that the cylindrical equivalent point is
(q,r,h) ≈ (4.3176,13,8)
The value of q is approximate to four decimal places, while r and h are exact values.
Spherical Coordinates
Figure 9-5 illustrates a system of spherical coordinates for defining points in three-space. Instead 
of one angle and two displacements as in cylindrical coordinates, we now use two angles and 
one displacement.
Spherical Coordinates  159

160  Alternative Three-Space
How it works
In the spherical coordinate arrangement, we start with a horizontal Cartesian reference plane, 
just as we do when we set up cylindrical coordinates. The positive Cartesian x axis forms the 
reference axis. Suppose that we want to define the location of a point P. Consider its projec-
tion, P ′, onto the reference plane:
• The horizontal angle, which we call q, turns counterclockwise in the reference plane 
from the reference axis to the ray that goes out from the origin through P ′.
• The vertical angle, which we call f, turns downward from the vertical axis to the ray 
that goes out from the origin through P.
• The radius, which we call r, is the straight-line distance from the origin to P.
These three coordinates, taken all together, provide us with sufficient information to uniquely 
define the location of P in three-space. We can express the spherical coordinates as an ordered 
triple
P = (q,f,r)
Strange values
In spherical three-space, we can have nonstandard horizontal direction angles, but it’s always 
best to add or subtract whatever multiple of 2p will keep us within the preferred range of 
0 ≤q < 2p. If q ≥ 2p, it represents at least one complete counterclockwise rotation from the 
reference axis. If q < 0, it represents clockwise rotation from the reference axis. 
P
r
+x
–x
+z
–z
+y
–y
P¢
Reference
plane
Reference
axis
f
q
Figure 9-5  Spherical coordinates define points in three-
space according to a horizontal angle, a 
vertical angle, and a radius.

We can have nonstandard vertical angles, although things are simplest if we keep them 
nonnegative but no larger than p. Theoretically, all possible locations in space can be covered if
we restrict the vertical angle to the range 0 ≤f ≤p. If it’s outside this range, such as −p < f < 0 or 
p < f < 2p, we can multiply the radius r by −1, and then add or subtract p to or from f, and 
we’ll end up at the point we want. But those are confusing ways to get there!
The radius r can be any real number, but things are simplest if we keep it nonnegative. If 
our horizontal and vertical direction angles put us on a ray that goes from the origin through 
P, then r > 0. If our direction angles put us on a ray that goes from the origin away from P,
then r < 0. We have r = 0 if and only if P is at the origin. If we find ourselves working with 
a negative radius, we should reverse the direction by adding or subtracting p to or from both 
angles, keeping 0 ≤q < 2p and 0 ≤f ≤p. Then we can take the absolute value of the negative 
radius and use it as the radius coordinate.
An example
In the situation of Fig. 9-5, the horizontal direction angle q appears to be somewhere between 
p and 3p /2. The vertical direction angle f appears to be roughly 1 radian. We can’t be sure 
of the exact values of these angles, because we don’t have any reference lines to compare them 
with. The radius r is positive, but we have no idea how large it is because there are no radial 
coordinate increments.
Another example
Imagine that we set the horizontal direction angle q equal to a constant in spherical coordi-
nates. For example, let’s say that we have the equation
q = 7p /5
When we work in polar coordinates and set the direction angle equal to a constant, we get a 
line passing through the origin. In spherical coordinates, the horizontal angle in the reference 
plane is geometrically identical to the polar direction angle. Therefore, if k is any real-number 
constant, the graph of
q = k
is a plane that passes through the vertical axis. When k = 7p /5, that vertical plane also con-
tains the ray for the direction angle 7p /5, as shown in Fig. 9-6.
Still another example
If we set the radius equal to a constant in spherical coordinates, we get the set of all points at 
some fixed distance from the origin. That’s a sphere centered at the origin. Figure 9-7 shows 
what happens when we graph the following equation:
r = k
in spherical three-space, where k is a nonzero constant.
Spherical Coordinates  161

162  Alternative Three-Space
Figure 9-6  When we set the horizontal angle equal to a 
constant in spherical coordinates, we get a plane 
that contains the vertical axis.
+x
–x
+z
–z
+y
–y
Reference
plane
Constant radius
r = k
Figure 9-7  When we set the radius equal to a constant 
in spherical coordinates, we get a sphere 
centered at the origin.

Are you confused?
Don’t get the wrong idea about the meaning of the radius in spherical coordinates. It’s not the 
same as the cylindrical-coordinate radius! In spherical coordinates, the radius follows a straight-
line path from the origin to the point whose coordinates we’re interested in. This line almost 
never lies in the reference plane. In cylindrical coordinates, the radius goes from the origin to the 
projection of the point in the reference plane. You can see the difference if you compare Fig. 9-1 
with Fig. 9-5.
Are you still confused?
If you’ve read a lot of other pre-calculus texts (and I recommend that you do), you might notice 
that the order in which we list spherical coordinates is different from the way it’s done in some 
of those other texts. You might see the spherical coordinates of a point P go with the radius first, 
then the horizontal angle, and finally the vertical angle, as
P = (r,q,f)
Theoretically, it doesn’t matter in which order we list the coordinates. For any particular values, 
we’re always working with the same point. When we want to get from the origin to a point in 
spherical three-space, most people find it easiest to think of the horizontal angle q first (as in “face 
southeast”), then the vertical angle f (as in “fix your gaze at an angle that’s p/6 radian from the 
zenith”), and finally the radius r (as in “follow the string for 150 meters to reach the kite”). That’s 
why we use the form
P = (q,f,r)
Here’s a challenge!
What sort of graph do we get if we set the vertical angle f equal to a constant in spherical coordi-
nates? As an example, draw a diagram showing the graph of the following equation:
f = p/4
Solution
This situation doesn’t resemble anything we’ve seen so far in Cartesian, polar, or cylindrical coor-
dinates. If we hold the vertical angle constant in a spherical coordinate system, we get the set of 
points formed by a line passing through the origin and rotated with respect to the vertical axis. If 
k is a real-number constant, then the graph of
f = k
is a double cone whose axis corresponds to the vertical axis and whose apex is at the origin, as 
shown in Fig. 9-8.
Spherical Coordinates  163

164  Alternative Three-Space
Spherical Conversions
Converting coordinates between xyz space and spherical three-space is a little tricky, but not 
too difficult. Let’s think about a point P whose spherical coordinates are (q,f,r) and whose 
Cartesian coordinates are (x,y,z).
Spherical to Cartesian: finding x
In spherical coordinates, the radius is usually outside of the reference plane, so we can’t use it 
directly in the same formulas as the cylindrical radius. But we can construct a projection radius
identical to the cylindrical radius: the distance from the origin to the projection point P ′ in the 
reference plane. In Fig. 9-9, the projection radius is called r ′. From this geometry, we can see 
that r ′ is equal to the true spherical radius times the sine of the vertical angle. As an equation, 
we have
r ′ = r sin f
+x
–x
+z
–y
Reference
plane
Cone extends
upward
forever
Constant
vertical angle
+y
–z
Cone extends
downward
forever
f = p/4
Figure 9-8  When we set the vertical angle equal to a 
constant in spherical coordinates, we get a 
double cone whose axis corresponds to the 
vertical axis.

The x value conversion formula from cylindrical coordinates, which we learned earlier in this 
chapter, tells us that
x = r ′ cos q
where q is the horizontal direction angle, which is the same in spherical and cylindrical coor-
dinates. Substituting the quantity (r sin f) for r ′ gives us
x = r sin f cos q
Spherical to Cartesian: finding y
When we found the cylindrical equivalent of the Cartesian y value, we took the radius in the 
reference plane and multiplied by the sine of the direction angle in that plane. In the spheri-
cal-coordinate situation of Fig. 9-9, that translates to
y = r ′ sin q
where q is the horizontal direction angle. We can substitute (r sin f) for r ′ to get
y = r sin f sin q
Spherical to Cartesian: finding z
Let’s look again at Fig. 9-9, and locate the projection point P ∗ on the z axis, such that the 
z values of P ∗ and P are equal. We can see that P ∗, P, P ′, and the origin form the vertices of a 
P
+x
–x
+z
–z
+y
–y
P¢
Reference
plane
Reference
axis
r
r¢
P*
f
q
Figure 9-9  Conversion between spherical and Cartesian 
three-space coordinates involves several 
geometric variables.
Spherical Conversions  165

166  Alternative Three-Space
rectangle perpendicular to the reference plane. It follows that P ∗, P, and the origin are at the 
vertices of a right triangle. By trigonometry, the z value of P ∗ is equal to the spherical radius r
times the cosine of the vertical angle f. Because the z values of P and P ∗ are the same, we can 
deduce that the z value of P is given by
z = r cos f
Cartesian to spherical: finding r
Now let’s figure out how to get from Cartesian xyz space to spherical three-space. The radius 
is the easiest coordinate to find, so let’s do it first. Recall that the spherical radius of a point is 
its distance from the origin. Therefore, when we want to find the spherical radius r for point P
in terms of its xyz space coordinates, we can apply the Cartesian three-space distance formula 
to get
r = (x2 + y2 + z2)1/2
Cartesian to spherical: finding q
The horizontal angle in spherical coordinates is identical to its counterpart in cylindrical coor-
dinates, so we can use the conversion table from earlier in this chapter.
q = 0 
by default
When x = 0 and y = 0 
that is, at the origin
q = 0
When x > 0 and y = 0
q = Arctan ( y/x)
When x > 0 and y > 0
q = p/2
When x = 0 and y > 0
q = p + Arctan ( y/x)
When x < 0 and y > 0
q = p
When x < 0 and y = 0
q = p + Arctan ( y/x)
When x < 0 and y < 0
q = 3p/2
When x = 0 and y < 0
q = 2p + Arctan ( y/x)
When x > 0 and y < 0
The Arccosine
Before we can find the vertical spherical angle for a point that’s given to us in Cartesian coor-
dinates, we must be familiar with the arccosine relation. It’s abbreviated arccos (cos−1 in some 
texts), and it “undoes” the work of the cosine function. For example, we know that
cos (p /3) = 1/2
and
cos p = −1

For things to work without ambiguity when we go the other way, we want the arccosine to be 
a true function. To do that, we must restrict its range (output) to an interval where we don’t 
get into trouble with ambiguity. By convention, mathematicians specify the closed interval 
[0,p] for this purpose. That happens to be the ideal range of values for our vertical angle f
in spherical coordinates. When we make this restriction, we capitalize the “A” and write Arc-
cosine or Arccos to indicate that we’re working with a true function. Then we can state the 
above facts “in reverse” using the Arccosine function, getting
Arccos 1/2 = p /3
and
Arccos (−1) = p
For any real number u, we can be sure that
Arccos (cos u) = u
Going the other way, for any real number v such that −1 ≤v ≤ 1, we know that
cos (Arccos v) = v
We restrict v because the Arccosine function is not defined for input values less than −1 or 
larger than 1.
Cartesian to spherical: finding e
We’ve learned how to find the vertical angle on the basis of the Cartesian coordinate z. That 
formula is
z = r cos f
We can use algebra to rearrange this, getting
cos f = z/r
provided r ≠ 0. When we examine Fig. 9-9, we can see that for any given point P, the absolute 
value of z can never exceed r, so we can be sure that −1 ≤z/r ≤ 1. Therefore, we can take the 
Arccosine of both sides of the preceding equation, getting
Arccos (cos f) = Arccos (z/r)
Simplifying, we obtain
f = Arccos (z/r)
Spherical Conversions  167

168  Alternative Three-Space
This formula works nicely if we know the value of r. But we sometimes want to find the verti-
cal angle in terms of x, y, and z exclusively. We’ve found that
r = (x2 + y2 + z2)1/2
so we can substitute to obtain
f = Arccos [z / (x2 + y2 + z2)1/2]
An example
Consider a point P in spherical three-space whose coordinates are given by
P = (q,f,r) = (3p /2,p /2,5)
Let’s find the equivalent coordinates in Cartesian xyz space. We’ll start by calculating the x
value. The formula is
x = r sin f cos q
When we plug in the spherical values, we get
x = 5 sin (p /2) cos (3p /2) = 5 × 1 × 0 = 0
The formula for y is
y = r sin f sin q
Plugging in the spherical values yields
y = 5 sin (p /2) sin (3p /2) = 5 × 1 × −1 = −5
The formula for z is
z = r cos f
When we put in the spherical values, we get
z = 5 cos (p /2) = 5 × 0 = 0
In xyz space, our point can be specified as
P = (0,−5,0)
Another example
Let’s convert the xyz space point (−1,−1,1) to spherical coordinates. To find the radius, we use 
the formula
r = (x2 + y2 + z2)1/2

Plugging in the values, we get
r = [(−1)2 + (−1)2 + 12]1/2 = (1 + 1 + 1)1/2 = 31/2
To find the horizontal angle, we use the formula
q = p + Arctan ( y/x)
because x < 0 and y < 0. When we plug in the values for x and y, we get
q = p + Arctan [−1/(−1)] = p + Arctan 1 = p + p /4 = 5p /4
To find the vertical angle, we can use the formula
f = Arccos (z /r)
We already know that r = 31/2, so
f = Arccos (1/31/2) = Arccos 3−1/2
Our spherical ordered triple, listing the coordinates in the order P = (q,f,r), is
P = [5p /4,(Arccos 3−1/2),31/2]
Are you confused?
When you come across a messy ordered triple like this, you might ask, “Is there any way to make it 
look simpler?” Sometimes there is. In this case, there isn’t. You can get rid of the grouping symbols 
if you’re willing to use a calculator to approximate the values. But even if you do that, you’ll have 
to remember that in spherical coordinates, the first two values represent angles in radians, and the 
third value represents a linear distance.
Here’s a challenge!
Suppose we’re given the coordinates of a point P in spherical three-space as
P = (q,f,r) = (3p /4,p /4,31/2)
Find the coordinates of P in cylindrical coordinates.
Solution
We haven’t learned any formulas for direct conversion between spherical and cylindrical coordi-
nates, so we must convert to Cartesian coordinates first, and then to cylindrical coordinates from 
there. The Cartesian x value is
 
x = r sin f cos q = 31/2 sin (p /4) cos (3p /4)
 
= 31/2 × 21/2/2 × (−21/2/2) = −31/2/2
Spherical Conversions  169

170  Alternative Three-Space
The Cartesian y value is
 
y = r sin f sin q = 31/2 sin (p /4) sin (3p /4)
 
= 31/2 × 21/2/2 × 21/2/2 = 31/2/2
The Cartesian z value is
z = r cos f = 31/2 cos (p /4) = 31/2 × 21/2/2 = 61/2/2
Our Cartesian ordered triple is therefore
P = (x,y,z) = (−31/2/2,31/2/2,61/2/2)
Now let’s convert these coordinates to their cylindrical counterparts. We have
x = −31/2/2
and
y = 31/2/2
To find the cylindrical direction angle q, we use the formula
q = p + Arctan ( y/x)
because x < 0 and y > 0. When we plug in the values for x and y, we get
 
q = p + Arctan [(31/2/2) / (−31/2/2)] = p + Arctan (−1)
 
= p + (−p /4) = 3p /4
This is the same as the horizontal direction angle in the original set of spherical coordinates, as we 
should expect. (If things hadn’t come out that way, we’d have made a mistake!) When we input the 
values for x and y to the formula for the cylindrical radius r, we get
 
r = [(−31/2/2)2 + (31/2/2)2]1/2 = (3/4 + 3/4)1/2
 
= (6/4)1/2 = 61/2/2
We calculated that z = 61/2/2, so the cylindrical height h is
h = z = 61/2/2
We’ve found that the cylindrical equivalent point is
(q,r,h) = (3p /4,61/2/2,61/2/2)

Practice Exercises
This is an open-book quiz. You may (and should) refer to the text as you solve these problems. 
Don’t hurry! You’ll find worked-out answers in App. A. The solutions in the appendix may not 
represent the only way a problem can be figured out. If you think you can solve a particular 
problem in a quicker or better way than you see there, by all means try it!
 1.  Describe the graphs of the following equations in cylindrical coordinates. What would 
they look like in Cartesian xyz space?
q = 0
r = 0
h = 0
 2.  Plot the point (q,r,h) = (3p /4,6,8) in the cylindrical coordinate system.
 3.  Consider the point (q,r,h) = (p /4,0,1) in cylindrical coordinates. Find the equivalent of 
this point in Cartesian xyz space.
 4.  Consider the point (−4,1,0) in xyz space. Find the equivalent of this point in cylindrical 
three-space. First, find the exact coordinates. Then, using a calculator, approximate the 
irrational coordinates to four decimal places.
 5.  In the chapter text, we used the conversion formulas to find that the cylindrical 
equivalent of (x,y,z) = (1,1,1) is (q,r,h) = (p /4,21/2,1). Convert these coordinates back to 
Cartesian xyz coordinates to verify that the result we got was correct and unambiguous.
 6.  Describe the graphs of the following equations in spherical coordinates. What would 
they look like in Cartesian xyz space?
q = 0
f = 0
r = 0
 7. Plot the point (q,f,r) = (3p /4,p /4,8) in the spherical coordinate system.
 8.  Consider the point (q,f,r) = (p /4,0,1) in spherical coordinates. Find the equivalent of 
this point in Cartesian xyz space.
 9.  Consider the point (−4,1,0) in xyz space. Find the equivalent of this point in spherical 
three-space. First, find the exact coordinates. Then, using a calculator, approximate the 
irrational coordinates to four decimal places.
 10.  Work the final “challenge” backward to verify that we did our calculations correctly. 
Consider the point P in cylindrical three-space given by
P = (q,r,h) = [3p /4,61/2/2,61/2/2]
 
  Find the coordinates of P in Cartesian coordinates, and from there, convert to spherical 
coordinates.
Practice Exercises  171

Part One
This is not a test! It’s a review of important general concepts you learned in the previous nine 
chapters. Read it through slowly and let it sink in. If you’re confused about anything here, or 
about anything in the section you’ve just finished, go back and study that material some more.
Chapter 1
Question 1-1
What’s the difference between an open interval, a half-open interval, and a closed interval?
Answer 1-1
All three types of intervals are continuous spans of values that a variable can attain between a 
specific minimum and a specific maximum, which are called the extremes. But there are subtle 
differences between the three types as listed below:
• In an open interval, neither extreme is included.
• In a half-open interval, one extreme is included, but not the other.
• In a closed interval, both extremes are included.
Question 1-2
Imagine two real numbers a and b, such that a < b. These numbers can be the extremes of 
four different intervals: one open, two half-open, and one closed. How can we denote these 
four intervals for a variable x?
Answer 1-2
If we include neither a nor b, we have an open interval where a < x < b. We can write
x ∈ (a,b)
CHAPTER 
10
Review Questions and Answers
172

which means “x is an element of the open interval (a,b).” If we include a but not b, we have a 
half-open interval where a ≤x < b. We can write
x ∈ [a,b)
which translates to “x is an element of the half-open interval [a,b).” If we include b but not a,
we have an open interval where a < x ≤b. We write
x ∈ (a,b]
which means “x is an element of the half-open interval (a,b].” If we include both a and b, we 
have a closed interval where a ≤x ≤b. We can write
x ∈ [a,b]
which means “x is an element of the closed interval [a,b].”
Question 1-3
What point of confusion must we avoid when working with interval notation?
Answer 1-3
We must never confuse an open interval with an ordered pair, which uses the same notation. 
If we pay close attention to the context in which the expression appears, we shouldn’t have 
trouble.
Question 1-4
Relations and functions are operations that map specific values of a variable into specific val-
ues of another variable. There’s an important distinction between a relation and a function. 
What is it?
Answer 1-4
In a relation, we can have more than one value of the dependent (or output) variable for a sin-
gle value of the independent (or input) variable. In a function, we’re allowed no more than one 
output for any given input. All functions are relations, but not all relations are functions.
Question 1-5
The Cartesian plane can be used for graphing relations and functions between an independent 
variable and a dependent variable. The plane is divided into four sections, called quadrants. 
How do we identify them?
Answer 1-5
In the first quadrant (usually the upper right), both variables are positive. In the second quadrant 
(usually the upper left), the independent variable is negative and the dependent variable is 
positive. In the third quadrant (usually the lower left), both variables are negative. In the 
fourth quadrant (usually the lower right), the independent variable is positive and the dependent 
variable is negative.
Part One  173

174  Review Questions and Answers
Question 1-6
Suppose we have a point S in Cartesian two-space that is represented by the ordered pair (xs,ys).
We can write this as
S = (xs,ys)
What’s the straight-line distance ds between S and the coordinate origin? What’s the minimum 
possible distance between S and the origin? Can the distance be negative? What’s the maxi-
mum possible distance?
Answer 1-6
We can find the distance using the formula that we derived from the Pythagorean theorem in 
geometry. In this situation, the formula is
ds = (xs
2 + ys
2)1/2
The minimum possible distance between S and the origin is zero, which occurs if and only if 
xs = 0 and ys = 0, so that
S = (xs,ys) = (0,0)
We can never have a negative distance. There is no maximum possible distance between S and 
the origin. We can make it as large as we want by making xs or ys (or both) huge positively or 
huge negatively.
Question 1-7
Imagine two points in Cartesian two-space, called S and T, such that
S = (xs,ys)
and
T = (xt,yt)
What’s the straight-line distance dst going from S to T? What’s the straight-line distance dts
going from T to S? Does it make any difference which way we go?
Answer 1-7
If we go from S to T, the distance between the points is
dst = [(xt −xs)2 + ( yt −ys)2]1/2
If we go from T to S, the distance is
dts = [(xs −xt)2 + ( ys −yt)2]1/2

It doesn’t matter which way we go when we want to determine the straight-line distance 
between two points. Therefore, dst = dts.
Question 1-8
In Fig. 10-1, what do the expressions Δx and Δy mean? What’s the straight-line distance d
between the two points, based on the values of Δx and Δy?
Answer 1-8
We read Δx as “delta x,” which means “the difference in x.” We read Δy as “delta y,” which 
means “the difference in y.” The straight-line distance d between the points can be found by 
squaring Δx and Δy individually, adding the squares, and then taking the nonnegative square 
root of the result, getting
d = (Δx2 + Δy2)1/2
Question 1-9
Suppose we want to find the midpoint of a line segment connecting two known points in the 
Cartesian xy plane. How can we do this?
Answer 1-9
We average the x coordinates of the endpoints to get the x coordinate of the midpoint, and 
we average the y coordinates of the endpoints to get the y coordinate of the midpoint.
Figure 10-1  Illustration for Question and Answer 1-8.
Part One  175

176  Review Questions and Answers
Question 1-10
Once again, imagine two points S and T in the Cartesian plane with the coordinates
S = (xs,ys)
and
T = (xt,yt)
What are the coordinates of the point B that bisects the line segment connecting S and T?
Answer 1-10
The point B is the midpoint of the line segment. When we follow the procedure described in 
Answer 1-9, we obtain the coordinates (xb,yb) of point B as
(xb,yb) = [(xs + xt)/2,(ys + yt)/2]
Chapter 2
Question 2-1
What is a radian?
Answer 2-1
A radian is the standard unit of angular measure in mathematics. If we have two rays point-
ing out from the center of a circle, and those rays intersect the circle at the endpoints of an 
arc whose length is equal to the circle’s radius, then the smaller (acute) angle between the rays 
measures one radian (1 rad ).
Question 2-2
How many radians are there in a full circle? In 1/4 of a circle? In 1/2 of a circle? In 3/4 of a 
circle?
Answer 2-2
There are 2p  rad in a full circle. Therefore, 1/4 of a circle is p/2 rad, 1/2 of a circle is p rad, 
and 3/4 of a circle is 3p/2 rad.
Question 2-3
Suppose we have an angle whose radian measure is 7p/6. What fraction of a complete circular 
rotation does this represent?
Answer 2-3
Remember that an angle of 2p represents a full rotation. The quantity p/6 is 1/12 of 2p, so 
an angle of p/6 represents 1/12 of a rotation. Therefore, an angle of 7p/6 represents 7/12 of 
a rotation.

Question 2-4
In Fig. 10-2, the gray circle is a graph of the equation x2 + y2 = 1. The point (x0,y0) lies on this 
circle. A ray from the origin through (x0,y0) subtends an angle q going counterclockwise from 
the positive x axis. How can we define the sine of the angle q ?
Answer 2-4
The sine of q as shown in Fig. 10-2 is equal to y0. Mathematically, we write this as
sin q = y0
Question 2-5
How can we define the cosine of the angle q in Fig. 10-2?
Answer 2-5
The cosine of q is equal to x0. Mathematically, we write this as
cos q = x0
Question 2-6
How can we define the tangent of the angle q in Fig. 10-2?
Figure 10-2  Illustration for Questions and Answers 
2-4 through 2-9. Each axis division 
represents 1/4 unit.
Part One  177

178  Review Questions and Answers
Answer 2-6
The tangent of q is equal to y0 divided by x0, as long as x0 is nonzero. If x0 = 0, then the tangent 
of the angle is not defined. Mathematically, we have
tan q = y0/x0 ⇔x0 ≠ 0
The double-headed, double-shafted arrow (⇔) is the logical equivalence symbol. It translates to 
the words “if and only if.” We can also define the tangent as
tan q = sin q /cos q ⇔ cos q ≠ 0
Question 2-7
How can we define the cosecant of the angle q in Fig. 10-2?
Answer 2-7
The cosecant of q is equal to the reciprocal of y0, as long as y0 is nonzero. If y0 = 0, then the 
cosecant is not defined. Mathematically, we have
csc q = 1/y0 ⇔y0 ≠ 0
We can also define the cosecant as
csc q = 1/sin q ⇔ sin q ≠ 0
Question 2-8
How can we define the secant of the angle q in Fig. 10-2?
Answer 2-8
The secant of q is equal to the reciprocal of x0, as long as x0 is nonzero. If x0 = 0, then the 
secant is not defined. Mathematically, we have
sec q = 1/x0 ⇔x0 ≠ 0
We can also define the secant as
sec q = 1/cos q ⇔ cos q ≠ 0
Question 2-9
How can we define the cotangent of the angle q in Fig. 10-2?
Answer 2-9
The cotangent of q is equal to x0 divided by y0, as long as y0 is nonzero. If y0 = 0, then the 
cotangent is not defined. Mathematically, we have
cot q = x0/y0 ⇔y0 ≠ 0

We can also define the cotangent as
cot q = 1/tan q ⇔  tan q ≠ 0
or as
cot q = cos q /sin q ⇔  sin q ≠ 0
Question 2-10
What are the Pythagorean identities for trigonometric functions? Which, if any, of these 
should be memorized?
Answer 2-10
The Pythagorean identities are the three formulas
sin2 q + cos2 q = 1
sec2 q – tan2 q = 1
csc2 q – cot2 q = 1
The first of these is worth memorizing, because it comes up quite often in applied mathemat-
ics and engineering. The second and third identities can be derived from the first one.
Chapter 3
Question 3-1
How are variables and points portrayed on the polar-coordinate plane?
Answer 3-1
The independent variable is rendered as a direction angle q, expressed counterclockwise from 
a reference axis. This reference axis normally goes outward from the origin toward the right (or 
“due east”), in the same direction as the positive x axis in the Cartesian xy plane. The depen-
dent variable is rendered as a radius r, expressed as the straight-line distance from the origin. 
Points in the plane are expressed as ordered pairs of the form (q,r), as shown in Fig. 10-3. In 
some texts, the ordered pair is written as (r,q).
Question 3-2
Can a point in polar coordinates have a negative direction angle, or an angle that represents a 
full rotation or more?
Answer 3-2
Yes. If q < 0, it represents clockwise rotation from the reference axis. If q ≥ 2p, it represents at 
least one complete counterclockwise rotation from the reference axis. 
Question 3-3
Can a point in polar coordinates have a negative radius?
Part One  179

180  Review Questions and Answers
Answer 3-3
Yes. If r < 0, we can multiply r by –1 so it becomes positive, and then add or subtract p  to or 
from the direction angle, keeping it within the preferred range 0 ≤q < 2p.
Question 3-4
How we can we portray a relation or function in polar coordinates when the independent 
variable is q and the dependent variable is r ?
Answer 3-4
We can write down an equation with r on the left-hand side and the name of the function fol-
lowed by q in parentheses on the right-hand side. For example, if our function is g, we write
r = g (q)
and read it as “r equals g of q.”
Question 3-5
If we set the polar-coordinate angle equal to a constant, say k, what graph do we get?
Answer 3-5
The graph is a straight line passing through the origin. The line appears at an angle of k radians 
with respect to the reference axis.
Question 3-6
If we set the polar-coordinate radius equal to a constant, say m, what graph do we get?
0
3p/2
(r, q)
Angle
is q
Radius
is r
p
p/2
Figure 10-3  Illustration for Question and Answer 3-1.

Answer 3-6
The graph a circle centered at the origin, so that every point on the circle is m units from the 
origin.
Question 3-7
Suppose we have a point (q,r) in polar coordinates. How can we convert this to coordinates 
in the Cartesian xy plane?
Answer 3-7
We can convert the polar point (q,r) to Cartesian (x,y) using the formulas
x = r cos q
and
y = r sin q
Question 3-8
Suppose we have a point (x,y) in the Cartesian plane. What’s the polar radius r of this point?
Answer 3-8
The polar radius of a point is its distance from the origin. We can use the formula for the 
distance of a point from the origin to find that
r = (x2 + y2)1/2
This gives us a positive value for the radius, which is preferred.
Question 3-9
Suppose we have a point (x,y) in the Cartesian plane. What’s the polar angle q of this point?
Answer 3-9
This problem breaks down into following nine cases, depending on where in the Cartesian 
plane our point (x,y) lies:
• If x = 0 and y = 0, then q = 0 by default.
• If x > 0 and y = 0, then q = 0.
• If x > 0 and y > 0, then q = Arctan ( y /x).
• If x = 0 and y > 0, then q = p /2.
• If x < 0 and y > 0, then q = p + Arctan ( y /x).
• If x < 0 and y = 0, then q = p.
• If x < 0 and y < 0, then q = p + Arctan ( y /x).
• If x = 0 and y < 0, then q = 3p /2.
• If x > 0 and y < 0, then q = 2p + Arctan ( y /x).
If we follow this process carefully, we always get an angle in the range 0 ≤q < 2p, which is 
preferred.
Part One  181

182  Review Questions and Answers
Question 3-10
What does “Arctan” mean in the conversions listed in Answer 3-9?
Answer 3-10
It stands for “Arctangent.” That’s the function that undoes the work of the trigonometric tan-
gent function. The domain of the Arctangent function is the entire set of real numbers. The 
range is the open interval (−p /2,p /2). For any real number u within this interval, we have
Arctan (tan u) = u
Conversely, for any real number v, we have
tan (Arctan v) = v
Chapter 4
Question 4-1
What is a vector?
Answer 4-1
A vector is a quantity with two independent properties: magnitude and direction. A vector 
can also be defined as a directed line segment having an originating point (beginning) and a 
terminating point (end ).
Question 4-2
What’s the standard form of a vector in the xy plane? What’s the standard form of a vector in 
the polar plane? What’s the advantage of putting a vector into its standard form?
Answer 4-2
In any coordinate system, a vector is in standard form if and only if its originating point is at 
the coordinate origin. The standard form allows us to uniquely define a vector as an ordered 
pair that represents the coordinates of its terminating point alone.
Question 4-3
How can we find the magnitude of a standard-form vector b in the xy plane whose terminat-
ing point has the coordinates (xb,yb)?
Answer 4-3
The magnitude of b, which we can write as rb, is found by using the formula for the distance 
of the terminating point from the origin. In this case, we get
rb = (xb
2 + yb
2)1/2
In some texts, the magnitude of b would be denoted as |b| or b.
Question 4-4
How can we find the direction of a standard-form vector b in the xy plane whose terminating 
point has the coordinates (xb,yb)?

Answer 4-4
We find the polar direction angle of the point (xb,yb). If we call this angle qb, the process can 
be broken down into the following nine possible cases:
• If xb = 0 and yb = 0, then qb = 0 by default.
• If xb > 0 and yb = 0, then qb = 0.
• If xb > 0 and yb > 0, then qb = Arctan ( yb/xb).
• If xb = 0 and yb > 0, then qb = p /2.
• If xb < 0 and yb > 0, then qb = p + Arctan ( yb/xb).
• If xb < 0 and yb = 0, then qb = p.
• If xb < 0 and yb < 0, then qb = p + Arctan ( yb/xb).
• If xb = 0 and yb < 0, then qb = 3p /2.
• If xb > 0 and yb < 0, then qb = 2p + Arctan ( yb/xb).
In some texts, the direction of b is denoted as dir b.
Question 4-5
Imagine two vectors a and b in the xy plane, in standard form with terminating-point coor-
dinates
a = (xa,ya)
and
b = (xb,yb)
How can we find the sum of these vectors?
Answer 4-5
We calculate the sum vector a + b using the formula
a + b = [(xa + xb),( ya + yb)]
Question 4-6
How can we calculate the Cartesian negative of a vector that’s in standard form? How does the 
Cartesian negative compare with the original vector?
Answer 4-6
We take the negatives of both coordinate values. For example, if we have
b = (xb,yb)
then its Cartesian negative is
-b = (−xb,−yb)
The Cartesian negative has the same magnitude as the original vector, but points in the opposite 
direction.
Part One  183

184  Review Questions and Answers
Question 4-7
Imagine two Cartesian vectors a and b, in standard form with terminating-point coordinates
a = (xa,ya)
and
b = (xb,yb)
How can we find a − b? How can we find b − a? How do these two vectors compare?
Answer 4-7
We calculate the difference vector a − b using the formula
a −b = [(xa −xb),( ya −yb)]
We find difference vector b − a by reversing the order of subtraction for each coordinate, 
getting
b −a = [(xb −xa),( yb −ya)]
In the Cartesian plane, the difference vector b − a is always equal to the negative of the dif-
ference vector a − b.
Question 4-8
Suppose we have a vector expressed in polar form as
c = (qc,rc)
where qc is the direction angle of c, and rc is the magnitude of c. How can we convert c to a 
standard-form vector (xc,yc) in the Cartesian plane?
Answer 4-8
We use formulas adapted from the polar-to-Cartesian conversion. We get
(xc,yc) = [(rc cos qc),(rc sin qc)]
Question 4-9
What restrictions apply when we work with vectors in the polar-coordinate plane?
Answer 4-9
A polar vector is not allowed to have a negative radius, a negative direction angle, or a direc-
tion angle of 2p  or more. These constraints prevent ambiguities, so we can be confident that 
the set of all polar-plane vectors can be paired off in a one-to-one correspondence with the set 
of all Cartesian-plane vectors.

Question 4-10
Suppose we’re given two vectors in polar coordinates. What’s the best way to find their sum 
and difference? What’s the best way to find the negative of a vector in polar coordinates?
Answer 4-10
The best way to add or subtract polar vectors is to convert them to Cartesian vectors in stan-
dard form, then add or subtract those vectors, and finally convert the result back to polar 
form. The best way to find the negative of a polar vector is to reverse its direction and leave 
the magnitude the same. Suppose we have
a = (qa,ra)
If 0 ≤qa < p, then the polar negative is
-a = [(qa + p ),ra]
If p ≤qa < 2p, then the polar negative is
-a = [(qa −p ),ra]
Chapter 5
Question 5-1
What’s the left-hand Cartesian product of a scalar and a vector? What’s the right-hand Cartesian 
product of a vector and a scalar? How do they compare?
Answer 5-1
Consider a real-number constant k, along with a standard-form vector a defined in the xy
plane as
a = (xa,ya)
The left-hand Cartesian product of k and a is
ka = (kxa,kya)
The right-hand Cartesian product of a and k is
ak = (xak,yak)
The left- and right-hand products of a scalar and a Cartesian vector are always the same. For 
all real numbers k and all Cartesian vectors a, we can be sure that
ka = ak
Question 5-2
What’s the left-hand polar product of a positive scalar and a vector? What’s the right-hand 
polar product of a vector and a positive scalar? How do they compare?
Part One  185

186  Review Questions and Answers
Answer 5-2
Imagine a polar vector a with angle qa and radius ra, such that
a = (qa,ra)
When we multiply a on the left by a positive scalar k+, we get
k+a = (qa,k+ra)
When we multiply a on the right by k+, we get
ak+ = (qa,rak+)
The left- and right-hand polar products of a positive scalar and a polar vector are always the 
same. For all positive real numbers k+ and all polar vectors a, we can be sure that
k+a = ak+
Question 5-3
What’s the left-hand polar product of a negative scalar and a vector? What’s the right-hand 
polar product of a vector and a negative scalar? How do they compare?
Answer 5-3
Once again, suppose we have a polar vector a with angle qa and radius ra, such that
a = (qa,ra)
When we multiply a on the left by a negative scalar k−, we get
k−a = [(qa + p ),(−k−ra)]
if 0 ≤qa < p, and
k−a = [(qa −p ),(−k−ra)]
if p ≤qa < 2p. Because k− is negative, −k− is positive, so −k−ra is positive, ensuring that we get 
a positive radius for the resultant vector. If we multiply a on the right by k−, we get
ak−= [(qa + p ),ra(−k−)]
if 0 ≤qa < p, and
ak−= [(qa −p ),ra(−k−)]

if p ≤qa < 2p. Because k− is negative, −k− is positive, so ra(−k−) is positive, ensuring that we 
get a positive radius for the resultant vector. For all negative real numbers k− and all polar 
vectors a,
k−a = ak−
Question 5-4
Suppose we’re given two standard-form vectors a and b, defined by the ordered pairs
a = (xa,ya)
and
b = (xb,yb)
What’s the Cartesian dot product a • b? What’s the Cartesian dot product b • a? How do they 
compare?
Answer 5-4
The Cartesian dot product a • b is a real number given by
a • b = xaxb + yayb
and the Cartesian dot product b • a is a real number given by
b • a = xbxa + ybya
The Cartesian dot product is commutative, so for any two vectors a and b in the xy plane, we 
can be confident that
a • b = b • a
Question 5-5
Imagine a polar vector a with angle qa and radius ra, such that
a = (qa,ra)
and a polar vector b with angle qb and radius rb, such that
b = (qb,rb)
What’s the polar dot product a • b?
Answer 5-5
Let qb −qa be the angle as we rotate from a to b. The polar dot product a • b is given by the 
formula
a • b = rarb cos (qb −qa)
Part One  187

188  Review Questions and Answers
Question 5-6
Consider the same two polar vectors as we worked with in Question and Answer 5-5. What’s 
the polar dot product b • a?
Answer 5-6
We can define this dot product by reversing the roles of the vectors in the previous problem. Let 
qa −qb be the angle going from b to a. The polar dot product b • a is given by the formula
b • a = rbra cos (qa −qb)
Question 5-7
How do the polar dot products a • b and b • a, as defined in Answers 5-5 and 5-6, 
compare?
Answer 5-7
For any two vectors a and b, the polar dot product is commutative. That is
a • b = b • a
Question 5-8
Imagine a polar vector c with angle qc and radius rc, such that
c = (qc,rc)
and a polar vector d with angle qd and radius rd, such that
d = (qd,rd )
What’s the polar cross product c ë d?
Answer 5-8
Imagine that we start at vector c and rotate counterclockwise until we get to vector d, so we 
turn through an angle of qd −qc. Suppose that 0 < qd −qc < p. To calculate the magnitude rc×d
of the cross-product vector c × d, we use the formula
rc×d = rcrd sin (qd −qc)
In this situation, c ë d points toward us. If p < qd −qc < 2p, we can consider the difference 
angle to be 2p + qc −qd. Then the magnitude of c ë d is
rc×d = rcrd sin (2p + qc −qd )
and it points away from us.

Question 5-9
What’s the right-hand rule for cross products?
Answer 5-9
Consider again the two vectors c and d that we defined in Question 5-8, and their differ-
ence angle qd −qc that we defined in Answer 5-8. If 0 < qd −qc < p, point your right thumb 
out, and curl your fingers counterclockwise from c to d. If p < qd −qc < 2p, point your right 
thumb out, and curl your right-hand fingers clockwise from c to d. Your thumb will then 
point in the general direction of c ë d. The vector c ë d is always perpendicular to the plane 
defined by c and d.
Question 5-10
How do the polar cross products of two vectors c ë d and d ë c compare?
Answer 5-10
They have identical magnitudes, but they point in opposite directions.
Chapter 6
Question 6-1
What’s the unit imaginary number? What’s the j operator?
Answer 6-1
These expressions both refer to the positive square root of −1. If we denote it as j, then
j = (−1)1/2
and
j 2 = −1
Question 6-2
How is the set of imaginary numbers “built up”? How do we denote such numbers?
Answer 6-2
If we multiply j by a nonnegative real number a, we get a nonnegative imaginary number. If we 
multiply j by a negative real number −a, we get a negative imaginary number. We denote non-
negative imaginary numbers by writing j followed by the real-number coefficient. If a ≥ 0, then
j × a = a ë j = ja
We denote negative imaginary numbers as −j followed by the absolute value of the real-number 
coefficient. If −a < 0, then
j ë (−a) = −a ë j = −ja
Part One  189

190  Review Questions and Answers
Question 6-3
How is the set of complex numbers “built up”? How do we denote such numbers?
Answer 6-3
A complex number is the sum of a real number and an imaginary number. If a is a real number 
and b is a nonnegative real number, then the general form for a complex number is
a + jb
If a is a real number and −b is a negative real number, then we have
a + j(−b)
but it’s customary to write the absolute value of −b after j, and use a minus sign instead of a 
plus sign in the expression. That gives us the general form
a −jb
Question 6-4
How do the complex number 0 + j0, the pure real number 0, and the pure imaginary number 
j0 compare?
Answer 6-4
They are all identical.
Question 6-5
How do we find the sum of two complex numbers a + jb and c + jd? How do we find their 
difference? How do we find their product? How do we find their ratio?
Answer 6-5
When we want to add, we use the formula
 (a + jb) + (c + jd ) = (a + c) + j(b + d )
When we want to subtract, we use the formula
 (a + jb) − (c + jd ) = (a −c) + j(b −d )
When we want to multiply, we use the formula
 (a + jb)(c + jd ) = (ac −bd ) + j(ad + bc)
When we want to find the ratio, we use the formula
(a + jb) / (c + jd ) = [(ac + bd ) / (c2 + d 2)] + j [(bc −ad ) / (c2 + d 2)]
In a complex-number ratio, the denominator must not be equal to 0 + j0.

Question 6-6
What are complex conjugates? What happens when we add a complex number to its conju-
gate? What happens when we multiply a complex number by its conjugate?
Answer 6-6
Complex conjugates have identical coefficients, but opposite signs between the real and imag-
inary parts, as in
a + jb
and
a −jb
When we add a complex number to its conjugate, we get
(a + jb) + (a −jb) = 2a
When we multiply a complex number by its conjugate, we get
(a + jb)(a −jb) = a2 + b2
Question 6-7
What’s the Cartesian complex-number plane? What’s the polar complex-number plane? How 
are complex vectors defined in these planes?
Answer 6-7
Figure 10-4 shows a Cartesian complex-number plane. The horizontal axis portrays the real-
number part, and the vertical axis portrays the imaginary-number part. A Cartesian complex 
vector is rendered in standard form, going from the origin to the terminating point corre-
sponding to the complex number. Figure 10-5 shows a polar complex-number plane. Polar 
complex vectors are defined in terms of their direction angle and magnitude, instead of their 
real and imaginary parts. Assuming that the axis divisions in Fig. 10-4 are the same size as 
the radial divisions in Fig. 10-5, the vectors in both drawings represent the same complex 
number.
Question 6-8
How can we convert a Cartesian complex vector to a polar complex vector?
Answer 6-8
Imagine a complex number a + jb in the Cartesian complex plane, whose vector extends from 
the origin to the point (a,jb). We can derive the magnitude r of the equivalent polar vector by 
applying the distance formula to get
r = (a2 + b2)1/2
Part One  191

192  Review Questions and Answers
0
Ordered pair is (q, r)
representing the
complex number a + jb
shown in Fig. 10-4
r
3p/2
p
p/2
q
Figure 10-5  Another illustration for Question and Answer 6-7.
x
jy
Ordered pair is (a, jb)
representing the
complex number a + jb
jy = jb
x = a
Figure 10-4  Illustration for Question and Answer 6-7.

To determine the direction angle q of the polar vector, we modify the polar-coordinate 
direction-finding system. Here’s what happens:
• When a = 0 and jb = j0, we have q = 0 by default.
• When a > 0 and jb = j0, we have q = 0.
• When a > 0 and jb > j0, we have q = Arctan (b/a).
• When a = 0 and jb > j0, we have q = p /2.
• When a < 0 and jb > j0, we have q = p + Arctan (b/a).
• When a < 0 and jb = j0, we have q = p.
• When a < 0 and jb < j0, we have q = p + Arctan (b/a).
• When a = 0 and jb < j0, we have q = 3p /2.
• When a > 0 and jb < j0, we have q = 2p + Arctan (b/a).
Question 6-9
How can we convert a polar complex vector to a Cartesian complex vector?
Answer 6-9
Imagine a complex vector (q,r) in the polar complex plane, whose direction angle is q and 
whose radius is r. The Cartesian vector equivalent is
 (a,jb) = [(r cos q), j(r sin q)]
which represents the complex number
a + jb = r cos q + j(r sin q)
Question 6-10
What are the two versions of De Moivre’s theorem? How are they used?
Answer 6-10
The first, and more general, version of De Moivre’s theorem involves products and ratios. 
Suppose we have two polar complex numbers c1 and c2, where
c1 = r1 cos q1 + j(r1 sin q1)
and
c2 = r2 cos q2 + j(r2 sin q2)
where r1 and r2 are real-number polar magnitudes, and q1 and q2 are real-number polar angles 
in radians. Then
c1c2 = r1r2 cos (q1 + q2) + j [r1r2 sin (q1 + q2)]
and, as long as r2 is nonzero,
c1/c2 = (r1/r2) cos (q1 −q2) + j [(r1/r2) sin (q1 −q2)]
Part One  193

194  Review Questions and Answers
The second version of De Moivre’s theorem involves integer powers. Suppose that c is a com-
plex number, where
c = r cos q + j(r sin q)
where r is the real-number polar magnitude and q is the real-number polar angle. Also sup-
pose that n is an integer. Then
cn = rn cos (nq) + j[rn sin (nq)]
Chapter 7
Question 7-1
How are the axes and variables defined in Cartesian xyz space?
Answer 7-1
We construct Cartesian xyz space by placing three real-number lines so that they all intersect 
at their zero points, and they’re all mutually perpendicular. One number line represents 
the variable x, another represents the variable y, and the third represents the variable z.
Figure 10-6 shows two perspective drawings of the typical system. Although the point of 
+x
+y
+z
–x
–y
–z
+x
–x
+z
–z
+y
–y
A
B
Figure 10-6  Illustration for 
Question and 
Answer 7-1.

view differs between illustrations A and B, the relative axis orientation is the same in both 
cases. When we graph relations and functions having two independent variables in Cartesian 
xyz space, x and y are usually the independent variables, and z is usually the dependent 
variable.
Question 7-2
What’s the difference between Cartesian xyz space and rectangular xyz space?
Answer 7-2
In Cartesian xyz space, the axes are all linear, and they’re all graduated in increments of the 
same size. In rectangular xyz space, the divisions can differ in size between the axes, although 
each axis must be linear along its entire length.
Question 7-3
What’s the “pool rule” for the relative axis orientation and coordinate values in Cartesian xyz
space?
Answer 7-3
We can imagine that the origin of the coordinate grid rests on the surface of a swimming pool. 
We orient the positive x axis horizontally along the pool surface, pointing due east. Once we’ve 
done that, the coordinate values can be generalized as follows:
• Positive values of x are east of the origin.
• Negative values of x are west of the origin.
• Positive values of y are north of the origin.
• Negative values of y are south of the origin.
• Positive values of z are up in the air.
• Negative values of z are under the water.
Question 7-4
What are the biaxial planes in Cartesian xyz space?
Answer 7-4
The biaxial planes are  the xy plane, the xz plane, and the yz plane. Each plane is perpendicular 
to the other two, and all three intersect at the origin. The biaxial planes are defined by pairs 
of axes as follows:
• The xy plane contains the axes for variables x and y.
• The xz plane contains the axes for variables x and z.
• The yz plane contains the axes for variables y and z.
Question 7-5
In Cartesian xyz space, a point can always be denoted as an ordered triple in the form (x,y,z).
What do the x, y, and z coordinates represent geometrically?
Part One  195

196  Review Questions and Answers
Answer 7-5
We can think of this situation in two different ways. First, we can use the notion of a point’s 
projection. We get the projection of a point onto an axis by drawing a line from the point 
to the axis, and making sure that the line intersects that axis at a right angle. That way, the 
coordinates and projection points are related as follows:
• The x coordinate represents the point’s projection onto the x axis.
• The y coordinate represents the point’s projection onto the y axis.
• The z coordinate represents the point’s projection onto the z axis.
We can also think of the x, y, and z values for a particular point in terms of perpendicular 
displacements from the biaxial planes as follows:
• The x coordinate is the point’s perpendicular displacement (positive, negative, or zero) 
from the yz plane.
• The y coordinate is the point’s perpendicular displacement (positive, negative, or zero) 
from the xz plane.
• The z coordinate is the point’s perpendicular displacement (positive, negative, or zero) 
from the xy plane.
Question 7-6
What semantical distinction should we keep in mind when we talk about points in terms of 
ordered triples?
Answer 7-6
An ordered triple represents the coordinates of a point in three-space, not the geometric point 
itself. Informally, the ordered triple is the name of the point. We can talk about the ordered 
triple as if it were the actual point, as long as we’re aware of the technical difference between 
the object and its name.
Question 7-7
How can we find the distance of a point from the origin in Cartesian xyz space?
Answer 7-7
Suppose we name the point Q, and assign it the coordinates
Q = (xq,yq,zq)
If we call the distance between Q and the origin by the name dq, then
dq = (xq
2 + yq
2 + zq
2)1/2
This distance is always defined, it’s always unique (unambiguous), it’s never negative, and it 
doesn’t depend on whether we go from the origin to the point or from the point to the origin.
Question 7-8
How can we find the distance between two points in Cartesian xyz space?

Answer 7-8
Let’s call the points and their coordinates
S = (xs,ys,zs)
and
T = (xt,yt,zt)
where each coordinate can range over the entire set of real numbers. If we go from S to T, the 
distance between the points is
dst = [(xt −xs)2 + ( yt −ys)2 + (zt −zs)2]1/2
If we go from T to S, the distance is
dts = [(xs −xt)2 + ( ys −yt)2 + (zs −zt)2]1/2
This distance is always defined and unique. It’s never negative, and it doesn’t depend on which 
direction we go. Therefore
dst = dts
Question 7-9
How can we find the midpoint of a line segment connecting two points in Cartesian xyz
space?
Answer 7-9
Let’s call the points and their coordinates
P = (xp,yp,zp)
and
Q = (xq,yq,zq)
We can call the midpoint M, and say that its coordinates are
M = (xm,ym,zm)
Given this information, the coordinates of M in terms of the coordinates of P and Q are
(xm,ym,zm) = [(xp + xq)/2,( yp + yq)/2,(zp + zq)/2]
This midpoint is always defined, it’s always unique, and it doesn’t depend on which direction 
we go.
Part One  197

198  Review Questions and Answers
Question 7-10
Suppose that we have two points in Cartesian xyz space where all three pairs of corresponding 
coordinates are negatives of each other. Where is the midpoint of a line segment connecting 
these two points?
Answer 7-10
It’s always at the origin.
Chapter 8
Question 8-1
What’s the Cartesian standard form for a vector in xyz space?
Answer 8-1
Any vector in xyz space, no matter where its originating and terminating points are located, 
has an equivalent standard-form vector whose originating point is at (0,0,0). Consider a vec-
tor c′ whose originating point is Q1 and whose terminating point is Q2, such that
Q1 = (x1,y1,z1)
and
Q2 = (x2,y2,z2)
The standard form of c′, denoted c, has the originating point (0,0,0) and the terminating 
point Qc such that
Qc = (xc,yc,zc) = [(x2 −x1),( y2 −y1),(z2 −z1)]
The two vectors c and c′ have identical direction angles and identical magnitudes. That’s why 
we say they’re equivalent.
Question 8-2
What’s the advantage of putting a three-space vector into its standard form?
Answer 8-2
The standard form allows us to uniquely define a vector as an ordered triple that represents the 
coordinates of its terminating point alone. We don’t have to worry about the originating point.
Question 8-3
How can we find the magnitude rb of a standard-form vector b in xyz space whose terminating 
point has the coordinates (xb,yb,zb)?
Answer 8-3
We can do it by calculating the distance of the terminating point from the origin. In this case, 
the formula is
rb = (xb
2 + yb
2 + zb
2)1/2

Question 8-4
How can we define the direction of a standard-form vector in xyz space whose terminating 
point has the coordinates (xb,yb,zb)?
Answer 8-4
The x, y, and z coordinates implicitly contain all the information we need to define the direc-
tion of a standard-form vector in Cartesian three-space. But this information is “indirect.” 
Alternatively, we can define the vector’s direction if we know the measures of the angles qx, qy,
and qz that the vector subtends relative to the +x, +y, and +z axes, respectively. These angles 
are never negative, and they’re never larger than p. There is a one-to-one correspondence 
between all possible vector orientations and all possible values of the ordered triple (qx,qy,qz).
Question 8-5
Imagine two Cartesian xyz space vectors a and b, in standard form with terminating-point 
coordinates
a = (xa,ya,za)
and
b = (xb,yb,zb)
How can we find the sum a + b? How can we find the difference a - b? How can we find the 
difference b - a? How can we calculate the Cartesian xyz space negative of a vector that’s in 
standard form? How does the Cartesian negative compare with the original vector? How do 
the differences a - b and b - a compare?
Answer 8-5
We can calculate the sum vector a + b using the formula
a + b = [(xa + xb),( ya + yb),(za + zb)]
We can calculate the difference vector a − b using the formula
a - b = [(xa −xb),( ya −yb),(za −zb)]
We can find the difference vector b - a using the formula
b - a = [(xb −xa),( yb −ya),(zb −za)]
To find the Cartesian xyz space negative of a vector that’s in standard form, we take the nega-
tives of all three terminating-point coordinate values. For example, if we have
b = (xb,yb,zb)
then its Cartesian negative is
-b = (−xb,−yb,−zb)
Part One  199

200  Review Questions and Answers
The Cartesian negative has the same magnitude as the original vector, but points in the oppo-
site direction. In xyz space, the difference vector b - a is always equal to the Cartesian negative 
of the difference vector a - b.
Question 8-6
What’s the left-hand Cartesian product of a scalar and a vector in xyz space? What’s the right-
hand Cartesian product of a vector and a scalar in xyz space? How do they compare?
Answer 8-6
Consider a real-number constant k, along with a standard-form vector a defined in xyz
space as
a = (xa,ya,za)
The left-hand Cartesian product of k and a is
ka = (kxa,kya,kza)
The right-hand Cartesian product of a and k is
ak = (xak,yak,zak)
For all real numbers k and all Cartesian xyz space vectors a, we can be sure that
ka = ak
Question 8-7
What are the three standard unit vectors (SUVs) in Cartesian xyz space?
Answer 8-7
The three SUVs in Cartesian xyz space are defined as the standard-form vectors
i = (1,0,0)
j = (0,1,0)
k = (0,0,1)
Any Cartesian xyz space vector in standard form can be split up into a sum of scalar multiples 
of the three SUVs. The scalar multiples are the coordinates of the ordered triple representing 
the vector. For example, suppose we have
a = (xa,ya,za)

We can break the vector a up in the following manner:
 
a = (xa,ya,za)
 
= (xa,0,0) + (0,ya,0) + (0,0,za)
 
= xa(1,0,0) + ya(0,1,0) + za(0,0,1)
 
= xai + yaj + zak
Question 8-8
Suppose we have two standard-form vectors in Cartesian xyz space, defined as
a = (xa,ya,za)
and
b = (xb,yb,zb)
How can we calculate the dot product a • b? How can we calculate the dot product b • a?
How do they compare?
Answer 8-8
We can calculate a • b as a real number using the formula
a • b = xaxb + yayb + zazb
Alternatively, it is
a • b = rarb cos qab
where ra is the magnitude of a, rb is the magnitude of b, and qab is the angle between the 
vectors as determined in the plane containing them both, rotating from a to b. In the same 
fashion, we can calculate b • a using the formula
b • a = xbxa + ybya + zbza
Alternatively, it is
b • a = rbra cos qba
where rb is the magnitude of b, ra is the magnitude of a, and qba is the angle between the vec-
tors as determined in the plane containing them both, rotating from b to a. The dot product 
is commutative. In other words, for all vectors a and b in Cartesian xyz space, we can be sure 
that
a • b = b • a
Part One  201

202  Review Questions and Answers
Question 8-9
How can we find the cross product of two standard-form vectors a and b in three-space if we 
know their magnitudes and the angle between them?
Answer 8-9
The cross product a ë b is a vector perpendicular to the plane containing both a and b, and 
whose magnitude ra×b is given by
ra×b = rarb sin qab
where ra is the magnitude of a, rb is the magnitude of b, and qab is the angle between a and 
b, expressed in the rotational sense going from a to b. We should define the angle so that it’s 
always within the range
0 ≤qab ≤p
If we look at a and b from some point far outside of the plane containing them, and if qab
turns through a half circle or less counterclockwise as we go from a to b, then the cross-
product vector a ë b points toward us. If qab turns through a half circle or less clockwise as we 
go from a to b, then a ë b points away from us.
Question 8-10
Imagine that we have two vectors in xyz space whose coordinates are
a = (xa,ya,za)
and
b = (xb,yb,zb)
How can we express a ë b as an ordered triple?
Answer 8-10
We can plug in the coordinate values directly into the formula
a ë b =  [( yazb −zayb),(zaxb −xazb),(xayb −yaxb)]
Chapter 9
Question 9-1
How do we determine the cylindrical coordinates of a point in three-space?
Answer 9-1
We “paste” a polar plane onto a Cartesian xy plane, creating a reference plane. The positive 
Cartesian x axis is the reference axis. To determine the cylindrical coordinates of a point P, we 
first locate its projection point, P′ on the reference plane:

• The direction angle q is expressed counterclockwise from the reference axis to the ray 
that goes out from the origin through P′.
• The radius r is the distance from the origin to P′.
• The height h is the vertical displacement (positive, negative, or zero) from P′  to P.
The basic scheme is shown in Fig. 10-7. We express the cylindrical coordinates of our point 
of interest as an ordered triple:
P = (q,r,h)
Question 9-2
Can we have nonstandard direction angles in cylindrical coordinates? Can we have negative 
radii? Are there any restrictions on the values of the height coordinate?
Answer 9-2
Theoretically, we can have a nonstandard direction angle. But if we come across that situ-
ation, it’s best to add or subtract whatever multiple of 2p  will bring the direction angle 
into the preferred range 0 ≤q < 2p. If q ≥ 2p, it represents at least one complete counter-
clockwise rotation from the reference axis. If q < 0, it represents clockwise rotation from 
the reference axis.
We can have a negative radius in theoretical terms. However, if we come across that sort 
of situation, it’s best to reverse the direction angle and then consider the radius positive. If 
r < 0, we can take the absolute value of the negative radius and use it as the radius coordinate. 
Then we must add or subtract p  to or from q to reverse the direction, while also making sure 
that the new angle is larger than 0 but less than 2p.
P
r
–x
+z
–z
+y
–y
P¢
h
Reference
plane
+x
Reference
axis
q
Figure 10-7  Illustration for Question and Answer 9-1.
Part One  203

204  Review Questions and Answers
The height h can be any real number. There are no restrictions on it whatsoever. We have 
h > 0 if and only if P is above the reference plane, h < 0 if and only if P is below the reference 
plane, and h = 0 if and only if P is in the reference plane.
Question 9-3
Consider a point P = (q,r,h) in cylindrical coordinates. How can we determine the coordinates 
of P in Cartesian xyz space?
Answer 9-3
The Cartesian x value of P is
x = r cos q
The Cartesian y value is
y = r sin q
The Cartesian z value is
z = h
Question 9-4
Consider a point P = (x,y,z) in Cartesian three-space. How can we find the direction angle q
of the point P in cylindrical coordinates?
Answer 9-4
Cartesian-to-cylindrical angle conversion is the same as Cartesian-to-polar angle conversion:
• If x = 0 and y = 0, then q = 0 by default.
• If x > 0 and y = 0, then q = 0.
• If x > 0 and y > 0, then q = Arctan ( y /x).
• If x = 0 and y > 0, then q = p /2.
• If x < 0 and y > 0, then q = p + Arctan ( y /x).
• If x < 0 and y = 0, then q = p.
• If x < 0 and y < 0, then q = p + Arctan ( y /x).
• If x = 0 and y < 0, then q = 3p /2.
• If x > 0 and y < 0, then q = 2p + Arctan ( y /x).
Question 9-5
Consider a point P = (x,y,z) in Cartesian three-space. How can we find the radius r of the 
point P in cylindrical coordinates? How can we find the height h of the point P in cylindrical 
coordinates?

Answer 9-5
To find the cylindrical radius coordinate of P, we find the distance between its projection 
point P′ and the origin in the xy plane. The z value is irrelevant, so the formula is
r = (x2 + y2)1/2
The cylindrical height is simply equal to z. The x and y values are irrelevant, so the formula is
h = z
Question 9-6
How do we determine the spherical coordinates of a point in three-space?
Answer 9-6
We start with a Cartesian reference plane. The positive Cartesian x axis forms the reference 
axis. To determine the spherical coordinates of a point P, we first locate its projection point, 
P′, on the reference plane:
• The horizontal angle q turns counterclockwise in the reference plane from the refer-
ence axis to the ray that goes out from the origin through P′.
• The vertical angle f turns downward from the vertical axis to the ray that goes out 
from the origin through P.
• The radius r is the straight-line distance from the origin to P.
The basic scheme is shown in Fig. 10-8. We express the spherical coordinates as an ordered triple
P = (q,f,r)
P
r
+x
–x
+z
–z
+y
–y
P¢
Reference
plane
Reference
axis
q
f
Figure 10-8  Illustration for Question and 
Answer 9-6.
Part One 205

206  Review Questions and Answers
Question 9-7
Are their any restrictions on the horizontal or vertical angles in spherical coordinates? Are 
there any restrictions on the radius?
Answer 9-7
Theoretically, we can have a nonstandard horizontal direction angle, but it’s best to add or 
subtract whatever multiple of 2p  will bring it into the preferred range 0 ≤q < 2p. If q ≥ 2p,
it represents at least one complete counterclockwise rotation from the reference axis. If q < 0, 
it represents clockwise rotation from the reference axis.
Theoretically, we can have a nonstandard vertical angle, but it’s best to restrict it to the 
range 0 ≤f ≤p. We can do that by making sure that we traverse the smallest possible angle 
between the positive z axis and the ray connecting the origin with P.
The radius can be any real number, but things are simplest if we keep it nonnegative. If we 
find ourselves working with a negative radius, we should reverse the direction by adding or sub-
tracting p to or from both angles, making sure that we end up with 0 ≤q < 2p and 0 ≤f ≤p.
Then we must take the absolute value of the negative radius and use it as the radius coordinate.
Question 9-8
Consider a point P = (q,f,r) in spherical coordinates. How can we determine the coordinates 
of P in Cartesian xyz space?
Answer 9-8
The Cartesian x value of P is
x = r sin f cos q
The Cartesian y value is
y = r sin f sin q
The Cartesian z value is
z = r cos f
Question 9-9
Consider a point P = (x,y,z) in Cartesian three-space. How can we find the horizontal angle 
coordinate q of the point P in spherical coordinates?
Answer 9-9
The Cartesian-to-spherical horizontal-angle conversion process is identical to the Cartesian-
to-cylindrical direction-angle conversion process:
• If x = 0 and y = 0, then q = 0 by default.
• If x > 0 and y = 0, then q = 0.
• If x > 0 and y > 0, then q = Arctan ( y /x).

• If x = 0 and y > 0, then q = p /2.
• If x < 0 and y > 0, then q = p + Arctan ( y /x).
• If x < 0 and y = 0, then q = p.
• If x < 0 and y < 0, then q = p + Arctan ( y /x).
• If x = 0 and y < 0, then q = 3p /2.
• If x > 0 and y < 0, then q = 2p + Arctan ( y /x).
Question 9-10
Consider a point P = (x,y,z) in Cartesian three-space. How can we find the radius coordinate 
r of the point P in spherical coordinates? How can we find the vertical angle coordinate f of 
the point P in spherical coordinates?
Answer 9-10
To find the spherical radius, we use the formula
r = (x2 + y2 + z2)1/2
To find the spherical vertical angle, we use the formula
f = Arccos [z / (x2 + y2 + z2)1/2]
If we already know the radius r, then we have
f = Arccos (z/r)
Part One  207

This page intentionally left blank 

209
PART
2
Analytic Geometry

This page intentionally left blank 

If you’ve taken the course Algebra Know-It-All, you’ve already had some basic training on 
relations and functions. They’ve been mentioned a few times in this book as well. Let’s look 
more closely at how relations and functions behave in two-space.
What’s a Two-Space Relation?
A relation is a special way of assigning, or mapping, the elements of a “source” set to the 
elements of a “destination” set. In two-space, both the source and destination sets usually 
consist of numbers. The sets might be identical, partially overlapping, or entirely disjoint. For 
example, we might have a relation between the set of negative integers and the set of positive 
integers, or the set of positive real numbers and the set of all real numbers, or the set of all real 
numbers and itself.
Ordered pairs
Any point in the Cartesian plane or the polar plane can be uniquely represented by an ordered 
pair in which a value of the independent variable (an element of the source set) is listed first, 
followed by a value of the dependent variable (an element of the destination set). The domain
is the set of all values of the independent variable for which the relation produces defined 
values of the dependent variable. The range is the set of all values of the dependent variable 
that come from the elements of the domain. Here’s an example of a relation written as a set 
of ordered pairs:
{(3,2),(4,3),(5,4),(6,5)}
The domain of this particular relation (let’s call it set D) is the set of first numbers in the 
ordered pairs. Therefore
D = {3,4,5,6}
211
CHAPTER 
11
Relations in Two-Space

212
Relations in Two-Space
The range (let’s call it set R) of the relation is the set of second numbers in the ordered 
pairs, so
R = {2,3,4,5}
Injection, surjection, and bijection
Imagine a relation between numbers x in a set X and numbers y in a set Y. Suppose that each 
number x in set X corresponds to one, but only one, number y in set Y. Also suppose that no 
number in Y has more than one “mate” in X. (There might be some numbers in Y without 
any “mate” in X.) A relation of this type is called an injection. In some older texts, it’s called 
one-to-one.
Now imagine a relation that assigns the elements of set X to the elements of set Y so that 
every element of Y has at least one “mate” in X. This type of relation is called a surjection. Set 
Y is completely “spoken for.” A surjection is sometimes called an onto relation, because it maps
(assigns) the values from set X completely onto the entire set Y.
Finally, imagine a relation that is both an injection and a surjection. This type of relation 
is called a bijection. In older texts, you might see it referred to as a one-to-one correspondence
(not to be confused with one-to-one, which means an injection). A bijection assigns every 
value of x in set X to a unique value of y in set Y. Conversely, every y in set Y corresponds to 
a unique value of x in set X. In this context, “a unique value” means “one and only one value” 
or “exactly one value.”
Example 1
Relations are commonly represented by equations. Here’s an example of a simple two-space 
relation that subtracts 1 from every value in the domain to generate values in the range:
y = x − 1
This relation could describe a one-to-one correspondence between the elements of the domain
X = {3,4,5,6}
and the elements of the range
Y = {2,3,4,5}
which we saw a few moments ago. If we allow the domain of the relation to extend over the 
entire set of real numbers, then the range also covers the entire set of real numbers. When we 
put specific values of x into the equation, we get results such as the following:
• If x = −13, then (x,y) = (−13,−14).
• If x = −1.6, then (x,y) = (−1.6,−2.6).
• If x = 0, then (x,y) = (0,−1).
• If x = 1, then (x,y) = (1,0).
• If x = 3/2, then (x,y) = (3/2,1/2).
• If x = 81/2, then (x,y) = [81/2,(81/2 − 1)].

For every value of x, the relation assigns one and only one value of y. The converse is also true; 
for every value of y, there is one and only one corresponding value of x.
Example 2
Next, let’s consider a real-number relation that squares each element in the domain to produce 
values in the range. We can write this relation as the following equation:
y = x2
In the set of real numbers, this relation is defined for all possible values of x, but we never get 
any negative values of y. The range is the set of all y such that y ≥ 0. When we plug specific 
numbers into this equation, we get results such as the following:
• If x = −4, then (x,y) = (−4,16).
• If x = −1, then (x,y) = (−1,1).
• If x = −1/2, then (x,y) = (−1/2,1/4).
• If x = 0, then (x,y) = (0,0).
• If x = 1/2, then (x,y) = (1/2,1/4).
• If x = 1, then (x,y) = (1,1).
• If x = 4, then (x,y) = (4,16).
For every value of x, the relation assigns a unique value of y, but for every assigned value of y
except y = 0 in the range, the domain contains two values of x.
Example 3
Now let’s look at a real-number relation that takes the positive or negative square root of ele-
ments in the domain to get elements in the range. We can write it as the equation
y = ±(x1/2)
When we plug in some numbers here, we get results like the following:
• If x = 1/9, then (x,y) = (1/9,1/3) or (1/9,−1/3).
• If x = 1/4, then (x,y) = (1/4,1/2) or (1/4,−1/2).
• If x = 1, then (x,y) = (1,1) or (1,−1).
• If x = 4, then (x,y) = (4,2) or (4,−2).
• If x = 9, then (x,y) = (9,3) or (9,−3).
• If x = 0, then (x,y) = (0,0).
In the set of real numbers, the domain of this relation is confined to nonnegative values of 
x. That is, the domain is the set of all x such that x ≥ 0. For every positive value of x in the 
domain, there are two values of y in the range. If x = 0, then y = 0. The range encompasses all 
possible real-number values of y. For any value of y in the range, there exists one and only one 
corresponding value of x in the domain.
What’s a Two-Space Relation? 213

214  Relations in Two-Space
Example 4
Finally, let’s examine a real-number relation that takes the nonnegative square root of values 
in the domain to get values in the range. We can denote it as
y = x1/2
The domain is the set of all real numbers x such that x ≥ 0, and the range is the set of all real 
numbers y such that y ≥ 0. Following are a few examples of what happens when we input 
values of x into this equation:
• If x = 1/9, then (x,y) = (1/9,1/3).
• If x = 1/4, then (x,y) = (1/4,1/2).
• If x = 1, then (x,y) = (1,1).
• If x = 4, then (x,y) = (4,2).
• If x = 9, then (x,y) = (9,3).
• If x = 0, then (x,y) = (0,0).
For every x in the domain, there is one and only one y in the range. The converse is also true. 
For every y in the range, there is one and only one x in the domain.
Are you confused?
Sometimes a relation fails to take all of the elements of the source or destination sets into account. 
Figure 11-1 illustrates a generic example of a situation of this sort using a graphical scheme called 
a Venn diagram:
• The entire source set is called the maximal domain.
• The entire destination set is called the co-domain.
• The domain of a relation is a subset of its maximal domain.
• The range of a relation is a subset of its co-domain.
Here’s a challenge!
Classify each of the relations in Examples 1 through 4 as an injection, a surjection, a bijection, or 
“none of them” from the set of real numbers to itself.
Solution
In each of these relations, our source set is the entire set of real numbers, and that’s not neces-
sarily the domain. Also, our destination set is the entire set of reals, and that’s not necessarily the 
range:
• In Example 1, we subtract 1 from each value of the independent variable to get a value of the 
dependent variable. This operation produces a one-to-one correspondence between the set of 
real numbers and itself. For every value we input, we get a unique output. Also, every output 
value is the result of one and only one input value. It follows that this relation is a bijection.

• In Example 2, we square each value of the independent variable to get a value of the dependent 
variable. For every value of the dependent variable except 0, two different values of the inde-
pendent variable are assigned to it. The relation is not an injection, because it’s not one-to-one. 
It can’t be a bijection, then, either. The independent variable can attain any real value, but the 
dependent variable can never be negative, so this relation is not a surjection onto the set of real 
numbers. We must therefore classify this relation as “none of them.”
• In Example 3, we take the positive or negative square root of each value of the indepen-
dent variable to get a value of the dependent variable. The independent variable can’t be 
negative, but the dependent variable can be any real number. The relation is therefore a 
surjection onto the set of real numbers. But it’s not an injection, because most values of 
the independent variable map to two values of the dependent variable. It’s not a bijection 
then, either.
• In Example 4, we take the nonnegative square root of each value of the independent variable to 
get a value of the dependent variable. As in Example 3, the independent variable can never be 
negative. Neither can the dependent variable. In this case we don’t have an injection, because 
some real numbers in the source set don’t have any counterparts in the destination set. We 
don’t have a surjection either, because the range fails to cover the entire set of real numbers. We 
must categorize this as a “none of them” relation.
Maximal domain
Co-domain
Range
Domain
Mapping
Figure 11-1
The domain of a relation is a 
subset of the maximal domain. 
The range is a subset of the 
co-domain.
What’s a Two-Space Relation?  215

216  Relations in Two-Space
What’s a Two-Space Function?
In two-space, a function is a relation that never maps any value of the independent variable to 
more than one value of the dependent variable. All functions are relations, but not all relations 
are functions. Figure 11-2 shows Venn diagrams of a “legal” assignment for a function (left) 
and an “illegal” assignment (right).
The vertical-line test
In the Cartesian xy plane, suppose that x is the independent variable, and we plot it against 
the horizontal axis. Also suppose that y is the dependent variable, and we plot it against the 
vertical axis. When we see the graph of a simple relation, it usually appears as a line or curve. 
More complicated relations may graph as groups of lines and/or curves.
We can test the graph of any relation in the Cartesian xy plane to see if it represents a 
function of x. Imagine an infinitely long, movable vertical line that’s always parallel to the 
dependent-variable axis (the y axis). Suppose that we’re free to move the line to the left or 
right, so it intersects the independent-variable axis (the x axis) wherever we want. If the 
graph is a function of x, then the movable vertical line never intersects the graph of our 
relation at more than one point. If, in any position, the vertical line intersects the graph 
at more than one point, then the relation is not a function of x. We call this exercise the 
vertical-line test.
Range
Domain
Range
Domain
A function
can do this ...
... but not this!
Figure 11-2  A true function never assigns any element in its 
domain to more than one element in its range.

Example 1 revisited
Let’s take another look at the relation given by Example 1 in the previous section. We described 
it using the following equation:
y = x − 1
Figure 11-3 is a graph of this equation in the Cartesian xy plane. It’s a straight line with a slope 
of 1 and a y intercept of −1. If we imagine an infinitely long, movable vertical line sweeping 
back and forth, it’s easy to see that the vertical line never intersects our graph at more than one 
point. Therefore, the relation is a function.
Example 2 revisited
The relation in Example 2 in the previous section has a graph that’s a parabola opening 
upward, as shown in Fig. 11-4. The equation is
y = x2
The vertex of the parabola represents the absolute minimum value of the relation, and it coin-
cides with the coordinate origin (0,0). The curve rises symmetrically on either side of the y
axis. It’s not difficult to see that a movable vertical line never intersects the parabola at more 
than one point. This fact tells us that the relation is a function of x.
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
6
–4
–6
x
y
4
Movable
vertical
line
Figure 11-3  Cartesian graph of the relation y = x − 1. 
The vertical-line test reveals that it’s a 
function of x.
What’s a Two-Space Function?  217

218  Relations in Two-Space
Example 3 revisited
Figure 11-5 is a graph of the relation we saw in Example 3 in the previous section. The equation 
for that relation was stated as
y = ±(x1/2)
In this case, the graph is a parabola that opens to the right. The vertex coincides with the 
coordinate origin, but there is no absolute minimum or maximum for the dependent variable. 
When we construct a movable vertical line in this situation, we find that it doesn’t intersect 
the graph when x < 0. When x = 0, the vertical line intersects the graph at the single point 
(0,0). When x > 0, the vertical line intersects the graph at two points. Therefore, this relation 
is not a function of x.
Example 4 revisited
Figure 11-6 is a graph of the relation we saw in Example 4 in the previous section. It’s the 
upper half of the parabola of Fig. 11-5, with the point (0,0) included. The equation is
y = x1/2
The vertical-line test tells us that this relation is a function of x. No matter where we position 
the vertical line, it never intersects the graph more than once.
Figure 11-4  Cartesian graph of the relation y = x2.  The 
vertical-line test reveals that it’s a function 
of x.
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
4
Movable
vertical
line

Figure 11-5  Cartesian graph of the relation y = ±(x1/2).
The vertical-line test reveals that it isn’t a 
function of x.
2
6
–2
–4
–6
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
4
Movable
vertical
line
2
6
–2
–4
–6
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
4
Movable
vertical
line
Figure 11-6  Cartesian graph of the relation y = x1/2.
The vertical-line test reveals that it’s a 
function of x.
What’s a Two-Space Function?  219

220  Relations in Two-Space
Are you confused?
By now you might wonder, “When we have a relation where the independent variable is repre-
sented by the polar angle q and the dependent variable is represented by the polar radius r, how 
can we tell if the relation is a function of q?” It’s easy, but there’s a little trick involved. We can 
draw the graph of the relation in a Cartesian plane with q on the horizontal axis and r on the verti-
cal axis. We must allow both q and r to attain all possible real-number values. Once we’ve drawn 
the graph of the polar relation the Cartesian way, we can use the Cartesian vertical-line test to see 
whether or not the relation is a function of q.
Here’s a challenge!
Consider the relation between an independent variable x and a dependent variable y such that
x2 −y2 = 1
Sketch a graph of this relation in the Cartesian xy plane. Use the vertical-line test to determine, 
on the basis of the graph, whether or not this relation is a function of x.
Solution
Figure 11-7 is a graph of this relation. It’s a geometric figure called a hyperbola. The vertical-line 
test tells us that the relation is not a function of x.
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
4
Movable
vertical
line
Figure 11-7  Cartesian graph of the relation x2 −y2 = 1. 
The vertical-line test reveals that it isn’t a 
function of x.

Here’s another challenge!
Consider the relation between an independent variable q and a dependent variable r defined by 
the equation
r = 2q /p
Sketch a graph of this equation in the polar plane. Then redraw it in the Cartesian plane with q on 
the horizontal axis and r on the vertical axis. Use the vertical-line test to determine, on the basis 
of the graph, whether or not the relation is a function of q.
Solution
Figure 11-8 is a graph of the equation in the polar plane. It’s a pair of “dueling spirals.” When 
we draw the graph of the equation in a Cartesian plane with q on the horizontal axis and r
on the vertical axis, we get a straight line that passes through the origin with a slope of 2 /p,
as shown in Fig. 11-9. The Cartesian vertical-line test indicates that the relation is a function 
of q.
Figure 11-8  Polar graph of the relation r = 2q /p. Each 
radial division represents 1 unit.
What’s a Two-Space Function?  221

222  Relations in Two-Space
Algebra with Functions
Functions can always be written as equations. Therefore, when we want to add, subtract, mul-
tiply, or divide two functions, we can use ordinary algebra to add, subtract, multiply, or divide 
both sides of the equations representing the functions. 
Cautions
There are three “catches” in the algebra of functions. Whenever we add, subtract, multiply, or 
divide one function by another, we must watch out for these potential pitfalls. Otherwise, we 
might get misleading or incorrect results:
• The independent variables of the two functions must match. That is, they must de-
scribe the same parameters or phenomena. We can’t algebraically combine functions of 
two different variables in an attempt to get a new function in a single variable. If we try 
to do that, we won’t know which variable the resultant function should operate on.
• The domain of the resultant function is the intersection of the domains of the two 
functions we combine. Any element in the domain of a sum, difference, product, or 
ratio function must belong to the domains of both of the constituent functions. The 
domain of a ratio function may, however, be restricted even further if the denominator 
function becomes 0 anywhere in its domain.
–3p
–p
3p
3
2
1
–2
–3
r
–2p
Movable
vertical
line
2p
p
q
Figure 11-9  Cartesian graph of the relation r = 2q /p.
The vertical-line test shows that it’s 
a function of q.

• If we divide a function by another function, the resultant function is undefined for 
any value of the independent variable where the denominator function becomes 0. 
This can, and often does, restrict the domain of the resultant function to a proper 
subset of the domain we would get if we were to add, subtract, or multiply the same 
two functions.
New names for old functions
So far in this chapter, we’ve encountered four different functions. Three of them are functions 
of x; the fourth is a function of q. Following are the equations of the functions once again, 
for reference:
 
y = x − 1
 
y = x2
 
y = x1/2
 
r = 2q /p
Let’s assign these functions specific names, so that we can write them in the conventional 
function notation. These are
 
f1 (x) = x − 1
 
f2 (x) = x2
 
f3 (x) = x1/2
 
f4 (q) = 2q /p
Sum of two functions
When we want to find the sum of two functions, we add both sides of their equations. This 
can be done in either order, producing identical results. For f1 and f2, we have
(f1 + f2)(x) = f1 (x) + f2 (x) = (x − 1) + x2 = x2 + x − 1
and
(f2 + f1)(x) = f2 (x) + f1 (x) = x2 + (x − 1) = x2 + x − 1
For f1 and f3, we have
(f1 + f3)(x) = f1 (x) + f3 (x) = (x − 1) + x1/2 = x + x1/2 − 1
and
(f3 + f1)(x) = f3 (x) + f1 (x) = x1/2 + (x − 1) = x + x1/2 − 1
For f2 and f3, we have
(f2 + f3)(x) = f2 (x) + f3 (x) = x2 + x1/2
Algebra with Functions  223

224  Relations in Two-Space
and
(f3 + f2)(x) = f3 (x) + f2 (x) = x1/2 + x2 = x2 + x1/2
It’s customary to write polynomials (sums or differences of a variable raised to powers) with 
the largest power first, and then descending powers after that. That’s why some of the sums 
and differences have been rearranged in the above examples.
What about f4?
The independent variable in f4 doesn’t match the independent variable in any of the other 
three functions, so we can’t combine and manipulate the equations as if the variables did 
match. We can add the equations straightaway, but that doesn’t tell us much. For example, 
we can say that
f2 (x) + f4 (q) = x2 + 2q /p
but that’s all we can do with it. It’s like trying to add minutes to millimeters. We can’t get a 
resultant function of a single variable. The same problem occurs if we try to subtract, multiply, 
or find a ratio involving f4 and any of the other three functions.
Difference between two functions
When we want to find the difference between two functions, we subtract both sides of their 
equations. This can be done in either order, usually producing different results. For f1 and f2,
we have
(f1 −f2)(x) = f1 (x) −f2 (x) = (x − 1) −x2 = −x2 + x − 1
and
(f2 −f1)(x) = f2 (x) −f1 (x) = x2 − (x − 1) = x2 −x + 1
For f1 and f3, we have
(f1 −f3)(x) = f1 (x) −f3 (x) = (x − 1) −x1/2 = x −x1/2 − 1
and
(f3 −f1)(x) = f3 (x) −f1 (x) = x1/2 − (x − 1) = −x + x1/2 + 1
For f2 and f3, we have
(f2 −f3)(x) = f2 (x) −f3 (x) = x2 −x1/2
and
(f3 −f2)(x) = f3 (x) −f2 (x) = x1/2 −x2 = −x2 + x1/2

Product of two functions
When we want to find the product of two functions, we multiply both sides of their equa-
tions. This can be done in either order, producing identical results. For f1 and f2, we have
 ( f1 × f2)(x) = f1 (x) × f2 (x) = (x − 1) x2 = x3 −x2
and
(f2 × f1)(x) = f2 (x) × f1 (x) = x2(x − 1) = x3 −x2
For f1 and f3, we have
 ( f1 × f3)(x) = f1 (x) × f3 (x) = (x − 1)x1/2 = x3/2 −x1/2
and
(f3 × f1)(x) = f3 (x) × f1 (x) = x1/2(x − 1) = x3/2 −x1/2
For f2 and f3, we have
 ( f2 × f3)(x) = f2 (x) × f3 (x) = x2x1/2 = x5/2
and
(f3 × f2)(x) = f3 (x) × f2 (x) = x1/2x2 = x5/2
Ratio of two functions
When we want to find the ratio of two functions, we divide both sides of their equations. This 
can be done in either order, usually producing different results. For f1 and f2, we have
 ( f1 / f2)(x) = f1 (x) / f2 (x) = (x − 1)/x2 = x−1 −x−2
and
(f2 / f1)(x) = f2 (x) / f1 (x) = x2/(x − 1) = x2 (x − 1)−1
For f1 and f3, we have
 ( f1 / f3)(x) = f1(x) / f3 (x) = (x − 1) / x1/2 = x1/2 −x−1/2
and
(f3 / f1)(x) = f3 (x) / f1 (x) = x1/2/(x − 1) = x1/2(x − 1)−1
For f2 and f3, we have
 ( f2 / f3)(x) = f2(x) / f3 (x) = x2/x1/2 = x3/2
and
(f3 / f2)(x) = f3(x) / f2(x) = x1/2/x2 = x−3/2
Algebra with Functions  225

226  Relations in Two-Space
Are you confused?
You ask, “Do the commutative, associative, distributive, and other rules of arithmetic and algebra 
work with functions in the same ways as they do with numbers and variables?” The answer is a 
qualified yes. All the rules of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division of functions are 
identical to the rules for arithmetic or algebra involving numbers or variables, as long as we heed 
the cautions outlined earlier in this section.
Here’s a challenge!
Define the real-number domains of all the sum, difference, product, and ratio functions we’ve 
found in this section.
Solution
We found the real-number domains (which we can call the real domains for short) of the functions 
f1, f2, and f3 earlier in this chapter. Here they are again, for reference:
• The real domain of f1 (x), which subtracts 1 from x, is the set of all reals.
• The real domain of f2 (x), which squares x, is the set of all reals.
• The real domain of f3 (x), which takes the nonnegative square root of x, is the set of all non-
negative reals.
The real domains of the sum, difference, and product functions are the intersections of these. 
Let’s list them:
• The real domains of ( f1 + f2), ( f1 −f2), and ( f1 × f2) are the set of all real numbers.
• The real domains of ( f2 + f1), ( f2 −f1), and ( f2 × f1) are the set of all real numbers.
• The real domains of ( f1 + f3), ( f1 −f3), and ( f1 × f3) are the set of all nonnegative real numbers.
• The real domains of ( f3 + f1), ( f3 −f1), and ( f3 × f1) are the set of all nonnegative real numbers.
• The real domains of ( f2 + f3), ( f2 −f3), and ( f2 × f3) are the set of all nonnegative real numbers.
• The real domains of ( f3 + f2), ( f3 −f2), and ( f3 × f2) are the set of all nonnegative real numbers.
The real domains of the ratio functions are subsets of the real domains for the sum, product, and 
difference functions. We have to look at each ratio function and check to see where the denomina-
tors are equal to 0:
• The denominator of ( f1 / f2) becomes 0 when x = 0.
• The denominator of ( f2 / f1) becomes 0 when x = 1.
• The denominator of ( f1 / f3) becomes 0 when x = 0.
• The denominator of ( f3 / f1) becomes 0 when x = 1.
• The denominator of ( f2 / f3) becomes 0 when x = 0.
• The denominator of ( f3 / f2) becomes 0 when x = 0.
On the basis of these observations, we can create one final list:
• The real domain of ( f1 / f2) is the set of all real numbers except 0.
• The real domain of ( f2 / f1) is the set of all real numbers except 1.

• The real domain of ( f1 / f3) is the set of all strictly positive real numbers.
• The real domain of ( f3 / f1) is the set of all nonnegative real numbers except 1.
• The real domain of ( f2 / f3) is the set of all strictly positive real numbers.
• The real domain of ( f3 / f2) is the set of all strictly positive real numbers.
Practice Exercises
This is an open-book quiz. You may (and should) refer to the text as you solve these problems. 
Don’t hurry! You’ll find worked-out answers in App. B. The solutions in the appendix may not 
represent the only way a problem can be figured out. If you think you can solve a particular 
problem in a quicker or better way than you see there, by all means try it!
 1.  Examine the relation illustrated in Fig. 11-10. Suppose that for every element x in set X,
there exists at most one element y in set Y. Is this relation an injection? Is it a surjection? 
Is it a bijection? Note that the range of the relation is the entire co-domain. Is that true 
of all relations? As described here, is this relation a function? Explain each answer.
Maximal domain
Set Y coincides
with co-domain
Set X
Relation
Figure 11-10 Illustration for Problem 1.
 2.  Imagine a relation in which the domain X is the set of all positive rational numbers, 
while the range Y is the set of all positive integers. Let’s call the independent variable x
and the dependent variable y. Suppose that for any x in set X, the relation rounds x up 
to the next larger integer to obtain the corresponding element y in set Y. Is this relation 
an injection? Is it a surjection? Is it a bijection? Is it a function of x? Explain each answer.
 3. Suppose that we reverse the action of the relation described in Problem 2. Let the 
domain X be the set of all positive integers, while the range Y is the set of all positive 
rationals. Suppose that for any value of the independent variable x in set X, the relation 
Practice Exercises  227

228  Relations in Two-Space
maps to the set of all rationals in the half open interval (x − 1,x]. Is this relation an 
injection? Is it a surjection? Is it a bijection? Is it a function of x? Explain each answer.
 4.  Can a relation whose graph is a circle or ellipse in the Cartesian xy plane ever be a 
function of x? Why or why not?
 5. Can a relation whose graph is a circle in the polar qr plane ever be a function of q ? Why 
or why not?
 6. Find all the sums, differences, products, and ratios of
f (x) = x + 2
 
 and
g (x) = 3
 7. Find all the sums, differences, products, and ratios of
f (x) = x + 1
 
 and
g (x) = x − 1
 8. Find all the sums, differences, products, and ratios of
f (x) = x−1
 
 and
g (x) = x−2
 9. Find all the sums, differences, products, and ratios of
f (x) = sin2 q
 
 and
g (x) = cos2 q
 10. What are the real-number domains of all the original and derived functions in Problems 
6 through 9?

Any relation in two-space has a unique inverse relation, which can be called simply the inverse
if we understand that we’re dealing with a relation. We denote the fact that a relation is an 
inverse by writing a superscript −1 after its name. For example, if we have a relation f (x), then 
its inverse is f   −1(x).
Finding an Inverse Relation
A relation’s inverse does the opposite of whatever the original relation does. To find the inverse 
of a relation, we can manipulate the equation so that the independent and dependent variables 
switch roles. We must therefore transpose the domain and range.
The algebraic way
Suppose we have a relation f (x). The inverse of f, which we call f −1, is another relation 
such that
f   −1[f (x)] = x
for all possible values of x in the domain of f, and
f [f   −1(y)] = y
for all possible values of y in the range of f. When we talk or write about an inverse relation, 
it’s customary to swap the names of the variables so the inverse relation calls the independent 
and dependent variables by their original names. That means the preceding equation can be 
rewritten as
f [f   −1(x)] = x
for all possible values of x in the domain of f   −1.
229
CHAPTER 
12
Inverse Relations in Two-Space

230  Inverse Relations in Two-Space
An example
Let’s find the inverse of the following relation:
f (x) = x + 2
If we call the dependent variable y, then we can rewrite our relation as
y = x + 2
Swapping the names of the variables, we get
x = y + 2
which can be manipulated with algebra to obtain
y = x − 2
If we replace the new variable y by the relation notation f −1(x), we get
f −1(x) = x − 2
The domain and range of the original relation f both span the entire set of real numbers. 
Therefore, the domain and range of the inverse relation f −1 also both span the entire set of 
reals.
Another example
Let’s find the inverse of the following relation:
g(x) = ±(x1/2)
If we call the dependent variable y, then we can rewrite the relation as
y = ±(x1/2)
When we switch the names of the variables, we get
x = ±( y1/2)
Squaring both sides produces
x2 = y
Reversing the left- and right-hand sides gives us
y = x2

Finding an Inverse Relation  231
Replacing y by g −1(x), we get
g −1(x) = x2
The domain of the original relation g spans the set of nonnegative reals, and the range of g
spans the set of all reals. Therefore, the domain of g −1 includes all reals, while the range of g −1
is confined to the set of nonnegative reals. 
Still another example
Let’s find the inverse of the relation
h(x) = x1/2
When we write the 1/2 power of a quantity without including any sign, we mean the non-
negative square root of that quantity. If we call the dependent variable y, then we have
y = x1/2
Swapping the names of the variables, we get
x = y1/2
Squaring both sides, we obtain
x2 = y
Reversing the left- and right-hand sides of this equation yields
y = x2
Replacing y by h −1(x), we get
h −1(x) = x2
Is the inverse of h identical to the inverse of g we obtained a few moments ago? It looks that 
way “on the surface,” but it’s not so simple when we examine the situation more closely. 
The domain of h spans the set of nonnegative reals, just as the domain of g does. But the 
range of h spans the set of nonnegative reals only (not the set of all reals, as the range of g
does). Transposing, we must conclude that the domain and range of h −1 are both confined 
to the set of nonnegative reals. The relations h and h −1 are therefore restricted versions of g
and g −1.
The graphical way
Imagine the line represented by the equation y = x in the Cartesian xy plane as a “point 
reflector.” For any point that’s part of the graph of the original relation, we can locate its 

232  Inverse Relations in Two-Space
counterpart in the graph of the inverse relation by going to the opposite side of the point 
reflector, exactly the same distance away. Figure 12-1 shows how this works. The line con-
necting a point in the original graph and its “mate” in the inverse graph is perpendicular to 
the point reflector. The point reflector is a perpendicular bisector of every point-connecting 
line.
Mathematically, we can do a point transformation of the sort shown in Fig. 12-1 by 
reversing the sequence of the ordered pair representing the point. For example, if (4,6) rep-
resents a point on the graph of a certain relation, then its counterpoint on the graph of the 
inverse relation is represented by (6,4).
When we want to graph the inverse of a relation, we flip the whole graph over along a 
“hinge” corresponding to the point reflector line y = x. That moves every point in the graph 
of the original relation to its new position in the graph of the inverse. Figures 12-2, 12-3, and 
12-4 show how this process works with the three relations we dealt with a few moments ago. 
The positions of the x and y axes haven’t changed, but the values of the variables, as well as the 
domain and range, have been reversed.
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
“Point
reflector”
line
y = x
Original
Inverse
Original
Inverse
Original
Inverse
Original
Inverse
Figure 12-1  Any point on the graph of the inverse of a 
relation is the point’s image on the opposite 
side of a point reflector line. The new 
coordinates are obtained by reversing the 
sequence of the ordered pair representing 
the original point.

Finding an Inverse Relation  233
Figure 12-2  At A, Cartesian graph of the relation y = x + 2. 
At B, Cartesian graph of the inverse relation.
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
(–5, –3)
(0, 2)
(4, 6)
2
4
6
–2
–6
2
4
6
–2
–4
x
y
A
B
–4
(–3, –5)
(2, 0)
(6, 4)

234  Inverse Relations in Two-Space
Figure 12-3  At A, Cartesian graph of the relation y = ±(x1/2).
At B, Cartesian graph of the inverse relation.
A
B
2
6
–2
–4
–6
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
(4, 2)
(4, –2)
(0, 0)
(1, 1)
(1, –1)
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
(0, 0)
(–1, 1)
(1, 1)
(–2, 4)
(2, 4)

Finding an Inverse Relation  235
A
B
2
6
–2
–4
–6
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
(4, 2)
(0, 0)
(1, 1)
4
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
(0, 0)
(1, 1)
(2, 4)
Figure 12-4  At A, Cartesian graph of the relation y = x1/2.
At B, Cartesian graph of the inverse relation.

236  Inverse Relations in Two-Space
Are you confused?
It’s reasonable for you to wonder, “Can any relation be its own inverse?” The answer is yes. There 
are plenty of examples. Consider the following equation:
x2 + y2 = 25
The Cartesian graph of this equation is a circle centered at the origin and having a radius of 5 units 
(Fig. 12-5). If we transpose the variables, we get
y2 + x2 = 25
which is equivalent to the original relation. If we perform the graphical transformation by mir-
roring the circle around the line y = x, we get another circle having the same radius and the same 
center. Theoretically, all but two of points on the new circle are in different places than the points 
on the original circle, but the graph looks the same as the one shown in Fig. 12-5.
Here’s a challenge!
Consider the following relation where the independent variable is x and the dependent variable 
is y:
x 2/9 + y2/25 = 1
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
4
“Point
reflector”
line
... with respect
to the “point
reflector” line
Circle centered at
the origin is
symmetrical ...
Figure 12-5  Cartesian graph of the relation x2 + y2 = 25. 
This relation is its own inverse.

Finding an Inverse Relation  237
Figure 12-6 is a graph of this relation in Cartesian coordinates. It’s an ellipse centered at the origin. 
The distance from the center to the extreme right- or left-hand point on the ellipse measures 
3 units, which is the square root of 9. The distance from the center to the uppermost or lowermost 
point on the ellipse measures 5 units, which is the square root of 25. Determine the inverse of this 
relation, and graph it.
Solution
We can obtain the inverse of this relation by swapping the variables. That gives us the equation
y2/9 + x2/25 = 1
which can be rewritten as
x2/25 + y2/9 = 1
Figure 12-7 illustrates the graphs of the original relation and its inverse in Cartesian coordinates. 
The new graph is another ellipse having the same shape as the original one, and centered at the 
origin just like the original one. But the horizontal and vertical axes of the ellipse have been 
transposed. The distance from the center to the extreme right- or left-hand point on the “inverse 
ellipse” measures 5 units, which is the square root of 25. The distance from the center to the upper-
most or lowermost point on the “inverse ellipse” measures 3 units, which is the square root of 9.
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
4
Ellipse centered
at origin
Figure 12-6 
 Cartesian graph of the relation x2/9 +
y2/25 = 1.

238  Inverse Relations in Two-Space
Finding an Inverse Function
If a function is a bijection (that is, a perfect one-to-one correspondence) over a certain domain 
and range, then we can transpose the domain and range, and the resulting inverse relation will 
always be a function. If a function is many-to-one, then its inverse relation is one-to-many, so 
it’s not a function.
“Undoing” the work
Suppose that f and f −1 are both true functions that are inverses of each other. Then for all x in 
the domain of either function, we have
f −1[f (x)] = x
and
f [ f −1(x)] = x
An inverse function undoes the work of the original function in an unambiguous manner 
when the domains and ranges are restricted so that the original function and the inverse are 
both bijections.
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
4
“Point
reflector”
line
Original
relation
Inverse
relation
Figure 12-7  Cartesian graph of the relation x2/25 +
y2/9 = 1, the inverse of the relation graphed 
in Fig. 12-6.

Sometimes we can simply turn f “inside-out” to get an inverse relation, and the inverse 
will be a true function for all the values in the domain and range of f. But often, when we seek 
the inverse of a function f, we get a relation that’s not a true function, because some elements 
in the range of f map from more than one element in the domain of f. When this happens, we 
must restrict f to define an inverse f −1 that’s a true function. We can usually (but not always) 
find a way to “force” f −1 to behave as a true function by excluding all values of either variable 
that map to more than one value of the other variable. Once we’ve done that, we get a bijec-
tion, ensuring that there is no ambiguity or redundancy either way.
Making a relation behave as a function
A little while ago, we looked at a relation whose graph is a circle with a radius of 5 units 
(Fig. 12-5). The equation of that relation, once again, is
x2 + y2 = 25
which can be rewritten as
y2 = 25 −x2
and then morphed to
y = ±(25 −x2)1/2
If we use relation notation to express this equation and name the relation f, we have
f (x) = ±(25 −x2)1/2
The vertical-line test tells us that f is not a true function of x. We can modify it so that it 
becomes a function of x if we restrict the range to nonnegative values. Graphically, that elimi-
nates the lower half of the circle, so that for every input value in the domain, we get only one 
output in the range. Figure 12-8A is an illustration of this function, which we can call f+ and 
define as
f+(x) = (25 −x2)1/2
Once again, we mustn’t forget that when we take the 1/2 power of a quantity without includ-
ing any sign, we mean, by default, the nonnegative square root of that quantity. The solid dots 
indicate that the plotted points are part of the range of f+.
Now suppose that we eliminate the top half of the circle including the points (−5,0) and 
(5,0), getting the graph shown in Fig. 12-8B. The vertical-line test indicates that this is a true 
function of x. If we call this function f−, we can write
f−(x) = −(25 −x2)1/2
The white dots (small open circles) tell us that the plotted points are not part of the range of f−.
We can restrict the range further, say to values strictly larger than 1 or values smaller than or 
Finding an Inverse Function  239

240  Inverse Relations in Two-Space
A
B
2
6
–2
–4
–6
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
4
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
(5, 0) is part
of the graph
(–5, 0) is part
of the graph
(–5, 0) is not
part of the graph
(5, 0) is not
part of the graph
Figure 12-8  At A, Cartesian graph of the function y =
(25 −x 2)1/2. At B, Cartesian graph of the 
function y = −(25 −x 2)1/2.

equal to −2, and we’ll get more true functions. You can doubtless imagine other restrictions 
we can impose on the range of the original relation f to get true functions of x.
What about the inverse of f+?
Let’s manipulate f+ algebraically to find its inverse. If we call the dependent variable y, then
y = (25 −x2)1/2
Swapping the names of the variables, we get
x = (25 −y2)1/2
Squaring both sides, we obtain
x2 = 25 −y2
Subtracting 25 from each side yields
x2 − 25 = −y2
When we multiply through by −1 and transpose the left-hand and right-hand sides of the 
equation, we obtain
y2 = 25 −x2
Taking the complete square root of both sides gives us
y = ±(25 −x2)1/2
Replacing y by f+
−1(x) to indicate the inverse of f+, we get
f+
−1(x) = ±(25 −x2)1/2
Does this look like the same thing as the inverse of the original relation f ? Don’t be fooled; it 
isn’t the same! We haven’t quite finished our work. We must transpose the domain and range of 
f+ to get the domain and range of the inverse relation f+
−1. The domain of f+ is the closed interval 
[−5,5], and the range of f+ is the closed interval [0,5]. Therefore, the domain of f+
−1 is the closed 
interval [0,5], and the range of f+
−1 is the closed interval [−5,5]. Figure 12-9A is a graph of this 
inverse relation. It’s easy to see that f+
−1 fails the vertical-line test, so it’s not a true function of x.
What about the inverse of f-?
Now let’s go through the algebra to figure out the inverse of the function f−. This process is 
almost identical to the work we just finished, but it’s a good practice to carry it out step by 
step anyway. If we call the dependent variable y, then
y = −(25 −x2)1/2
Finding an Inverse Function  241

242  Inverse Relations in Two-Space
A
B
2
6
–2
–4
–6
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
4
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
(0, 5) is part
of the graph
(0, –5) is part
of the graph
(0, 5) is not
part of the graph
(0, –5) is not
part of the graph
Figure 12-9  At A, Cartesian graph of the inverse of the 
function y = (25 −x2)1/2. At B, Cartesian graph 
of the inverse of the function y = −(25 −x2)1/2.
Vertical-line tests indicate that neither of these 
inverse relations is a function.

Switching the names of the variables, we get
x = −(25 −y2)1/2
Squaring both sides, we obtain
x2 = 25 −y2
Subtracting 25 from each side gives us
x2 − 25 = −y2
When we multiply through by −1 and transpose the left- and right-hand sides of the equation, 
we get
y2 = 25 −x2
Taking the complete square root of both sides, we have
y = ±(25 −x2)1/2
Replacing y by f−
−1(x) to indicate the inverse of f−, we get
f−
−1(x) = ±(25 −x2)1/2
We transpose the domain and range of f− to get the domain and range of f−
−1. Things get a little 
tricky here. Refer again to Fig. 12-8B. The domain of f− is the open interval (−5,5), and the 
range of f− is the half-open interval [−5,0). Transposing, we can see that the domain of f−
−1 is 
the half-open interval [−5,0), and the range of f−
−1 is the open interval (−5,5). Figure 12-9B is 
a graph of f−
−1. This inverse relation fails the vertical-line test, so it’s not a true function of x.
Making an inverse behave as a function
Do you get the idea that we can’t make the relation graphed in Fig. 12-5 behave as a function 
whose inverse is another function, no matter what limitations we impose on the domain and 
range? Don’t give up. There are plenty of ways. For example, we can restrict both the domain 
and the range of the original relation
x2 + y2 = 25
to values that all show up in the first quadrant of the Cartesian plane. When we do that, the 
domain and range are both narrowed down to the open interval (0,5). The relation becomes 
a true function of x, and its inverse also becomes a true function. Similar things happen if we 
restrict both the domain and the range to values that show up entirely in the second quadrant, 
entirely in the third quadrant, or entirely in the fourth quadrant. Feel free to draw the graphs, 
put a point reflector line to work, and see for yourself.
Finding an Inverse Function  243

244  Inverse Relations in Two-Space
Are you confused?
You might ask, “We’ve seen an example of a relation that’s its own inverse. Can a function be its 
own inverse?” The answer is yes. The function f (x) = x is its own inverse; the domain and range 
both span the entire set of real numbers. It’s the ultimate in simplicity. The function’s graph coin-
cides with the point reflector line, so it’s identical to its own reflection! We have
f −1[f (x)] = f −1(x) = x
so therefore
f [ f −1(x)] = f (x) = x
Another example
Consider g(x) = 1/x, with the restriction that the domain and range can attain any real-number 
value except zero. This function is its own inverse. We have
g −1[g(x)] = g −1(1/x) = 1/(1/x) = x
so therefore
g[g −1(x)] = g(1/x) = 1/(1/x) = x
Still another example
Consider the function h(x) = 3 for all real numbers x. Figure 12-10 shows its graph. When we 
transpose the variables, domain, and range, we must set x = 3 for h −1(x) to mean anything. 
Then we end up with all the real numbers at the same time. This relation fails the vertical-line 
function test in the worst possible way, because the graph is itself a vertical line (Fig. 12-11).
Here’s a challenge!
Consider the following three functions:
f (x) = x − 11
 
g(x) = x2/4
 
h(x) = −32x5
The inverse of one of these functions is not a function. Which one?

2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
4
(0, 3)
Horizontal line
representing
y = 3
Figure 12-10 Cartesian graph of the function h (x) = 3.
Figure 12-11  Cartesian graph of the inverse of h (x) = 3. 
It’s obviously not a function!
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
4
“Point
reflector”
line
Inverse
relation
Original
function
Finding an Inverse Function  245

246  Inverse Relations in Two-Space
Solution
The inverse of g is not a function. If we call the dependent variable y, we get
y = x2/4
The domain is the entire set of reals, and the range is the set of non-negative reals. If we swap the 
names of the independent and dependent variables, we get
x = y2/4
which is the same as
y2 = 4x
Taking the complete square root of both sides gives us
y = ± 2x1/2
The plus-or-minus symbol indicates that for every nonzero value of the independent variable x
that we input to this relation, we get two values of the dependent variable y, one positive and the 
other negative. We can also write
g −1(x) = ± 2x1/2
The original function g is two-to-one (except when x = 0). That’s okay. But the inverse relation is 
one-to-two except when x = 0. That prevents g −1 from qualifying as a true function.
 The other two functions, f and h, have inverses that are also functions. Both f and h are one-to-
one, so their inverses are also one-to-one. We have
f (x) = x − 11
and
f −1(x) = x + 11
We also have
h(x) = −32x5
and
h −1(x) = (−x)1/5/2

Practice Exercises
This is an open-book quiz. You may (and should) refer to the text as you solve these problems. 
Don’t hurry! You’ll find worked-out answers in App. B. The solutions in the appendix may not 
represent the only way a problem can be figured out. If you think you can solve a particular 
problem in a quicker or better way than you see there, by all means try it!
 1. Use algebra to find the inverse of the relation
f (x) = 2x + 4
 2. Use algebra to find the inverse of the relation
g(x) = x2 − 4x + 4
 3. Use algebra to find the inverse of the relation
h(x) = x3 − 5
 4. Determine the real-number domains and ranges of the relations and inverses from the 
statements and solutions of Problems 1, 2, and 3.
 5. Consider the two-space relation
x2/4 −y2/9 = 1
 
 Figure 12-12 is a graph of this relation in Cartesian coordinates. It’s a hyperbola centered 
at the origin, opening to the right and left, and crossing the x axis at (2,0) and (−2,0). 
Figure 12-12 Illustration for Problem 5.
4
6
–4
–6
2
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
4
Practice Exercises  247

248  Inverse Relations in Two-Space
Call the independent variable x and the dependent variable y. Call the relation f.
Determine f (x) and f   −1(x) mathematically. State them both using relation notation.
 6. What is the real-number domain of the relation f (x) that you determined when you 
solved Problem 5? What is its real-number range?
 7. Sketch a graph of the inverse relation you found when you solved Problem 5. What is 
its real-number domain? What is its real-number range?
 8. The relation described and graphed in Problem 5 can be modified by restricting its 
domain to the set of reals greater than or equal to 2. Show graphically, by means of the 
vertical-line test, that this restriction makes the inverse f   −1into a function.
 9. The relation described and graphed in Problem 5 can be modified by restricting its 
domain to the set of reals smaller than or equal to −2. Show graphically, by means of 
the vertical-line test, that this restriction makes the inverse f   −1 into a function.
 10. The relation described and graphed in Problem 5 can be modified by restricting its 
range to the set of nonnegative reals. Show graphically, and by means of vertical-
line tests, that this restriction makes f  into a function, but does not make f   −1 into a 
function.

In this chapter, we’ll learn the fundamental properties of curves called conic sections. These curves 
include the circle, the ellipse, the parabola, and the hyperbola. The conic sections can always be 
represented in the Cartesian plane as equations that contain the squares of one or both variables.
Geometry
Imagine a double right circular cone with a vertical axis that extends infinitely upward and 
downward. Also imagine a flat, infinitely large plane that can be moved around so that it slices 
through the double cone in various ways, as shown in Fig. 13-1. The intersection between the 
plane and the double cone is always a circle, an ellipse, a parabola, or a hyperbola, as long as 
the plane doesn’t pass through the point where the apexes of the cones meet.
Geometry of a circle and an ellipse
Figure 13-1A shows what happens when the plane is perpendicular to the axis of the double 
cone. In that case, we get a circle. In Fig. 13-1B, the plane is not perpendicular to the axis of 
the cone, but it isn’t tilted very much. The curve is closed, but it isn’t a perfect circle. Instead, 
it’s an “elongated circle” or ellipse.
Geometry of a parabola
As the plane tilts farther away from a right angle with respect to the double-cone axis, the 
ellipse becomes increasingly elongated. Eventually, we reach an angle of tilt where the curve is 
no longer closed. At precisely this threshold angle, the intersection between the plane and the 
cone is a parabola (Fig. 13-1C).
Geometry of a hyperbola
So far, the plane has only intersected one half of the double cone. If we tilt the plane beyond 
the angle at which the intersection curve is a parabola, the plane intersects both halves of the 
cone. In that case, we get a hyperbola. If we tilt the plane as far as possible so that it becomes 
parallel to the cone’s axis, we still get a hyperbola (Fig. 13-1D).
249
CHAPTER 
13
Conic Sections

250
Conic Sections
Are you confused?
You might ask, “We haven’t mentioned the flare angle of the double cone (the measure of the angle 
between the axis of the cone and its surface). Does the size of this angle make any difference?” 
Quantitatively, it does. As the flare angle increases (the cones become “fatter”), we get ellipses less 
often and hyperbolas more often. As the flare angle decreases (the cones get “slimmer”), we obtain 
ellipses more often and hyperbolas less often. However, we can always get a circle, an ellipse, a parabola, 
or a hyperbola by manipulating the plane to the desired angle, regardless of the flare angle.
Here’s a challenge!
Imagine that you’re standing on a frozen lake at night, holding a flashlight that throws a cone-
shaped beam with a flare angle of p /10; in other words, the outer face of the light cone subtends 
an angle of p /10 with respect to the beam center. How can you aim the flashlight so that the edge 
of the light cone forms a circle on the ice? An ellipse? A parabola?
Solution
The edge of the light cone is a circle if and only if the flashlight is pointed straight down, so the 
center of the beam is perpendicular to the surface of the ice (Fig. 13-2A). The edge of the region 
A
B
C
D
Double
circular
cone
Double
circular
cone
Double
circular
cone
Double
circular
cone
Flat
plane
Flat
plane
Flat plane
Flat plane
Figure 13-1  The conic sections can be defined by the 
intersection of a flat plane with a double right 
circular cone. At A, a circle. At B, an ellipse. 
At C, a parabola. At D, a hyperbola.

Flashlight
Flashlight
Flashlight
A
B
C
Edge of bright region is a circle
Edge of bright region is an ellipse
Edge of bright region is a parabola
of light is an ellipse if and only if the beam axis subtends an angle of more than p /10 with respect 
to the ice, but the entire light cone still lands on the surface (Fig. 13-2B). The edge of the region 
of light is a parabola if and only if the beam axis subtends an angle of exactly p /10 with respect to 
the ice, so the top edge of the light cone is parallel to the surface (Fig. 13-2C). 
Here’s another challenge!
Imagine the scenario described above with the flashlight. How can you aim the flashlight so the 
edge of the light cone forms a half-hyperbola on the ice?
Figure 13-2  At A, the edge of the light cone creates a circle on the 
surface. At B, the edge of the light cone creates an 
ellipse on the surface. At C, the edge of the light cone 
creates a parabola on the surface. The dashed lines 
show the edges of the light cones. The dotted-and-
dashed lines show the central axes of the light cones.
Geometry  251

252  Conic Sections
Solution
The edge of the region of light is a half-hyperbola if and only if one of the following conditions is met:
• The beam’s central axis intersects the lake at an angle of less than p /10 with respect to the 
surface of the ice (Fig. 13-3A).
• The beam’s central axis is aimed horizontally (Fig. 13-3B).
• The beam’s central axis is aimed into the sky at an angle of less than p /10 above the horizon 
(Fig. 13-3C).
Flashlight
C
Flashlight
Flashlight
A
B
Edge of bright region is a half-hyperbola
Edge of bright region is a half-hyperbola
Edge of bright region is a half-hyperbola
Figure 13-3  At A, B, and C, the edge of the light cone 
creates a half-hyperbola on the surface. The 
uppermost part of the light cone is above 
the horizon in all three cases. The dashed 
lines show the edges of the light cones. The 
dotted-and-dashed lines show the central 
axes of the light cones.

Basic Parameters
Figure 13-4 illustrates generic examples of a circle (at A), an ellipse (at B), and a parabola 
(at C) in the Cartesian xy plane. The circle and ellipse are closed curves, while the parabola 
is an open curve. In the circle, r is represents the radius. In the ellipse, a and b represent 
the semi-axes. The longer of the two is called the major semi-axis. The shorter of the two is 
called the minor semi-axis. In these examples, the circle and the ellipse are centered at the 
origin, and the parabola’s vertex (the extreme point where the curvature is sharpest) is at 
the origin.
Specifications for a parabola
Suppose that we’re traveling in a geometric plane along a course that has the contour of a 
parabola. At any given time, our location on the curve is defined by the ordered pair (x,y). To 
follow a parabolic path, we must always remain equidistant from a point called the focus and 
a
b
x
x
r
y
x
y
y
A
B
C
Figure 13-4  Three basic conic sections in the Cartesian xy plane. 
At A, a circle centered at the origin with radius r. At 
B, an ellipse centered at the origin with semi-axes a
and b. At C, a parabola with the vertex at the origin.
Basic Parameters  253

254  Conic Sections
a line called the directrix as shown in Fig. 13-5, where the focus and the directrix both lie in 
the same plane as the parabola. Let’s call this distance u. In this illustration, the focus of the 
parabola is at the coordinate origin (0,0).
Now imagine a straight line passing through the focus and intersecting the directrix at a 
right angle. This line forms the axis of the parabola. In Fig. 13-5, the parabola’s axis happens 
to coincide with the coordinate system’s y axis. Along the axis line, the distance u is called the 
focal length, which mathematicians and scientists usually call f. (Be careful here! Don’t confuse 
this f with the name of a relation or a function.) By drawing a line through the focus parallel 
to the directrix and perpendicular to the axis, we can divide u, measuring our distance from 
the directrix, into two line segments, one having length 2f and the other having length y.
Therefore
u = 2f + y
The focus is at the point (0,0). Therefore, the distance u is the length of the hypotenuse of a 
right triangle whose base length is x and whose height is y. The Pythagorean theorem tells us 
that
x2 + y2 = u2
If we divide the distance from the focus to point (x,y) on the curve by the distance from 
(x,y) to the directrix, we get a figure called the eccentricity of the curve. The eccentricity is 
x
y
f
f
Focus
Directrix
u
u
(x, y)
Point
u = 2f + y
Vertex
Figure 13-5  All the points on a parabola are at equal distances u
from the focus and the directrix. The focus and the 
directrix are at equal distances f from the vertex of 
the curve.

symbolized e. (Don’t confuse this with the exponential constant, which is also symbolized e.)
In the case of a parabola, these distances are both equal to u, so
e = u/u = 1
Specifications for an ellipse and a circle
Suppose that we want to construct a curve in which the eccentricity is positive but less than 1. 
We can use a geometric arrangement similar to the one we used with the parabola, but the 
distance from the focus is eu instead of u, as shown in Fig. 13-6. In this situation we get an 
ellipse. The focus is at the origin (0,0). The ellipse has two vertices (points where the curvature 
is sharpest), both of which lie on the y axis, and the ellipse is taller than it is wide. When we 
draw an ellipse this way, its variables and parameters are related according to the equations
u = f + f /e + y
and
x2 + y2 = (eu)2
x
y
f
Focus
Directrix
(x, y)
Point
Vertex
u
eu
f/e
u = f + f/e + y
Figure 13-6  Construction of an ellipse based on a defined focus 
and directrix. The eccentricity e is an expression of 
the elongation of the ellipse.
Basic Parameters  255

256  Conic Sections
As the eccentricity e approaches 0, the focus gets farther from the directrix, and the ellipse 
gets less elongated. When e reaches 0, then f  /e becomes meaningless, the directrix vanishes 
(“runs away to infinity”), and we have a circle where f is equal to the radius r. A circle is actu-
ally an ellipse whose major and minor semi-axes are the same length. Going the other way, as 
the eccentricity e approaches 1, the focus gets closer to the directrix, and the ellipse gets more 
elongated. When e reaches 1, the ellipse “breaks open” at one end and becomes a parabola. 
Summarizing the above we can say
• For a circle, e = 0
• For an ellipse, 0 < e < 1
• For a parabola, e = 1
The ellipse has another focus besides the one shown in Fig. 13-6. It’s located at the same 
distance from the upper vertex of the curve as the coordinate origin is from the lower vertex. 
We can flip the ellipse in Fig. 13-6 upside-down, putting the upper focus in place of the lower 
focus and vice versa, and we’ll get a diagram that looks exactly the same. The center of the 
ellipse is midway between the two foci.
How the foci, directrix, and eccentricity relate
Let’s look at the circle, the ellipse, and the parabola in terms of the parameters we’ve just 
described. The circle has a single focus, which is at the center. The directrix is “at infinity.” 
The ellipse has two foci separated by a finite distance. The curve is symmetrical with respect 
to a straight line that goes through the two foci. The curve is also symmetrical with respect to 
a straight line equidistant from the foci. The ellipse has two directrixes at finite distances from 
the vertices. We can think of a parabola as having two foci: one “within reach” and the other 
“at infinity.” Its single directrix is at a distance from the vertex equal to the focal length.
There’s an alternative way to define the eccentricity of an ellipse. Suppose we know the 
distance d between the foci, and we also know the length s of the major semi-axis. The eccen-
tricity can be found by taking the ratio
e = d/(2s)
Specifications for a hyperbola
If we construct a conic section for which e > 1, we get a curve called a hyperbola. Figure 13-7 
shows an example. The hyperbola looks like two parabolas back-to-back, but there’s an impor-
tant difference in the shape of a hyperbola compared with the shape of a double parabola. The 
parameters that help define hyperbolas are straight lines called asymptotes. Hyperbolas always 
have asymptotes, but parabolas never do.
In the scenario of Fig. 13-7, the hyperbola has two asymptotes that happen to pass through 
the origin. In this case, the equations of the asymptotes are
y = (b/a) x
and
y = −(b/a) x
The curve approaches the asymptotes as we move away from the center of the hyperbola, but 
the curves never quite reach the asymptotes, no matter how far from the center we go.

Are you confused?
You might ask, “Is it possible to have a conic section with negative eccentricity?” For our purposes 
in this course, the answer is no. Negative eccentricity involves the notion of negative distances. If 
we allow the eccentricity of a noncircular conic section to become negative, we get an “inside-out” 
ellipse, parabola, or hyperbola. In ordinary geometry, such a curve is the same as a “real-world” 
ellipse, parabola, or hyperbola.
That said, it’s worth noting that in certain high-level engineering and physics applications, neg-
ative distances sometimes behave differently than positive distances. In those special situations, an 
inside-out conic section might represent an entirely different phenomenon from a real-world conic 
section. Keep that in the back of your mind if you plan on becoming an astronomer, cosmologist, or 
high-energy physicist someday!
Here’s a challenge!
Using the alternative formula for the eccentricity of an ellipse, show that if we have an ellipse in 
which e = 0, then that ellipse is a circle. 
b
a
x
y
Asymptotes
Asymptotes
Figure 13-7  A basic hyperbola in the Cartesian xy plane. The 
eccentricity is greater than 1. The distances a and b
are the semi-axes.
Basic Parameters  257

258  Conic Sections
Solution
First, we should realize that a circle is a special sort of ellipse in which the two semi-axes have 
identical length. With that in mind, let’s plug e = 0 into the alternative equation for the eccentric-
ity of an ellipse. That gives us
0 = d/(2s)
where d is the distance between the foci, and s is the length of the major semi-axis. We can multiply 
the above formula by 2s to obtain
0 = d
which tells us that the two foci are located at the same point, so there’s really only one focus. A circle is 
the only type of ellipse that has a single focus.
Standard Equations
When we graph a conic section in the Cartesian xy plane, we can find a unique equation that 
represents that curve. These equations are always of the second degree, meaning that the equa-
tion must contain the square of one or both variables.
Equations for circles
We can write the standard-form general equation for a circle in terms of its center point and 
its radius as
(x −x0)2 + ( y −y0)2 = r2
where x0 and y0 are real constants that tell us the coordinates (x0,y0) of the center of the circle, 
and r is a positive real constant that tells us the radius (Fig. 13-8).
When a circle is centered at the origin, the equation is simpler because x0 = 0 and y0 = 0. 
Then we have
x2 + y2 = r2
The simplest possible case is the unit circle, centered at the origin and having a radius equal 
to 1. Its equation is
x2 + y2 = 1
Equations for ellipses
The standard-form general equation of an ellipse in the Cartesian xy plane, as shown in 
Fig. 13-9, is
 (x −x0)2/a2 + ( y −y0)2/b2 = 1

(x0, y0)
r
x
y
Figure 13-8 Graph of the circle for (x −x0)2 + (y −y0)2 = r2.
(x0, y0)
b
a
x
y
Figure 13-9  Graph of the ellipse for (x −x0)2/a2 +
(y −y0)2/b2 = 1.
Standard Equations  259

260  Conic Sections
where x0 and y0 are real constants representing the coordinates (x0,y0) of the center of the 
ellipse, a is a positive real constant that represents the distance from (x0,y0) to the curve along 
a line parallel to the x axis, and b is a positive real constant that tells us the distance from (x0,y0)
to the curve along a line parallel to the y axis. When we plot x on the horizontal axis and y
on the vertical axis (the usual scheme), a is the length of the horizontal semi-axis or horizontal 
radius of the ellipse, and b is the length of the vertical semi-axis or vertical radius.
For ellipses centered at the origin, we have x0 = 0 and y0 = 0, so the general equation is
x2/a2 + y2/b2 = 1
If a = b, then the ellipse is a circle. Remember that a circle is an ellipse for which the eccentricity 
is 0.
Equations for parabolas
Figure 13-10 is an example of a parabola in the Cartesian xy plane. The standard-form general 
equation for this curve is
y = ax2 + bx + c
The vertex is at the point (x0,y0). We can find these values according to the formulas
x0 = −b/(2a)
x
y
x0 = –b/(2a)
y0 = –b2/(4a) + c
Vertex
Figure 13-10  Graph of the parabola for y = ax2 + bx + c.

and
y0 = ax0
2 + bx0 + c = −b2/(4a) + c
If a > 0, the parabola opens upward, and the vertex represents the absolute minimum value 
of y. If a < 0, the parabola opens downward, and the vertex represents the absolute maximum
value of y. In the graph of Fig. 13-10, the parabola opens upward, so we know that a > 0 in 
its equation.
Equations for hyperbolas
The standard-form general equation of a hyperbola in the Cartesian xy plane, as shown in 
Fig. 13-11, is
 (x −x0)2/a2 − ( y −y0)2/b2 = 1
where x0 and y0 are real constants that tell us the coordinates (x0,y0) of the center.
(x0, y0)
b
a
D
x
y
Figure 13-11 Graph of the hyperbola for (x −x0)2/a2 − (y −y0)2/b2 = 1.
Standard Equations  261

262  Conic Sections
The dimensions of a hyperbola are harder to define than the dimensions of a circle or an 
ellipse. Suppose that D is a rectangle whose center is at (x0,y0), whose vertical edges are tangent 
to the hyperbola, and whose corners lie on the asymptotes. When we define D this way, then 
a is the distance from (x0,y0) to D along a line parallel to the x axis, and b is the distance from 
(x0,y0) to D  along a line parallel to the y axis. We call a the width of the horizontal semi-axis, 
and we call b the height of the vertical semi-axis.
For hyperbolas centered at the origin, we have x0 = 0 and y0 = 0, so the general equation 
becomes
x2/a2 −y2/b2 = 1
The simplest possible case is the unit hyperbola whose equation is
x2 −y2 = 1
Are you astute?
You might imagine that the above-mentioned standard forms are not the only ways that the equa-
tions of conic sections can present themselves. If that’s what you’re thinking, you’re right! How-
ever, you can always convert the equation of a conic section to its standard form. For example, 
suppose you encounter
49x2 + 25y2 = 1225
You say, “This looks like it might be the equation for an ellipse, but it’s not in the standard form 
for any known conic section.” Then you notice that 1225 is the product of 49 and 25. When you 
divide the whole equation through by 1225, you get
49x2/1225 + 25y2/1225 = 1225 / 1225
which simplifies to
x2/25 + y2/49 = 1
which can also be written as
x2/52 + y2/72 = 1
Now you know that the equation represents an ellipse centered at the origin whose horizontal 
semi-axis is 5 units wide, and whose vertical semi-axis is 7 units tall.
Here’s a challenge!
Whenever we have an equation that can be reduced to the standard form
y = ax2 + bx + c

we get a parabola that opens either upward or downward, and that represents a true function of x.
How can we write the standard-form general equation of a parabola that opens to the right or the 
left? Does such a parabola represent a true function of x?
Solution
We can simply switch the variables to get
x = ay2 + by + c
If a > 0, we have a parabola that opens to the right. If a < 0, we have a parabola that opens to the left. If 
we define x as the independent variable and y as the dependent variable as is usually done in Cartesian 
xy coordinates, then vertical-line tests reveal that these parabolas do not represent true functions of x.
Practice Exercises
This is an open-book quiz. You may (and should) refer to the text as you solve these problems. 
Don’t hurry! You’ll find worked-out answers in App. B. The solutions in the appendix may not 
represent the only way a problem can be figured out. If you think you can solve a particular 
problem in a quicker or better way than you see there, by all means try it!
 1. At the beginning of this chapter, we learned that the intersection between a plane and 
a double right circular cone is always a circle, an ellipse, a parabola, or a hyperbola, 
as long as the plane doesn’t pass through the point where the apexes of the two cones 
meet. What happens if the plane does pass through that point?
 2. Figure 13-12 shows an ellipse in the Cartesian xy plane with some dimensions labeled. 
The lower focus is at the origin (0,0). The lower vertex is at (0,−2). Both foci and both 
vertices lie on the y axis. The ellipse is taller than it is wide. What is its eccentricity?
 3. Recall the formulas relating the parameters of an ellipse when plotted in the manner of 
Fig. 13-12:
u = f + f /e + y
 
 and
x2 + y2 = (eu)2
 
 Based on these formulas, the information provided in the figure, and the solution you 
worked out to Problem 2, determine a relation between x and y that describes our 
ellipse. The equation should include only the variables x and y, but it doesn’t have to be 
in the standard form.
 4. What are the coordinates of the upper vertex of the ellipse shown in Fig. 13-12? What 
are the coordinates of the upper focus of the ellipse shown in Fig. 13-12?
Practice Exercises  263

264  Conic Sections
 5. What are the coordinates of the center of the ellipse shown in Fig. 13-12? What is the 
length of the vertical semi-axis? What is the length of the horizontal semi-axis? Based 
on these results, write down the standard-form equation for the ellipse. 
 6. Determine the type of conic section the following equation represents, and then draw 
its graph:
x2 + 9y2 = 9
 7. Determine the type of conic section the following equation represents, and then draw 
its graph:
x2 + y2 + 2x − 2y + 2 = 4
 8. Determine the type of conic section the following equation represents, and then draw 
its graph:
x2 −y2 + 2x + 2y = 4
x
y
f
(x, y)
Point
u
eu
f/e
u = f + f /e + y
Lower
focus
Upper
focus
Equation of directrix is y = –6 
Lower vertex
is at (0, –2)
Upper vertex
Figure 13-12 Illustration for Problems 2 through 5.

 9. Determine the type of conic section the following equation represents, and then draw 
its graph:
x2 − 3x −y + 3 = 1
 10. Following is an equation in the standard form for a hyperbola:
(x − 1)2/4 − ( y + 2)2/9 = 1
 
 First, find the coordinates (x0,y0) of the center point. Then determine the length a of 
the horizontal semi-axis and the length b of the vertical semi-axis. Next, sketch a graph 
of the curve. Finally, work out the equations of the lines representing the asymptotes. 
Here’s a hint: Use the point-slope form of the equation for a straight line in the xy
plane. If it has slipped your memory, the general form is
y −y0 = m(x −x0)
 
 where m is the slope of the line, and (x0,y0) represents a known point on the line.
Practice Exercises  265

In your algebra courses, you learned about exponential functions and logarithmic functions. If 
you need a refresher, the basics are covered in Chap. 29 of Algebra Know-It-All. Let’s look some 
graphs that involve these functions.
Graphs Involving Exponential Functions
An exponential function of a real variable x is the result of raising a positive real constant, 
called the base, to the xth power. The base is usually e (an irrational number called Euler’s 
constant or the exponential constant) or 10. The value of e is approximately 2.71828.
Exponential: example 1
When we raise e to the xth power, we get the natural exponential function of x. When we raise 
10 to the xth power, we get the common exponential function of x. Figure 14-1 shows graphs of 
these functions. At A, we see the graph of
y = ex
over the portion of the domain between −2.5 and 2.5. At B, we see the graph of
y = 10x
over the portion of the domain between −1 and 1. The curves have similar contours. When we 
“tailor” the axis scales in a certain relative way (as we do here), the two curves appear almost 
identical.
In the overall sense, both of these functions have domains that include all real numbers, 
because we can raise e or 10 to any real-number power and always get a real-number as the 
result. However, the ranges of both functions are confined to the set of positive reals. No matter 
what real-number exponent we attach to e or 10, we can never produce an output that’s equal 
to 0, and we can never get an output that’s negative.
CHAPTER 
14
Exponential and Logarithmic 
Curves
266

Exponential: example 2
Let’s see what happens to the graphs of the foregoing functions when we take their reciprocals 
and then graph them over the same portions of their domains as we did before. Figure 14-2A 
is a graph of
y = 1/ex
Figure 14-2B is a graph of
y = 1/10x
Graphs Involving Exponential Functions  267
2
y
x
–2
–1
0
1
10
5
5
10
x
–1
0
1
y
A
B
Figure 14-1  Graphs of the natural 
exponential function 
(at A) and the 
common exponential 
function (at B).

268  Exponential and Logarithmic Curves
These curves are exactly reversed left-to-right from those in Fig. 14-1. The above reciprocal 
functions can be rewritten, respectively, as
y = e−x
and
y = 10−x
When we negate x before taking the power of the exponential base, we “horizontally mirror” all 
of the function values. The y axis acts as a “point reflector.” The overall domains and ranges of 
these reciprocal functions are the same as the domains and ranges of the original functions.
2
y
x
–2
–1
0
1
10
5
5
10
x
–1
0
1
y
A
B
Figure 14-2  Graphs of the 
reciprocals of the 
natural exponential 
(at A) and the 
common exponential 
(at B).

Exponential: example 3
Now that we have two pairs of exponential functions, let’s create two new functions by adding 
them, and see what their graphs look like. The solid black curve in Fig. 14-3A is a graph of
y = ex + 1/ex = ex + e−x
The solid black curve in Fig. 14-3B is a graph of
y = 10x + 1/10x = 10x + 10−x
The domains of these sum functions both encompass all the real numbers. The ranges are 
limited to the reals greater than or equal to 2.
2
y
x
–2
–1
0
1
10
5
5
10
x
–1
0
1
y
A
B
1/ex
ex
1/10x
10x
Figure 14-3  Graphs of the natural 
exponential plus 
its reciprocal (solid 
black curve at A) 
and the common 
exponential plus 
its reciprocal (solid 
black curve at B). 
The dashed gray 
curves are the graphs 
of the original 
functions.
Graphs Involving Exponential Functions  269

270  Exponential and Logarithmic Curves
Here’s a “heads up”!
In many of the graphs to come, you’ll see two dashed gray curves representing functions to be 
combined in various ways, as is the case in Fig. 14-3. But the constituent functions won’t be 
labeled as they are in Fig. 14-3. The absence of labels will keep the graphs from getting too 
cluttered, so you’ll be able to see clearly how they relate. Also, the lack of labels will force you 
to think! Based on your knowledge of the way the functions behave, you should be able to tell 
which graph is which without having them labeled. 
Exponential: example 4
Figure 14-4 shows what happens when we subtract the reciprocal of the natural exponential 
function from the original function and then graph the result. The solid black curve is the 
graph of
y = ex − 1/ex = ex −e−x
2
y
x
–2
–1
1
10
5
–5
–10
Figure 14-4  Graph of the natural 
exponential minus 
its reciprocal (solid 
black curve). The 
dashed gray curves 
are the graphs of the 
original functions.

Graphs Involving Exponential Functions  271
In Fig. 14-5, we do the same thing with the common exponential function and its reciprocal. 
Here, the solid black curve represents
y = 10x − 1/10x = 10x − 10−x
In both of these figures, the dashed gray curves represent the original functions. The domains 
and ranges of both difference functions include all real numbers.
Are you confused?
Do you wonder how we arrived at the graphs in Figs. 14-3 through 14-5? We can plot sum and 
difference functions in two ways. We can graph the original functions separately, and then add or 
subtract their values graphically (that is, geometrically) by moving vertically upward or downward 
at various points within the spans of the domains shown. Alternatively, we can, with the help of a 
calculator, plot several points for each sum or difference function after calculating the outputs for 
several different input values. Once we have enough points for the sum or difference function, we 
can draw an approximation of the graph for that function directly.
5
10
x
–1
1
y
–5
–10
Figure 14-5  Graph of the 
common exponential 
minus its reciprocal 
(solid black curve). 
The dashed gray 
curves are the graphs 
of the original 
functions.

272  Exponential and Logarithmic Curves
Here’s a challenge!
Plot a graph of the function we get when we raise e to the power of 1/x. In rectangular xy coordi-
nates, the curve is represented by the equation
y = e(1/x)
What is the domain of this function? What is its range?
Solution
We can use a calculator to determine the values of y for various values of x. Figure 14-6 is the 
resulting graph for values of x ranging from −10 to 10. When we input x = 0, we get e1/0, which is 
undefined. For any other real value of x, the output value y is a positive real number. Therefore, 
the domain of this function is the set of all nonzero reals. No matter how large we want y to be 
when y > 1, we can always find some value of x that will give it to us. Similarly, no matter how 
small we want y to be when 0 < y < 1, we can always find some value of x that will do the job. 
However, we can’t find any value for x that will give us y = 1. For that to happen, we must raise e
to the 0th power, meaning that we must find some x such that 1/x = 0. That’s impossible! There-
fore, the range of our function is the set of all positive reals except 1. The graph has a horizontal 
asymptote whose equation is y = 1, and a vertical asymptote corresponding to the y axis. The open 
circle at the point (0,0) indicates that it’s not part of the graph.
y
x
10
5
5
–10
10
–5
0
Asymptote
at y = 1
Domain includes all nonzero real numbers
Range includes
all positive
real numbers
except 1
Asymptote
along y axis
Figure 14-6  Graph of the function y = e(1/x). Note the 
“hole” in the domain at x = 0 and the “hole” 
in the range at y = 1.

Graphs Involving Logarithmic Functions
A logarithm (sometimes called a log) of a quantity is a power to which a positive real constant 
is raised to get that quantity. As with exponential functions, the constant is called the base, 
and it’s almost always equal to either e or 10. The base-e log function, also called the natural 
logarithm, is usually symbolized by writing “ln” or “log e” followed by the argument (the 
quantity on which the function operates). The base-10 log function, also called the common
logarithm, is usually symbolized by writing “log10” or “log” followed by the argument.
They’re inverses!
A logarithmic function is the inverse of the exponential function having the same base. The 
natural logarithmic function “undoes” the work of the natural exponential function and 
vice versa, as long as we restrict the domains and ranges so that both functions are bijec-
tions. The common logarithmic and exponential functions also behave this way, so we can 
say that
ln ex = x = e(ln x)
and
log 10x = x = 10(log x)
For these formulas to work, we must restrict x to positive real-number values, because the 
logarithms of quantities less than or equal to 0 are not defined.
Logarithm: example 1
Figure 14-7 illustrates graphs of the two basic logarithmic functions operating on a variable 
x. At A, we see the graph of the base-e logarithmic function, over the portion of the domain 
from 0 to 10. The equation is
y = ln x
At B in Fig. 14-7, we see the graph of the base-10 logarithmic function, over the portion of 
the domain from 0 to 10. The equation is
y = log10 x
As with the exponential graphs, these curves have similar contours, and they look almost 
identical if we choose the axis scales as we’ve done here.
The domains of the natural and common log functions both span the entire set of posi-
tive reals. When we try to take a logarithm of 0 or a negative number, however, we get a 
meaningless quantity (or, at least, something outside the set of reals!). By inputting just the 
right positive real value to a log function, we can get any real-number output we want. The 
ranges of the log functions therefore include all real numbers.
Graphs Involving Logarithmic Functions  273

274  Exponential and Logarithmic Curves
Logarithm: example 2
Let’s take the reciprocal of the independent variable x before performing the natural or com-
mon log, and then plot the graphs. Figure 14-8 shows the results. At A, we see the graph of 
the function
y = ln (1/x)
and at B, we see the graph of the function
y = log10 (1/x)
2
–2
–1
0
1
10
5
A
y
x
5
10
–1
0
1
B
y
x
Figure 14-7  Graphs of the natural logarithmic 
function (at A) and the common 
logarithmic function (at B).

These functions can also be written as
y = ln (x−1)
and
y = log10 (x−1)
Based on our knowledge of logarithms from algebra, we can rewrite these functions, respec-
tively, as
y = −1 ln x = −ln x
2
–2
–1
0
1
10
5
A
y
x
5
10
–1
0
1
B
y
x
Figure 14-8  Graphs of the natural log of the 
reciprocal (at A) and the common log 
of the reciprocal (at B).
Graphs Involving Logarithmic Functions  275

276  Exponential and Logarithmic Curves
and
y = −1 log10 x = −log10 x
When we raise x to the −1 power before taking the logarithm, we negate all the function 
values, compared to what they’d be if we left x alone. The x axis acts as a point reflector. The 
domains and ranges of these reciprocal functions are the same as the domains and ranges of 
the original functions.
Logarithm: example 3
We can create two interesting functions by multiplying the functions defined in the previous two 
paragraphs. Let’s do that, and see what the graphs look like. We want to graph the functions
y = (ln x) [ln (x−1)]
and
y = (log10 x) [log10 (x−1)]
Our knowledge of logarithms allows us to rewrite these functions, respectively, as
y = −(ln x)2
and
y = −(log10 x)2
The results are shown in Figs. 14-9 and 14-10. The domains of both product functions span 
the entire set of positive reals. The ranges of both functions are confined to the set of nonposi-
tive reals (that is, the set of all reals less than or equal to 0).
y
x
10
5
0
3
–3
–6
6
Figure 14-9  Graph of the natural 
log times the natural 
log of the reciprocal 
(solid black curve). 
The dashed gray 
curves are the graphs 
of the original 
functions.

Logarithm: example 4
Finally, let’s take the log functions we’ve been working with and find their ratios, as follows:
y = (ln x) / [ ln (x−1)]
and
y = (log10 x) / [ log10 (x−1)]
Our knowledge of logarithms allows us to simplify these, respectively, to
y = (ln x) / (−ln x) = −1
and
y = (log10 x) / (−log10 x) = −1
These functions are defined only if 0 < x < 1 or x > 1. The domains have “holes” at x = 1 
because when we input 1 to either quotient, we end up dividing by 0. (Try it and see!) The 
ranges are confined to the single value −1.
5
10
x
1
y
–1
Figure 14-10  Graph of the 
common log times 
the common log of 
the reciprocal (solid 
black curve). The 
dashed gray curves 
are the graphs 
of the original 
functions.
Graphs Involving Logarithmic Functions  277

278  Exponential and Logarithmic Curves
Don’t let them confuse you!
In some texts, natural (base-e) logs are denoted by writing “log” without a subscript, fol-
lowed by the argument. In other texts and in most calculators, “log” means the common 
(base-10) log.
  To avoid confusion, you should include the base as a subscript whenever you write “log” 
followed by anything. For example, write “log10” or “loge” instead of “log” all by itself, unless 
it’s impractical to write the subscript. You don’t need a subscript when you write “ln” for the 
natural log.
  If you aren’t sure what the “log” key on a calculator does, you can do a test to find out. If your 
calculator says that the “log” of 10 is equal to 1, then it’s the common log. If the “log” of 10 turns 
out to be an irrational number slightly larger than 2.3, then it’s the natural log.
Here’s a challenge!
Draw graphs of the ratio functions we found in “Logarithm: example 4.” Be careful! They’re a 
little tricky.
Solution
Figure 14-11 is a graph of the function
y = (ln x) / [ln (x−1)]
y
x
10
5
0
3
–3
–6
6
Points (0, –1) and (1, –1)
are not part of the graph
of the ratio function!
Figure 14-11  Graph of the 
natural log divided 
by the natural log 
of the reciprocal 
(solid black line 
with “holes”). The 
dashed gray curves 
are the graphs 
of the original 
functions.

Figure 14-12 is a graph of the function
y = (log10 x) / [log10 (x−1)]
In both graphs, the original numerator and denominator functions are graphed as dashed gray curves. 
The ratio functions are graphed as solid black lines with “holes.” The small open circles at the points 
(0,−1) and (1,−1) indicate that those points are not part of either graph. That’s the trick I warned you 
about. Without the open circles, these graphs would be wrong.
Logarithmic Coordinate Planes
Engineers and scientists sometimes use coordinate systems in which one or both axes are 
graduated according to the common (base-10) logarithm of the displacement. Let’s look at 
the three most common variants.
Semilog (x-linear) coordinates
Figure 14-13 shows semilogarithmic (semilog) coordinates in which the independent-variable 
axis is linear, and the dependent-variable axis is logarithmic. The values that can be depicted 
on the y axis are restricted to one sign or the other (positive or negative). The graphable inter-
vals in this example are
–1 ≤x ≤ 1
and
0.1 ≤y ≤ 10
5
10
x
1
y
–1
Points (0, –1) and (1, –1)
are not part of the graph
of the ratio function!
Figure 14-12  Graph of the 
common log 
divided by the 
common log of 
the reciprocal 
(solid black line 
with “holes”). The 
dashed gray curves 
are the graphs 
of the original 
functions.
Logarithmic Coordinate Planes  279

280  Exponential and Logarithmic Curves
The y axis in Fig. 14-13 spans two orders of magnitude (powers of 10). The span could be increased 
to encompass more powers of 10, but the y values can never extend all the way down to 0.
Semilog (y-linear) coordinates
Figure 14-14 shows semilog coordinates in which the independent-variable axis is logarith-
mic, and the dependent-variable axis is linear. The values that can be depicted on the x axis 
are restricted to one sign or the other (positive or negative). The graphable intervals in this 
illustration are
0.1 ≤x ≤ 10
and
–1 ≤y ≤ 1
The x axis in Fig. 14-14 spans two orders of magnitude. The span could cover more powers of 
10, but in any case the x values can’t extend all the way down to 0.
Log-log coordinates
Figure 14-15 shows log-log coordinates. Both axes are logarithmic. The values that can be 
depicted on either axis are restricted to one sign or the other (positive or negative). In this 
example, the graphable intervals are 
0.1 ≤x ≤ 10
and
0.1 ≤y ≤ 10
Both axes in Fig. 14-15 span two orders of magnitude. The span of either axis could cover 
more powers of 10, but neither axis can be made to show values down to 0.
x
–1
0
1
y
10
1
3
0.3
Figure 14-13  The semilog 
coordinate plane 
with a linear x axis 
and a logarithmic 
y axis.

Are you confused?
Semilog and log-log coordinates distort the graphs of relations and functions because the axes 
aren’t linear. Straight lines in Cartesian or rectangular coordinates usually show up as curves in 
semilog or log-log coordinates. Some functions whose graphs appear as curves in Cartesian or 
rectangular coordinates turn out to be straight lines in semilog or log-log coordinates. Try plotting 
some linear, logarithmic, and exponential functions in Cartesian, semilog, and log-log coordi-
nates. See for yourself what happens! Use a calculator, plot numerous points, and then “connect 
the dots” for each function you want to graph.
x
y
1
–1
0
10
1
0.3
3
Figure 14-14  The semilog 
coordinate plane 
with a logarithmic 
x axis and a linear 
y axis.
x
y
10
1
3
0.3
0.1
10
1
0.3
3
0.1
Figure 14-15  The log-log 
coordinate plane. 
The x and y axes are 
both logarithmic.
Logarithmic Coordinate Planes  281

282  Exponential and Logarithmic Curves
Here’s a challenge!
Plot graphs of each of the following three functions in x-linear semilog coordinates, y-linear semi-
log coordinates, and log-log coordinates (use the templates from Figs. 14-13 through 14-15):
 
y = x
 
y = ln x
 
y = ex
Solution
Use a scientific calculator and input various values of x. Plot several points for each function and 
then draw curves through them, interpolating as you go. Be sure that your calculator is set for the 
natural logarithmic and exponential functions (that is, base e), not common logarithm or common 
exponential functions (base 10). You should get graphs that look like those shown in Fig. 14-16. 
In two cases, only a single point of the function shows up in the coordinate spans portrayed here. 
You’d have to expand the linear axis (the x axis) at A beyond 1 to see any of the graph for y = ln x.
You’d have to expand the linear axis (the y axis) at B beyond 1 to see any of the graph for y = ex.
Figure 14-16  Simple functions in x-linear semilog 
coordinates (at A), y-linear semilog coordinates 
(at B), and log-log coordinates (at C).
x
–1
0
1
y
10
1
3
0.3
x
y
1
–1
0
10
0.3
3
x
y
10
1
3
0.3
0.1
10
1
0.3
3
0.1
y = x
y = ln x
y = ln x
y = e x
y = e x
A
B
C
1

Practice Exercises
This is an open-book quiz. You may (and should) refer to the text as you solve these problems. 
Don’t hurry! You’ll find worked-out answers in App. B. The solutions in the appendix may not 
represent the only way a problem can be figured out. If you think you can solve a particular 
problem in a quicker or better way than you see there, by all means try it! When plotting 
graphs here, feel free to use a calculator, locate numerous points, and “connect the dots.”
 1.  When we discussed the range of the natural exponential function, we claimed that 
no real-number power of e is equal to 0. Prove it. Here’s a hint: Use the technique of 
reductio ad absurdum, in which we assume the truth of a statement and then derive 
something obviously false or contradictory from that assumption.
 2.  Set up a rectangular coordinate system like the one in Fig. 14-1A, where the values of x
are portrayed from −2.5 to 2.5, and the values of y are portrayed from 0 to 10. Sketch 
the graphs of the following functions on this coordinate grid:
 
  
y = ex
 
  
y = e−x
 
  
y = ex e−x
 3.  Set up a rectangular coordinate system like the one in Fig. 14-1B, where the values of x
are portrayed from −1 to 1, and the values of y are portrayed from 0 to 10. Sketch the 
graphs of the following functions on this coordinate grid:
 
  
y = 10x
 
  
y = 10−x
 
  
y = 10x/10−x
 4.  Draw the graphs of the three functions from Problem 3 on an x-linear semilog 
coordinate grid, where the values of x are portrayed from −1 to 1, and the values of y are 
portrayed over the three orders of magnitude from 0.1 to 100.
 5.  Plot a rectangular-coordinate graph of the function we get when we raise 10 to the 
power of 1/x. The curve is represented by the following equation:
 
  
y = 10(1/x)
 
  What is the domain of this function? What is its range? Include all values of the domain 
from −10 to 10.
 6.  We’ve claimed that the natural log of 0 isn’t a real number. Prove it. Here’s a hint: Use 
reductio ad absurdum, and use the solution to Problem 1 as a lemma (a theorem that 
helps in the proof of another theorem).
 7.  Plot a rectangular-coordinate graph of the sum of the natural log function and the 
common log function. The curve is represented by the following equation:
y = ln x + log10 x
 
  What is the domain of this function? What is its range? Include all values of the domain 
from 0 to 10. Include all values of the range from −5 to 5.
Practice Exercises  283

284  Exponential and Logarithmic Curves
 8.  Plot a rectangular-coordinate graph of the product of the natural log function and the 
common log function. The curve is represented by the following equation:
y = (ln x) (log10 x)
 
  What is the domain of this function? What is its range? Include all values of the domain 
from 0 to 10, and all values of the range from 0 to 5.
 9.  Draw the graphs of the three functions from Fig. B-18 (the illustration for the solution 
to Problem 7) on a y-linear semilog coordinate grid. Portray values of x over the two 
orders of magnitude from 0.1 to 10. Portray values of y from −5 to 5.
 10.  Draw the graphs of the three functions from Fig. B-19 (the illustration for the solution 
to Problem 8) on a y-linear semilog coordinate grid. Portray values of x over the single 
order of magnitude from 1 to 10. Portray values of y from 0 to 2.5.

If you’ve taken basic algebra and geometry, you’re familiar with the trigonometric functions. 
You also got some experience with them in Chap. 2 of this book. Now we’ll graph some algebraic 
combinations of these functions.
Graphs Involving the Sine and Cosine
Let’s find out what happens when we add, multiply, square, and divide the sine and cosine 
functions.
Sine and cosine: example 1
Figure 15-1 shows superimposed graphs of the sine and cosine functions along with a graph of 
their sum. You can follow along by inputting numerous values of q into your calculator, deter-
mining the output values, plotting the points corresponding to the input/output ordered pairs, 
and then filling in the curve by “connecting the dots.” In Fig. 15-1, the dashed gray curves are 
the individual sine and cosine waves. The solid black curve is the graph of the sum function:
f (q) = sin q + cos q
The sum-function wave has the same period (distance between the corresponding points 
on any two adjacent waves) as the sine and cosine waves. In this situation, that period is 2p.
The new wave also has the same frequency as the originals. The frequency of any regular, 
repeating wave is always equal to the reciprocal of its period.
The peaks (recurring maxima and minima) of the sine and cosine waves attain values of 
±1. The peaks of the new wave attain values of ±21/2, which occur at values of q where the 
graphs of the sine and cosine cross each other. By definition, the peak amplitude of the new 
function is 21/2 times the peak amplitude of either original function. The new wave appears 
“sine-like,” but we can’t be sure that it’s a true sinusoid on the basis of its appearance in this 
graph. The domain of our function f includes all real numbers. The range of f is the set of all 
reals in the closed interval [−21/2,21/2].
285
CHAPTER 
15
Trigonometric Curves

286
Trigonometric Curves
Sine and cosine: example 2
In Fig. 15-2, we see graphs of the sine and cosine functions along with a graph of their product. 
The dashed gray curves are the superimposed sine and cosine waves. The solid black curve is 
the graph of the product function:
f (q) = sin q cos q
The new function’s graph has a period of p, which is half the period of the sine wave, 
and half the period of the cosine wave. The peaks of the new wave are ±1/2, which occur at 
values of q where the graphs of the sine and cosine intersect. As in the previous example, the 
new wave looks like a sinusoid, but we can’t be sure about that by merely looking at it. The 
domain of the product function spans the entire set of reals. The range is the set of all reals in 
the closed interval [−1/2,1/2].
Sine and cosine: example 3
Figure 15-3 shows the graphs of the sine function (at A) and the cosine function (at B) along 
with their squares. The dashed gray curve at A is the sine wave; the dashed gray curve at B is 
the cosine wave. In illustration A, the solid black curve is the graph of
f (q) = sin2 q
In illustration B, the solid black curve is the graph of
g (q) = cos2 q
Figure 15-1  Graphs of the 
sine and cosine 
functions (dashed 
gray curves) and 
the graph of their 
sum (solid black 
curve). Each division 
on the horizontal 
axis represents p/2
units. Each division 
on the vertical axis 
represents 1/2 unit.

f(q)
Each horizontal
division
is p/2 units
Each vertical division
is 1/4 unit
q
Figure 15-2  Graphs of the sine 
and cosine functions 
(dashed gray curves) 
along with the graph 
of their product 
(solid black curve). 
Each horizontal 
division represents 
p/2 units. Each 
vertical division 
represents 1/4 unit.
f(q)
Each horizontal
division
is
/2 units
Each vertical division
is 1/4 unit
A
Each horizontal
division
is
/2 units
Each vertical division
is 1/4 unit
B
g(q)
q
q
p
p
Figure 15-3  The dashed gray 
curves are graphs of 
the sine function 
(at A) and the cosine 
function (at B). The 
solid black curves are 
graphs of the square 
of the sine function 
(at A) and the square 
of the cosine function 
(at B). Each division 
on the horizontal 
axes represents p /2 
units. Each division 
on the vertical axes 
represents 1/4 unit.

288  Trigonometric Curves
The squared-function waves have periods of p, half the periods of the original func-
tions. Therefore, the frequencies of the squared functions are twice those of the original 
functions.
The waves for the squared functions are displaced upward relative to the waves for the 
original functions. The squared functions attain repeated minima of 0 and repeated maxima 
of 1. In other words, the positive peak amplitudes of the squared-function waves are equal to 
1, while the minimum peak amplitudes are equal to 0. We define the peak-to-peak amplitude
of a regular, repeating wave as the difference between the positive peak value and the negative 
peak value. In this example, the original waves have peak-to-peak amplitudes of 1 − (−1) = 2, 
while the squared-function waves have peak-to-peak amplitudes of 1 − 0 = 1.
The waves representing the squared functions f and g look like sinusoids, but we can’t 
be certain about that on the basis of their appearance alone. The domains of f and g include 
all real numbers. The ranges of f and g are confined to the set of all reals in the closed 
interval [0,1].
Sine and cosine: example 4
Let’s add the squared functions from the previous example and graph the result. The solid 
black line in Fig. 15-4 is a graph of the sum of the squares of the sine and the cosine functions, 
which are shown as superimposed dashed gray curves. We have
f (q) = sin2 q + cos2 q
In this case, the function has a constant value. The domain includes all of the real numbers. 
The range is the set containing the single real number 1.
f(q)
Each horizontal
division
is p/2 units
Each vertical
division
is 1/4 unit
q
Figure 15-4  Graph of the sum 
of the squares of 
the sine and cosine 
functions (solid 
black line). The 
dashed gray curves 
are the graphs of 
the original squared 
functions. Each 
horizontal division 
represents p/2 units. 
Each vertical division 
represents 1/4 unit.

Are you confused?
You might wonder, “How can we be certain that the graph in the previous example is actually a 
straight, horizontal line? When I input values into my calculator, I always get an output of 1, but 
I’ve learned that even a million examples can’t prove a general truth in mathematics.” Your skepti-
cism shows that you’re thinking! But let’s remember one of the basic trigonometric identities that 
we learned in Chap. 2. For all real numbers q, the following equation holds true:
sin2 q + cos2 q = 1
This fact assures us that in the previous example, we have
f (q) = 1
so the graph of the sum-of-squares function is indeed the horizontal, solid black line portrayed 
in Fig. 15-4.
Here’s a challenge!
Sketch a graph of the ratio of the square of the sine function to the square of the cosine function. 
That is, graph
f (q) = (sin2 q)/(cos2 q)
Solution
The solid black complex of curves in Fig. 15-5 is the graph of the ratio of the square of the sine 
to the square of the cosine. The superimposed gray curves are graphs of the original sine-squared 
and cosine-squared functions.
Figure 15-5  Graph of the ratio of 
the square of the sine 
function to the square 
of the cosine function 
(solid black curves). 
Each horizontal 
division represents 
p /2 units. Each 
vertical division 
represents 1/2 unit. 
The dashed gray 
curves are the graphs 
of the original sine-
squared and cosine-
squared functions. 
The vertical dashed 
lines are asymptotes 
of f.
f(q)
Each horizontal
division
is p/2 units
Each vertical
division
is 1/2 unit
q
Graphs Involving the Sine and Cosine  289

This ratio function f  is singular (that is, it “blows up”) when q is any odd-integer multiple of p/2.
That’s because cos2 q (the denominator) equals 0 at those points, while sin2 q (the numerator) equals 1. 
The function attains values of 0 at all integer multiples of p because at those points, sin2 q (the numerator) 
equals 0, while cos2 q (the denominator) equals 1.
The period of f  is p, the distance between the asymptotes; the graph repeats itself completely 
between each adjacent pair of asymptotes. The peak amplitude and the peak-to-peak amplitude are 
both undefined. (It’s tempting to call them “infinite,” but let’s not go there!) The domain includes all 
reals except the odd-integer multiples of p/2. The range is the set of all nonnegative reals.
Graphs Involving the Secant and Cosecant
In Chap. 2, we saw graphs of the basic secant and cosecant functions, which are the reciprocals 
of the cosine and sine, respectively. Let’s combine these two functions after the fashion of the 
previous section, and see what the resulting graphs look like.
Secant and cosecant: example 1
The dashed gray curves in Fig. 15-6 are the superimposed graphs of the secant and cosecant 
functions. The complex of solid black curves is a graph of their sum. As always, you can repro-
duce this graph by inputting a sufficient number of values into your calculator, plotting the 
Figure 15-6  Graph of the sum of 
the secant and cosecant 
functions (solid 
black curves). The 
dashed gray curves 
are the graphs of the 
original functions. 
Each division on 
the horizontal axis 
represents p/2 units. 
Each vertical division 
represents 1 unit. 
The vertical dashed 
lines are asymptotes 
of f.  The dependent-
variable axis is also an 
asymptote of f.
f(q)
Each horizontal division is p/2 units
Each vertical division is 1 unit
q
290  Trigonometric Curves

output points, and then “connecting the dots.” You’ll have to take some time to “investigate” 
this function before you can accurately plot this graph, but be patient! We have
f (q) = sec q + csc q
The graph of f   has asymptotes that pass through every point where the independent vari-
able is an integer multiple of p/2. If you examine Fig. 15-6 closely, you’ll see that the graph is 
regular and it repeats with a period of 2p, but we can’t call it a wave. The domain includes all 
real numbers except the integer multiples of p/2 because, whenever q attains one of those values, 
either the secant or the cosecant is undefined. The range spans the set of all real numbers.
Secant and cosecant: example 2
Figure 15-7 shows graphs of the secant and cosecant functions along with their product. The 
dashed gray curves are graphs of the original functions superimposed on each other; the solid 
black curves show the graph of
f (q) = sec q csc q
This function f  has a period of p, which is half that of the secant and cosecant functions. 
Like the sum-function graph, this graph has asymptotes that pass through every point where 
the independent variable is an integer multiple of p /2. The domain is the set of all reals except 
the integer multiples of p /2. The range spans the set of all real numbers except those in the 
open interval (−2,2). Alternatively, we can say that the range includes all reals y such that y ≥ 2 
or y ≤−2.
Figure 15-7  Graph of the 
product of the 
secant and cosecant 
functions (solid 
black curves). The 
dashed gray curves 
are the graphs of the 
original functions. 
Each division on 
the horizontal axis 
represents p/2 units. 
Each vertical division 
represents 1 unit. 
The vertical dashed 
lines are asymptotes 
of f. The dependent-
variable axis is also 
an asymptote of f.
f(q)
Each horizontal division is p/2 units
Each vertical division is 1 unit
q
Graphs Involving the Secant and Cosecant  291

292  Trigonometric Curves
Secant and cosecant: example 3
The dashed gray curves in Fig. 15-8 are the graphs of the secant function (at A) and the 
cosecant function (at B). At A, the solid black curve is the graph of
f (q) = sec2 q
At B, the solid black curve is the graph of
g (q) = csc2 q
f(q)
A
B
g(q)
Each horizontal division is p/2 units
Each vertical division is 1 unit
q
q
Figure 15-8  The solid black 
curves are the graphs 
of the squares of the 
secant function (at 
A) and the cosecant 
function (at B). The 
dashed gray curves 
are the graphs of the 
original functions. 
Each division on 
the horizontal axes 
represents p/2 units. 
Each division on the 
vertical axes represents 
1 unit. The vertical 
dashed lines are 
asymptotes of f and g.
At B, the dependent-
variable axis is also an 
asymptote of g.

The squared functions have periods of p, which are half the periods of the original func-
tions. Therefore, the frequencies of the squared functions are double those of the originals. 
Singularities occur at the same points on the independent-variable axes as they do for the 
original functions. The domain of the secant-squared function is the set of all reals except 
odd-integer multiples of p/2. The domain of the cosecant-squared function is the set of all 
reals except integer multiples of p. The ranges in both cases are confined to the set of reals y
such that y ≥ 1.
Secant and cosecant: example 4
Figure 15-9 shows what happens when we add the secant-squared function to the cosecant-
squared function. The solid black curves compose the graph of
f (q) = sec2 q + csc2 q
The dashed gray curves are superimposed graphs of the original functions. This sum function 
has a period equal to half that of the original functions, or p/2. The domain includes all reals 
except the integer multiples of p/2. The range is the set of reals y such that y ≥ 4.
f(q)
Each horizontal
division
is p/2 units
Each vertical
division
is 1 unit
q
Figure 15-9  Graph of the sum 
of the squares of the 
secant and cosecant 
functions (solid 
black curves). The 
dashed gray curves 
are the graphs of 
the original squared 
functions. Each 
horizontal division 
represents p/2 units. 
Each vertical division 
represents 1 unit. 
The vertical dashed 
lines are asymptotes 
of f. The positive 
dependent-variable 
axis is also an 
asymptote of f.
Graphs Involving the Secant and Cosecant  293

294  Trigonometric Curves
Are you confused?
You’re bound to wonder, “How do we know that the range of the sum-of-squares function in the 
previous example is the set of all reals greater than or equal to 4?” Another way of stating this fact 
is that the minima of the solid black curves in Fig. 15-9 have dependent-variable values equal to 4. 
These minima occur at values of q where the graphs of the secant-squared and cosecant-squared 
functions (dashed gray curves) intersect. Every one of those points occurs where q is an odd-in-
teger multiple of p/4. With the help of your calculator, you can determine that whenever q is an 
odd-integer multiple of p/4, the secant squared and cosecant squared are both 2, so their sum is 4. If you 
move slightly to the right or left of any of these points, the value of the sum-of-squares function 
increases (a fact that you can, again, check out with your calculator). It follows that the sum-of-
squares function can never attain any real-number value less than 4. However, there’s no limit to 
how large the value of the function can get. One or the other of the original functions “blows up 
positively” at every point where q attains an integer multiple of p/2.
Here’s a challenge!
Sketch a graph of the ratio of the square of the secant function to the square of the cosecant func-
tion. That is, graph
f (q) = (sec2 q)/(csc2 q)
Determine the domain and range of f. Be careful! Both the domain and the range have some tricky 
restrictions.
Solution
We can simplify this problem by remembering a few basic facts in trigonometry, and by applying 
a little algebra. First, let’s remember that the cosecant is equal to the reciprocal of the sine, so the 
converse is also true. We have
1/(csc q) = sin q
When we square both sides, we get
1/(csc2 q) = sin2 q
Substituting in the equation for our function gives us
f (q) = (sec2 q) (sin2 q)
We’ve learned that the secant is equal to the reciprocal of the cosine. We have
sec q = 1/(cos q)
so we can square both sides to get
sec2 q = 1/(cos2 q)

Substituting again in the equation for our original function, we obtain
f (q) = (sin2 q)/(cos2 q) = [(sin q)/(cos q)]2
The sine over the cosine is equal to the tangent, so we can substitute again to conclude that our 
original function is
f (q) = tan2 q
with the restriction that we can’t define it for any input value where either the secant or the cosecant 
become singular.
The solid black curves in Fig. 15-10 show the result of squaring all the values of the tangent func-
tion, noting the additional undefined values as open circles. At the points shown by the open circles, the 
cosecant function is singular so its square is undefined. That means we can’t define our ratio function f
at any such point. At the asymptotes (dashed vertical lines), the secant function is singular so its square 
is undefined, making it impossible to define the ratio function f for those values of q. Our function f
has a period of p. The domain of f  includes all real numbers except integer multiples of p/2, where one 
or the other of the original squared functions is singular. The range is the set of all positive reals.
f(q)
Each horizontal
division
is p/2 units
Each vertical
division
is 1 unit
q
Figure 15-10  Graph of the ratio of the square of the 
secant function to the square of the 
cosecant function (solid black curves). 
The dashed gray curves are the graphs 
of the original squared functions. 
Each horizontal division represents 
p/2 units. Each vertical division 
represents 1 unit. The vertical dashed 
lines are asymptotes of f.
Graphs Involving the Secant and Cosecant  295

296  Trigonometric Curves
Graphs Involving the Tangent and Cotangent
You were introduced to graphs of the basic tangent and cotangent functions in Chap. 2. The tan-
gent is the ratio of the sine to the cosine, and the cotangent is the ratio of the cosine to the sine. 
Now we’ll see what happens when we alter or combine these functions in a few different ways.
Tangent and cotangent: example 1
In Fig. 15-11, the dashed gray curves are superimposed graphs of the tangent and cotangent 
functions. The solid black curves portray the graph of
f (q) = tan q + cot q
The graph of f has asymptotes that pass through every point where the independent 
variable attains an integer multiple of p/2. The period is p. The domain is the set of all real 
numbers except the integer multiples of p/2. The range is the set of reals larger than or equal 
f(q)
Each horizontal division is p/2 units
Each vertical division is 1 unit
q
Figure 15-11  Graph of the sum of the tangent 
and cotangent functions (solid black 
curves). The dashed gray curves are 
the graphs of the original functions. 
Each division on the horizontal axis 
represents p /2 units. Each vertical 
division represents 1 unit. The 
vertical dashed lines are asymptotes 
of f. The dependent-variable axis is 
also an asymptote of f.

to 2 or smaller than or equal to −2. We can also say that the range spans the set of all reals 
except those in the open interval (−2,2).
Tangent and cotangent: example 2
Figure 15-12 shows superimposed graphs of the tangent and cotangent functions (dashed gray 
curves) along with their product (black line with “holes” in it). We have
f (q) = tan q cot q
We can simplify the calculations to graph this function when we recall that the cotangent 
and the tangent are reciprocals of each other, so we have
cot q = 1/(tan q)
This equation is valid as long as both functions are defined and tan q ≠ 0. By substitution, the 
equation for our function f  becomes
f (q) = (tan q)/(tan q) = 1
f(q)
Each horizontal division is p/2 units
Each vertical division is 1 unit
q
Figure 15-12  Graph of the product of the tangent 
and cotangent functions (solid black 
curve). The dashed gray curves are 
the graphs of the original functions. 
Each division on the horizontal axis 
represents p/2 units. Each vertical 
division represents 1 unit.
Graphs Involving the Tangent and Cotangent  297

298  Trigonometric Curves
The graph of f is a horizontal, straight line with infinitely many “holes,” with each hole 
located at a point where q is an integer multiple of p /2. If we want to get creative with our 
terminology, we can say that the graph of f consists of infinitely many open-ended line seg-
ments, each of length p/2, placed end-to-end in a collinear arrangement. The domain of f
spans the set of all reals except the integer multiples of p/2. The range is the set containing 
the single real number 1.
Tangent and cotangent: example 3
The dashed gray curves in Fig. 15-13 are the graphs of the tangent function (at A) and the 
cotangent function (at B). The solid black curves in drawing A compose the graph of
f (q) = tan2 q
f(q)
A
B
g(q)
Each horizontal division is p/2 units
Each vertical division is 1 unit
q
q
Figure 15-13  The solid black 
curves are graphs of 
the squares of the 
tangent function 
(at A) and the 
cotangent function 
(at B). The dashed 
gray curves are 
graphs of the 
original functions. 
Each division on 
the horizontal axes 
represents p/2
units. Each division 
on the vertical axes 
represents 1 unit. 
The vertical dashed 
lines are asymptotes 
of f and g. At B, the 
positive dependent-
variable axis is also 
an asymptote of g.

The solid black curves in drawing B compose the graph of
g (q) = cot2 q
Both f and g have periods of p, the same as the periods of the tangent and cotangent 
functions. Therefore, the frequencies of the squared functions are the same as those of the 
originals. Singularities occur in f and g at the same points on the independent-variable axis 
as they do for the original functions. The domain of f is the set of all reals except odd-integer 
multiples of p /2. The domain of g is the set of all reals except integer multiples of p. The 
ranges of both f and g span the set of nonnegative real numbers.
Tangent and cotangent: example 4
Figure 15-14 is a graph of the sum of the tangent-squared function and the cotangent-squared 
function. The solid black curves compose the graph of
f (q) = tan2 q + cot2 q
The dashed gray curves are superimposed graphs of the original squared functions. This 
sum function f  has a period equal to half that of the original functions, or p/2. The domain 
includes all reals except the integer multiples of p/2. The range is the set of reals y such that 
y ≥ 2.
f(q)
Each horizontal
division
is p/2 units
Each vertical
division
is 1 unit
q
Figure 15-14  Graph of the sum 
of the squares 
of the tangent 
and cotangent 
functions (solid 
black curves). The 
dashed gray curves 
are the graphs of 
the original squared 
functions. Each 
division on the 
horizontal axis 
represents p/2 
units. Each vertical 
division represents 
1 unit. The vertical 
dashed lines are 
asymptotes of f. The 
positive dependent-
variable axis is also 
an asymptote of f.
Graphs Involving the Tangent and Cotangent  299

300  Trigonometric Curves
Are you confused?
You might wonder how we can be sure that the range of the sum-of-squares function graphed in 
Fig. 5-14 is the set of all reals greater than or equal to 2. To understand this, we can use the same 
reasoning as we did when we added the squares of the secant and the cosecant functions. All the 
minima on the solid black curves in Fig. 15-14 correspond to dependent-variable values of 2, 
because they occur where the graphs of the dashed gray curves intersect. At all such points, the 
tangent squared and cotangent squared are both 1, so their sum is 2. If you move slightly on either 
side of any such point, the value of the sum-of-squares function increases.
Here’s a challenge!
Sketch a graph of the ratio of the square of the tangent function to the square of the cotangent 
function. That is, graph
f (q) = (tan2 q)/(cot2 q)
State the domain and range of f. Be careful! There are some tricky restrictions in the domain.
Solution
Let’s use our knowledge of trigonometry to break this ratio down into sines and cosines. We recall 
that
tan q = (sin q)/(cos q)
as long as q isn’t an odd-integer multiple of p /2, and
cot q = (cos q)/(sin q)
provided q isn’t an integer multiple of p. Therefore,
tan2 q = (sin2 q)/(cos2 q)
and
cot2 q = (cos2 q)/(sin2 q)
with the same restrictions. By substitution, our ratio function becomes
f (q) = [(sin2 q)/(cos2 q)]/[(cos2 q)/(sin2 q)]
as long as q isn’t an integer multiple of p/2. The above equation can be rewritten as
f (q) = [(sin2 q)/(cos2 q)] [(sin2 q)/(cos2 q)]
which simplifies to
f (q) = (sin4 q)/(cos4 q)]

and finally to
f (q) = tan4 q
with, once again, the important restriction that q cannot be any integer multiple of p/2. If we 
input any integer multiple of p/2 to the original function, we can’t define the output because 
either the numerator or the denominator function encounters a singularity.  
The black curves with the holes in Fig. 15-15 show the result of raising all the values of the tangent 
function to the fourth power, noting the additional undefined values as open circles. The dashed gray 
curves are the original tangent-squared and cotangent-squared functions. Our function f  has a period 
of p. The domain includes all real numbers except integer multiples of p/2. The range includes all 
positive real numbers.
f(q)
Each horizontal
division
is p/2 units
Each vertical
division
is 1 unit
q
Figure 15-15 
 Graph of the ratio of the square 
of the tangent function to the 
square of the cotangent function 
(solid black curves). The dashed 
gray curves are the graphs of the 
original squared functions. Each 
division on the horizontal axis 
represents p/2 units. Each vertical 
division represents 1 unit. The 
vertical dashed lines represent 
asymptotes of f.
Graphs Involving the Tangent and Cotangent  301

Practice Exercises
This is an open-book quiz. You may (and should) refer to the text as you solve these problems. 
Don’t hurry! You’ll find worked-out answers in App. B. The solutions in the appendix may not 
represent the only way a problem can be figured out. If you think you can solve a particular 
problem in a quicker or better way than you see there, by all means try it!
 1. Look back at Fig. 15-1, which shows the graphs of the sine and cosine waves (dashed 
gray curves) along with their sum (solid black curve). Sketch a graph, and state the 
domain and the range, of the difference function:
h (q) = sin q − cos q
 2. Look back at Fig. 15-4, which shows the sine-squared and cosine-squared waves (dashed 
gray curves) along with their sum (solid black horizontal line). Sketch a graph, and state 
the domain and the range, of the difference-of-squares function:
h (q) = sin2 q − cos2 q
 3. Look back at Fig. 15-5, which shows the graphs of the sine-squared and cosine-squared 
waves (dashed gray curves) along with the graph of the ratio-of-squares function:
f (q) = (sin2 q)/(cos2 q)
 
 Sketch a graph, and state the domain and the range, of the ratio-of-squares function 
going the other way. That function is
h (q) = (cos2 q)/(sin2 q)
 4. Look back at Fig. 15-6, which shows the graphs of the secant and cosecant functions 
(dashed gray curves) along with their sum (solid black curves). Sketch a graph, and state 
the domain and the range, of the difference function:
h (q) = sec q − csc q
 5. Look back at Fig. 15-9, which shows the graphs of the secant-squared and cosecant-
squared functions (dashed gray curves) along with their sum (solid black curves). 
Sketch a graph, and state the domain and the range, of the difference function:
h (q) = sec2 q − csc2 q
 6. Look back at Fig. 15-10, which shows the graphs of the secant-squared and cosecant-
squared functions (dashed gray curves) along with the graph of
f (q) = (sec2 q)/(csc2 q)
 
 Sketch a graph, and state the domain and the range, of the ratio-of-squares function 
going the other way. That function is
h (q) = (csc2 q)/(sec2 q)
 7. Look back at Fig. 15-11, which shows the graphs of the tangent and cotangent 
functions (dashed gray curves) along with the graph of their sum (solid black curves). 
Sketch a graph, and state the domain and the range, of the difference function:
h (q) = tan q − cot q
302  Trigonometric Curves

 8. Look back at Fig. 15-14, which shows the graphs of the tangent-squared and cotangent-
squared functions (dashed gray curves) along with the graph of their sum (solid black 
curves). Sketch a graph, and state the domain and the range, of the difference-of-
squares function:
h (q) = tan2 q − cot2 q
 9. In Chap. 2, we learned that square of the secant of an angle minus the square of the 
tangent of the same angle is always equal to 1, as long as the angle is not an odd-integer 
multiple of p /2. That is,
sec2 q – tan2 q = 1
 
 Sketch a graph that illustrates this principle, which is sometimes called the Pythagorean 
theorem for the secant and tangent.
 10. In Chap. 2, we learned that the square of the cosecant of an angle minus the square 
of the cotangent of the same angle is always equal to 1, as long as the angle is not an 
integer multiple of p. That is,
csc2 q – cot2 q = 1
 
 Sketch a graph that illustrates this principle, which is sometimes called the Pythagorean 
theorem for the cosecant and cotangent.
Practice Exercises  303

In the two-space relations and functions we’ve seen so far, the value of one variable depends on 
the value of the other variable. In this chapter, we’ll learn how to express two-space relations 
and functions in which both variables depend on an external factor called a parameter.
What’s a Parameter?
In a two-space relation or function, a parameter acts as a “master controller” for one or both 
variables. When there exists  a relation between x and y, for example, we don’t have to say 
that x depends on y or vice versa. Instead, we can say that a parameter, which we usually call t,
independently governs the values of x and y. We use parametric equations to describe how this 
happens.
A rectangular-coordinate example
Here’s an example of a pair of parametric equations that produce a straight line in the Cartesian 
xy plane. Consider
x = 2t
and
y = 3t
To generate the graph of this system, we can input various values of t to both of the parametric 
equations, and then plot the ordered pairs (x,y) that come out. Following are some examples:
• When t = −2, we have x = 2 × (−2) = −4 and y = 3 × (−2) = −6.
• When t = −1, we have x = 2 × (−1) = −2 and y = 3 × (−1) = −3.
• When t = 0, we have x = 2 × 0 = 0 and y = 3 × 0 = 0.
• When t = 1, we have x = 2 × 1 = 2 and y = 3 × 1 = 3.
• When t = 2, we have x = 2 × 2 = 4 and y = 3 × 2 = 6.
CHAPTER 
16
Parametric Equations in Two-Space
304

When we plot the (x,y) ordered pairs based on the above list as points on a Cartesian plane 
and then “connect the dots,” we get a line passing through the origin with a slope of 3/2, as 
shown in Fig. 16-1. From our knowledge of the slope-intercept form of a line in the xy plane, 
we can write down the equation in that form as
y = (3/2)x
Alternatively, we can use algebra to derive the equation of our system in terms of x and y alone, 
without t. Let’s take the first parametric equation
x = 2t
and multiply it through by 3/2 to get
(3/2)x = (3/2)(2t) = 3t
Deleting the middle portion in the above three-way equation gives us
(3/2)x = 3t
The second parametric equation tells us that 3t = y, so we can substitute directly in the above 
equation to obtain
(3/2)x = y
What’s a Parameter?  305
2
4
6
–6
2
6
–2
–4
x
y
4
t = 0
t = 1
t = 2
t = –1
t = –2
Figure 16-1  Cartesian-coordinate graph of the 
parametric equations x = 2t and y = 3t.

which is identical to the slope-intercept equation
y = (3/2)x
The polar-coordinate counterpart
Let’s see what happens if we change our pair of parametric equations to polar form. We’ll put 
q in place of x, and put r in place of y. Now we have
q = 2t
and
r = 3t
To create the polar graph, we can input various values of t, just as we did before. To keep 
things from getting messy, let’s restrict ourselves to values of t such that we see only the part 
of the graph corresponding to the first full counterclockwise rotation of the direction angle, 
so 0 ≤q ≤ 2p. Consider the following cases:
• When t = 0, we have q = 2 × 0 = 0 and r = 3 × 0 = 0.
• When t = p /4, we have q = 2 × p /4 = p /2 and r = 3p /4.
• When t = p /2, we have q = 2 × p /2 = p  and r = 3p /2.
• When t = 3p /4, we have q = 2 × 3p /4 = 3p /2 and r = 3 × 3p /4 = 9p /4.
• When t = p, we have q = 2p  and r = 3p.
Our graph is a spiral, as shown in Fig. 16-2. Its equation can be derived with algebra exactly 
as we did in the Cartesian plane, substituting q for x and r for y to get
r = (3/2)q
Figure 16-2  Polar-coordinate 
graph of the 
parametric equations 
q = 2t and r = 3t.
Each radial division 
represents p  units. 
For simplicity, we 
restrict q to the 
interval [0,2p ].
306  Parametric Equations in Two-Space

Are you confused?
If you’re having trouble understanding the concept of a parameter, imagine the passage of time. 
In science and engineering, elapsed time t is the parameter on which many things depend. In the 
Cartesian situation described above, as time flows from the past (t < 0) through the present moment 
(t = 0) and into the future (t > 0), a point moves along the line in Fig. 16-1, going from the third 
quadrant (lower left, in the past) through the origin (right now) and into the first quadrant (upper 
right, in the future). In the polar case, as time flows from the present (t = 0) into the future (t > 0), 
a point travels along the spiral in Fig. 16-2, starting at the center (right now) and going counter-
clockwise, arriving at the outer end when t = p (a little while from now).
Here’s a challenge!
Find a pair of parametric equations that represent the line shown in Fig. 16-3.
Solution
We’re given two points on the line. One of them, (0,3), tells us that the y-intercept is 3. We can 
deduce the slope from the coordinates of the other point. When we move 4 units to the right from 
(0,3), we must go downward by 3 units (or upward by −3 units) to reach (4,0). The “rise over run” 
ratio is −3 to 4, so the slope is −3/4. The slope-intercept form of the equation for our line is
y = (−3/4)x + 3
(0, 3)
(4, 0)
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
4
Figure 16-3  How can we represent this line as a pair of 
parametric equations?
What’s a Parameter?  307

308  Parametric Equations in Two-Space
We can let x vary directly with the parameter t. We describe that relation simply as
x = t
That’s one of our two parametric equations. We can substitute t for x into the point-slope equation 
to get
y = (−3/4)t + 3
That’s the other parametric equation.
Here’s an experiment!
Do you suspect that the pair of equations
x = t
and
y = (−3/4)t + 3
isn’t the only parametric way we can represent the line in Fig. 16-3? If so, maybe you’re right. Let x = −2t,
or x = t + 1, or x = −2t + 1, and see what happens when you generate the equation for y in terms of t on 
that basis. When you put the two parametric equations together, do you get the same line as the one 
shown in Fig. 16-3?
From Equations to Graph
Parametric equations allow us to define complicated curves in an elegant, and often simpler, 
way than we can do with ordinary equations. Let’s look at a couple of examples, and plot their 
graphs in rectangular and polar coordinates.
Rectangular-coordinate graph: example 1
Suppose that x varies directly with the square of t, and y varies directly with the cube of t. In this 
situation, we have the parametric equations
x = t2
and
y = t3

Let’s construct a graph of this equation by inputting several values of t to the system and then 
plotting the points. We can break the situation down as follows:
• When t = −4, we have x = (−4)2 = 16 and y = (−4)3 = −64.
• When t = −3, we have x = (−3)2 = 9 and y = (−3)3 = −27.
• When t = −2, we have x = (−2)2 = 4 and y = (−2)3 = −8.
• When t = −1, we have x = (−1)2 = 1 and y = (−1)3 = −1.
• When t = 0, we have x = 02 = 0 and y = 03 = 0.
• When t = 1, we have x = 12 = 1 and y = 13 = 1.
• When t = 2, we have x = 22 = 4 and y = 23 = 8.
• When t = 3, we have x = 32 = 9 and y = 33 = 27.
• When t = 4, we have x = 42 = 16 and y = 43 = 64.
We can plot the points for these nine xy-plane coordinates and then connect them by curve 
fitting to get the graph of Fig. 16-4. To keep the picture clean, the points aren’t labeled. In 
this illustration, we have a rectangular-coordinate graph, but not a true Cartesian graph. 
That’s because the divisions on the y axis represent different increments than those on the 
x axis. The result is a curve that’s “vertically squashed” compared to the way it would look 
if plotted on a true Cartesian coordinate grid, but we can fit more of the curve into the 
available space.
Polar-coordinate graph: example 1
Figure 16-5 illustrates what happens when we substitute q for x and r for y in the above 
example, and then graph the result in polar coordinates. For simplicity, let’s restrict the graph 
x
y
–30
–60
30
60
–16
–8
8
16
Figure 16-4  Rectangular-
coordinate graph 
of the parametric 
equations x = t2 and 
y = t3.
From Equations to Graph  309

310  Parametric Equations in Two-Space
to values of t such that 0 ≤t ≤ (2p)1/2. To keep the picture clean, we won’t label any of the 
points. The situation breaks down as follows:
• When t = 0, we have q = 02 = 0 and r = 03 = 0.
• When t = 1, we have q = 12 = 1 and r = 13 = 1.
• When t = p 1/2, we have q = (p 1/2)2 = p  and r = (p 1/2)3 = p 3/2 ≈ 5.57.
• When t = 2, we have q = 22 = 4 and r = 23 = 8.
• When t = 51/2, we have q = (51/2)2 = 5 and r = (51/2)3 = 53/2 ≈ 11.18.
• When t = (2p )1/2, we have q = [(2p )1/2]2 = 2p  and r = [(2p )1/2]3 = (2p )3/2 ≈ 15.75.
Rectangular-coordinate graph: example 2
Suppose that x varies inversely with t, and y varies directly with ln t. The parametric equations 
are
x = t −1
and
y = ln t
Each radial
division ...
... is 3 units
0
3p/2
p/2
p
Figure 16-5  Polar-coordinate graph of the 
parametric equations q = t2 and r =
t3. Each radial division represents 3 
units.

We can construct a rectangular-coordinate graph of the relation between x and y by tabulat-
ing the values for several points, based on various values of t. Let’s break things down into the 
following cases:
• When t ≤ 0, ln t is undefined, so there are no points to plot.
• When t = e−2 ≈ 0.14, we have x = (e−2)−1 = e2 ≈ 7.39 and y = ln (e−2) = −2.
• When t = e−1 ≈ 0.37, we have x = (e−1)−1 = e ≈ 2.72 and y = ln (e−1) = −1.
• When t = 1, we have x = 1−1 = 1 and y = ln 1 = 0.
• When t = 2, we have x = 2−1 = 1/2 and y = ln 2 ≈ 0.69.
• When t = e ≈ 2.72, we have x = e−1 ≈ 0.37 and y = ln e = 1.
• When t = e2 ≈ 7.39, we have x = (e2)−1 = e−2 ≈ 0.14 and y = ln (e2) = 2.
Figure 16-6 shows the curve we obtain when we plot these points and “connect the dots.” To keep 
the picture clean, the points aren’t labeled. As in Fig. 16-4, we use distorted rectangular coordi-
nates to help us fit more of the curve on the page than we could with a true Cartesian grid.
Polar-coordinate graph: example 2
We can directly substitute q for x and r for y in the above example, tabulate some values, graph 
the results, and get the curve shown in Fig. 16-7. Let’s restrict t to keep q within the closed 
interval [0,2p] so we see only the first full positive revolution. The situation breaks down as 
follows:
• When t = e5 ≈ 148, we have q = (e5)−1 = e−5 ≈ 0.0067 and r = ln (e5) = 5.
• When t = e2 ≈ 7.39, we have q = (e2)−1 = e−2 ≈ 0.14 and r = ln (e2) = 2.
2
–2
x
y
–8
–4
4 
8
1
–1
Figure 16-6  Rectangular-coordinate graph of 
the parametric equations x = t−1
and y = ln t.
From Equations to Graph  311

312  Parametric Equations in Two-Space
• When t = 2, we have q = 2−1 = 1/2 and r = ln 2 ≈ 0.69.
• When t = 1, we have q = 1−1 = 1 and r = ln 1 = 0.
• When t = 1/2, we have q = (1/2)−1 = 2 and r = ln (1/2) ≈−0.69.
• When t = p −1 ≈ 0.32, we have q = (p −1)−1 = p  and r = ln (p −1) ≈−1.14.
• When t = (2p )−1 ≈ 0.16, we have q = [(2p )−1]−1 = 2p and r = ln [(2p )−1] ≈−1.84.
As we plot the points to obtain this graph, we must remember that when we have a negative 
radius in polar coordinates, we go outward from the origin by a distance equal to |r|, but in 
the opposite direction from that indicated by q.
Are you confused?
The polar graph in Fig. 16-7 can be baffling. Imagine that we start out facing east, in the direction 
q = 0. Our graph is infinitely far away in this direction. As we turn counterclockwise, the curve 
approaches us as r becomes finite and decreases. When we have turned counterclockwise through 
an angle of 1 rad (approximately 57º), the graph has come all the way in and reached the origin. As 
we continue to turn counterclockwise, the radius becomes negative, so the graph is behind us. As 
we rotate farther counterclockwise, r increases negatively. When we’ve rotated all the way around 
through a complete circle, the graph is approximately 1.84 units to our rear.
Each radial
division ...
... is 1 unit
0
3p/2
p/2
p
Figure 16-7  Polar-coordinate graph of the para-
metric equations q = t−1 and r = ln t.
Each radial division represents 
1 unit.

x
y
2
6
–2
–4
–6
4
2
4
6
–2
–4
8
Figure 16-8  Cartesian-coordinate 
graph of the 
parametric equations 
x = et and y = t2.
From Equations to Graph  313
Here’s a challenge!
Plot a rectangular-coordinate graph of the pair of parametric equations where x varies directly 
with et and y varies directly with t2. Then plot a polar-coordinate graph of the pair of parametric 
equations where q varies directly with et and r varies directly with t2. For simplicity, restrict the 
polar graph to values of t such that 0 ≤q ≤ 2p.
Solution
The parametric equations for plotting the system in the rectangular xy plane are
x = e t
and
y = t 2
Let’s tabulate the x and y values for several points, based on various values of t:
• When t = −2, we have x = e−2 ≈ 0.14 and y = (−2)2 = 4.
• When t = −1, we have x = e−1 ≈ 0.37 and y = (−1)2 = 1.
• When t = 0, we have x = e0 = 1 and y = 02 = 0.
• When t = 1, we have x = e1 = e ≈ 2.72 and y = 12 = 1.
• When t = 3/2, we have x = e3/2 ≈ 4.48 and y = (3/2)2 = 9/4 = 2.25.
• When t = 2, we have x = e2 ≈ 7.39 and y = 22 = 4.
Figure 16-8 shows the graph we obtain by plotting the points in the xy plane. This is a true 
Cartesian graph; the divisions on the x and y axes are the same size.

314  Parametric Equations in Two-Space
Now let’s tabulate some values for a polar graph. We substitute q for x and r for y, input values 
of t to get a good sampling of polar angles in the output, and restrict t to keep q within the closed 
interval [0,2p]. The situation breaks down into the following cases:
• When t = −2, we have q = e−2 ≈ 0.14 and r = (−2)2 = 4.
• When t = −1, we have q = e−1 ≈ 0.37 and r = (−1)2 = 1.
• When t = 0, we have q = e0 = 1 and r = 02 = 0.
• When t = 1, we have q = e1 = e ≈ 2.72 and r = 12 = 1.
• When t = 3/2, we have q = e3/2 ≈ 4.48 and r = (3/2)2 = 9/4 = 2.25.
• When t = ln 2p, we have q = e(ln 2p ) = 2p  and r = (ln 2p )2 ≈ 3.38.
Figure 16-9 shows the resulting curve in the polar plane. If the above tabulation doesn’t generate 
enough points to satisfy you, feel free to work out a few more. As you gain experience in plotting 
graphs like this, you’ll learn to get a sense of where the curves go without having to calculate very 
many discrete values.
Each radial
division ...
... is 1 unit
0
3p/2
p/2
p
Figure 16-9  Polar-coordinate graph of the 
parametric equations q = et and r =
t2. Each radial division represents 
1 unit.
From Graph to Equations
We’ve seen how we can go from parametric equations to graphs. Now we’ll do an exercise 
going from a graph to a pair of parametric equations.

Cartesian-coordinate graph to equations
Consider a circle of radius a, centered at the origin in the Cartesian xy plane as shown in 
Fig. 16-10. From trigonometry, we remember that
x = a cos f
and
y = a sin f
where f is the angle going counterclockwise from the positive x axis. Both x and y depend on 
the value of f. Let’s rename f and call it t, so our equations become
x = a cos t
and
y = a sin t
This is a pair of parametric equations representing a circle of radius a, centered at the origin in 
the Cartesian xy plane. For any particular circle, a is a constant (not a variable), so the parameter 
t is the only variable on the right-hand side of either equation.
x
y
(x, y)
x = a cos f
y = a sin f
a
f
Figure 16-10  Cartesian-coordinate graph of a circle 
with radius a, centered at the origin. We 
can let f = t to describe this circle as a 
pair of parametric equations.
From Graph to Equations  315

316  Parametric Equations in Two-Space
Polar-coordinate graph to equations
Now let’s convert the circle in the previous example to a pair of polar-form parametric equa-
tions. Suppose the polar direction angle is f, and the polar radius is r. The equation of a circle 
having radius a as shown in Fig. 16-11 is
r = a
Let’s call the angle f our parameter t, just as we did in the xy-plane situation. Then we can 
write the parametric equations of our circle as
f = t
and
r = a
Are you confused?
Does the above pair of parametric equations seem strange to you? The second equation doesn’t 
contain the parameter! That’s not a problem in this situation. The parameter has no effect because 
the polar radius r is always the same.
Here’s a challenge!
Suppose that we come across a pair of parametric equations similar to the one in the Cartesian-
coordinate example above, except that the cosine and sine of the parameter are multiplied by 
different nonzero real-number constants a and b, like this:
x = a cos t
0
3p/2
a
r = a
(f, r)
f = t
f
p
p/2
Figure 16-11  Polar-coordinate 
graph of a circle 
with radius a,
centered at the 
origin. We can let 
f = t to describe 
this circle as a 
pair of parametric 
equations.

and
y = b sin t
What sort of curve should we expect to get if we graph the relation defined by this pair of para-
metric equations?
Solution
We’ve been told that a and b are both nonzero real numbers. Therefore, we can divide the equa-
tions through by their respective constants to get
x/a = cos t
and
y/b = sin t
If we square both sides of both equations, we obtain
(x/a)2 = cos2 t
and
(y/b)2 = sin2 t
When we add these two equations, left-to-left and right-to-right, we obtain the new equation
(x/a)2 + (y/b)2 = cos2 t + sin2 t
From trigonometry, we remember that for any real number t, it’s always true that
cos2 t + sin2 t = 1
Therefore, the preceding equation can be rewritten as
(x/a)2 + (y/b)2 = 1
Expanding the squared ratios on the left-hand side gives us
x2/a2 + y2/b2 = 1
which is the equation of an ellipse centered at the origin. The horizontal (x-coordinate) semi-axis is a
units wide, and the vertical (y-coordinate) semi-axis is b units high.
From Graph to Equations  317

318  Parametric Equations in Two-Space
Practice Exercises
This is an open-book quiz. You may (and should) refer to the text as you solve these problems. 
Don’t hurry! You’ll find worked-out answers in App. B. The solutions in the appendix may not 
represent the only way a problem can be figured out. If you think you can solve a particular 
problem in a quicker or better way than you see there, by all means try it!
 1. In “Rectangular-coordinate graph: example 1” (Fig. 16-4), the parametric equations are
x = t2
 
 and
y = t3
 
  Find an equation for this relation that expresses x in terms of y without the parameter t.
Then find an equation that expresses y in terms of x without the parameter t.
 2. Is the relation defined in your second answer to Problem 1 a function of x?
 3. In “Polar-coordinate graph: example 2” (Fig. 16-7), the parametric equations are
q = t −1
 
 and
r = ln t
 
  Find an equation for this relation that expresses q in terms of r without the parameter t.
Then find an equation that expresses r in terms of q without the parameter t.
 4. Is the relation defined in your second answer to Problem 3 a function of q?
 5. In “Cartesian-coordinate graph to equations” (Fig. 16-10), the parametric equations are
x = a cos t
 
 and
y = a sin t
 
  where a is a nonzero constant. Find an equation for this relation in terms of x and y
only, without the parameter t.
 6.  Express the solution to Problem 5 as a relation in which x is the independent variable 
and y is the dependent variable. You should end up with y alone on the left-hand side 
of the equals sign, and an expression containing x (but not y) on the right-hand side. 
Is this relation a function of x?
 7. Suppose that we come across the pair of parametric equations
x = sec t
 
 and
y = tan t
 
  Find an equation for this relation in terms of x and y only, without the parameter t. What 
sort of curve should we expect to get if we graph this relation in the Cartesian xy plane?

 8. Consider the pair of parametric equations
x = a csc t
 
 and
y = b cot t
 
  where a and b are nonzero real-number constants. Find an equation for this relation in 
terms of x and y only, without the parameter t. What sort of curve should expect to get 
if we graph this relation in the Cartesian xy plane?
 9. Express the relation
x = sin (cos y)
 
 as a pair of parametric equations.
 10.  Manipulate the equation stated in Problem 9 so that y appears all by itself on the left-hand 
side of the equals sign, and operations involving x appear on the right-hand side. Then 
manipulate your answer to Problem 9 to get the same equation.
Practice Exercises  319

320
Three-space can contain an infinite variety of surfaces, all of which can be defined as equa-
tions in terms of three variables. In this chapter, we’ll examine a few basic surfaces and their 
equations in Cartesian three-space.
Planes
An intuitive way to express the equation for a plane in Cartesian xyz space is to define the 
direction of a vector normal (perpendicular) to the plane, and then to identify the coordinates 
of a point in the plane. We don’t have to know the magnitude of the vector, and the point in 
the plane doesn’t have to be the one where the vector originates.
General equation of plane
Figure 17-1 shows a plane W in Cartesian three-space, a point P = (x0,y0,z0) in the plane W,
and a vector (a,b,c) = ai + bj + ck that’s normal to plane W. The vector (a,b,c) originates at a 
point Q that differs from P, and which is also located away from the coordinate origin. The 
values x = a, y = b, and z = c for the vector are nevertheless based on the vector’s standard form, 
as if it originated at (0,0,0). The point and the vector give us enough information to uniquely 
define the plane and write its equation in standard form as
a(x −x0) + b(y −y0) + c(z −z0) = 0
This equation can also be written as
ax + by + cz + d = 0
where d is a stand-alone constant. With a little algebra, we can work out its value in terms of 
the other constants and coefficients as
d = −ax0 −by0 −cz0
CHAPTER
17
Surfaces in Three-Space

Plotting a plane
When we want to construct a plane in Cartesian xyz space based on its equation, we can do it 
by figuring out the coordinates of points where the plane crosses each of the three coordinate 
axes. These points are the x-intercept, the y-intercept, and the z-intercept. When we plot these 
intercept points on the axes, we can envision the position and orientation of the plane.
There’s a potential “hangup” with this scheme for plane-graphing. Not all planes cross all 
three axes in Cartesian xyz-space. If a plane is parallel to one of the axes, then it does not cross 
that axis, although must cross at least one of the other two. If a plane is parallel to the plane 
formed by two coordinate axes, then that plane crosses only the axis with respect to which it 
is not parallel.
An example
Suppose that a plane contains the point (3,−6,2), and the standard form of a vector normal to 
the plane is 4i + 3j + 2k. Let’s find the plane’s equation in the standard form given above. To 
begin, we know that the vector
4i + 3j + 2k
is equivalent to the ordered triple
(a,b,c) = (4,3,2)
z
+
y
+
x
y
x
+
Plane
W
W
(x0, y0 , z0)
in plane
Point P
(a, b, c)
normal to W
Vector
at point Q
Point Q
in plane W
Figure 17-1  A plane W can be uniquely defined on the basis of a point 
P in the plane and a vector (a,b,c) normal to the plane.
Planes  321

322  Surfaces in Three-Space
We’ve been told that
(x0,y0,z0) = (3,−6,2)
and that this point lies in the plane. The general formula for the plane is
a(x −x0) + b(y −y0) + c(z −z0) = 0
Plugging in the known values for a, b, c, x0, y0, and z0, we get
4(x − 3) + 3[y − (−6)] + 2(z − 2) = 0
which simplifies to
4x + 3y + 2z + 2 = 0
Are you confused?
The standard-form equation of a plane in xyz space looks like an extrapolation of the standard-
form equation of a straight line in the xy plane. This can confuse some people. Don’t let it baffle 
you! An equation of the form
ax + by + cz + d = 0
where a, b, c, and d are constants represents a plane, not a line. In Chap. 18, you’ll learn how to 
describe straight lines in Cartesian xyz space.
Here’s a challenge!
Draw a graph of the plane represented by the following equation:
−2x − 4y + 3z − 12 = 0
Solution
Let’s work out the graph by finding the coordinate-axis intercepts. The x-intercept, or the point 
where the plane intersects the x axis, can be found by setting y = 0 and z = 0, and then solving the 
resultant equation for x. Let’s call this point P. We have
−2x − 4 × 0 + 3 × 0 − 12 = 0
Solving step-by-step, we get
−2x − 12 = 0
−2x = 12
x = 12/(−2) = −6
Therefore
P = (−6,0,0)

+y
+x
–z
+z
–x
–y
P = (–6, 0, 0)
Q = (0, –3, 0)
R = (0, 0, 4)
Each axis division
is 1 unit
Figure 17-2  Here’s the graph of a plane, based on the locations 
of the three axis intercept points P, Q, and R.
The y-intercept, or the point where the plane intersects the y axis, can be found by setting x = 0 
and z = 0, and then solving the resultant equation for y. Let’s call this point Q. We have
−2 × 0 − 4y + 3 × 0 − 12 = 0
Solving, we get
−4y − 12 = 0
− 4y = 12
y = 12/(−4) = −3
Therefore
Q = (0,−3,0)
The z-intercept, or the point where the plane intersects the z axis, can be found by setting x = 0 
and y = 0, and then solving the resultant equation for z. Let’s call this point R. We have
−2 × 0 − 4 × 0 + 3z − 12 = 0
Solving, we get
3z − 12 = 0
3z = 12
z = 12/3 = 4
Therefore
R = (0,0,4)
These three points are shown in Fig. 17-2. We can now envision the plane because, as we recall 
from our courses in spatial geometry, a plane in three dimensions can be uniquely defined on the 
basis of three points.
Planes  323

324  Surfaces in Three-Space
Spheres
A spherical surface is defined as the set of all points that lie at a fixed distance from a known 
central point in three dimensions. When we recall the formula for the distance between a 
point and the origin, it’s easy to work out equations for spheres in Cartesian xyz space.
Center at the origin
Imagine a sphere whose center lies at the origin (0,0,0), as shown in Fig. 17-3. Any point on 
the sphere’s surface is at the same distance from the origin as any other point on the sphere’s 
surface. Suppose that P is one such point whose coordinates are given by
P = (xp,yp,zp)
In Chap. 7, we learned that the distance r of the point P from the origin in Cartesian xyz
space is
r = (xp
2 + yp
2 + zp
2)1/2
We can square both sides of the above equation to get
r2 = xp
2 + yp
2 + zp
2
+x
+y
+z
–x
–y
Radius = r
Center of
sphere is at
(0, 0, 0)
Figure 17-3  A sphere of radius r in Cartesian xyz space, centered 
at the origin. All points on the sphere’s surface are 
at distance r from the center point (0,0,0).

Transposing the left- and right-hand sides, we have
xp
2 + yp
2 + zp
2 = r2
Every point on the sphere’s surface is the same distance from the origin as P, so we can general-
ize the above equation to get
x2 + y2 + z2 = r2
which defines the set of all points in three dimensions that lie at a fixed distance r from the 
origin. That’s all there is to it! We’ve found the standard-form equation for a sphere of radius r,
centered at the origin in Cartesian xyz space.
Center away from the origin
Consider a sphere whose center is somewhere other than the origin in Cartesian xyz space. 
Suppose that the coordinates of the center point are (x0,y0,z0), as shown in Fig. 17-4. Whatever 
point P that we choose on the sphere’s surface, the distance between P and the center is equal 
to the sphere’s radius r. Adapting the distance-between-points formula for Cartesian xyz space 
from Chap. 7, we get
r = [(xp −x0)2 + (yp −y0)2 + (zp −z0)2]1/2
Radius = r
+x
+y
+z
–x
–y
–z
(x0, y0, z0)
Center of
sphere is at
Figure 17-4  A sphere of radius r in Cartesian xyz space, centered 
away from the origin. All points on the sphere’s surface 
are at distance r from the center point (x0,y0,z0).
Spheres  325

326  Surfaces in Three-Space
Squaring both sides of this equation and then transposing the left- and right-hand sides, we 
obtain
(xp −x0)2 + (yp −y0)2 + (zp −z0)2 = r2
Every point on the sphere’s surface is the same distance from P as (x0,y0,z0), so we can general-
ize to get
(x −x0)2 + (y −y0)2 + (z −z0)2 = r2
This is the standard-form equation for a sphere of radius r, centered at the point (x0,y0,z0) in 
Cartesian xyz space.
An example
Suppose we have a sphere whose center is at the origin, and whose radius is 7 units. If we let 
r = 7 in the general equation for a sphere centered at the origin, then we have
x2 + y2 + z2 = 72
which can be simplified to
x2 + y2 + z2 = 49
Another example
Consider a sphere centered at the point (−2,4,−1) with a radius of 5 units in Cartesian xyz
space. We can let
  x0 = −2
y0 = 4
  z0 = −1
 r = 5
in the general equation for a sphere centered at a point other than the origin. When we plug 
in the numbers, we obtain
[x − (−2)]2 + (y − 4)2 + [z − (−1)]2 = 52
which simplifies to
(x + 2)2 + (y − 4)2 + (z + 1)2 = 25

Are you confused?
The radius of a sphere is usually defined as a positive real number. If we define the radius of a 
particular sphere as a negative real number, we get the same equation as we would if we defined 
the radius as the absolute value of that number. That’s because we square the radius when we work 
out the formula. For example, if we have a sphere centered at the origin with a radius of 4 units, 
then its equation is
x2 + y2 + z2 = 42
which simplifies to
x2 + y2 + z2 = 16
If we find a companion “antisphere” centered at the origin with radius −4 units, then its equation is
x2 + y2 + z2 = (−4)2
which also simplifies to
x2 + y2 + z2 = 16
In physics and engineering, it’s possible to come up with spheres having negative radii, as well as 
negative dimensions for other physical objects. These results are usually mere artifacts of the cal-
culation process, and don’t have any significance in the real world. However, if you ever encounter 
a sphere whose radius is represented by an imaginary number such as j4, then you have good rea-
son to be confused until you know what sort of object or phenomenon the equation describes!
Here’s a challenge!
Suppose we’re told that the following equation represents a sphere in Cartesian xyz space:
x2 − 6x + y2 − 2y + z2 + 4z = 86
We’re also informed that the sphere has a radius of 10 units. What are the coordinates of the center 
of the sphere?
Solution
To solve this problem, we need some intuition. We know that the radius r of the sphere is 10 
units. Therefore, r2 = 100. If we add 14 to both sides of the original equation, we get r2 on the 
right-hand side:
x2 − 6x + y2 − 2y + z2 + 4z + 14 = 100
We can split the stand-alone constant 14 into the sum of 9, 1, and 4, getting
x2 − 6x + y2 − 2y + z2 + 4z + 9 + 1 + 4 = 100
Spheres  327

328  Surfaces in Three-Space
Rearranging the addends on the left-hand side produces the following equation:
x2 − 6x + 9 + y2 − 2y + 1 + z2 + 4z + 4 = 100
When we group the terms on the left-hand side by threes, we obtain
(x2 − 6x + 9) + (y2 − 2y + 1) + (z2 + 4z + 4) = 100
This is a sum of three perfect squares! Factoring them individually gives us
(x − 3)2 + (y − 1)2 + (z + 2)2 = 100
The coordinates of the center point are therefore
x0 = 3
y0 = 1
  z0 = −2
Expressed as an ordered triple, it’s (3,1,−2).
Distorted Spheres
Spheres can be made “out of the round” by increasing or decreasing the axial radii in the x, y,
and z directions individually.
Alternative equation for a sphere centered at the origin
Once again, consider the general equation of a perfect sphere centered at the origin. That 
equation, in standard form, is
x2 + y2 + z2 = r2
where r is the radius. If we divide through by r2, we get
x2/r2 + y2/r2 + z2/r2 = 1
This equation tells us that the radius is always the same, whether we measure it in the direction 
of the x axis, y axis, or z axis. To emphasize the fact that we can, if desired, change any of all of 
these axial radii, let’s rewrite the above equation as
x2/a2 + y2/b2 + z2/c2 = 1
where a, b, and c are positive real numbers representing the radii along the x, y, and z axes, 
respectively. In the case of a perfect sphere, we have
a = b = c
If these three positive real-number constants a, b, and c are not all the same, then we have a 
distorted sphere.

Oblate sphere centered at the origin
Suppose that we take a perfect sphere and then shorten one of the three axial radii. This pro-
cess gives us an object called an oblate sphere. It’s flattened, like a soft rubber ball when pressed 
between our hands. Figure 17-5 shows an example. This is what we get if we take the sphere 
from Fig. 17-3 and reduce the axial radius b (the one that goes along the y axis), while leaving 
the axial radii a and c unchanged. The center of the object is still at the origin, but we can no 
longer say that all the points on its surface are equidistant from the origin. The general equation 
for an oblate sphere centered at the origin is
 
x2/a2 + y2/b2 + z2/c2 = 1
where a is the x-axial radius, b is the y-axial radius, c is the z-axial radius, and exactly one of 
the following relationships holds true among them:
a < b = c
b < a = c
 c < a = b
Alternative equation for a sphere centered away from the origin
Earlier in this chapter, we learned that the general equation of a sphere centered at some point 
other than the origin in Cartesian xyz space is
(x −x0)2 + (y −y0)2 + (z −z0)2 = r2
+x
+y
+z
–x
–y
–z
Radius in
x direction
= a
Radius in
y direction
= b
Radius in
z direction
= c
(0, 0, 0)
Center is at
Figure 17-5  An oblate sphere in Cartesian xyz space, centered at 
the origin.
Distorted Spheres  329

330  Surfaces in Three-Space
where r is the radius, and (x0,y0,z0) are the coordinates of the center. Dividing through by r2,
we obtain
(x −x0)2/r2 + (y −y0)2/r2 + (z −z0)2/r2 = 1
As we did with the sphere centered at the origin, we can rewrite this equation, getting
(x −x0)2/a2 + (y −y0)2/b2 + (z −z0)2/c2 = 1
where a, b, and c are the radii parallel to the x, y, and z axes, respectively. As before, with a 
perfect sphere, we have
a = b = c
If a, b, and c are not all the same, then the sphere is distorted.
Oblate sphere centered away from the origin
If we take a sphere that’s centered at (x0,y0,z0) and shorten one of the axial radii, we get an 
oblate sphere defined by the general equation
(x −x0)2/a2 + (y −y0)2/b2 + (z −z0)2/c2 = 1
where exactly one of the following is true:
 
a < b = c
 
b < a = c
 
c < a = b
Figure 17-6 should give you a general idea of what happens in a case like this. Imagine a sphere 
centered at (x0,y0,z0) that has been squashed in the direction defined by a line parallel to the y axis.
Ellipsoid centered at the origin
Again, imagine that we have a perfect sphere centered at the origin in Cartesian xyz space. Let’s 
lengthen one of the axial radii while leaving the other two unchanged. This stretching process 
produces an ellipsoid. It’s elongated, like a football with blunted ends. Figure 17-7 shows an 
example. Imagine that we take the sphere from Fig. 17-3 and then stretch it in the z direction. 
The general equation for an ellipsoid centered at the origin is
x2/a2 + y2/b2 + z2/c2 = 1
where a is the x-axial radius, b is the y-axial radius, c is the z-axial radius, and exactly one of 
the following relationships is true:
a > b = c
b > a = c
 c > a = b

+x
+y
+z
–x
–y
–z
Radius in
x direction
= a
Radius in
y direction
= b
Radius in
z direction
= c
(x0, y0, z0)
Center is at
Figure 17-6  An oblate sphere in Cartesian xyz space, centered 
at (x0,y0,z0).
+x
+y
+z
–x
–y
–z
Radius in
x direction
= a
Radius in
y direction
= b
Radius in
z direction
= c
(0, 0, 0)
Center is at
Figure 17-7  An ellipsoid in Cartesian xyz space, centered at the 
origin.
Distorted Spheres  331

332  Surfaces in Three-Space
Ellipsoid centered away from the origin
Consider a sphere centered at (x0,y0,z0). If we make one of the axial radii longer while leaving 
the other two unchanged, we get an ellipsoid defined by the general equation
(x −x0)2/a2 + (y −y0)2/b2 + (z −z0)2/c2 = 1
where exactly one of the following is true:
 
a > b = c
 
b > a = c
 
c > a = b
Figure 17-8 portrays a situation in which a sphere centered at (x0,y0,z0) has been stretched 
along a line parallel to the z axis to obtain an ellipsoid.
Oblate ellipsoid centered at the origin
One more time, imagine a sphere centered at the origin. We start out with all three axial radii 
equal in measure. Then we lengthen one of them, shorten another, and leave the third one 
unchanged. This process gives us an oblate ellipsoid. Figure 17-9 shows an example where we 
take the sphere from Fig. 17-3, squash the radius in the y direction, stretch the radius in the 
z direction, and leave the radius unchanged in the x direction. The general equation for an 
oblate ellipsoid centered at the origin is
x2/a2 + y2/b2 + z2/c2 = 1
Radius in
y direction
= b
Radius in
z direction
= c
+x
+y
+z
–x
–y
–z
Radius in
x direction
= a
(x0, y0, z0)
Center is at
Figure 17-8  An ellipsoid in Cartesian xyz space, centered at 
(x0,y0,z0).

where a is the x-axial radius, b is the y-axial radius, c is the z-axial radius, and all of the fol-
lowing are true:
 a ≠b
b ≠c
a ≠c
Oblate ellipsoid centered away from the origin
Finally, imagine a sphere that’s centered at (x0,y0,z0). If we lengthen one of the axial radii, 
shorten another, and leave the third one unchanged, we get an oblate ellipsoid defined by
(x −x0)2/a2 + (y −y0)2/b2 + (z −z0)2/c2 = 1
where all of the following are true:
 
a ≠b
 
b ≠c
 
a ≠c
Figure 17-10 shows an example of what happens when we move the center of the oblate ellip-
soid from Fig. 17-9 away from the origin.
+x
+y
+z
–x
–y
Radius in
x direction
= a
Radius in
y direction
= b
Radius in
z direction
= c
(0, 0, 0)
Center is at
Figure 17-9  An oblate ellipsoid in Cartesian xyz space, centered 
at the origin.
Distorted Spheres  333

334  Surfaces in Three-Space
An example
Suppose that the coordinates of the center of a certain oblate sphere in Cartesian xyz space are 
(1,2,3). The axial radius in the x direction is 4, the axial radius in the y direction is 4, and the 
axial radius in the z direction is 2. The general equation is
(x −x0)2/a2 + (y −y0)2/b2 + (z −z0)2/c2 = 1
where (x0,y0,z0) are the coordinates of the center, a is the is the axial radius in the x direction, b
is the axial radius in the y direction, and c is the axial radius in the z direction. We know that
(x0,y0,z0) = (1,2,3)
   a = 4
   b = 4
   c = 2
Plugging these values into the general equation, we conclude that our oblate sphere can be 
represented by the following equation:
(x − 1)2/42 + (y − 2)2/42 + (z − 3)2/22 = 1
which simplifies to
(x − 1)2/16 + (y − 2)2/16 + (z − 3)2/4 = 1
+x
+y
+z
–x
–y
–z
Radius in
x direction
= a
Radius in
y direction
= b
Radius in
z direction
= c
(x0, y0, z0)
Center is at
Figure 17-10  An oblate ellipsoid in Cartesian xyz space, 
centered at (x0,y0,z0).

Another example
The coordinates of the center of an ellipsoid are (−3,−2,−6). The axial radius in the x direc-
tion is 3, the axial radius in the y direction is 7, and the axial radius in the z direction is 3. The 
general equation is
(x −x0)2/a2 + (y −y0)2/b2 + (z −z0)2/c2 = 1
This time, we have
    (x0,y0,z0) = (−3,−2,−6)
a = 3
b = 7
 c = 3
Plugging these values into the general equation, we obtain
[x − (−3)]2/32 + [y − (−2)]2/72 + [z − (−6)]2/32 = 1
which simplifies to
(x + 3)2/9 + (y + 2)2/49 + (z + 6)2/9 = 1
Still another example
The coordinates of the center of an oblate ellipsoid are (0,−3,11). The axial radius in the x
direction is 5, the axial radius in the y direction is 8, and the axial radius in the z direction is 1. 
The general equation is
(x −x0)2/a2 + (y −y0)2/b2 + (z −z0)2/c2 = 1
In this case, we have
  (x0,y0,z0) = (0,−3,11)
a = 5
b = 8
 c = 1
Plugging these values into the general equation gives us
[x − 0]2/52 + [y − (−3)]2/82 + (z − 11)2/12 = 1
which simplifies to
x2/25 + (y + 3)2/64 + (z − 11)2 = 1
Distorted Spheres  335

336  Surfaces in Three-Space
Are you astute?
So far, we’ve described various surfaces by adding squared binomials to each other. You have every 
right to ask, “What will happen if we subtract any of the squared binomials in equations like 
these?” We’ll do that shortly, and you’ll see a few examples of what can take place. When we add 
squared binomials, the graphs always turn out to be spheres, oblate spheres, ellipsoids, or oblate 
ellipsoids in Cartesian xyz space. These are closed surfaces. They’re “air-tight.” If we subtract one 
or more of the squared binomials, we get open surfaces that “can’t hold air.” Such surfaces can take 
diverse, interesting forms.
Here’s a challenge!
Consider a distorted sphere represented by the following equation:
12x2 + 72x + 20y2 − 80y + 15z2 − 30z = −143
What are the coordinates of the center? What are the axial radii? Is the object an oblate sphere, an 
ellipsoid, or an oblate ellipsoid?
Solution
This problem requires a lot of insight to solve! Let’s begin by adding 203 to each side of the equa-
tion to obtain
12x2 + 72x + 20y2 − 80y + 15z2 − 30z + 203 = 60
The number we’ve added, 203, happens to be the sum of 108, 80, and 15. Let’s add these three 
numbers into the above equation just after the terms 72x, 80y, and −30z, respectively. The equation 
then becomes
12x2 + 72x + 108 + 20y2 − 80y + 80 + 15z2 − 30z + 15 = 60
Grouping the addends on the left-hand side by threes gives us
(12x2 + 72x + 108) + (20y2 − 80y + 80) + (15z2 − 30z + 15) = 60
which is equivalent to
12(x2 + 6x + 9) + 20(y2 − 4y + 4) + 15(z2 − 2z + 1) = 60
The three trinomials factor into perfect squares, so we can further morph the equation to obtain
12(x + 3)2 + 20(y − 2)2 + 15(z − 1)2 = 60
Dividing through by 60, we get
(x + 3)2/5 + (y − 2)2/3 + (z − 1)2/4 = 1

We recall that general formula for a distorted sphere in Cartesian xyz space is
(x −x0)2/a2 + (y −y0)2/b2 + (z −z0)2/c2 = 1
where (x0,y0,z0) are the coordinates of the center, a is the axial radius in the x direction, b is the axial 
radius in the y direction, and c is the axial radius in the z direction. In this situation, we have
(x0,y0,z0) = (−3,2,1)
   a = 51/2
   b = 31/2
          c = 41/2 = 2
Our object is an oblate ellipsoid centered at (−3,2,1). The radius in the x direction is 51/2. The radius 
in the y direction is 31/2. The radius in the z direction is 2.
Other Surfaces
Let’s look at three general objects that arise in Cartesian xyz space from equations with sums 
and differences of terms containing x2, y2, and z2.
Hyperboloid of one sheet
Figure 17-11 shows a generic example of a hyperboloid of one sheet. In this context, the term sheet
refers to an unbroken surface. We get this type of object when we graph an equation of the form
x2/a2 + y2/b2 −z2/c2 = 1
where a, b, and c are positive real-number constants. This equation is like the one for a dis-
torted sphere, except that one of the plus signs has been replaced by a minus sign. That sign 
change makes a huge difference! Instead of a closed surface centered at the origin, we get an 
infinitely tall, pinched cylinder whose axis lies along the coordinate z axis, and whose center 
coincides with the origin. The dimensions and shape of the hyperboloid depend on the values 
of a, b, and c. The perpendicular cross sections are always circles or ellipses.
If we move the minus sign so that it’s in front of the term containing y2 instead of the term 
containing z2, we get the general equation
x2/a2 −y2/b2 + z2/c2 = 1
Again, we get a hyperboloid of one sheet, but its axis is along the coordinate y axis, and its 
center is at the origin. If we move the minus sign one more place to the left, putting it in front 
of the term containing x2, the general equation becomes
−x2/a2 + y2/b2 + z2/c2 = 1
This is the general form of the equation for a hyperboloid of one sheet whose axis coincides 
with the coordinate x axis, and whose center is at the origin.
Other Surfaces  337

338  Surfaces in Three-Space
+x
+y
+z
–x
–y
–z
Figure 17-11  A hyperboloid of one sheet in Cartesian xyz space, 
centered at the origin.
Are you astute?
Figure 17-11 shows a perspective on Cartesian xyz space that we haven’t seen before. We’re looking 
“down” on the yz plane from somewhere near the positive x axis. Nevertheless, the axes are correctly 
oriented with respect to each other, as you can verify by referring back to Chap. 7. Let’s stay with this 
axis orientation as we look at the next couple of objects.
Hyperboloid of two sheets
Figure 17-12 shows a hyperboloid of two sheets, which is the graph in Cartesian xyz space of an 
equation having the form
−x2/a2 + y2/b2 −z2/c2 = 1
where a, b, and c are positive real-number constants. Here, we have two surfaces that resemble 
bowls facing in opposite directions. In theory, the bowls extend infinitely toward the left and 
the right in this illustration. Both surfaces share a common straight-line axis that coincides 
with the coordinate y axis, and the two sheets are exact mirror images of each other. The center 
of the entire hyperboloid is at the origin. The contours of the surfaces depend on the values 
of a, b, and c.

If we make the term containing x2 positive instead of the term containing y2, we get the 
general equation
x2/a2 −y2/b2 −z2/c2 = 1
which produces a hyperboloid of two sheets whose axis lies along the coordinate x axis, and 
whose center is at the origin. If we move the plus sign so it’s in front of the term containing 
z2, the general equation becomes
−x2/a2 −y2/b2 + z2/c2 = 1
This maneuver gives us a hyperboloid of two sheets whose axis lies along the coordinate z axis, 
and whose center is at the origin.
Elliptic cone
Figure 17-13 shows an elliptic cone. It’s what we get when we graph an equation of the form
x2/a2 + y2/b2 −z2/c2 = 0
where a, b, and c are positive real-number constants. The perpendicular cross sections of the 
cone are always circles or ellipses. The cone’s axis coincides with the coordinate z axis, and the 
cone’s vertex coincides with the origin. The flare angles, as well as the eccentricity of the cross-
sectional ellipses, depend on the values of a, b, and c.
+x
+y
+z
–y
–z
–x
Figure 17-12  A hyperboloid of two sheets in Cartesian xyz
space, centered at the origin.
Other Surfaces  339

340  Surfaces in Three-Space
If we move the minus sign so it’s in front of the term containing y2, we get the general 
equation
x2/a2 −y2/b2 + z2/c2 = 0
whose graph is an elliptic cone with the axis along the coordinate y axis, and whose center 
is at the origin. If we move the minus sign so that it’s in front of the term containing x2, the 
general equation becomes
−x2/a2 + y2/b2 + z2/c2 = 0
and the graph becomes an elliptic cone whose axis lies along the coordinate x axis, and whose 
center is at the origin.
An example
Consider the object in Cartesian xyz space represented by
36x2 − 16y2 + 36z2 = 0
We can divide through by 144 to obtain
x2/4 −y2/9 + z2/4 = 0
This is the equation for an elliptic cone whose vertex is at the origin, and whose axis coincides 
with the coordinate y axis.
+x
+y
+z
–x
–y
–z
Figure 17-13  An elliptic cone in Cartesian xyz space, centered at 
the origin.

Another example
Consider the object in Cartesian xyz space represented by
−x2 + y2 + z2 = −7
When we divide through by −7, we get
−x2/(−7) + y2/(−7) + z2/(−7) = 1
which simplifies to
x2/7 −y2/7 −z2/7 = 1
This equation describes a hyperboloid of two sheets whose center is at the origin, and whose 
axis lies along the coordinate x axis.
Still another example
Consider the object in Cartesian xyz space represented by
15x2 + 10y2 = 6z2 + 30
We can subtract 6z2 from each side, getting
15x2 + 10y2 − 6z2 = 30
Dividing through by 30 gives us
x2/2 + y2/3 −z2/5 = 1
This is the equation for a hyperboloid of one sheet whose center is at the origin, and whose 
axis lies along the coordinate z axis.
Are you confused?
It’s reasonable to ask, “What if the center of a hyperboloid, or the vertex of an elliptic cone, lies 
somewhere other than the origin, say at (x0,y0,z0)? What happens to the equation in that case?” If 
you’re willing to exercise your mathematical intuition, you can probably guess the answer. Make 
the following substitutions in the equation:
• Replace every occurrence of x with x −x0
• Replace every occurrence of y with y −y0
• Replace every occurrence of z with z −z0
Consider a hyperboloid of two sheets such as the one in Fig. 17-12. The straight-line axis of the 
“bowls” lies along the coordinate y axis, and the center of the entire object is at the origin. If a = 2, 
b = 3, and c = 4, the equation is
−x2/22 + y2/32 −z2/42 = 1
Other Surfaces  341

342  Surfaces in Three-Space
which simplifies to
−x2/4 + y2/9 −z2/16 = 1
Now suppose that you change the equation to
−(x − 7)2/4 + (y + 1)2/9 − (z − 5)2/16 = 1
You’ve moved the entire hyperboloid, without altering its overall shape or orientation. It has a 
new center whose coordinates are (7,−1,5) instead of (0,0,0). The straight-line axis of the two 
bowls is parallel to, but no longer coincides with, the coordinate y axis. If you want to disguise 
this equation, you can multiply it through by the product of the denominators on the left-hand side, 
getting
−144(x − 7)2 + 64(y + 1)2 − 36(z − 5)2 = 576
Here’s a challenge!
Consider the object in Cartesian xyz space represented by
3x2 + 6x − 4y2 − 16y + 2z2 − 4z = 35
What do we get when we graph this equation in Cartesian xyz space? Where is the center of the 
object? How is its axis oriented?
Solution
As with some of the examples we’ve seen, we need lot of intuition to solve this problem. Let’s 
subtract 11 from both sides of the equation. That gives us
3x2 + 6x − 4y2 − 16y + 2z2 − 4z − 11 = 24
When we subtract 11, we in effect add −11, which happens to be the sum of 3, −16, and 2. That 
means we can rewrite the above equation as
3x2 + 6x − 4y2 − 16y + 2z2 − 4z + 3 − 16 + 2 = 24
which can be rearranged to get
3x2 + 6x + 3 − 4y2 − 16y − 16 + 2z2 − 4z + 2 = 24
Grouping the terms on the left-hand side into trinomials, and paying special attention to the signs 
associated with the variable y as we group the second three terms, we get
(3x2 + 6x + 3) − (4y2 + 16y + 16) + (2z2 − 4z + 2) = 24
which morphs to
3(x2 + 2x + 1) − 4(y2 + 4y + 4) + 2(z2 − 2z + 1) = 24

and further to
3(x + 1)2 − 4(y + 2)2 + 2(z − 1)2 = 24
Dividing through by 24, we get
(x + 1)2/8 − (y + 2)2/6 + (z − 1)2/12 = 1
This is the equation of a hyperboloid of one sheet whose center is at (−1,−2,1), and whose axis is ori-
ented along a line parallel to the coordinate y axis.
Practice Exercises
This is an open-book quiz. You may (and should) refer to the text as you solve these problems. 
Don’t hurry! You’ll find worked-out answers in App. B. The solutions in the appendix may not 
represent the only way a problem can be figured out. If you think you can solve a particular 
problem in a quicker or better way than you see there, by all means try it!
 1. Suppose that a plane contains the point (0,0,0), and the standard form of a vector 
normal to the plane is −4i + 4j − 4k. Find the plane’s equation in standard form.
 2. Suppose that a plane contains the point (4,5,6), and the standard form of a vector 
normal to the plane is −2i + 0j + 0k. Find the plane’s equation in standard form.
 3. Consider a sphere whose equation is
x2 + 2x + 1 + y2 − 2y + 1 + z2 + 8z + 16 = 64
 
 What are the coordinates of the center of this sphere? What’s its radius?
 4. What’s the equation of a sphere centered at the point (5,7,−3) and whose radius is equal 
to the positive square root of 23?
 5. Consider the equation
8(x − 1)2 + 8(y + 2)2 + 6(z + 7)2 = 24
 
 What sort of object does this equation describe? Does the object have a center? If so, 
what are the coordinates of the center point? Does the object have axial radii? If so, what 
are they?
 6. Consider the equation
400(x + 2)2 + 225(y − 4)2 + 144z2 − 3\600 = 0
 
 What sort of object does this equation describe? Does the object have a center? If so, 
what are the coordinates of the center point? Does the object have axial radii? If so, what 
are they?
Practice Exercises  343

344  Surfaces in Three-Space
 7. Consider a surface whose equation is
x2 + 2x + 1 + y2 − 2y + 1 −z2 + 6z − 9 = 36
 
 What sort of object is this? What are the coordinates of the center? How is the axis 
oriented?
 8. Write down a generalized equation for an elliptic cone whose axis is parallel to the 
coordinate y axis, and whose vertex is at (−2,3,4).
 9. Suppose we slice the elliptic cone described in Problem 8 straight through with the 
coordinate xz plane. The cone’s surface intersects the xz plane in a curve. Derive a 
generalized equation of that curve in the variables x and z. What sort of curve is it? 
Here’s a hint: At every point in the xz plane, y = 0.
 10. Suppose we slice the elliptic cone described in Problem 8 straight through with the 
coordinate xy plane. The cone’s surface intersects the xy plane in a curve. Derive a 
generalized equation of that curve in the variables x and y. What sort of curve is it? 
Here’s a hint: At every point in the xy plane, z = 0.

In Chap. 16, we learned how parametric equations can define curves that are difficult to por-
tray as conventional relations. “Parametric power” becomes more apparent when we graduate 
to three dimensions.
Straight Lines
Finding an equation for a straight line in Cartesian three-space is harder than it is in the 
Cartesian plane. The extra dimension makes expressing the line’s location and orientation 
more complicated. There are at least two ways we can do it: the symmetric method and the 
parametric method.
Symmetric method
A straight line in Cartesian xyz space can be represented by a three-part symmetric-form equa-
tion. Suppose that (x0,y0,z0) are the coordinates of a known point on the line, and a, b, and c
are nonzero real-number constants. Given this information, we can represent the line as
(x −x0)/a = (y −y0)/b = (z −z0)/c
If a = 0 or b = 0 or c = 0, then we get a zero denominator somewhere, and the system becomes 
meaningless.
Direction numbers
In the symmetric-form equation of a straight line, the constants a, b, and c are known as the 
direction numbers. Imagine a vector m whose originating point is at the origin (0,0,0) and 
whose terminating point has coordinates (a,b,c). Under these circumstances, the vector m
either lies right along, or is parallel to, the line denoted by the symmetric-form equation. 
CHAPTER 
18
Lines and Curves in Three-Space
345

(In three-space, a vector m and a straight line L are parallel if and only if the line containing 
m occupies the same plane as L but does not intersect L.) We have
m = ai + bj + ck
where m is the three-dimensional equivalent of the slope of a line in the Cartesian plane. 
Figure 18-1 shows a generic example.
Parametric method
Given any particular line L in Cartesian xyz space, we can find infinitely many vectors to play 
the role of the direction-defining vector m. If t is a nonzero real number, then any vector
tm = (ta,tb,tc) = tai + tbj + tck
works just as well as
m = ai + bj + ck
for the purpose of defining the direction of L, so we have an alternative way to describe a 
straight line using the following equations:
x = x0 + at
y = y0 + bt
z = z0 + ct
z
z
+
y
+
x
y
x
+
L
m = (a, b, c)
P
(x0, y0, z0)
=
Line L
and vector m
are parallel
Figure 18-1  We can uniquely define a line L in Cartesian xyz
space on the basis of a point P on L and a vector 
m = (a,b,c) parallel to L.
346  Lines and Curves in Three-Space

The variable t behaves as a “master controller” for the variables x, y, and z, so the above system 
is a set of parametric equations for a straight line in Cartesian xyz space. To completely define 
a straight, infinitely long line this way, we must let t vary throughout the entire set of real 
numbers, including t = 0 to “fill the hole” at the point (x0,y0,z0).
An example
Let’s find the symmetric-form equation for the line L shown in Fig. 18-2. As indicated in the 
drawing, L passes through the point
P = (−5,−4,3)
and is parallel to the vector
m = 3i + 5j − 2k
The direction numbers of L are the coefficients of the vector m, so we have
a = 3
b = 5
   c = −2
–z
+z
+y
–x
–y
x
+
(–5, –4, 3)
L
m = 3i + 5j – 2k
P =
Each axis
division
equals 1 unit
Line L
and vector m
are parallel
Figure 18-2  What are the symmetric and parametric equations for line L?
Straight Lines  347

We are given a point P on the line L with the coordinates
  x0 = −5
   y0 = −4
z0 = 3
The general symmetric-form equation for a line in Cartesian xyz space is
(x −x0)/a = (y −y0)/b = (z −z0)/c
When we plug in the known values, we get the three-part equation
[x − (−5)]/3 = [y − (−4)]/5 = (z − 3)/(−2)
which simplifies to
(x + 5)/3 = (y + 4)/5 = (z − 3)/(−2)
Another example
Let’s find a set of parametric equations for the line L shown in Fig. 18-2. In this case, our work 
is easy. We can take the values of x0, y0, z0, a, b, and c that we already know, and plug them into 
the generalized set of parametric equations
 x = x0 + at
 y = y0 + bt
z = z0 + ct
The results are
  x = −5 + 3t
   y = −4 + 5t
z = 3 − 2t
Are you confused?
For any particular line in Cartesian xyz space, there are infinitely many valid ordered triples that 
can represent the direction numbers. If a line has the direction numbers (2,3,4), then we can 
multiply all three entries by a real number other than 0 or 1, and we’ll get another valid ordered 
triple of direction numbers. For example, all of the following ordered triples represent the same 
line orientation as (2,3,4):
(4,6,8)
(−2,−3,−4)
(20,30,40)
(−20,−30,−40)
(2p,3p,4p )
(−2p,−3p,−4p )
348  Lines and Curves in Three-Space

“That’s interesting,” you say, “but which direction numbers are the best?” In theory, it doesn’t 
matter; any of the above ordered triples is as “good” as any other. Nevertheless, from an esthetic 
point of view, it’s a good idea to reduce an ordered triple of direction numbers so that the only 
common divisor is 1, and so that there is at most one negative element. According to that standard, 
(2,3,4) are the preferred direction numbers.
Here’s a challenge!
Consider the following three-way equation that represents a straight line in Cartesian xyz space:
3x − 6 = 4y − 12 = 6z − 24
Find a point on the line. Determine the preferred direction numbers. Based on that information, 
write down the direction vector as a sum of multiples of i, j, and k.
Solution
Before we think about the direction numbers or any specific point on the line, let’s try to get the 
equation into the standard symmetric form. We can multiply the left-hand part of the equation 
by 4/4, the middle part by 3/3, and the right-hand part by 2/2. That gives us
4(3x − 6)/4 = 3(4y − 12)/3 = 2(6z − 24)/2
Multiplying out the numerators, we get
(12x − 24)/4 = (12y − 36)/3 = (12z − 48)/2
We can factor out 12 from each of the numerators to obtain
12(x − 2)/4 = 12(y − 3)/3 = 12(z − 4)/2
Dividing the entire equation through by 12 gives us the standard symmetric form
(x − 2)/4 = (y − 3)/3 = (z − 4)/2
We remember that the generalized symmetric equation for a straight line in Cartesian xyz space is
(x −x0)/a = (y −y0)/b = (z −z0)/c
where (x0,y0,z0) are the coordinates of a specific point on the line, and a, b, and c are the direction 
numbers. Comparing the symmetric-form equation we derived with the generalized form, we can 
see that
x0 = 2
y0 = 3
z0 = 4
Straight Lines  349

350  Lines and Curves in Three-Space
This tells us that (2,3,4) is a point on the line. We can also see that
a = 4
b = 3
c = 2
so the line’s direction numbers are (4,3,2). We can write down a standard-form direction vector 
m from these numbers as
m = 4i + 3j + 2k
Parabolas
From algebra, we remember that a quadratic equation in a variable x can always be written in 
the form
a1x2 + a2x + a3 = 0
where a1, a2, and a3 are real-number constants called the coefficients, and a1 ≠ 0. If we replace 
the 0 on the right-hand side of this equation by another variable and then transpose the sides, 
we get an expression for a quadratic function. For example,
4x2 + 2x + 1 = 0
is a quadratic equation in x, but
y = 4x2 + 2x + 1
is a quadratic function in which the independent variable is x and the dependent variable is y.
If we give our function a name (f, for example), then we can denote it as
f (x) = 4x2 + 2x + 1
When we graph a quadratic function in Cartesian two-space, we always get a parabola that’s 
fairly easy to graph, because there’s only one plane to worry about (the xy plane, if our inde-
pendent variable is x and our dependent variable is y). In xyz space, the situation is more com-
plicated, because we have an extra variable. There are infinitely many different planes in which 
a parabola can lie, as well as infinitely many different shapes and orientations for a parabola in 
any particular plane. Let’s look at a few simple cases.
Hold x constant
Imagine a parameter t that’s allowed to wander all over the set of real numbers. Also imagine 
a generalized quadratic function f of this parameter, such that
f (t) = a1t2 + a2t + a3

where a1, a2, and a3 are real-number coefficients. Let’s go into Cartesian xyz space and restrict 
ourselves to a single plane in which the value of x is some real-number constant c. This plane is 
parallel to the yz plane, and it intersects the x axis at the point (c,0,0). Consider a parabola in 
the plane x = c whose axis is parallel to the y axis, as shown in Fig. 18-3. (The axis of a parabola
is a straight line in the same plane as the parabola, and on either side of which the parabola is 
symmetrical.) In this situation, the value of z tracks right along with the value of t, while the 
variable y follows f (t). Therefore
 
 x = c
 y = f (t) = a1t2 + a2t + a3
 
z = t
The above set of equations is a parametric description of our parabola. If we want to describe 
a parabola in the plane x = c whose axis is parallel the z axis instead of the y axis, then y follows 
t while z follows f (t), and we have
 
x = c
 
y = t
z = f (t) = a1t2 + a2t + a3
Figure 18-3  Parabola in a plane where x is held to a constant 
value c. The plane is perpendicular to the x axis, and 
intersects that axis at the point (c,0,0).
z
z
+
y
+
x
y
x
+
Parabola
in plane
x = c
x = c
(c, 0, 0)
Parabolas  351

352  Lines and Curves in Three-Space
Hold y constant
Now suppose that we restrict our movements to a plane in which the value of y is always equal 
to a constant c. The equation of the plane is y = c. It’s parallel to the xz plane, and it intersects 
the y axis at (0,c,0). Imagine a parabola in this plane whose axis is parallel to the z axis, as 
shown in Fig. 18-4. In this situation, x follows t while z follows f (t), and the curve can be 
described as
 
x = t
 
y = c
z = f (t) = a1t2 + a2t + a3
To describe a parabola in the plane y = c whose axis is parallel the x axis, we can let z follow t
and let x follow f (t), getting the system
x = f (t) = a1t2 + a2t + a3
 
y = c
 
z = t
Hold z constant
Finally, let’s confine our attention to a single plane in which the value of z is some real-number 
constant c. The plane z = c is parallel to the xy plane, and it intersects the z axis at (0,0,c).
z
z
+
y
+
x
y
x
+
y = c
Parabola
in plane
y = c
(0, c, 0)
Figure 18-4  Parabola in a plane where y is held to a constant 
value c. The plane is perpendicular to the y axis, and 
intersects that axis at the point (0,c,0).

Imagine a parabola in the plane z = c whose axis is parallel to the y axis as shown in Fig. 18-5. 
Here, x follows t while y follows f (t). We therefore have the parametric system
 
x = t
y = f (t) = a1t2 + a2t + a3
 
z = c
For a parabola in the plane z = c whose axis is parallel to the x axis instead of the y axis, the 
value of y follows t while the value of x follows f (t), so we have
x = f (t) = a1t2 + a2t + a3
 
y = t
 
z = c
An example
Consider a quadratic function in the plane x = 2. Suppose that the parametric equations are
 
x = 2
 
y = t
z = t2 − 3t + 2
z
z
+
y
+
x
y
x
+
Parabola
in plane
z = c
z = c
(0, 0, c)
Figure 18-5  Parabola in a plane where z is held to a constant 
value c. The plane is perpendicular to the z axis, and 
intersects that axis at the point (0,0,c).
Parabolas  353

354  Lines and Curves in Three-Space
Using the knowledge we’ve gained so far in this chapter, along with our existing knowledge 
of algebra (such as we got from Algebra Know-It-All or a comparable algebra book), let’s draw 
a graph of this function. Imagine that we’re gazing broadside at the plane x = 2 from some 
distant point on the positive x axis. We’ve been told that y = t. If we stay in the plane x = 2, we 
can therefore write the quadratic function by direct substitution as
z = y2 − 3y + 2
The coefficient of y2 is positive, so the parabola opens in the positive z direction. The above 
polynomial equation factors into
z = (y − 1)(y − 2)
so we can see that z = 0 when y = 1, and also that z = 0 when y = 2. Because x is always equal 
to 2, we know that the points (2,1,0) and (2,2,0) are on the parabola. The curve opens in 
the positive z direction, so we know that the parabola must have an absolute minimum. The 
y-value at the point, ymin, is the average of the y-values of the points where z = 0. Therefore
  ymin = (1 + 2)/2
= 3/2
To find the z-value at this point, we plug 3/2 into the quadratic function and get
zmin = (3/2)2 − 3 × 3/2 + 2 = 9/4 − 9/2 + 2
               = 9/4 − 18/4 + 8/4 = (9 − 18 + 8)/4 = −1/4
We’ve determined that the coordinates of the absolute minimum are (2,3/2,−1/4). We also 
know that the points (2,1,0) and (2,2,0) lie on the parabola. Figure 18-6 shows these points. 
They’re close together, so it’s difficult to get a clear picture of the parabola based on their 
locations. But we can find another point to help us draw the curve. When we plug in 0 for y,
we get
z = y2 − 3y + 2 = 02 − 3 × 0 + 2
 
= 0 − 0 + 2 = 2
This tells us that the point (2,0,2) is on the curve. It’s also shown in Fig. 18-6.
Another example
Now let’s look at a quadratic function in the plane where y = 5. Suppose that the parametric 
equations are
 
x = t
 
 y = 5
z = 2t2 + 4t + 3

Imagine that we’re gazing broadside at the plane y = 5 from somewhere on the negative y axis. 
We have been told that x = t, so we can write the quadratic function as
z = 2x2 + 4x + 3
This parabola opens in the positive z direction, because the coefficient of x2 is positive. That 
means this parabola attains an absolute minimum for some value of x. Let’s call it xmin. When 
x is the independent variable and z is the dependent variable, the general polynomial form for 
a quadratic function is
z = a1x2 + a2x + a3
where a1, a2, and a3 are constants. From our algebra courses, we know that
xmin = −a2/(2a1)
In this situation, we have
xmin = −4/(2 × 2) = (−4)/4 = −1
Each axis increment
is 1/4 unit
+y
+z
(2, 0, 2)
(2, 1, 0)
(2, 3/2, –1/4)
(2, 2, 0)
Figure 18-6  Graph of a parabola in a plane parallel to the 
yz plane, such that x has a constant value of 2. 
On both axes, each increment represents 
1/4 unit.
Parabolas  355

356  Lines and Curves in Three-Space
The z-value at the absolute minimum point is
zmin = 2xmin
2 + 4xmin + 3 = 2 × (−1)2 + 4 × (−1) + 3
 
= 2 − 4 + 3 = −2 + 3 = 1
Now we know that the coordinates of the parabola’s vertex are (−1,5,1). As the basis for our 
next point, let’s choose x = −3. We can plug it directly into the function to get
z = 2x2 + 4x + 3 = 2 × (−3)2 + 4 × (−3) + 3
 
= 18 − 12 + 3 = 6 + 3 = 9
This gives us (−3,5,9) as the coordinates of a second point on the curve. Finally, let’s set x = 1. 
Plugging it in, we obtain
z = 2x2 + 4x + 3 = 2 × 12 + 4 × 1 + 3
 
= 2 + 4 + 3 = 9 
The third point on our curve is (1,5,9). We now have three points: (−3,5,9), (−1,5,1), and 
(1,5,9). Figure 18-7 shows these points, along with a graph of the parabola passing through 
them, as seen in the plane where y maintains a constant value of 5.
Each axis
increment
is 1 unit
+x
+z
(–3, 5, 9)
(–1, 5, 1)
(1, 5, 9)
Figure 18-7  Graph of a parabola in a plane parallel to the 
xz plane, such that y has a constant value of 5. 
On both axes, each increment represents 
1 unit.

Are you curious and ambitious?
Think about the graphs of higher-degree polynomial functions confined to specific planes in 
Cartesian xyz space. For example, consider the cubic function in the plane where x = 2, such that
 x = 2
y = t
 z = t3
or the quartic function in the plane where z = −7, such that
x = 3t 4 + 6
 
y = t
 
z = −7
Can you draw graphs of these curves?
Circles
In Chap. 13, we learned that the equation of a circle centered at the origin in the Cartesian xy
plane can be written in the form
x2 + y2 = r2
where r is the radius. In Chap. 16, we learned that the parametric equations for such a 
circle are
x = r cos t
and
y = r sin t
where t is the parameter. Let’s expand these notions to deal with any circle in xyz space that’s 
centered on, and exists entirely in a plane perpendicular to, one of the three coordinate 
axes.
Hold x constant
Consider a plane x = c in Cartesian xyz space, where c is a constant. This plane is parallel to 
the yz plane, and it intersects the x axis at (c,0,0). Imagine a circle of radius r in the plane 
x = c that’s centered on the x axis as shown in Fig. 18-8. The variable y follows along with 
Circles  357

358  Lines and Curves in Three-Space
r cos t, while the variable z follows along with r sin t. Therefore, we can define our circle with 
the system of parametric equations
 
x = c
 y = r cos t
z = r sin t
For the circle to be fully circumscribed, the parameter t must range continuously over a span 
of values sufficient to ensure that a moving point makes at least one full revolution around the 
x axis. The smallest such span is any half-open interval that’s at least 2p units wide.
Hold y constant
Now suppose that we restrict ourselves to a plane such that y = c, where c is a constant. This 
plane is parallel to the xz plane, and it intersects the y axis at (0,c,0). Imagine a circle in 
the plane y = c that’s centered on the y axis, as shown in Fig. 18-9. In this case, the circle is 
described by the system
x = r cos t
 
y = c
z = r sin t
z
z
+
y
+
x
y
x
+
x = c
(c, 0, 0)
Circle
in plane
x = c
Radius
of circle
= r
Figure 18-8  Circle in a plane where x is held to a constant 
value c. The plane is perpendicular to the x axis, 
and intersects that axis at the point (c,0,0). The 
circle has radius r and is centered at (c,0,0).

For a complete circle to be described, the parameter t must range continuously over a 
span of values sufficient to ensure that a moving point makes at least one full revolu-
tion around the y axis. The smallest such span is any half-open interval that’s at least 
2p units wide.
Hold z constant
Finally, consider a plane in which z = c. It’s parallel to the xy plane, and it intersects the z axis 
at (0,0,c). Imagine a circle in the plane z = c that’s centered on the z axis as shown in Fig. 18-10. 
Here, we have
x = r cos t
y = r sin t
 
 z = c
For a complete circle to be described, the parameter t must range continuously over a 
span of values sufficient to ensure that a moving point makes at least one full revolu-
tion around the z axis. The smallest such span is any half-open interval that’s at least 
2p units wide.
z
z
+
y
+
x
y
x
+
y = c
(0, c, 0)
Radius
of circle
= r
Circle
in plane
y = c
Figure 18-9  Circle in a plane where y is held to a constant value c.
The plane is perpendicular to the y axis, and intersects 
that axis at the point (0,c,0). The circle has radius r and 
is centered at (0,c,0).
Circles  359

360  Lines and Curves in Three-Space
An example
Imagine a circle in the plane x = 3. Suppose that the circle is centered on the x axis, and its 
parametric equations are
 
x = 3
 y = 3 cos t
z = 3 sin t
In the plane x = 3, our circle can be described by the two parametric equations
y = 3 cos t
and
z = 3 sin t
When we express this system as a relation between y and z, we have
y2 + z2 = 9
z
z
+
y
+
x
y
x
+
z = c
(0, 0, c)
Circle
in plane
z = c
Radius
of circle
= r
Figure 18-10 
 Circle in a plane where z is held to a constant value c.
The plane is perpendicular to the z axis, and intersects 
that axis at the point (0,0,c). The circle has radius r
and is centered at (0,0,c).

Figure 18-11 is a perspective rendition of this circle’s graph in Cartesian xyz space. The radius 
is 3, and the center is at (3,0,0).
Another example
Now let’s look at a circle having a radius of 3 units, and contained in the plane where y main-
tains a constant value of −2. The parametric equations are
x = 3 cos t
 
y = −2
z = 3 sin t
In the plane y = −2, our circle can be described by the parametric system
x = 3 cos t
and
z = 3 sin t
As a relation between x and z, this system can be represented by
x2 + z2 = 9
Figure 18-11  Graph of a circle of radius 3 in the plane x = 3, 
centered on (3,0,0). Each axis increment 
represents 1 unit.
z
+
y
+
x
y
x
+
Circle
in plane
x = 3
x = 3
Radius
of circle
= 3
(3, 0, 0)
Each axis
increment
is 1 unit
Circles  361

362  Lines and Curves in Three-Space
Figure 18-12 is a perspective graph of this circle in Cartesian xyz space.
Are you confused?
All of the parabolas and circles described in this chapter are confined to planes parallel to the xy
plane, the xz plane, or the yz plane. Finding equations for curves in other planes is sometimes easy, 
but more often it’s difficult. The process can be streamlined by adding a function called a coordinate 
transformation to the relation describing the curve. That way, any curve that lies in a single plane 
(no matter how the plane is oriented in space, and no matter where the curve is positioned within 
the plane) can be described in terms of a curve in the xy plane, the xz plane, or the yz plane. You’ll 
learn how to do coordinate transformations in advanced calculus or analysis courses.
Here’s a challenge!
Consider a curve whose parametric equations are
 x = 2 cos t
 y = 3 sin t
 
z = −3
What sort of curve is this? Sketch its graph in Cartesian xyz space.
z
+z
y
+
x
y
+x
(0, –2, 0)
Circle
in plane
y = –2 
y = –2
Each axis
increment
is 1 unit
Radius
of circle
= 3
Figure 18-12  Graph of a circle of radius 3 in the plane y = −2, 
centered on (0,−2,0). Each axis increment represents 
1 unit.

Solution
For a moment, suppose that the coefficient in the first equation was 3 rather than 2. In that case, 
the set of parametric equations would be
x = 3 cos t
y = 3 sin t
 
z = −3
and we’d have a circle in the plane z = −3. Figure 18-10, on page 360 is an approximate graph 
of this circle if we imagine each coordinate axis division to represent 1 unit. However, the coef-
ficient in the first equation is 2, not 3. Therefore, the curve is squashed in the x direction; it’s only 
2/3 as wide as the above described circle. This squashed circle is an ellipse centered on the point 
(0,0,−3). Figure 18-13 shows how its graph looks in Cartesian xyz space, from a vantage point far 
from the origin but close to the positive z axis.
Circular Helixes  363
+z
y
+
x
y
x
+
Major
semi-axis
= 3
Minor
semi-axis
= 2
Ellipse
in plane
z = –3 
z = –3
(0, 0, –3)
Figure 18-13  Graph of an ellipse in the plane z = −3, centered 
on (0,0,−3). Each axis increment is 1 unit.
Circular Helixes
When we created the generalized circles and graphed them as shown in Figs. 18-8 through 
18-10, we held one variable constant and forced the other two variables to follow the para-
metric equations for a circle in a plane. Now imagine that, instead of holding one variable 

364  Lines and Curves in Three-Space
constant, we let it change according to a constant multiple of the parameter. When we do this, 
we get a three-dimensional object called a circular helix.
Center on x axis
Consider a moving plane x = ct in Cartesian xyz-space, where c is a constant and t is the parameter. 
This plane is always perpendicular to the x axis, so it’s always parallel to the yz plane. It intersects 
the x axis at a moving point (ct,0,0). Imagine a moving a circle of radius r in the moving plane x =
ct that’s centered on the x axis. On this circle, the value of y tracks along with r cos t, while the value 
of z tracks along with r sin t. The complete set of parametric equations is
 
x = ct
 y = r cos t
z = r sin t
When we graph the path of a point on this moving circle as t varies, we get a circular helix 
of uniform pitch (that means its “coil turns” are evenly spaced, like those of a well-designed 
spring). The pitch depends on c. Small values of c produce tightly compressed helixes, while 
large values of c produce stretched-out helixes. The helix axis corresponds to the coordinate 
x axis, so the helix is centered on the x axis. Figure 18-14 is a generic graph of a circular helix 
oriented in this way.
z
+z
y
+
x
y
x
+
Radius
of helix
= r
Helix is
centered
on the
x axis
Figure 18-14  Circular helix of radius r, centered on the 
x axis. The pitch depends on the constant by 
which t is multiplied to obtain x.

z
+z
y
+
x
y
x
+
Radius
of helix
= r
Helix is
centered
on the
y axis
Figure 18-15  Circular helix of radius r, centered on the y axis. 
The pitch depends on the constant by which t
is multiplied to obtain y.
Center on y axis
Now imagine a moving plane y = ct that’s perpendicular to the y axis, parallel to the xz plane, 
and intersects the y axis at a moving point (0,ct,0). The value of x tracks along with r cos t,
while the value of z tracks along with r sin t, so we have the system
 x = r cos t
 
y = ct
z = r sin t
The graph of this set of parametric equations is a circular helix of uniform pitch, centered on 
the y axis as shown in Fig. 18-15.
Center on z axis
Finally, envision a moving plane z = ct that’s perpendicular to the z axis, parallel to the xy
plane, and intersects the z axis at a moving point (0,0,ct). The value of x follows r cos t, while 
y follows r sin t. Our parametric equations are therefore
 x = r cos t
 y = r sin t
 
z = ct
Circular Helixes  365

366  Lines and Curves in Three-Space
In Cartesian xyz space, these equations produce a circular helix of uniform pitch, centered on 
the z axis. Figure 18-16 is a generic graph.
An example
Consider a circular helix centered on the x axis, described by the parametric equations
    x = t/(2p )
 y = cos t
z = sin t
Here are some values of x, y, and z that we can calculate as t varies, causing a point on the helix 
to complete a single revolution in a plane perpendicular to the x axis:
• When t = 0, we have x = 0, y = 1, and z = 0.
• When t = p /2, we have x = 1/4, y = 0, and z = 1.
• When t = p, we have x = 1/2, y = −1, and z = 0.
• When t = 3p /2, we have x = 3/4, y = 0, and z = −1.
• When t = 2p, we have x = 1, y = 1, and z = 0.
z
+z
y
+
x
y
+x
Helix is
centered
on the
axis
z
Radius
of helix
= r
Figure 18-16  Circular helix of radius r, centered on the z axis. 
The pitch depends on the constant by which t is 
multiplied to obtain z.

Every time t increases by 2p, our point makes one complete revolution in a moving plane 
that’s always perpendicular to the x axis. Also, every time t increases by 2p, our point gets 1 
unit farther away from the yz plane. The pitch of the helix is therefore equal to 1 linear unit 
per revolution.
Another example
Consider a circular helix centered on the y axis, described by the parametric equations
 x = 2 cos t
 
y = t
z = 2 sin t
Here are some values of x, y, and z that we can calculate as t varies, causing a point on the helix 
to complete a single revolution in a plane perpendicular to the y axis:
• When t = 0, we have x = 2, y = 0, and z = 0.
• When t = p /2, we have x = 0, y = p /2, and z = 2.
• When t = p, we have x = −2, y = p, and z = 0.
• When t = 3p /2, we have x = 0, y = 3p /2, and z = −2.
• When t = 2p, we have x = 2, y = 2p, and z = 0.
Every time t increases by 2p, our point makes a complete revolution in a moving plane that’s 
always perpendicular to the y axis. Also, every time t increases by 2p, our point moves 2p units
farther away from the xz plane. The pitch of the helix is therefore equal to 2p linear units per 
revolution.
Are you confused?
You might ask, “When describing a helix with parametric equations, does it make any difference 
if we multiply t by a positive constant or a negative constant?” That’s an excellent question. The 
answer is yes; it matters a lot!
The polarity of the constant affects the sense in which the helix rotates as we move in the positive 
direction. For example, suppose we have a helix described by the parametric equations
 
x = 3t
 y = 3 cos t
z = 3 sin t
In this case, the helix turns counterclockwise as we move in the positive x direction. If we observe 
the situation from somewhere on the positive x axis while the value of t increases, a point on the 
Circular Helixes  367

368  Lines and Curves in Three-Space
helix will appear to approach us and rotate counterclockwise. If the value of t decreases, a point 
on the helix will appear to retreat from us and rotate clockwise.
Now suppose that we reverse the sign of the constant in the first equation, so our system becomes
 
x = −3t
y = 3 cos t
z = 3 sin t
If we watch this scene from somewhere on the positive x axis while the value of t increases, a point 
on the helix will appear to retreat from us and rotate counterclockwise. If the value of t decreases, a 
point on the helix will appear to approach us and rotate clockwise.
Are you astute?
Imagine yourself at some point far from the origin on the +x axis in Fig. 18-14, or far from the 
origin on the +y axis in Fig. 18-15, or far from the origin on the +z axis in Fig. 18-16. If you have 
excellent spatial perception, you’ll be able to figure out that in all three of these situations, the 
constant c is negative! In each case, a retreating point on the helix will appear to revolve counter-
clockwise, and an approaching point on the helix will appear to revolve clockwise.
Here’s a challenge!
Suppose that we encounter an object in Cartesian xyz space whose parametric equations are
x = 2 cos t
y = 3 sin t
 
z = −3t
What sort of object is this?
Solution
Let’s divide the first two equations through by their respective constants. That gives us
x/2 = cos t
and
y/3 = sin t
Squaring both sides of both equations, we obtain
(x/2)2 = cos2 t

and
(y/3)2 = sin2 t
When we add these two equations, left-to-left and right-to-right, we get
(x/2)2 + (y/3)2 = cos2 t + sin2 t
The rules of trigonometry tell us that
cos2 t + sin2 t = 1
so the preceding equation can be rewritten as
(x/2)2 + (y/3)2 = 1
and further morphed into
x2/4 + y2/9 = 1
This equation describes an ellipse in the xy plane whose horizontal (x-coordinate) semi-axis mea-
sures 2 units, and whose vertical (y-coordinate) semi-axis measures 3 units. Now let’s consider the 
z coordinate. The equation for z in terms of t is
z = −3t
This equation tells us that a point on our object travels in the negative z direction as the value 
of the parameter t increases. The complete set of three parametric equations therefore describes 
an elliptical helix centered on the z axis. As we move in the positive z direction, the helix rotates 
clockwise, because the coefficient of t is negative. It looks something like the helix in Fig. 18-16, 
except that it’s stretched by approximately 50 percent in the positive and negative y directions 
(vertically in this particular illustration).
Here’s an extra-credit challenge!
Sketch three-dimensional perspective graphs of the helixes described in the foregoing two examples 
and challenge.
Solution
You’re on your own. That’s why you get extra credit!
Circular Helixes  369

370  Lines and Curves in Three-Space
Practice Exercises
This is an open-book quiz. You may (and should) refer to the text as you solve these 
problems. Don’t hurry! You’ll find worked-out answers in App. B. The solutions in the 
appendix may not represent the only way a problem can be figured out. If you think you 
can solve a particular problem in a quicker or better way than you see there, by all means 
try it!
 1. Consider the following three-way equation for a straight line in Cartesian xyz space:
x − 1 = y − 2 = z − 4
 
 Find a point on the line, find the preferred direction numbers, and determine the 
direction vector as a sum of multiples of i, j, and k.
 2. Consider the following three-way equation for a straight line in Cartesian xyz space:
4x = 5y = 6z
 
 Find a point on the line, find the preferred direction numbers, and determine the 
direction vector as a sum of multiples of i, j, and k.
 3. Consider the following three-way equation for a straight line in Cartesian xyz space:
 (x − 2)/3 = (4y − 8)/4 = (z + 5)/(−2)
 
 Find a point on the line, find the preferred direction numbers, and determine the 
direction vector as a sum of multiples of i, j, and k.
 4. Consider a relation in Cartesian xyz space described by the system of parametric 
equations
 
x = −4
 
y = t
z = −t2 − 1
 
 Draw a two-dimensional graph of this relation as it appears when we look broadside at 
the plane containing it.
 5. Consider a relation in Cartesian xyz space described by the system of parametric 
equations
x = t2 + 2t
 
y = t
 
z = 0

 
 Draw a two-dimensional graph of this relation as it appears when we look broadside at 
the plane containing it.
 6. Consider a relation in Cartesian xyz space described by the system of parametric 
equations
 
x = t
 
y = −7
z = t2/2 − 5
 
 Draw a two-dimensional graph of this relation as it appears when we look broadside at 
the plane containing it.
 7.  Consider a relation in Cartesian xyz space described by the system of parametric 
equations
x = 4 cos t
y = 4 sin t
 
z = 1
 
 Draw a two-dimensional graph of this relation as it appears when we look broadside at 
the plane containing it.
 8. Consider a relation in Cartesian xyz space described by the system of parametric 
equations
x = 5 cos t
 
y = 0
z = 5 sin t
 
 Draw a two-dimensional graph of this relation as it appears when we look broadside at 
the plane containing it.
 9. Consider a relation in Cartesian xyz space described by the system of parametric 
equations
x = 5 cos t
y = 3 sin t
 
z = p
 
 Draw a two-dimensional graph of this relation as it appears when we look broadside at 
the plane containing it.
Practice Exercises  371

372  Lines and Curves in Three-Space
 10. Consider a relation in Cartesian xyz space described by the system of parametric 
equations
x = 2 cos t
 y = t /(2p )
z = 2 sin t
 
 Draw a perspective view of this relation’s three-dimensional graph. Here’s a hint: You 
can probably tell that the graph is a circular helix, but as you draw it, pay attention to 
the orientation, the pitch, and the sense of rotation.

Have you ever tried to find the missing number in a list? Have you ever figured out how much 
money an interest-bearing bank account will hold after 10 years? Have you ever calculated the 
value that a function approaches but never reaches? If you can answer “Yes” to any of these 
questions, you’ve worked with sequences (also called progressions), series, or limits.
Repeated Addition
A sequence is a list of numbers. Some sequences are finite; others are infinite. The simplest sequences 
have values that repeatedly increase or decrease by a fixed amount. Here are some examples:
 
A = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
 
B = 0, −1, −2, −3, −4, −5
 
C = 2, 4, 6, 8
 
D = −5, −10, −15, −20
 
E = 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, 24, 28, ...
 
F = 2, 0, −2, −4, −6, −8, −10, ...
The first four sequences are finite. The last two are infinite, as indicated by an ellipsis 
(three dots) at the end.
Arithmetic sequence
In each of the sequences shown above, the values either increase steadily (in A, C, and E) or 
decrease steadily (in B, D, and F). In all six sequences, the spacing between numbers is con-
stant throughout. Here’s how each sequence changes as we move along from term to term:
• The values in A always increase by 1.
• The values in B always decrease by 1.
• The values in C always increase by 2.
373
CHAPTER 
19
Sequences, Series, and Limits

374  Sequences, Series, and Limits
• The values in D always decrease by 5.
• The values in E always increase by 4.
• The values in F always decrease by 2.
Each sequence has an initial value. After that, we can easily predict subsequent values by 
repeatedly adding a constant. If the constant is positive, the sequence increases. If the added 
constant is negative, the sequence decreases.
Suppose that s0 is the first number in a sequence S. Let c be a real-number constant. If S 
can be written in the form
S = s0, (s0 + c), (s0 + 2c), (s0 + 3c), ...
then it’s an arithmetic sequence or an arithmetic progression. In this context, the word “arithmetic” 
is pronounced “err-ith-MET-ick.”
The numbers s 0 and c can be integers, but that’s not a requirement. They can be fractions 
such as 2/3 or −7/5. They can be irrational numbers such as the square root of 2. As long 
as the separation between any two adjacent terms is the same wherever we look, we have an 
arithmetic sequence, even in the trivial case
S0 = 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, ...
Arithmetic series
A series is the sum of all the terms in a sequence. For an arithmetic sequence, the correspond-
ing arithmetic series can be defined only if the sequence has a finite number of terms. For the 
above sequences A through F, let the corresponding series be called A+ through F+. The total 
sums are as follows.
 
A+ = 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6 = 21
 
B+ = 0 + (−1) + (−2) + (−3) + (−4) + (−5) = −15
 
C+ = 2 + 4 + 6 + 8 = 20
 
D+ = (−5) + (−10) + (−15) + (−20) = −50
E+ is not defined
F+ is not defined
Now consider the infinite series
S0+ = 0 + 0 + 0 + 0 + 0 + 0 + 0 + ···
We might think of S0+ as “infinity times 0,” because it’s the sum of 0 added to itself infinitely 
many times. It’s tempting to suppose that S0+ = 0, but we can’t prove it. When we add up any 
finite number of “nothings”, we get “nothing”, of course. However, when we try to find the 
sum of infinitely many nothings, we encounter a mystery. The best we can do is say that S0+ 
is undefined.

Graphing an arithmetic sequence
When we plot the values of an arithmetic sequence as a function of the term number in rect-
angular coordinates, we get a set of discrete points. We can depict the term number along the 
horizontal axis going toward the right, so the term number plays the role of the independent 
variable. We can plot the term value along the vertical axis, so it plays the role of the depen-
dent variable.
Figure 19-1 illustrates two arithmetic sequences as they appear when graphed in this 
way. (The dashed lines connect the dots, but they aren’t actually parts of the sequences.) One 
sequence is increasing, and the dashed line connecting this set of points ramps upward as we 
go toward the right. Because this sequence is finite, the dashed line ends at (6,6). The other 
sequence is decreasing, and its dashed line ramps downward as we go toward the right. This 
sequence is infinite, as shown by the ellipsis at the end of the string of numbers, and also by 
the arrow at the right-hand end of the dashed line.
When any arithmetic sequence is graphed according to the scheme shown in Fig. 19-1, 
its points lie along a straight line. The slope m of the line depends on whether the sequence 
increases ( positive slope) or decreases (negative slope). In fact, m is equal to the constant c in 
the general arithmetic series form: 
S = s0, (s0 + c), (s0 + 2c), (s0 + 3c), ...
regardless of how many terms the sequence contains.
2
4
6
0
–2
–4
2
4
6
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
6, 3, 0, –3, –6, ...
Term value
–6
3
5
1
Term number
Figure 19-1  Rectangular-coordinate plots of two arithmetic 
sequences.
Repeated Addition  375

376  Sequences, Series, and Limits
An example
Suppose that in an infinite sequence S, we have s0 = 5 and c = 3. The first 10 terms are
 
s0 = 5
 
s1 = s0 + 3 = 5 + 3 = 8
 
s2 = s1 + 3 = 8 + 3 = 11
 
s3 = s2 + 3 = 11 + 3 = 14
 
s4 = s3 + 3 = 14 + 3 = 17
 
s5 = s4 + 3 = 17 + 3 = 20
 
s6 = s5 + 3 = 20 + 3 = 23
 
s7 = s6 + 3 = 23 + 3 = 26
 
s8 = s7 + 3 = 26 + 3 = 29
 
s9 = s8 + 3 = 29 + 3 = 32
Therefore
S  = 5, 8, 11, 14, 17, 20, 23, 26, 29, 32, ...
Another example
Consider the following sequence T. Someone asks, “Is this an arithmetic sequence? If so, what 
are the values t0 (the starting value) and ct (the constant of change)?”
T = 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, ...
In this case, T is not an arithmetic sequence. The numbers do not increase at a steady rate. There 
is a pattern, however. Each number in the sequence is twice as large as the number before it.
Still another example
Consider the following sequence U. Someone asks, “Is this an arithmetic sequence? If so, what 
are the values u0 (the starting value) and cu (the constant of change)?”
U = 100, 65, 30, −5, −40, −75, −110, ...
This is an arithmetic sequence, at least for the numbers shown (the first seven terms). In this 
case, s0 = 100 and cu = −35, so we can generate the following list:
 
 s0  = 100
 
u1 = u0 + (−35) = 100 − 35 = 65
 
u2 = u1 + (−35) = 65 − 35 = 30
 
u3 = u2 + (−35) = 30 − 35 = −5
 
u4 = u3 + (−35) = −5 − 35 = −40
 
u5 = u4 + (−35) = −40 − 35 = −75
 
u6 = u5 + (−35) = −75 − 35 = −110

Are you confused?
You ask, “What happens if we start a sequence with a fixed number and then alternately add and 
subtract a constant? Is the result an arithmetic sequence?” Here’s an example:
V = −1/2, 1/2, −1/2, 1/2, −1/2, 1/2, −1/2, ...
In this case, the first term, v0, is equal to −1/2. We might say that the constant, cv, is equal to 1, 
but we alternately add and subtract it to generate the terms. This is a definable sequence, but it’s 
not an arithmetic sequence. In order to generate a true arithmetic sequence, we must repeatedly 
add the constant, whether it’s positive, negative, or 0. When the constant is positive, the terms 
steadily increase. When the constant is negative, the terms steadily decrease. Arithmetic sequences 
never alternate as V does.
Here’s a challenge!
When we have a sequence and we start to add up its numbers, we get another sequence of numbers 
representing the sums. These sums are called partial sums. List the first five partial sums of the 
following sequences:
 
S = 5, 8, 11, 14, 17, 20, 23, 26, 29, 32, ...
 
T = 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, ...
 
U = 100, 65, 30, −5, −40, −75, −110, ...
 
V = −1/2, 1/2, −1/2, 1/2, −1/2, 1/2, −1/2, ...
Solution
We simply add increasing numbers of terms and list the sums. For the sequence S, the first five 
partial sums are
 
s0+ = 5
 
s1+ = 5 + 8 = 13
 
s2+ = 5 + 8 + 11 = 24
 
s3+ = 5 + 8 + 11 + 14 = 38
 
s4+ = 5 + 8 + 11 + 14 + 17 = 55
For the sequence T, the first five partial sums are
 
t0+ = 2
 
t1+ = 2 + 4 = 6
 
t2+ = 2 + 4 + 8 = 14
 
t3+ = 2 + 4 + 8 + 16 = 30
 
t4+ = 2 + 4 + 8 + 16 + 32 = 62
Repeated Addition  377

378  Sequences, Series, and Limits
For the sequence U, the first five partial sums are
 
u0+ = 100
 
u1+ = 100 + 65 = 165
 
u2+ = 100 + 65 + 30 = 195
 
u3+ = 100 + 65 + 30 + (−5) = 190
 
u4+ = 100 + 65 + 30 + (−5) + (−40) = 150
For the sequence V, the first five partial sums are
 
v0+ = −1/2
 
v1+ = −1/2 + 1/2 = 0
 
v2+ = −1/2 + 1/2 + (−1/2) = −1/2
 
v3+ = −1/2 + 1/2 + (−1/2) + 1/2 = 0
 
v4+ = −1/2 + 1/2 + (−1/2) + 1/2 + (−1/2) = −1/2
Repeated Multiplication
Another common type of sequence has values that are repeatedly multiplied by some constant. 
Here are a few examples:
 
G = 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32
 
H = 1, −1, 1, −1, 1, −1, ...
 
 I = 1, 10, 100, 1000
 
 J = −5, −15, −45, −135, −405
 
K = 3, 9, 27, 81, 243, 729, 2187, ...
 
L = 1/2, 1/4, 1/8, 1/16, 1/32, ...
Sequences G, I, and J are finite. Sequences H, K, and L are infinite, as indicated by an ellipsis 
at the end of each list.
Geometric sequence
Upon casual observation, the above sequences appear to be much different from one another. 
But in all six sequences, each term is a constant multiple of the term before it:
• The values in G progress by a constant factor of 2.
• The values in H progress by a constant factor of −1.
• The values in I progress by a constant factor of 10.
• The values in J progress by a constant factor of 3.
• The values in K progress by a constant factor of 3.
• The values in L progress by a constant factor of 1/2.

If the constant is positive, the values either remain positive or remain negative. If the constant 
is negative, the values alternate between positive and negative.
Let t0 be the first number in a sequence T, and let k be a constant. Imagine that T can be 
written in the general form:
T = t 0, t 0k, t 0k 2, t0k 3, t0k 4, ...
for as long as the sequence goes. Such a sequence is called a geometric sequence or a geometric
progression.
If k  = 1, the sequence consists of the same number over and over. (In that case, it’s also an 
arithmetic sequence with a constant equal to 0!) If k = −1, the sequence alternates between t0 
and its negative. If t 0 is less than −1 or greater than 1, the values get farther from 0 as we move 
along in the series. If t 0 is between (but not including) −1 and 1, the values get closer to 0. If 
t0 = 1 or t0 = −1, the values stay the same distance from 0.
The numbers t0 and k can be whole numbers, but this is not a requirement. As long as the 
multiplication factor between any two adjacent terms in a sequence is the same, the sequence 
is a geometric sequence. In the sequence L above, we have the constant k = 1/2. This is an 
especially interesting case, as we’ll see in a moment.
Geometric series
In a geometric sequence, the corresponding geometric series, which is the sum of all the terms, can 
always be defined if the sequence is finite, and can sometimes be defined if the sequence is infinite.
For the above sequences G through L, let the corresponding series be called G+ through L+. 
Then we have
 
G+ = 1 + 2 + 4 + 8 + 16 + 32 = 63
 
H+ = 1 − 1 + 1 − 1 + 1 − 1 + ··· = ?
 
I+ = 1 + 10 + 100 + 1000 = 1111
 
J+ = −5 − 15 − 45 − 135 − 405 = −605
K+ is not defined
 
L+ = 1/2 + 1/4 + 1/8 + 1/16 + 1/32 + ··· = ?
The finite series G+, I+, and J+ are straightforward. There’s no mystery there! The partial sums 
of H+ alternate between 0 and 1, but can’t settle on either of those values. It’s tempting to 
say that H+ has two values, just as certain equations have solution sets containing two roots. 
But we’re looking for a single, identifiable number, not the solution set of an equation. On 
that basis, we’re forced to conclude that H+ is not definable. The infinite series K+ goes “out 
of control.” It’s an example of a divergent series; its values keep getting farther from 0 without 
ever reaching a limit.
Convergence
For the above sequences H, K, and L, the sequences of partial sums, which we’ll denote using 
asterisk subscripts, go as follows:
Repeated Multiplication  379

380  Sequences, Series, and Limits
 
H* = 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, ...
 
K* = 3, 12, 39, 120, 363, 1092, 3279, ...
 
L* = 1/2, 3/4, 7/8, 15/16, 31/32, ...
The partial sums denoted by H* and K* don’t settle down on anything. But the partial sums 
denoted by L* seem to approach 1. They don’t “run away” into uncharted territory, and they 
don’t alternate between or among multiple numbers. The partial sums in L* seem to have a clear 
destination that they could reach, if only they had an infinite amount of time to get there.
It turns out that the complete series L+, representing the sum of the infinite string of 
numbers in the sequence L, is exactly equal to 1! We can get an intuitive view of this fact by 
observing that the partial sums approach 1. As the position in the sequence of partial sums, L*, 
gets farther and farther along, the denominators keep doubling, and the numerator is always 
1 less than the denominator. In fact, if we want to find the nth number L*n in the sequence of 
partial sums L*, we can calculate it by using the following formula:
L*n = (2n − 1)/2n
As n becomes large, 2n becomes large much faster, and the proportional difference between 
2n − 1 and 2n becomes smaller. When n reaches extremely large positive integer values, the quo-
tient (2n − 1)/2n is almost exactly equal to 1. We can make the quotient as close to 1 as we want 
by going out far enough in the series of partial sums, but we can never make it equal to or larger 
than 1. The sequence L* is said to converge on the number 1. The sequence of partial sums L* is 
an example of a convergent sequence. The series L+ is an example of a convergent series.
Plotting a geometric sequence
A geometric sequence, like an arithmetic sequence, appears as a set of points when plotted 
on a Cartesian plane. Figure 19-2 shows examples of two geometric sequences as they appear 
1
2
3
4
5
6
1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32
0
10
20
30
40
Term value
Term number
40, 20, 10, 5, 2.5, 1.25, ...
Figure 19-2  Rectangular-coordinate plots of 
two geometric sequences.

when graphed. Note that the dashed curves, which show the general trends of the sequences 
(but aren’t actually parts of the sequences), aren’t straight lines, but they are “smooth.” They 
don’t turn corners or make sudden leaps.
One of the sequences in Fig. 19-2 is increasing, and the dashed curve connecting this 
set of points goes upward as we move to the right. Because this sequence is finite, the dashed 
curve ends at the point (6,32), where the term number is 6 and the term value is 32. The other 
sequence is decreasing, and the dashed curve goes downward and approaches 0 as we move 
to the right. This sequence is infinite, as shown by the three dots at the end of the string of 
numbers, and also by the arrow at the right-hand end of the dashed curve.
If a geometric sequence has a negative factor, that is, if k < 0, the plot of the points alter-
nates back and forth on either side of 0. The points fall along two different curves, one above 
the horizontal axis and the other below. If you want to see what happens in a case like this, try 
plotting an example. Set t 0 = 64 and k = −1/2, and plot the resulting points.
An example
Suppose you get a 5-year certificate of deposit (CD) at your local bank for $1000.00, and it earns 
interest at the annualized rate of exactly 5 percent per year. The CD will be worth $1276.28 after 
6 years. To calculate this, multiply $1000 by 1.05, then multiply this result by 1.05, and repeat 
this process a total of 5 times. The resulting numbers form a geometric sequence:
• After 1 year: $1000.00 × 1.05 = $1050.00
• After 2 years: $1050.00 × 1.05 = $1102.50
• After 3 years: $1102.50 × 1.05 = $1157.63
• After 4 years: $1157.63 × 1.05 = $1215.51
• After 5 years: $1215.51 × 1.05 = $1276.28
Another example
Is the following sequence a geometric sequence? If so, what are the values t0 (the starting value) 
and k (the factor of change)?
T = 3, −6, 12, −24, 48, −96, ...
This is a geometric sequence. The numbers change by a factor of −2. In this case, t 0 = 3 and 
k = −2.
Are you confused?
It’s reasonable to ask, “Can we categorize all sequences as either arithmetic or geometric?” The 
answer is no! Consider
U = 10, 13, 17, 22, 28, 35, 43, ...
This sequence shows a pattern, but it’s neither arithmetic nor geometric. The difference between 
the first and second terms is 3, the difference between the second and third terms is 4, the difference 
Repeated Multiplication  381

382  Sequences, Series, and Limits
between the third and fourth terms is 5, and so on. The difference keeps increasing by 1 for 
each succeeding pair of terms. This is a fairly simple example of a nonarithmetic, nongeometric 
sequence with an identifiable pattern.
Here’s a challenge!
Suppose a particular species of cell undergoes mitosis (splits in two) every half hour, precisely on 
the half hour. We take our first look at a cell culture at 12:59 p.m., and find three cells. At 1:00 
p.m., mitosis occurs for all the cells at the same time, and then there are six cells in the culture. 
At 1:30 p.m., mitosis occurs again, and we have 12 cells. How many cells are there in the culture 
at 4:01 p.m.?
Solution
There are 3 hours and 2 minutes between 12:59 p.m. and 4:01 p.m. This means that mitosis takes 
place 7 times: at 1:00, 1:30, 2:00, 2:30, 3:00, 3:30, and 4:00. Table 19-1 illustrates the scenario. 
We look at the culture repeatedly at 1 minute past each half hour. There are 384 cells at 4:01 p.m., 
just after the mitosis event that occurs at 4:00 p.m.
Table 19-1 Cell division as a function of time, 
assuming mitosis occurs every half hour
Time 
Number of cells
12:59 
3
1:01 
6
1:31 
12
2:01 
24
2:31 
48
3:01 
96
3:31 
192
4:01 
384
Limit of a Sequence
A limit is a specific, well-defined quantity that a sequence, series, relation, or function approaches. 
The value of the sequence, series, relation, or function can get arbitrarily close to the limit, 
but doesn’t always reach it.
An example
Let’s look at an infinite sequence A that starts with 1 and then keeps getting smaller. For any 
positive integer n, the nth term is 1/n, so we have
A = 1, 1/2, 1/3, 1/4, 1/5, ..., 1/n, ...

This is a simple example of a special type of sequence called a harmonic sequence. In this 
particular case, the values of the terms approach 0. The hundredth term is 1/100; the thou-
sandth term is 1/1000; the millionth term is 1/1,000,000. If we choose a tiny but positive real 
number, we can always find a term in the sequence that’s closer to 0 than that number. But no 
matter how much time we spend generating terms, we’ll never get 0. We say that “The limit 
of 1/n, as n approaches infinity, is 0,” and write it as
Lim
n→∞1/n = 0
Another example
Consider the sequence B in which the numerators ascend one by one through the set of natu-
ral numbers, while every denominator is equal to the corresponding numerator plus 1. For 
any positive integer n, the nth term is (n − 1)/n, so we have
B = 0/1, 1/2, 2/3, 3/4, 4/5, ..., (n − 1)/n, ...
As n becomes extremely large, the numerator (n − 1) gets closer and closer to the denominator, 
when we consider the difference in proportion to the value of n. Therefore
Lim
n→∞(n − 1)/n = n/n = 1
Still another example
Let’s see what happens in a sequence C where every numerator is equal to the square of the 
term number, while every denominator is equal to twice the term number. For any positive 
integer n, the nth term is n 2/(2n), so we have
C = 1/2, 4/4, 9/6, 16/8, 25/10, 36/12, 49/14, ..., n 2 / (2n), ...
Note that
n 2/(2n) = n/2
This tells us that
Lim
n→∞n 2/(2n) = Lim
n→∞n/2
As n grows larger without end, so does n/2. Therefore
Lim
n→∞n/2
is undefined, so we know that
Lim
n→∞n 2/(2n)
is also undefined. Alternatively, we can say that this limit doesn’t exist, or that it’s meaningless.
Limit of a Sequence  383

384  Sequences, Series, and Limits
Are you confused?
By now, you should suspect that any given sequence must fall into one or the other of two cat-
egories: convergent (meaning that it has a limit) or divergent (meaning that it doesn’t have a 
limit). But what if a sequence alternates between two numbers endlessly? Once again, look at the 
sequence
H = 1, −1, 1, −1, 1, −1, ...
We might be tempted to suggest that a sequence of this type “has two different limits,” but it 
doesn’t converge on any single number. However, that won’t work because a limit must always 
be a single value that we can specify as a number. In cases like this, it’s customary to say that the 
limit is not defined.
Here’s a challenge!
Consider the sequence D in which the numerators alternate between −1 and 1, while the denomi-
nators start at 1 and increase by 1 with each succeeding term. For any positive integer n, the nth 
term is (−1)n/n, so that
D = −1/1, 1/2, −1/3, 1/4, −1/5, ..., (−1)n/n, ...
Does this sequence have a limit? If so, what is it? If not, why not?
Solution
As n becomes extremely large, the absolute value of the numerator is always 1, although the sign 
alternates. The denominator increases steadily, and without end. If we choose a tiny positive or 
negative real number, we can always find a term that’s closer to 0 than that number, but we’ll never 
actually reach 0 from either the positive side or the negative side. Therefore
Lim
n→∞(−1)n/n = 0
Here’s another challenge!
Consider the following sequence:
K = (−1 − 1/1), (1 + 1/2), (−1 − 1/3), (1 + 1/4), ..., [(−1)n + (−1)n/n], ...
The parentheses and brackets are not technically necessary here, but they visually isolate the terms 
from one another. Does K have a limit? If so, what is it? If not, why not?
Solution
Each term in K is expressed as a sum. The first addend alternates between −1 and 1, endlessly. The 
second addend is identical to the corresponding term in the sequence D that we evaluated in the 
previous challenge. We determined that D converges toward 0. The terms in K therefore approach 

two different values, −1 and 1, as we generate terms indefinitely. If we want to claim that a sequence 
has a limit, we must take that expression literally. “A limit” means “one and only one limit.” We 
therefore conclude that
Lim
n→∞(−1)n + (−1)n/n
is not defined.
Summation “Shorthand”
Mathematicians have a “shorthand” way to denote long sums. This technique can save a lot 
of space and writing time. We can even write down an infinite sum in a compact statement. 
It’s called summation notation.
Specify the series
Imagine a set of constants, all denoted by a with a subscript, such as
{a1, a2, a3, a4, a5, a6, a7, a8}
Suppose that we add up the elements of this set, and call the sum b. We can write this sum 
out term by term as
a1 + a2 + a3 + a4 + a5 + a6 + a7 + a8 = b
That’s easy because we have only eight terms, but if the set contained 800 elements, writing 
down the entire sum would be exasperating. We could put an ellipsis in the middle of the sum, 
calling it c and then writing
a1 + a2 + a3 + ··· + a798 + a799 + a800 = c
If the series had infinitely many terms, we could use an ellipsis after the first few terms and 
leave the statement wide open after that, calling it d and then writing
a1 + a2 + a3 + a4 + a5 + ··· = d
Tag the terms
Let’s invent a nonnegative-integer variable and call it i. Written as a subscript, i can serve as 
a counting tag in a series containing a large number of terms. Don’t confuse this i with the 
symbol some texts use to represent the unit imaginary number, which is the positive square 
root of −1!
In the above-described series, we can call each term by the generic name ai. In the first 
series, we add up eight ai’s to get the final sum b, and the counting tag i goes from 1 to 8. In 
Summation “Shorthand”  385

386  Sequences, Series, and Limits
the second series, we add up 800 ai’s to get the final sum c, and the counting tag i goes from 
1 to 800. In the third series, we add up infinitely many ai’s to get the final sum d, and the 
counting tag i ascends through the entire set of positive integers. Suppose that we have a series 
with n terms, as follows:
a1 + a2 + a3 + ··· + an−2 + an−1 + an = k
In this case, we add up n ai’s to get the final sum k.
The big sigma
Let’s go back to the series with eight terms. We can write it down in a cryptic but information- 
dense manner as
i=∑
1
8
ai = b
We read this expression out loud as, “The summation of the terms ai, from i = 1 to 8, is equal 
to b.” The large symbol Σ is the uppercase Greek letter sigma, which stands for summation or 
sum. Now let’s look at the series in which 800 terms are added:
i=∑
1
800
ai = c
We can read this aloud as, “The summation of the terms ai, from i = 1 to 800, is equal to c.” 
In the third example containing infinitely many terms, we can write
i=
∞
∑
1
ai = d
This statement can be read as, “The summation of the terms ai, from i = 1 to infinity, is equal 
to d.” Finally, in the general case, we can write
i
n
=∑
1
ai = k
and read it aloud as, “The summation of the terms ai, from i = 1 to n, is equal to k.”
A more sophisticated example
Suppose we want to determine the value of an infinite series starting with 1, then adding 1/2, 
then adding 1/4, then adding 1/8, and going on forever, each time cutting the value in half. 
As things work out, we get
1 + 1/2 + 1/4 + 1/8 + ··· = 2
even though the series has infinitely many terms. We can also write
1/20 + 1/21 + 1/22 + 1/23 + ··· = 2
In summation notation, we write
i=
∞
∑
0
1/2i = 2

Are you confused?
If you’re baffled by the idea that we can add up infinitely many numbers and get a finite sum, 
you can use the “frog-and-wall” analogy. Imagine that a frog sits 8 meters (8 m) away from a wall. 
Then she jumps halfway to the wall, so she’s 4 m away from it. Now imagine that she continues 
to make repeated jumps toward the wall, each time getting halfway there (Fig. 19-3). No finite 
number of jumps will allow the frog to reach the wall. To accomplish that goal, she would have to 
take infinitely many jumps. This scenario can be based on a sequence of partial sums of a series
S = 4 + 2 + 1 + 1/2 + 1/4 + 1/8 + ···
A real-world frog cannot reach the wall by jumping halfway to it, over and over. But in the 
imagination, she can. There are two ways this can happen. First, in the universe of mathematics, 
we have an infinite amount of time, so an infinite number of jumps can take place. Another way 
around the problem is to keep halving the length of time in between jumps, say from 4 seconds 
to 2 seconds, then to 1 second, then to 1/2 second, and so on. This will make it possible for our 
“cosmic superfrog” to hop an infinite number of times in a finite span of time. Either way, when 
she has finished her journey and her nose touches the wall, she’ll have traveled exactly 8 m. There-
fore, the sum total of the lengths of her jumps is
S = 4 + 2 + 1 + 1/2 + 1/4 + 1/8 + ··· = 8
Here’s a challenge!
Consider the series that we dealt with in “A more sophisticated example” a couple of paragraphs 
ago, but only up to the reciprocal of the nth power of 2. Let Sn be the partial sum of this series up to, 
and including, that term. Write Sn in summation notation.
Summation “Shorthand”  387
Wall
Initial position of frog
(point on surface exactly
below her nose)
1st jump
2nd jump
3rd
4th
4 m
2 m
1 m
1/2 m
Figure 19-3  A frog jumps toward a wall, getting halfway there 
with each jump.

388  Sequences, Series, and Limits
Solution
Let’s use the letter i as the counting tag. We start at i = 0 and go up to i = n, with each term having 
the value 1/2i. Therefore, the summation notation is
i
n
=∑
0
1/2i
Limit of a Series
If a series has a limit, we can sometimes figure it out by creating a sequence from the partial 
sums, and then finding the limit of that sequence. 
An example
Think of the summation in the previous challenge, and imagine what happens as n increases 
endlessly—that is, as n approaches infinity. As n grows larger, the sequence of partial sums 
approaches 2. We can plug the summation into a limit template, and then state that
Lim
n→∞
i
n
=∑
0
1/2i = 2
Another example
Let’s look once again at the infinite sequence V we saw a little while ago, where the numerators 
keep alternating between −1 and 1, as follows:
V = −1/2, 1/2, −1/2, 1/2, −1/2, 1/2, −1/2 ...
Let’s replace every comma by a plus sign, creating the infinite series
V+ = −1/2 + 1/2 − 1/2 + 1/2 − 1/2 + 1/2 − 1/2 + ···
We can write this series in summation form as
i=
∞
∑
1
(−1)i/2
Now consider the limit of the sequence of partial sums of V+ as the number of terms becomes 
arbitrarily large. We write this quantity symbolically as
Lim
n→∞
i
n
=∑
1
(−1)i/2
This limit does not exist, because the sequence of partial sums alternates endlessly between two 
values, −1/2 and 0.

Limit of a Series  389
Are you confused?
Does the combination of limit and summation notation look intimidating? Besides getting used 
to the symbology, you have to keep track of two different indexes, i for the sum and n for the limit. 
It helps if you remember that the two indexes are independent of each other. You’re finding the 
limit of a sum as you keep making that sum longer.
Here’s a challenge!
Find the limit of the partial sums of the infinite series
1/100 + 1/1002 + 1/1003 + 1/1004 + 1/1005 + ···
as the number of terms in the partial sum increases without end. That is, find
Lim
n→∞ 
i
n
=∑
1
1/100i
Solution
In decimal form, 1/100 = 0.01, 1/1002 = 0.0001, 1/1003 = 0.000001, and so on.  Let’s arrange 
these numbers in a column with each term underneath its predecessor, and all the decimal points 
along a vertical line, as the following:
 
0.01
 
0.0001
 
0.000001
 
0.00000001
 
0.0000000001
 
↓
 
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯
 
0.0101010101...
When we look at the series this way, we can see that it must ultimately add up to the nonterminat-
ing, repeating decimal 0.0101010101.... From our algebra or number theory courses, we recall 
that this endless decimal number is equal to 1/99. That’s the limit of the sequence of partial sums 
in the series:
i
n
=∑
1
1/100i
as the positive integer n increases without end. It’s also the value of the entire infinite series:
i=
∞
∑
1
1/100i

390  Sequences, Series, and Limits
Limits of Functions
So far, we’ve looked at situations where we move from term to term in a sequence or series. 
Sometimes, such sequences and series have limits (they converge); in other cases they don’t 
have limits (they diverge). Similar phenomena can occur when we have a variable that changes 
in a smooth, continuous manner, rather than jumping among discrete values.
Some functions have limits, and some don’t
Certain functions increase or decrease without bound, while others reach specific values and 
stay there. Still others increase or decrease continuously without ever passing, or even reach-
ing, a certain value. It’s also possible for a function to “blow up” and have no limit at all.
The solid curve in Fig. 19-4 shows the reciprocal function in the first quadrant of the 
Cartesian plane, where the value of the independent variable is positive. The dashed curve 
shows the negative reciprocal function in the fourth quadrant, where, again, the value of the 
independent variable is positive. The functions are
f (x) = x −1
x
f(x) = x –1
for x > 0
–f(x) = –x –1
for x > 0
Each
axis division
is 1 unit
Value
of
function
What are
the limits?
Figure 19-4  Graphs of the reciprocal function (solid 
curve) and its negative (dashed curve) 
in the first and fourth quadrants of the 
Cartesian plane, where x > 0. Each axis 
division represents 1 unit.

and
−f (x) = −x −1
As the value of x increases without end, both of these functions approach, but never reach, 0. 
We can therefore write
Lim
x→∞f (x) = 0
and
Lim
x→∞−f (x) = 0
As the value of x becomes arbitrarily small but remains positive, both of these functions 
approach singularity. The reciprocal function “blows up positively” while the negative recipro-
cal function “blows up negatively.” Therefore, we must conclude that neither
Lim
x→0 f (x)
nor
Lim
x→0 −f (x)
exists. It’s tempting to claim that
Lim
x→0 f (x) = +∞
and
Lim
x→0 −f (x) = −∞
However, we haven’t explicitly defined +∞ (“positive infinity”) or −∞ (“negative infinity”), so 
such statements are informal at best.
Right-hand limit at a point
Consider again the reciprocal function
f (x) = x −1
To specify that we approach 0 from the positive direction, we can refine the limit notation by 
placing a plus sign after the 0, as follows:
Lim
x→+
0 f (x)
This expression reads, “The limit of f (x) as x approaches 0 from the positive direction.” We 
can also say, “The limit of f (x) as x approaches 0 from the right.” (In most graphs where x 
is on the horizontal axis, the value of x becomes more positive as we move toward the right.) 
Limits of Functions  391

392  Sequences, Series, and Limits
This sort of limit is called a right-hand limit. Because f is singular where x = 0, this particular 
limit is not defined.
Left-hand limit at a point
Let’s expand the domain of f  to the entire set of reals except 0, for which f  is not defined 
because 0−1 is meaningless. Suppose that we start out with negative real values of x and 
approach 0 from the left. As we do this, f  decreases endlessly. Another way of saying this is 
that f  increases negatively without limit, or that it “blows up negatively.” Therefore,
Lim
x→−
0
f (x)
is not defined. We read the above symbolic expression as, “The limit of f (x) as x approaches 
0 from the negative direction.” We can also say, “The limit of f (x) as x approaches 0 from the 
left.” This sort of limit is called a left-hand limit.
An example
Let’s consider a function g that takes the reciprocal of twice the independent variable. If the 
independent variable is x, then we have
g (x) = (2x) −1
Imagine that we allow x to be any positive real number. As x gets arbitrarily large positively, g (x) 
gets arbitrarily small positively, approaching 0 but never quite getting there. We can say, “The 
limit of g (x), as x approaches infinity, is 0,” and write
Lim
x→∞g (x) = 0
This scenario is similar to what happens with the reciprocal function, except that this func-
tion g approaches 0 at a different rate than the reciprocal function as the independent variable 
becomes arbitrarily large.
Now let’s see what happens when x gets smaller but stays positive, so that g (x) gets larger. 
If we make x close enough to 0, we can make g (x) as large as we want. This function, like the 
reciprocal function, “blows up” as x approaches 0 from the positive direction, but at a different 
rate. Therefore
Lim
x→+
0 g (x)
is not defined.
Another example
Suppose that x is a positive real-number variable, and we want to evaluate
Lim
x→∞1/x 2
Let’s start out with x at some positive real number for which the function is defined. As we 
increase the value of x, the value of 1/x 2 decreases, but it always remains positive. If we choose 
some tiny positive real number r, no matter how close to 0 it might be, we can always find 

some large value of x for which 1/x 2 is smaller than r. Therefore, as x grows without bound, 
1/x 2 approaches 0, telling us that
Lim
x
x→∞
=
/
1
0
2
Still another example
Again, let x be a positive real-number variable. This time, let’s evaluate
Lim
x→+
0 1/x 2
Suppose that we start out with x at some positive real number for which the function is defined and 
then decrease x, letting it get arbitrarily close to 0 but always remaining positive. As we decrease the 
value of x, the value of 1/x2 remains positive and increases. If we choose some large positive real 
number s, no matter how gigantic, we can always find some small, positive value of x for which 1/x2 
is larger than s. As x becomes arbitrarily small positively, 1/x2 grows without bound, so
Lim
x
x→+
0
2
1/
is not defined.
Are you confused?
It’s easy to get mixed up by the meanings of negative direction and positive direction, and how 
these relate to the notions of left hand and right hand. These terms are based on the assumption 
that we’re talking about the horizontal axis in a graph, and that this axis represents the indepen-
dent variable. In most graphs of this type, the value of the independent variable gets more negative 
as we move to the left, and it gets more positive as we move to the right.
As we travel along the horizontal axis, we might be in positive territory the whole time; we might be 
in negative territory the whole time; we might cross over from the negative side to the positive side or vice 
versa. Whenever we come toward a point from the left, we approach from the negative direction, even if 
that point corresponds to something like x = 567. Whenever we come toward a point from the right, we 
approach from the positive direction, even if the point is at x = −53,535. The location of the point doesn’t 
matter. The important consideration is the direction from which we approach the point.
Here’s a challenge!
Consider the base-10 logarithm function (symbolized log10). Sketch a graph of the function f (x) = 
log10 x for values of x from 0.1 to 10, and for values of f from −1 to 1. Then determine
Lim
x→−
5 log10 x
Solution
Figure 19-5 is a graph of the function f (x) = log10 x for values of x from 0.1 to 10, and for values 
of f from −1 to 1. The function varies smoothly throughout this span. If we start at values of x a 
little smaller than 5 and work our way toward 5, the value of f approaches log10 5. Therefore, 
Lim
x→−
5 log10 x =  log10 5
Limits of Functions  393

394  Sequences, Series, and Limits
Memorable Limits of Series
Certain limits of series are found often in calculus and analysis. If you plan to go on to Calculus 
Know-It-All after finishing this book, you’re certain to see the three examples that follow!
An example
Imagine an infinite series where we take a positive integer i and then divide it by the square of 
another positive integer n. Symbolically, we write this as
i=
∞
∑
1
i/n 2
When we expand this series out, we write it as
1/n 2 + 2/n 2 + 3/n 2 + ··· + n/n 2 + ···
which simplifies to
(1 + 2 + 3 + ··· + n + ···)/n 2
x
5
10
1
–1
0
f(x)
We “close in”
on this point ...
... from
the negative
direction
log 10 x
=
Common logarithm function
f(x)
Figure 19-5  An example of the limit of a 
function as we approach a point 
from the negative direction.

Suppose that we let n grow endlessly larger, increasing the number of terms in the series. Let’s 
consider
Lim
n→∞(1 + 2 + 3 + ··· + n)/n 2
As things work out, this limit is equal to 1/2. Therefore
Lim
n→∞
i
n
=∑
1
i/n 2 = 1/2
Another example
Now imagine an infinite series where we square a positive integer i and then divide it by the 
cube of another positive integer n. Symbolically, we write this as
i=
∞
∑
1
i 2/n 3
We can expand it to
12/n 3 + 22/n 3 + 32/n 3 + ··· + n 2/n 3 + ···
which simplifies to
(12 + 22 + 32 + ··· + n 2 + ···)/n 3
As n grows endlessly larger, we have
Lim
n→∞(12 + 22 + 32 + ··· + n 2)/n 3
This limit turns out to be 1/3. Therefore
Lim
n→∞
i
n
=∑
1
i 2/n 3 = 1/3
Still another example
Finally, let’s look at an infinite series where we cube a positive integer i and then divide it by 
the fourth power of another positive integer n. Symbolically, we write this as
i=
∞
∑
1
i 3/n 4
When we write this series out, we obtain
13/n 4 + 23/n 4 + 33/n 4 + ··· + n 3/n 4 + ···
which simplifies to
 (13 + 23 + 33 + ··· + n 3 + ···)/n 4
Memorable Limits of Series  395

396  Sequences, Series, and Limits
As n grows endlessly larger, we have
Lim
n→∞(13 + 23 + 33 + ··· + n 3)/n 4
This limit turns out to be 1/4. Therefore
Lim
n→∞
i
n
=∑
1
i 3/n 4 = 1/4
Practice Exercises
This is an open-book quiz. You may (and should) refer to the text as you solve these problems. 
Don’t hurry! You’ll find worked-out answers in App. B. The solutions in the appendix may not 
represent the only way a problem can be figured out. If you think you can solve a particular 
problem in a quicker or better way than you see there, by all means try it!
 1. Figure 19-6 is a graph of the first few elements of an infinite arithmetic sequence. If we 
call the sequence S, then
S = s 0, (s 0 + c), (s 0 + 2c), (s 0 + 3c), ...
 
 where s0 is the initial term value and c is a constant. Based on the information given in 
this graph, what is s0? What is c? What is the value of the hundredth term in S?
2
4
6
0
–2
–4
2
4
6
Term value
–6
3
5
1
Term number
5, 3, 1, –1, –3, –5, ...
Figure 19-6 Illustration for Problem 1.

 2. Does the infinite arithmetic sequence described in Problem 1 converge? If so, on what 
value does it converge? If not, why not?
 3. The general form for an infinite geometric sequence T is
T = t0, t 0k, t 0k2, t 0k 3, t 0k 4, ...
 
 where t0 is the initial value and k is the constant of multiplication. Calculate, and write 
down, the first seven terms in an infinite geometric sequence T where t 0 = 2 and k = −4. 
Does this sequence converge? If so, on what value does it converge? If not, why not?
 4. Suppose that in the scenario of Problem 3, we change k from −4 to −1/4. Calculate and 
list the first seven values of the resulting infinite sequence. Does it converge? If so, on 
what value does it converge? If not, why not?
 5. Consider again the sequence we saw earlier in this chapter:
B = 0/1, 1/2, 2/3, 3/4, 4/5, ..., (n − 1)/n, ...
 
 We determined that the limit of B, as n grows without end, is
Lim
n→∞(n − 1)/n = 1
 
 so we know that B converges. Write down the series B+ that we get when we add the 
elements of B. Then write down the first five terms of the sequence B*, which is made 
up of the partial sums in B+. Does the sequence B* converge? If so, to what value does it 
converge? If not, why not?
 6. Express the following series by writing out the first five terms followed by an ellipsis:
S+ = 
i
n
=∑
1
1/10i
 
 First, express the terms as fractions. Then express them as powers of 10. Then express 
them as decimal quantities. Finally, write down the first five terms in the sequence S* of 
partial sums.
 7. Find the following limit if it exists. If no limit exists, explain:
Lim
n→∞
i
n
=∑
1
1/10i
 8. Using a calculator, plug in n = 2, n = 6, n = 10, and n = 20 to informally illustrate that
Lim
n→∞(1 + 2 + 3 + ··· + n)/n 2 = 1/2 = 0.5
 
 and therefore that
Lim
n→∞
i
n
=∑
1
i/n 2 = 1/2 = 0.5
 
 Work out the partial sums to obtain decimal quantities. Round off your results to five 
decimal places when you encounter repeating or lengthy decimals.
 9. Using a calculator, plug in n = 2, n = 6, n = 10, and n = 20 to informally illustrate that
 Lim
n→∞(12 + 22 + 32 + ··· + n 2)/n 3 = 1/3 = 0.33333...
Practice Exercises  397

398  Sequences, Series, and Limits
 
 and therefore that
Lim
n→∞
i
n
=∑
1
i 2/n 3 = 1/3 = 0.33333...
 
 Work out the partial sums to obtain decimal quantities. Round off your results to five 
decimal places when you encounter repeating or lengthy decimals.
 10. Using a calculator, plug in n = 2, n = 6, n = 10, and n = 20 to informally illustrate that
Lim
n→∞(13 + 23 + 33 + ··· + n 3 )/n 4 = 1/4 = 0.25
 
 and therefore that
Lim
n→∞
i
n
=∑
1
i 3/n 4 = 1/4 = 0.25
 
 Work out the partial sums to obtain decimal quantities. Round off your results to five 
decimal places when you encounter repeating or lengthy decimals.

Part Two
This is not a test! It’s a review of important general concepts you learned in the previous nine 
chapters. Read it though slowly and let it sink in. If you’re confused about anything here, or 
about anything in the section you’ve just finished, go back and study that material some more.
Chapter 11
Question 11-1
What’s a mathematical relation?
Answer 11-1
A relation is a clearly defined way of assigning, or mapping, some or all of the elements of a 
source set to some or all of the elements of a destination set. Suppose that X is the source set 
for a relation, and Y is the destination set for the same relation. In that case, the relation can 
be expressed as a collection of ordered pairs of the form (x,y), where x is an element of set X
and y is an element of set Y.
Question 11-2
What’s an injection, also known as an injective relation?
Answer 11-2
Imagine two sets X and Y. Suppose that a relation assigns each element of X to exactly one ele-
ment of Y. Also suppose that, according to the same relation, an element of Y never has more 
than one mate in X. (Some elements of Y might have no mates in X.) In a situation like this, 
the relation is an injection.
Question 11-3
What’s a surjection, also called an onto relation?
399
CHAPTER 
20
Review Questions and Answers

400  Review Questions and Answers
Answer 11-3
Again, imagine two sets X and Y. Suppose that according to a certain relation, every element 
of Y has at least one (and maybe more than one) mate in X, so that no element of Y is left out. 
A relation of this type is a surjection from X onto Y.
Question 11-4
What’s a bijection, also called a one-to-one correspondence?
Answer 11-4
A bijection is a relation that’s both an injection and a surjection. Given two sets X and Y, a 
bijection assigns every element of X to exactly one element of Y, and vice versa. This is why a 
bijection is sometimes called a one-to-one correspondence.
Question 11-5
What’s a two-space function? Is every two-space function a relation? Is every two-space rela-
tion a function?
Answer 11-5
A two-space function is a relation between two sets that never maps any element of the source 
set to more than one element of the destination set. All two-space functions are relations. 
However, not all two-space relations are functions.
Question 11-6
What’s the vertical-line test for the graph of a two-space function?
Answer 11-6
The vertical-line test is a quick way to determine, based on the graph of a two-space relation, 
whether or not the relation is a function. Imagine an infinitely long, movable line that’s always 
parallel to the dependent-variable axis (usually the vertical axis). Suppose that we’re free to 
move the line to the left or right, so it intersects the independent-variable axis (usually the 
horizontal axis) wherever we want. The graph is a function of the independent variable if and 
only if the movable vertical line never intersects the graph at more than one point.
Question 11-7
Based on the vertical-line test, which of the curves in Fig. 20-1 are functions of x within the 
span of values for which −6 < x < 6?
Answer 11-7
Only f is a function of x. If we construct a movable vertical line (always parallel to the y axis), 
it never intersects the curve for f at more than one point over the span of values for which −6
< x < 6. However, the movable vertical line intersects the curve for g at more than one point 
for some values of x where −6 < x < 6. The same is true of the curve for h.
Question 11-8
Suppose we’re working in the polar coordinate plane, and we encounter the graph of a relation 
where the independent variable is represented by q (the direction angle) and the dependent 

variable is represented by r (the radial distance from the origin). How can we tell if the relation 
is a function of q ?
Answer 11-8
We can draw the graph of the relation in a Cartesian plane, plotting values of q along the 
horizontal axis, and plotting values of r along the vertical axis. We can allow both q and r to 
attain all possible real-number values. Then we can use the Cartesian vertical-line test to see if 
the relation is a function of q.
Question 11-9
How do functions add, subtract, multiply, and divide?
Answer 11-9
To add one function to another, we add both sides of their equations. This can be done in 
either order, producing identical results. If f1 and f2 are functions of x, then
( f1 + f2)(x) = f1(x) + f2(x)
and
( f2 + f1)(x) = f2(x) + f1(x)
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
4
f
g
h
Figure 20-1 Illustration for Question and Answer 11-7.
Part Two  401

402  Review Questions and Answers
To subtract one function from another, we subtract both sides of their equations. This can be 
done in either order, usually producing different results. If f1 and f2 are functions of x, then
( f1 −f2)(x) = f1(x) −f2(x)
and
( f2 −f1)(x) = f2(x) −f1(x)
To multiply one function by another, we multiply both sides of their equations. This can be 
done in either order, producing identical results. If f1 and f2 are functions of x, then
( f1 × f2)(x) = f1(x) × f2(x)
and
( f2 × f1)(x) = f2(x) × f1(x)
To divide one function by another, we divide both sides of their equations. This can be done 
in either order, usually producing different results. If f1 and f2 are functions of x, then
( f1/f2)(x) = f1(x)/f2(x)
and
( f2/f1)(x) = f2(x)/f1(x)
Question 11-10
When we add, subtract, multiply, or divide functions, we must adhere to three important 
rules. What are they?
Answer 11-10
First, we must be sure that the functions both operate on the same thing. In other words, the 
independent variables must describe the same parameters or phenomena. Second, we must 
restrict the domain of the resultant function to only those values that are in the domains of 
both functions (the intersection of the domains). Third, if we divide a function by another 
function, we can’t define the resultant function for any value of the independent variable 
where the denominator function becomes 0.
Chapter 12
Question 12-1
How can we informally define the inverse of a relation?

Part Two  403
Answer 12-1
The inverse of a relation is another relation that undoes whatever the original relation does. 
Also, the original relation undoes whatever its inverse does.
Question 12-2
How can we rigorously define the inverse of a relation?
Answer 12-2
Let f   be a relation where x is the independent variable and y is the dependent variable. The 
inverse relation for f is another relation f   −1 such that
f   −1 [f (x)] = x
for all values of x in the domain of f, and
f [f   −1 (y)] = y
for all values of y in the range of f.
Question 12-3
Suppose we’ve drawn the graph of a relation f in the Cartesian xy plane. How can we create 
the graph of the inverse relation f −1?
Answer 12-3
Imagine the line y = x as a “point reflector.” For any point on the graph of f, its counterpoint 
on the graph of f −1 lies on the opposite side of the line y = x but the same distance away, as 
shown in Fig. 20-2. Mathematically, we can do this transformation by reversing the sequence 
of the ordered pair representing the point. When we want to obtain the graph of f −1 based on 
the graph of f, we can “flip the whole graph over in three dimensions” around the line y = x,
as if that line were the hinge of a revolving door.
Question 12-4
Is it possible for a relation to be its own inverse?
Answer 12-4
Yes. The simplest example is the relation described in the Cartesian xy plane by the equation
y = x
which can also be written as
f (x) = x
Another, less obvious example, is
y = −x

404  Review Questions and Answers
which can also be written as
f (x) = −x
If a relation’s graph is a circle centered at the origin, then that relation is its own inverse. 
Examples include all relations of the form
x2 + y2 = r2
where r is the radius of the circle. We can also write such a relation in the form
f (x) = ±(r2 −x2)1/2
Question 12-5
How can we tell, simply by looking at the graph of a relation, whether or not that relation is 
its own inverse?
Answer 12-5
Suppose that when we “flip the graph over in three dimensions” along the line y = x as if that 
line were the hinge of a revolving door, we end up with exactly the same graph as the one we 
started with. In any case like that, the relation is its own inverse. If we do the “revolving door” 
transformation and end up with a graph that’s different in any way from the one we started 
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
“Point
reflector”
line
y = x
Original
Inverse
Original
Inverse
Original
Inverse
Original
Inverse
Figure 20-2 Illustration for Question and Answer 12-3.

Part Two  405
with, then the relation isn’t its own inverse. Figure 20-3 shows an example of a graph of the 
second type, where the inverse obviously differs from the original relation.
Question 12-6
Suppose we have a relation that’s not a function, because it maps some values of the indepen-
dent variable x to more than one value of the dependent variable y. Is it possible to modify 
such a relation so that it becomes a function of x?
Answer 12-6
Yes, in most cases it’s possible. If we can restrict the domain or the range to values such that 
the modified relation never maps any value of x to more than one value of y, then the modified 
relation is a function of x.
Question 12-7
Is the inverse of a function always a function?
Answer 12-7
No, not always. Suppose we have a function f that maps values of an independent variable x
to values of a dependent variable y. Also imagine that, for any value of x in the domain, there’s 
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
y = x
4
Flip whole graph
over
by 1/2 revolution
along this line
Graph of
original relation
Graph of inverse
relation
Figure 20-3 Illustration for Question and Answer 12-5.

406  Review Questions and Answers
only one corresponding value of y in the range. On that basis, we know that f  is a function of 
x. However, if some values of y are mapped from two or more values of x, then we don’t have a 
function of y when we consider y as the independent variable and x as the dependent variable. 
Although the inverse f −1 is a relation, it’s not a true function.
Question 12-8
Consider a function f that maps values of x to values of y. Suppose that f −1, which maps values 
of y to values of x, is a relation but not a true function. Is it possible to modify the inverse 
relation f −1 so that it becomes a function of y?
Answer 12-8
In most cases, yes. If we can restrict the inverse relation’s domain (the set of y values for which 
f −1 is defined) or the inverse relation’s range (the set of x values for which f −1 is defined) so 
that the modified version of f −1 never maps any value of y to more than one value of x, then 
the modified inverse is a true function of y.
Question 12-9
Consider the two functions
f (x) = x
and
g (x) = −x
Both f and g are their own inverses, and the inverses are also true functions. Is it possible for any 
other true function to be its own inverse, with that inverse also constituting a true function?
Answer 12-9
Yes, this can happen. Consider the real-number function
h (x) = 1/x
where x ≠ 0. This function is its own inverse, because
h −1[h (x)] = h −1(1/x) = 1/(1/x) = x
and
h[h −1(x)] = h (1/x) = 1/(1/x) = x
Question 12-10
Imagine a function f such that
y = f (x)

Part Two  407
and whose inverse f    −1 is a true function, so that
f   −1(y) = x
for all values of x in the domain of f, and for all values of y in the range of f. Based on this 
information, what can we conclude about the nature of the mapping that f represents between 
the elements of its domain and the elements of its range?
Answer 12-10
Every element x in the domain maps to exactly one element y in the range, and every element 
y in the range is mapped from exactly one element x in the domain. Therefore, within the 
specified domain and range, the mapping that f represents is a one-to-one correspondence, 
technically known as a bijection.
Chapter 13
Question 13-1
What are the four basic types of conic sections? What do they look like in the Cartesian 
plane?
Answer 13-1
The conic sections are geometric curves representing the intersection of a plane with a double 
cone. There are four types: the circle, the ellipse, the parabola, and the hyperbola. Figure 20-4 
shows generic graphs of each type of conic section in the Cartesian plane. 
Question 13-2
How are the conic sections generated in 3D geometry?
Answer 13-2
When the plane is perpendicular to the axis of the double cone, we get a circle, as shown in 
Fig. 20-5A. When the plane is not perpendicular to the axis of the cone but the intersection 
curve is closed, we get an ellipse ( Fig. 20-5B). When we tilt the plane just enough to open up 
the curve, we get a parabola ( Fig. 20-5C). When we tilt the plane still more, we get a hyper-
bola ( Fig. 20-5D).
Question 13-3
What is meant by the term “eccentricity” with respect to a conic section? How do the eccen-
tricity values compare for a circle, an ellipse, a parabola, and a hyperbola?
Answer 13-3
Eccentricity (symbolized e) is a nonnegative real number that defines the extent to which a 
conic section differs from a circle. Here’s how the eccentricity values compare for the four 
types of conic section:
• A circle has e = 0
• An ellipse has 0 < e < 1

408  Review Questions and Answers
• A parabola has e = 1
• A hyperbola has e > 1
Question 13-4
What’s the focus of a parabola? What’s the directrix of a parabola? How are they related?
Answer 13-4
The focus of a parabola is a point in the same plane as the parabola, and the directrix is a line 
in that plane that does not pass through the focus. On a parabola, every point is equidistant 
from a specific focus and a specific directrix, as shown in Fig. 20-6. For any particular focus 
and directrix in geometric space, there exists exactly one parabola. Conversely, for any particu-
lar parabola in space, there exists exactly one focus, and exactly one directrix.
Question 13-5
What’s the focal length of a parabola?
Figure 20-4 Illustration for Question and Answer 13-1.
Circle
Ellipse
Parabola
Hyperbola

Part Two  409
Circle
Ellipse
Parabola
Hyperbola
A
B
D
C
Figure 20-5 Illustration for Question and Answer 13-2.
Focus
Directrix
Parabola
For any point
on the parabola,
these distances
are equal
Figure 20-6 Illustration for Question and Answer 13-4.

410  Review Questions and Answers
Answer 13-5
The focal length of a parabola is the distance between the focus and the point on the parabola 
closest to the focus. The focal length is also equal to half the distance between the focus and 
the point on the directrix closest to the focus.
Question 13-6
What’s the standard-form general equation for a circle in the Cartesian xy plane?
Answer 13-6
The standard-form general equation is
(x −x0)2 + (y −y0)2 = r2
where x0 and y0 are real-number constants that tell us the coordinates (x0,y0) of the center of 
the circle, and r is a positive real-number constant that tells us the radius of the circle.
Question 13-7
What’s the standard-form general equation for an ellipse in a Cartesian xy plane where the 
x axis is horizontal and the y axis is vertical?
Answer 13-7
The standard-form general equation is
(x −x0)2/a2 + (y −y0)2/b2 = 1
where x0 and y0 are real-number constants representing the coordinates (x0,y0) of the center of 
the ellipse, a is a positive real-number constant that tells us the length of the horizontal semi-
axis, and b is a positive real-number constant that tells us the length of the vertical semi-axis.
Question 13-8
What’s the standard-form general equation for a parabola that opens upward or downward in 
a Cartesian xy plane where the x axis is horizontal and the y axis is vertical?
Answer 13-8
The standard-form general equation is
y = ax2 + bx + c
where a, b, and c are real-number constants, and a ≠ 0. If a > 0, the parabola opens upward. 
If a < 0, the parabola opens downward.
Question 13-9
How can we locate the coordinates (x0,y0) of the vertex point on a parabola that opens upward 
or downward in a Cartesian xy plane where the x axis is horizontal and the y axis is vertical? 

How can we tell whether that vertex point represents the absolute minimum value of y or the 
absolute maximum value of y?
Answer 13-9
We can find the coordinates (x0,y0) of the vertex point based on the constants in the standard-
form equation of the parabola. The x value is
x0 = −b/(2a)
The y value is
y0 = −b2/(4a) + c
If a > 0, the parabola opens upward, so the vertex represents the absolute minimum value of 
y on the curve. If a < 0, the parabola opens downward, so the vertex represents the absolute 
maximum value of y on the curve.
Question 13-10
What’s the standard-form general equation for a hyperbola that opens toward the right and 
left in a Cartesian xy plane where the x axis is horizontal and the y axis is vertical?
Answer 13-10
The standard-form general equation is
(x −x0)2/a2 − (y −y0)2/b2 = 1
where x0 and y0 are real-number constants that tell us the coordinates (x0,y0) of the center of 
the hyperbola, a is a positive real-number constant that tells us the length of the horizontal 
semi-axis, and b is a positive real-number constant that tells us the length of the vertical 
semi-axis.
Chapter 14
Question 14-1
How can we informally describe the graph of the function
y = ex
in the Cartesian xy plane?
Answer 14-1
The graph is a smooth, continually increasing curve that crosses the y axis at the point (0,1). The 
domain is the set of all real numbers, and the range is the set of all positive real numbers. The 
curve is entirely contained within the first and second quadrants. As we move to the left (in 
the negative x direction), the curve approaches, but never reaches, the x axis. As we move to 
the right (in the positive x direction), the graph rises at an ever-increasing rate.
Part Two  411

412  Review Questions and Answers
Question 14-2
How can we informally describe the graph of the function
y = e−x
in the Cartesian xy plane?
Answer 14-2
The graph is a smooth, continually decreasing curve that crosses the y axis at (0,1). The domain 
is the set of all real numbers, and the range is the set of all positive real numbers. The curve is 
entirely contained within the first and second quadrants. As we move to the right, the curve 
approaches the x axis but never quite reaches that axis. As we move to the left, the graph rises 
at an ever-increasing rate. In fact, the curve for the function
y = e−x
has exactly the same shape as the curve for the function
y = ex
but is reversed left-to-right around the y axis, so the two graphs are horizontal mirror images 
of each other.
Question 14-3
How can we informally describe the graphs of the functions
y = 10x
and
y = 10−x
in the Cartesian xy plane?
Answer 14-3
The graphs of these functions are curves that closely resemble the graphs of the functions
y = ex
and
y = e−x
respectively. Both base-10 graphs cross the y axis at (0,1), just as the base-e graphs do. How-
ever, the contours differ. The base-10 curves are somewhat steeper than the base-e curves.

Question 14-4
How can we visually and qualitatively compare the graphs of the four functions described in 
Questions 14-1 through 14-3?
Answer 14-4
We can graph them all together on a generic rectangular-coordinate grid such as the one 
shown in Fig. 20-7.
Question 14-5
How can we informally describe the graph of the function
y = ln x
in the Cartesian xy plane?
Answer 14-5
The graph is a smooth, continually increasing curve that crosses the x axis at the point (1,0). The 
domain is the set of positive real numbers, and the range is the set of all real numbers. The 
curve is entirely contained within the first and fourth quadrants. As we move to the left (in 
the negative x direction) from the point (1,0), the curve “blows up negatively,” approaching 
the y axis but never reaching it. As we move to the right from (1,0), the graph rises at an ever-
decreasing rate.
Part Two  413
y = ex
y = 10 x
y = 10–x
y = e–x
(0, 1)
+x
+y
–x
–y
Figure 20-7 Illustration for Question and Answer 14-4.

414  Review Questions and Answers
Question 14-6
How can we verbally describe the graph of
y = ln (1/x)
in the Cartesian xy plane?
Answer 14-6
The graph is a smooth, continually decreasing curve that crosses the y axis at (1,0). The domain 
is the set of positive real numbers, and the range is the set of all real numbers. The curve is 
entirely contained within the first and fourth quadrants. As we move to the left from the point 
(1,0), the curve “blows up positively,” approaching the y axis but never reaching it. As we move 
to the right from (1,0), the graph falls at an ever-decreasing rate. In fact, the curve representing
y = ln (1/x)
has exactly the same shape as the curve for
y = ln x
but is reversed top-to-bottom with respect to the x axis, so the two graphs are vertical mirror 
images of each other.
Question 14-7
How can we informally describe the graphs of the common-log functions
y = log10 x
and
y = log10 (1/x)
in the Cartesian xy plane?
Answer 14-7
The graphs of these functions closely resemble the graphs of the functions
y = ln x
and
y = ln (1/x)
respectively. Both common-log graphs cross the x axis at (1,0), just as the natural-log graphs do. 
However, the contours differ. The natural-log curves are somewhat steeper than the common-
log curves.

Part Two  415
Question 14-8
How can we visually and qualitatively compare the graphs of the four functions described in 
Questions 14-5 through 14-7?
Answer 14-8
We can graph them all together on a generic rectangular-coordinate grid such as the one 
shown in Fig. 20-8.
Question 14-9
How can we plot the graph of the sum of two functions or the difference between two functions?
Answer 14-9
There are two ways in which this can be done. First, we can graph the original functions 
separately, and then add or subtract their values visually to infer the sum or difference graph. 
Second, we can calculate several outputs for each function using inputs that we’ve selected to 
get a good sampling. Then we can add or subtract these outputs arithmetically. Based on that 
data, we can graph the sum or difference function.
Question 14-10
Texts don’t always agree in the denotation of logarithmic functions. How can we avoid confu-
sion when we write our own papers?
(1, 0)
y = ln x
y = ln (1/x)
y = log
x
10
y = log
(1/x)
10
+x
+y
–x
–y
Figure 20-8 Illustration for Question and Answer 14-8.

416  Review Questions and Answers
Answer 14-10
We should always clarify the logarithmic base when we write “log” followed by anything. For 
example, we should write “log10” or “loge” instead of “log” (unless we can’t portray the sub-
script within the constraints of a text-editing or Web site–building program). We don’t need 
to write a subscript when we write “ln” to denote the natural logarithm, because “ln” means 
natural log or base-e log all the time.
Chapter 15
Special note
If you want to see graphical illustrations of the answers to the following 10 questions, feel free 
to look back at Chap. 15. Try to envision or draw the graphs yourself before you look back!
Question 15-1
Consider a function f of a real-number variable q such that
f (q) = sin q + cos q
What are the period, the positive peak amplitude and the negative peak amplitude of f   ? What 
are the domain and range of f   ?
Answer 15-1
The period of f  is 2p. That’s the same as the period of the sine. It’s also the same as the period 
of the cosine. The positive peak amplitude of f  is 21/2. The negative peak amplitude of f is 
−21/2. The domain of f   is the set of all real numbers. The range of f  is the set of all real num-
bers f (q) such that
−21/2 ≤f (q) ≤ 21/2
Question 15-2
Consider a function f of a real-number variable q such that
f (q) = sin q cos q
What are the period, the positive peak amplitude and the negative peak amplitude of f ? What 
are the domain and range of f ?
Answer 15-2
The period of f  is p, which is equal to half the period of the sine, and is also half the period 
of the cosine. The positive peak amplitude of f  is 1/2. The negative peak amplitude of f  is 
−1/2. The domain of f is the set of all real numbers. The range of f is the set of all real numbers 
f (q) such that
−1/2 ≤f (q) ≤ 1/2

Question 15-3
Consider a function f of a real-number variable q such that
f (q) = sin2 q + cos2 q
What are the period, the positive peak amplitude and the negative peak amplitude of f   ? What 
are the domain and range of f   ?
Answer 15-3
In this case, the function f has a constant value of 1. The period is not defined, because the 
function’s output value never changes, and is defined for all inputs. The positive peak ampli-
tude of f is equal to 1. The negative peak amplitude of f is also equal to 1. The domain of f is 
the set of all real numbers. The range of f is the set containing the single number 1.
Question 15-4
Consider a function f of a real-number variable q such that
f (q) = sec q + csc q
What are the period, the positive peak amplitude and the negative peak amplitude of f ? What 
are the domain and range of f ?
Answer 15-4
The period of f  is 2p, which is the same as the period of the secant, and the same as the period 
of the cosecant. The positive and negative peak amplitudes of f are not defined, because f
blows up in both the positive and negative directions whenever q is an integer multiple of p/2.
The domain of f is the set of all real numbers except the integer multiples of p /2. The range 
of f is the set of all real numbers.
Question 15-5
Consider a function f of a real-number variable q such that
f (q) = sec q csc q
What are the period, the positive peak amplitude and the negative peak amplitude of f ? What 
are the domain and range of f   ?
Answer 15-5
The period of f  is p, which is half the period of the secant, and half the period of the cose-
cant. The positive and negative peak amplitudes of f are undefined, because f  blows up both 
positively and negatively at all integer multiples of p /2. The domain of f  is the set of all real 
numbers except the integer multiples of p /2. The range is the set of all real numbers f (q)
such that
f (q) ≥ 2  or f (q) ≤−2
Part Two  417

418  Review Questions and Answers
Question 15-6
Consider a function f of a real-number variable q such that
f (q) = sec2 q + csc2 q
What are the period, the positive peak amplitude and the negative peak amplitude of f ? What 
are the domain and range of f ?
Answer 15-6
The period of f  is p /2, which is half the period of the secant squared, and half the period of the 
cosecant squared. The positive peak amplitude of f is undefined, because f “blows up” positively 
at all integer multiples of p /2. The negative peak amplitude of f is equal to 4, which occurs 
whenever q is an odd-integer multiple of p /4. The domain of f is the set of all real numbers 
except the integer multiples of p /2. The range is of f the set of all real numbers f (q) such that
f (q) ≥ 4
Question 15-7
Consider a function f of a real-number variable q such that
f (q) = tan q + cot q
What are the period, the positive peak amplitude and the negative peak amplitude of f   ? What 
are the domain and range of f   ?
Answer 15-7
The period of f   is p, which is the same as that of the tangent, and the same as that of the cotangent. 
The positive and negative peak amplitudes of f are both undefined, because f   blows up positively 
and negatively at all integer multiples of p /2. The domain of f is the set of all real numbers except 
the integer multiples of p /2. The range of f is the set of all real numbers f (q) such that
f (q) ≥ 2  or f (q) ≤−2
Question 15-8
Consider a function f of a real-number variable q such that
f (q) = tan q cot q
What are the period, the positive peak amplitude and the negative peak amplitude of f   ? What 
are the domain and range of f   ?
Answer 15-8
This particular function presents a strange situation. The graph of f is a horizontal, straight 
line with single-point gaps wherever q is an integer multiple of p /2. The period of f is p /2,
because the graph consists of infinitely many open line segments placed end to end, each of 

Part Two  419
length p /2. The positive peak amplitude of f is equal to 1. The negative peak amplitude of f
is also equal to 1. The domain of f   is the set of all real numbers except the integer multiples 
of p /2. The range is the set containing the single element 1.
Question 15-9
Consider a function f of a real-number variable q such that
f (q) = tan2 q + cot2 q
What are the period, the positive peak amplitude and the negative peak amplitude of f   ? What 
are the domain and range of f   ?
Answer 15-9
The period of f  is p /2, which is half that of the tangent squared, and is also half that of the 
cotangent squared. The positive peak amplitude of f is undefined, because the function blows up 
positively at all integer multiples of p /2. The negative peak amplitude of f  is equal to 2, which 
occurs whenever q is an odd-integer multiple of p /4. The domain of f is the set of all real num-
bers except the integer multiples of p /2. The range of f is the set of real numbers f (q) such that
f (q) ≥ 2
Question 15-10
Consider a function f of a real-number variable q such that
f (q) = (tan2 q)/(cot2 q)
What are the period, the positive peak amplitude and the negative peak amplitude of f ? What 
are the domain and range of f ?
Answer 15-10
The period of f    is p, which is the same as the period of the tangent squared, and is also the same 
as the period of the cotangent squared. The positive peak amplitude of  f   is undefined, because 
the function blows up positively at all odd-integer multiples of p /2. The negative peak ampli-
tude of f  is undefined as well, although f (q) approaches 0 whenever q approaches any integer 
multiple of p  from either side. (We can’t say that the negative peak amplitude is 0, because the 
function never actually attains that value.) The domain of  f   is the set of all real numbers except 
the integer multiples of p /2. The range of f   is the set of all positive real numbers.
Chapter 16
Question 16-1
What’s a parameter? What’s a set of parametric equations?
Answer 16-1
A parameter is an independent variable on which other variables depend. A set of parametric 
equations is a collection of equations, at least one of which has one or more variables that 

420  Review Questions and Answers
depend on the parameter. The parameter, which is often symbolized t, plays the role of master 
controller for the other variables in the system.
Question 16-2
Consider the pair of parametric equations
x = 3t
and
y = −t
where t is the parameter on which both x and y depend. How can we sketch a Cartesian graph 
of this system? How can we find an equivalent equation in terms of the variables x and y only, 
based on the graph?
Answer 16-2
We can input various values of t to both equations, and plot the ordered pairs (x,y) that come 
out of those equations. Following are some examples:
• When t = −2, we have x = 3 × (−2) = −6 and y = −1 × (−2) = 2.
• When t = −1, we have x = 3 × (−1) = −3 and y = −1 × (−1) = 1.
• When t = 0, we have x = 3 × 0 = 0 and y = −1 × 0 = 0.
• When t = 1, we have x = 3 × 1 = 3 and y = −1 × 1 = −1.
• When t = 2, we have x = 3 × 2 = 6 and y = −1 × 2 = −2.
When we plot the (x,y) ordered pairs based on this list as points on a Cartesian plane and then 
“connect the dots,” we get a line through the origin with a slope of −1/3, as shown in Fig. 20-9. 
In slope-intercept form, the line can be represented as
y = (−1/3)x
Question 16-3
Consider again the pair of parametric equations
x = 3t
and
y = −t
How can we use algebra alone (without the help of a graph) to determine the equivalent equa-
tion in terms of x and y only?
Answer 16-3
We can take the first parametric equation
x = 3t

Part Two  421
and multiply it through by −1/3 to get
(−1/3)x = (−1/3)(3t) = −t
Deleting the middle portion, we get
(−1/3)x = −t
The second parametric equation tells us that −t = y, so we can substitute directly in the above 
equation to obtain
(−1/3)x = y
which is identical to the following slope-intercept equation:
y = (−1/3)x
Question 16-4
Consider the pair of parametric equations
q = 3t
2
4
6
–6
–2
–4
x
y
2
6
4
t = 0
t = 1
t = 2
t = –1
t = –2
–2
–4
–6
Figure 20-9 Illustration for Question and Answer 16-2.

422  Review Questions and Answers
and
r = −t
where t is the parameter on which both q and r depend. How can we sketch a polar graph of 
this system?
Answer 16-4
We can input various values of t, restricting ourselves to values such that we see only the part 
of the graph corresponding to the first full counterclockwise rotation of the direction angle, 
where 0 ≤q ≤ 2p:
• When t = 0, we have q = 3 × 0 = 0 and r = −1 × 0 = 0.
• When t = p /4, we have q = 3p /4 and r = −p /4 ≈−0.79.
• When t = p /2, we have q = 3p /2  and r = −p /2 ≈−1.57.
• When t = 2p /3, we have q = 3 × 2p /3 = 2p  and r = −2p /3 ≈−2.09.
Figure 20-10 illustrates this graph, based on these four points and the intuitive knowledge 
that the graph must be a spiral, starting at the origin and expanding as we rotate counterclock-
wise. The graph is a little tricky, because all of the radii are negative! Also, we should remember 
that the concentric circles represent radial divisions on the polar coordinate grid; the straight 
lines represent angular divisions.
Figure 20-10  Illustration for Question and 
Answer 16-4. In this coordinate 
system, each radial division 
represents p /4 units.

Part Two  423
Question 16-5
Consider again the pair of parametric equations
q = 3t
and
r = −t
How can we use algebra to determine the equivalent equation in terms of q and r only?
Answer 16-5
The equation can be derived using the same algebraic process that we used in the Cartesian situ-
ation. We substitute q in place of x, and we substitute r in place of y. When we do that, we get
r = (−1/3)q
Question 16-6
What are the parametric equations for a circle centered at the origin in the Cartesian xy plane?
Answer 16-6
The parametric equations are
x = a cos t
and
y = a sin t
where a is the radius of the circle and t is the parameter.
Question 16-7
What are the parametric equations for a circle centered at the origin in the polar coordinate plane?
Answer 16-7
Let the polar direction angle be q, and let the polar radius be r. The parametric equations of a 
circle having radius a, and centered at the origin, are
q = t
and
r = a
where t is the parameter.

424  Review Questions and Answers
Question 16-8
Why does only one of the equations in Answer 16-7 contain the parameter t? Shouldn’t both 
equations contain it?
Answer 16-8
The parameter t has no effect in the second equation, because the polar radius r of a circle 
centered at the origin is always the same, no matter how anything else varies.
Question 16-9
What are the parametric equations for an ellipse centered at the origin in the Cartesian xy plane?
Answer 16-9
The parametric equations are
x = a cos t
and
y = b sin t
where a is the length of the horizontal (x-coordinate) semi-axis, b is the length of the vertical 
(y-coordinate) semi-axis, and t is the parameter.
Question 16-10
Why is the passage of time a common parameter in science and engineering?
Answer 16-10
In the physical world, many effects and phenomena depend on elapsed time. If we find time 
acting as a mathematical variable, then that variable is almost always independent. We often 
come across situations where two or more factors fluctuate with the passage of time. An 
example is the variation of temperature, humidity, and barometric pressure versus time in a 
specific location. In a situation of this sort, time can be considered as the parameter on which 
the other three physical variables depend.
Chapter 17
Question 17-1
What information do we need to determine the equation of a plane in Cartesian xyz space?
Answer 17-1
We can find an equation for a plane in Cartesian xyz space if we know the direction of at least 
one vector that’s perpendicular to the plane, and if we know the coordinates of at least one 
point in the plane. We don’t have to know the magnitude of the vector, but only its direction. 
The point’s coordinates don’t have to tell us where the vector begins or ends; the point can be 
anywhere in the plane.

Part Two  425
Question 17-2
Imagine a plane that passes through a point whose coordinates are (x0,y0,z0) in Cartesian xyz space. 
Also suppose that we’ve found a vector ai + bj + ck that’s normal (perpendicular) to the plane. 
Based on this information, how can we write down an equation that represents the plane?
Answer 17-2
We can write the plane’s equation in the standard form
a(x −x0) + b(y −y0) + c(z −z0) = 0
We can also write the equation as
ax + by + cz + d = 0
where d is a constant that works out to
d = −ax0 −by0 −cz0
Question 17-3
What’s the general equation for a sphere centered at the origin and having radius r in Cartesian 
xyz space?
Answer 17-3
The equation can be written in the standard form
x2 + y2 + z2 = r2
Question 17-4
What’s the general equation for a sphere of radius r in Cartesian xyz space, centered at a point 
whose coordinates are (x0,y0,z0)?
Answer 17-4
The equation can be written in the standard form
(x −x0)2 + (y −y0)2 + (z −z0)2 = r2
Question 17-5
Can a sphere have a negative radius in Cartesian xyz space?
Answer 17-5
Normally, we define a sphere’s radius as a positive real number. Nevertheless, spheres with 
negative radii can exist in theory. If we encounter a sphere whose radius happens to be defined 

426  Review Questions and Answers
as a negative real number, then that sphere has the same equation as it would if we defined 
the radius as the absolute value of that number. For all real numbers r, it’s always true that 
r2 = |r|2, so the following two equations:
(x −x0)2 + (y −y0)2 + (z −z0)2 = r2
and
(x −x0)2 + (y −y0)2 + (z −z0)2 = |r|2
are equivalent, whether r is positive or negative.
Question 17-6
What’s the general equation for a distorted sphere in Cartesian xyz space?
Answer 17-6
The equation can be written in the standard form
(x −x0)2/a2 + (y −y0)2/b2 + (z −z0)2/c2 = 1
where (x0,y0,z0) are the coordinates of the center, a is the is the axial radius in the x direction, 
b is the axial radius in the y direction, and c is the axial radius in the z direction. Normally, all 
three of the constants a, b, and c are positive reals.
Question 17-7
There are three distinct classifications of distorted sphere. What are they? How can we tell, 
from the standard-form equation, which of these three types we have?
Answer 17-7
We can have an oblate sphere, an ellipsoid, or an oblate ellipsoid. We can tell which of these 
three types a particular standard-form equation represents by comparing the values of the axial 
radii a, b, and c. We have an oblate sphere if and only if two of the positive real-number axial 
radii are equal, and the third is smaller. In that case, one of the following is true:
a < b = c
b < a = c
c < a = b
We have an ellipsoid if and only if two of the positive real-number axial radii are equal, and the 
third is larger. Then one of the following is true:
a > b = c
b > a = c
c > a = b

Part Two  427
We have an oblate ellipsoid if and only if no two of the positive real-number axial radii are 
equal. In that scenario, all of the following are true:
 
a ≠b
 
b ≠c
 
a ≠c
Question 17-8
What’s the general equation for a hyperboloid of one sheet in Cartesian xyz space?
Answer 17-8
The equation can be written in one of the following standard forms:
(x −x0)2/a2 + (y −y0)2/b2 − (z −z0)2/c2 = 1
(x −x0)2/a2 − (y −y0)2/b2 + (z −z0)2/c2 = 1
−(x −x0)2/a2 + (y −y0)2/b2 + (z −z0)2/c2 = 1
where (x0,y0,z0) are the coordinates of the center, the constants a, b, and c are positive real 
numbers that define the object’s general shape, and the locations of the signs (plus and minus) 
define the object’s orientation with respect to the coordinate axes.
Question 17-9
What’s the general equation for a hyperboloid of two sheets in Cartesian xyz space?
Answer 17-9
The equation can be written in one of the following standard forms:
−(x −x0)2/a2 + (y −y0)2/b2 − (z −z0)2/c2 = 1
(x −x0)2/a2 − (y −y0)2/b2 − (z −z0)2/c2 = 1
−(x −x0)2/a2 − (y −y0)2/b2 + (z −z0)2/c2 = 1
where (x0,y0,z0) are the coordinates of the center, the constants a, b, and c are positive real 
numbers that define the object’s general shape, and the locations of the signs (plus and minus) 
define the object’s orientation with respect to the coordinate axes.
Question 17-10
What’s the general equation for an elliptic cone in Cartesian xyz space?
Answer 17-10
The equation can be written in one of the following standard forms:
(x −x0)2/a2 + (y −y0)2/b2 − (z −z0)2/c2 = 0
(x −x0)2/a2 − (y −y0)2/b2 + (z −z0)2/c2 = 0
−(x −x0)2/a2 + (y −y0)2/b2 + (z −z0)2/c2 = 0

428  Review Questions and Answers
where (x0,y0,z0) are the coordinates of the point where the apexes of the two halves of the 
double cone meet, the constants a, b, and c are positive real numbers that define the object’s 
general shape, and the locations of the signs (plus and minus) define the object’s orientation 
with respect to the coordinate axes. Don’t get confused by the similarity between these equa-
tions and those for hyperboloids of one sheet. The only difference is that the net values are all 
equal to 1 for the hyperboloids, and all equal to 0 for the cones.
Chapter 18
Question 18-1
What’s the general symmetric equation for a straight line in Cartesian xyz space?
Answer 18-1
Imagine that (x0,y0,z0) are the coordinates of a specific point. Suppose that a, b, and c are 
nonzero real-number constants. The general symmetric equation of a straight line passing 
through (x0,y0,z0) is
(x −x0)/a =  (y −y0)/b =  (z −z0)/c
The constants a, b, and c are called direction numbers. When considered all together as an 
ordered pair (a,b,c), these numbers define the direction or orientation of the line with respect 
to the coordinate axes.
Question 18-2
What are the general parametric equations for a straight line in Cartesian xyz space?
Answer 18-2
Let (x0,y0,z0) be the coordinates of a specific point, and suppose that a, b, and c are nonzero 
real-number constants. The general parametric equations for a straight line passing through 
(x0,y0,z0) are
x = x0 + at
y = y0 + bt
z = z0 + ct
where the parameter t can range over the entire set of real numbers. As with the symmetric 
form, the constants a, b, and c are direction numbers that tell us how the line is orientated 
relative to the coordinate axes.
Question 18-3
What is meant by the expression “preferred direction numbers” when describing the orienta-
tion of a straight line in Cartesian xyz space?
Answer 18-3
For any line in Cartesian xyz space, there are infinitely many ordered triples that can define its 
orientation with respect to the coordinate axes. For example, if a line has the direction numbers 
(a,b,c), then we can multiply all three entries by a real number other than 0 or 1, and we’ll get 

Part Two  429
another valid ordered triple of direction numbers for that same line. For the sake of simplicity and 
elegance, mathematicians usually reduce the direction numbers so that their only common divi-
sor is 1, and so that at most one of them is negative. Doing this produces a unique set of direction 
numbers “in lowest terms,” and these are the preferred direction numbers for the line.
Question 18-4
What are the generalized parametric equations for a parabola in Cartesian xyz space where the 
value of x is constant, and the curve’s axis is parallel to either the y axis or the z axis?
Answer 18-4
If x is constant and the axis of the parabola is parallel to the y axis, then the curve’s parametric 
equations are
x = c
y = a1t2 + a2t + a3
z = t
where a1, a2, and a3 are real-number coefficients, c is the real-number constant value to which 
x is held, and t is a parameter that can range over the set of all real numbers. If x is constant 
and the curve’s axis is parallel to the z axis, then the parametric equations are
x = c
y = t
z = a1t2 + a2t + a3
In either case, the parabola lies in a plane parallel to the yz plane.
Question 18-5
What are the generalized parametric equations for a parabola in Cartesian xyz space where the 
value of y is constant, and the curve’s axis is parallel to either the x axis or the z axis?
Answer 18-5
If y is constant and the axis of the parabola is parallel to the x axis, then the parametric equations are
x = a1t2 + a2t + a3
y = c
z = t
where a1, a2, and a3 are real-number coefficients, c is the real-number constant value to which 
y is held, and t is a parameter that can range over the set of all real numbers. If y is constant 
and the curve’s axis is parallel to the z axis, then the parametric equations are
x = t
y = c
z = a1t2 + a2t + a3
In either case, the parabola lies in a plane parallel to the xz plane.

430  Review Questions and Answers
Question 18-6
What are the generalized parametric equations for a parabola in Cartesian xyz space where the 
value of z is constant, and the curve’s axis is parallel to either the x axis or the y axis?
Answer 18-6
If z is constant and the axis of the parabola is parallel to the x axis, then the parametric equa-
tions are
x = a1t2 + a2t + a3
y = t
z = c
where a1, a2, and a3 are real-number coefficients, c is the real-number constant value to which 
z is held, and t is a parameter that can range over the set of all real numbers. If z is constant 
and the curve’s axis is parallel to the y axis, then the parametric equations are
x = t
y = a1t2 + a2t + a3
z = c
In either case, the parabola lies in a plane parallel to the xy plane.
Question 18-7
What are the generalized parametric equations for a circle in Cartesian xyz space where the 
value of x is constant so the circle lies in a plane parallel to the yz plane, and the center of the 
circle lies on the x axis?
Answer 18-7
The parametric equations are
 x = c
         y = r cos t
         z = r sin t
where r is the radius of the circle, c is the real-number constant value to which x is held, 
and t is a parameter that varies continuously over a real-number interval at least 2p  units 
wide.
Question 18-8
What are the generalized parametric equations for a circle in Cartesian xyz space where the 
value of y is constant so the circle lies in a plane parallel to the xz plane, and the center of the 
circle lies on the y axis?

Part Two  431
Answer 18-8
The parametric equations are
        x = r cos t
y = c
       z = r sin t
where r is the radius of the circle, c is the real-number constant value to which y is held, and 
t is a parameter that varies continuously over a real-number interval at least 2p  units wide.
Question 18-9
What are the generalized parametric equations for a circle in Cartesian xyz space where the 
value of z is constant so the circle lies in a plane parallel to the xy plane, and the center of the 
circle lies on the z axis?
Answer 18-9
The parametric equations are
        x = r cos t
        y = r sin t
z = c
where r is the radius of the circle, c is the real-number constant value to which z is held, and 
t is a parameter that varies continuously over a real-number interval at least 2p  units wide.
Question 18-10
Imagine a circle in Cartesian xyz space whose sets of parametric equations have one of the 
forms described in Answer 18-7 through 18-9. Consider the variable that’s held constant. 
Suppose that, instead of insisting that it always keep the same value, we allow that variable 
to follow a constant multiple of the parameter t. What sort of curve will we get under these 
conditions?
Answer 18-10
We’ll get a circular helix centered on the axis for whichever variable follows the constant 
multiple of t.
Chapter 19
Question 19-1
What’s the difference between a sequence (also called a progression) and a series?
Answer 19-1
A sequence is a list of numbers or variables. Such a list can contain anywhere from two to 
infinitely many elements. A series is the sum of the elements in a specific sequence.

432  Review Questions and Answers
Question 19-2
What’s an arithmetic sequence?
Answer 19-2
An arithmetic sequence is a list of numbers that starts at a certain value, and then increases 
or decreases at a constant rate after that. Therefore, each element is larger or smaller than its 
predecessor by a certain fixed amount.
Question 19-3
What’s the general form of a finite arithmetic sequence of real numbers? What’s the general 
form of an infinite arithmetic sequence of real numbers?
Answer 19-3
The general form of a finite arithmetic sequence Sfin is
Sfin = s0, (s0 + c), (s0 + 2c), (s0 + 3c), ..., (s0 + nc)
where s0 is a real number representing the first element, c is a real number representing the 
sequence constant, and n is a positive integer. In this case, the sequence has n + 1 elements. 
The general form of an infinite arithmetic sequence Sinf is
Sinf = s0, (s0 + c), (s0 + 2c), (s0 + 3c), ...
where s0 is a real number representing the first element, and c is a real number representing the 
sequence constant. The ellipsis (...) tells us that the sequence continues without end.
Question 19-4
What are the partial sums of an infinite arithmetic sequence?
Answer 19-4
When we add up the elements of a numeric sequence, we get another list of numbers called 
the sequence of partial sums. For Sinf described in Answer 19-3, the first five partial sums are
s0
s0 + s0 + c
s0 + s0 + c + s0 + 2c
s0 + s0 + c + s0 + 2c + s0 + 3c
s0 + s0 + c + s0 + 2c + s0 + 3c + s0 + 4c
which can be simplified to
s0
2s0 + c
3s0 + 3c

Part Two  433
4s0 + 6c
5s0 + 10c
Question 19-5
What’s a geometric sequence?
Answer 19-5
A geometric sequence is a list of numbers with a starting value that’s repeatedly multiplied by 
a constant factor. If we take any element in the sequence (except the first one) and divide it by 
its predecessor, we always get the same constant.
Question 19-6
What’s the general form of a finite geometric sequence of real numbers? What’s the general 
form of an infinite geometric sequence of real numbers?
Answer 19-6
The general form of a finite geometric sequence Tfin is
Tfin = t0, t0k, t0k2, t0k3, t0k4, ..., t0kn
where t0 is a real number representing the first element, k is a real number representing the 
sequence constant, and n is a positive integer. In this case, the sequence has n + 1 elements. 
The general form of an infinite geometric sequence Tinf is
Tinf = t0, t0k, t0k2, t0k3, t0k4, ...
where t0 is a real number representing the first element, and k is a real number representing 
the sequence constant.
Question 19-7
What are the partial sums of an infinite geometric sequence?
Answer 19-7
For Tinf described in Answer 19-6, the first five partial sums are
t0
t0 + t0k
t0 + t0k + t0k2
t0 + t0k + t0k2 + t0k3
t0 + t0k + t0k2 + t0k3 + t0k4

434  Review Questions and Answers
which can be simplified to
t0
t0 (1 + k)
t0 (1 + k + k2)
t0 (1 + k + k2 + k3)
t0 (1 + k + k2 + k3 + k4)
Question 19-8
How can summation notation be used to symbolize a finite series? How can summation nota-
tion be used to symbolize an infinite series?
Answer 19-8
Suppose we have a series with n terms
a1 + a2 + a3 + ··· + an−2 + an−1 + an
We can symbolize it by writing
i
n
=∑
1
ai
and read it as, “The summation of the terms ai, from i = 1 to n.” If we have an infinite series
a1 + a2 + a3 + a4 + a5 + ···
then we can symbolize it by writing
i=
∞
∑
1
ai
and read it as, “The summation of the terms ai, from i = 1 to infinity.”
Question 19-9
What is the limit of an infinite sequence, an infinite series, a relation, or a function? How can 
we symbolize the fact that the limit of x−5, as a real number x approaches infinity, is equal to 0? 
What does the term “convergent” mean in relation to an infinite sequence or series?
Answer 19-9
A limit is a value that an infinite sequence, an infinite series, a relation, or a function approaches, 
but does not necessarily reach. We can symbolize the fact that the limit of x−5, as a real-number 
variable x approaches infinity, is equal to 0 by writing
Lim
x→∞x−5 = 0
An infinite sequence is convergent if and only if, as we move along the sequence from term to 
term, the values of the terms approach a definable limit. An infinite series is convergent if and 

Part Two  435
only if, as we move along the series from term to term, the values of the partial sums approach 
a definable limit.
Question 19-10
What is the right-hand limit of a function at a point? What is the left-hand limit of a function 
at a point?
Answer 19-10
The right-hand limit of a function at a point is the value that the function approaches as we 
move toward the point from the positive direction. We denote a right-hand limit by writing a 
small plus sign at the end of the subscript. For example, if we approach the point where x = 0 
along the x axis from the positive side, then the expression
Lim
x→+
0 ln x
refers to the limit of the natural logarithm of x, as x approaches 0 from the right. (You might 
immediately see that this particular limit is not defined.) The left-hand limit of a function 
at a point is the value that the function approaches as we move toward the point from the 
negative direction. We denote a left-hand limit by writing a small minus sign at the end of the 
subscript. For example, if we approach the point where x = 3 along the x axis from the nega-
tive side, then the expression
Lim
x→−
3 ex
refers to the limit of the natural exponential of x, as x approaches 3 from the left. (This par-
ticular limit happens to be defined, and is equal to e3.)

436
This exam is designed to test your general knowledge, not to measure how fast you can perform 
calculations. A good score is at least 80 correct answers. The answers are listed in App. C. This 
test is long, so don’t try to take it in a single session. Feel free to draw diagrams, sketch graphs, or 
use a calculator. But don’t look back at the text or refer to outside information sources.
 1. Under what conditions is the dot product of two nonzero polar-plane vectors equal to 0?
(a) When the two vectors point in the same direction.
(b) When the two vectors point in opposite directions.
(c) When the two vectors have equal magnitude.
(d) When the two vectors are mutually perpendicular.
(e) Under more than one of the above conditions (a), (b), (c), and (d).
 2. The cosecant function is singular when the input, in radians, is equal to
(a) 0.
(b) p /6.
(c) p /4.
(d) p /3.
(e) p /2.
 3. The conjugate of 8 −j6 is
(a) undefined.
(b) 8 + j6.
(c) 6 −j8.
(d) 6 + j8.
(e) the pure real number 10.
Final Exam

Final Exam  437
 4. Consider two vectors a and b in the Cartesian xy plane, both of which originate at 
(−1,4). Suppose that vector a terminates at (0,5) and vector b terminates at (0,3). If 
we add these vectors and express the result in standard form, what do we get?
(a) a + b = (31/2,51/2)
(b) a + b = (−1,1)
(c) a + b = (−1,9)
(d) a + b = (2,0)
(e) a + b = (0,21/2)
 5. Suppose that we have a complex number c in polar form, such that
c = r cos q + j(r sin q)
 
 where r is the real-number polar vector magnitude and q is the real-number polar 
vector angle. Also suppose that n is an integer. DeMoivre’s theorem tells us that the 
nth power of this complex number is equal to
(a) rn cos (nq) + j[rn sin (nq)].
(b) (r + n) cos (nq) + j[(r + n) sin (nq)].
(c) r n cos (nq) + j[r n sin (nq)].
(d) rn cos (q) + j[rn sin (q)].
(e) r n cos (q) + j[r n sin (q)].
 6. The point (x,y) = (0,−3) is
(a) in the first quadrant of the Cartesian plane.
(b) in the second quadrant of the Cartesian plane.
(c) in the third quadrant of the Cartesian plane.
(d) in the fourth quadrant of the Cartesian plane.
(e) not in any quadrant of the Cartesian plane.
 7. Under what conditions is the cross product of two nonzero polar-plane vectors equal 
to the zero vector?
(a) When the two vectors point in the same direction.
(b) When the two vectors point in opposite directions.
(c) When the two vectors have equal magnitude.
(d) When the two vectors are mutually perpendicular.
(e) Under more than one of the above conditions (a), (b), (c), and (d).
 8. In polar coordinates, which, if any, of the following equations can represent the 
dashed line graphed in Fig. FE-1?
(a) q = 0
(b) q = r
(c) q = 2rp /3
(d) q = 2p /3
(e) We can’t say without knowing the size of each radial increment.

438  Final Exam
 9. The intersection of the sets of real and imaginary numbers is the set
(a) { j}.
(b) {1}.
(c) {−j}.
(d) {−1}.
(e) {0}.
 10. Which, if any, of these geometric figures would be the graph of a true function of x if 
drawn on the Cartesian xy plane, and the graph of a true function of q if drawn on the 
polar coordinate plane?
(a) A circle centered at the origin.
(b) A straight line passing through the origin.
(c) A straight line parallel to the Cartesian x axis, but not passing through the origin.
(d) A straight line parallel to the Cartesian y axis, but not passing through the origin.
(e) None of the above
 11. When we multiply a polar vector by a negative scalar, what restrictions, if any, should 
we put on the direction angle of the product?
(a) It should be nonnegative, but less than p /2.
(b) It should be nonnegative, but less than p.
(c) It should be nonnegative, but less than 2p.
(d) It should be at least −p, but less than p.
(e) We don’t have to take any precautions concerning the direction angle.
Figure FE-1 Illustration for Question 8.

Final Exam  439
 12. If we quadruple the value of each coordinate of a point in Cartesian three-space, then 
its distance from the origin increases by a factor of
(a) 2.
(b) 4.
(c) 8.
(d) 16.
(e) 64.
 13. If we graph the unit circle in the Cartesian xy plane and then pick a point (x0,y0) on 
that circle such that x0 ≠ 0, then 1/x0 is equal to
(a) the cosine of the counterclockwise angle between the positive x axis and a ray 
going out from the origin through (x0,y0).
(b) the Arccosine of the counterclockwise angle between the positive x axis and a ray 
going out from the origin through (x0,y0).
(c) the tangent of the counterclockwise angle between the positive x axis and a ray 
going out from the origin through (x0,y0).
(d) the Arctangent of the counterclockwise angle between the positive x axis and a ray 
going out from the origin through (x0,y0).
(e) the secant of the counterclockwise angle between the positive x axis and a ray 
going out from the origin through (x0,y0).
 14. Suppose that we have a vector in Cartesian xyz space whose originating point is 
(1,−1,3) and whose terminating point is (7,−4,−3). What is the ordered triple 
representing the Cartesian standard form of this vector?
(a) We need more information to answer this question.
(b) (8,−5,0)
(c) (6,−3,−6)
(d) (7,4,−9)
(e) (4,−5/2,0)
 15. What are the Cartesian xy plane coordinates of the point P plotted in Fig. FE-2? 
Assume that each concentric-circle radial division represents 2 units.
(a) (21/2,6)
(b) (21/2,−6)
(c) (−21/2,6)
(d) (−21/2,−6)
(e) None of the above
 16. What is the range of values for x in the interval (−4,0]?
(a) −4 < x < 0
(b) −4 ≤x < 0
(c) −4 < x ≤ 0

440  Final Exam
(d) −4 ≤x ≤ 0
(e) We can’t say, because the notation (−4,0] is meaningless.
 17. The direction of a standard-form vector in Cartesian xyz space can be uniquely defined by
(a) the angle that the vector subtends with respect to the positive x axis.
(b) the angle that the vector subtends with respect to the positive y axis.
(c) the angle that the vector subtends with respect to the positive z axis.
(d) the sum of the angles that the vector subtends with respect to the positive x, y, and z axes.
(e) None of the above
 18. In Cartesian xyz space, the point (2,3,4) is 
(a) 3 units from the origin.
(b) 9 units from the origin.
(c) 241/2 units from the origin.
(d) 291/2 units from the origin.
(e) 24 units from the origin.
 19. The Cartesian negative of a vector in xyz space
(a) points in the same direction as the original vector.
(b) has the same magnitude as the original vector.
(c) has the same direction angles as the original vector.
(d) always has negative coordinates.
(e) always has coordinates whose absolute values are negative.
0
3p/2
Point P
p/2
p
Figure FE-2 Illustration for Question 15.

Final Exam  441
 20. The radian is an angle whose measure is precisely equivalent to
(a) p /2 of a full circle.
(b) 2/p of a full circle.
(c) 4/p of a full circle.
(d) 1/(2p) of a full circle.
(e) 3p /2 of a full circle.
 21. When we multiply a vector in two-space by a positive scalar k+, the magnitude
(a) changes by a factor of k+, while the direction angle stays the same.
(b) changes by a factor of k+, while the direction angle reverses.
(c) stays the same, but the direction angle changes by a factor of k+.
(d) stays the same, but the direction angle becomes k+ radians larger.
(e) and direction angle both change by a factor of k+.
 22. Suppose we see the ordered pair (5p /2,−2) as the representation for a point in the polar 
coordinate plane. If we want to keep the direction angle nonnegative but less than 2p,
and if we want to keep the radius nonnegative, we should rewrite this ordered pair as
(a) (3p /2,2).
(b) (p /2,2).
(c) (2p /5,2).
(d) (2p /5,1/2).
(e) (p /2,1/2).
 23. In Cartesian xyz space, the distance between the points (−1,−2,−3) and (3,2,1) is
(a) 6 units.
(b) 8 units.
(c) 9 units.
(d) 12 units.
(e) None of the above
 24. In Cartesian two-space, a line segment connecting the points (−3,10) and (5,16) is 
exactly
(a) 1451/2 units long.
(b) 10 units long.
(c) 971/2 units long.
(d) 9 units long.
(e) 791/2 units long.
 25. What are the polar coordinates of the point plotted in Fig. FE-3?
(a) (3p /4,501/2)
(b) (5p /4,−501/2)
(c) (7p /4,501/2)

442  Final Exam
(d) (5p /2,−501/2)
(e) None of the above
 26. Imagine a polar complex vector p, as follows:
p = (q,r) = (3p /4,721/2)
 
 What complex number does this vector represent?
(a) 6 + j6
(b) −6 + j6
(c) −6 −j6
(d) 6 −j6
(e) More than one of the above
 27. What’s the ordered pair representing the standard form of a vector in the Cartesian xy
plane whose originating point is (−2,−2) and whose ending point is (3,3)?
(a) (5,5)
(b) (−5,−5)
(c) (1,1)
(d) (−1,−1)
(e) (1/2,1/2)
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
4
Point Q
Figure FE-3 Illustration for Question 25.

Final Exam  443
 28. How is the cross product b ë a oriented in the situation of Fig. FE-4?
(a) It points in the direction bisecting the smaller angle between a and b.
(b) It points in the direction bisecting the larger angle between a and b.
(c) It points straight out of the page toward us.
(d) It points straight out of the page away from us.
(e) It has no orientation, because it’s a scalar, not a vector!
 29. How is the dot product b • a oriented in the situation of Fig. FE-4?
(a) It points in the direction bisecting the smaller angle between a and b.
(b) It points in the direction bisecting the larger angle between a and b.
(c) It points straight out of the page toward us.
(d) It points straight out of the page away from us.
(e) It has no orientation, because it’s a scalar, not a vector!
 30. The midpoint coordinates of a line segment in Cartesian two-space can be found by
(a) adding the coordinates of the endpoints.
(b) multiplying the coordinates of the endpoints.
(c) multiplying the distances of the endpoints from the origin.
(d) averaging  the coordinates of the endpoints.
(e) averaging  the distances of the endpoints from the origin.
b
0
3p/2
a
Smaller angle
between a and b
Larger angle
between a and b
p/2
p
Figure FE-4 Illustration for Questions 28 and 29.

444  Final Exam
 31. Suppose we’re given two points P and Q in the Cartesian xy plane, such that their 
y values are negatives of each other. Based on our knowledge of the midpoint formula 
for Cartesian two-space, we can be absolutely certain that if we connect P and Q with 
a line segment, the midpoint of that line segment lies
(a) on the x axis.
(b) at the origin.
(c) on the y axis.
(d) in either the first quadrant or the third quadrant.
(e) in either the second quadrant or the fourth quadrant.
 32. In Cartesian xyz space, the point midway between (−1,−2,−3) and (3,2,1) is
(a) (0,0,0).
(b) (1,0,−1).
(c) (2,2,2).
(d) (2,−2,2).
(e) (−2,0,2).
 33. How do we find the negative of a vector in polar coordinates?
(a) We negate the magnitude, but leave the direction angle unchanged.
(b) We negate the direction angle, but leave the magnitude unchanged.
(c) We add or subtract p to or from the direction angle, keeping the angle 
nonnegative but less than 2p, but leave the magnitude unchanged.
(d) We add or subtract p to or from the direction angle, keeping the angle 
nonnegative but less than 2p, and negate the magnitude.
(e) We don’t, because we can’t!
 34. Fill in the blank to make the following sentence true: “A ________ exists between the 
set of all polar-plane vectors and the set of all Cartesian-plane vectors.”
(a) circular relation
(b) linear function
(c) quadratic function
(d) bijection
(e) trijection
 35. In Fig. FE-5, what complex number does the longer vector represent?
(a) 5p /4 + j14
(b) −5p /4 −j14
(c) 701/2p /4 + j701/2p /4
(d) −701/2p /4 −j701/2p /4
(e) −981/2 −j981/2

Final Exam  445
 36. In Fig. FE-5, what is the magnitude of the cross product of the two vectors?
(a) 0
(b) 701/2
(c) 981/2
(d) 24
(e) 140
 37. Imagine two generic standard-form vectors in xyz space, defined by ordered triples as
a = (xa,ya,za)
 
 and
b = (xb,yb,zb)
 
 Now consider the quantity
k = [(xa
2 + ya
2 + za
2)(xb
2 + yb
2 + zb
2)]1/2 cos qab
0
3p/2
Each radial
division is
2 units
( /4,1 )
0
p/2
p
p
(5p/4,14)
Figure FE-5 Illustration for Questions 35 and 36.

446  Final Exam
 
 where qab is the angle between a and b as determined in the plane containing them 
both, rotating from a to b. What does k represent?
(a) The dot product of a and b.
(b) The product of the magnitudes of a and b.
(c) The ratio of the magnitudes of a and b.
(d) The Cartesian product of a and b.
(e) The magnitude of the cross product of a and b.
 38. Is there anything wrong with the rendition of Cartesian xyz space in Fig. FE-6? If so, 
how can things be made right?
(a) Nothing is wrong with Fig. FE-6.
(b) The axis polarities do not conform to the rules for Cartesian xyz space. To make 
things right, the polarity of the x axis can be reversed, while leaving the polarities 
of the other two axes as they are.
(c) The axis polarities do not conform to the rules for Cartesian xyz space. To make 
things right, the polarity of the y axis can be reversed, while leaving the polarities 
of the other two axes as they are.
(d) The axis polarities do not conform to the rules for Cartesian xyz space. To make 
things right, the polarity of the z axis can be reversed, while leaving the polarities 
of the other two axes as they are.
(e) Any single one of the above actions (b), (c), or (d) can be taken, and things will be 
made right.
+x
+y
–x
–y
+z
–z
Figure FE-6 Illustration for Question 38.

Final Exam  447
 39. The square of the sine of an angle plus the square of the cosine of the same angle is 
always equal to
(a) 0.
(b) 1.
(c) p /2.
(d) p.
(e) 2p.
 40. Imagine two generic standard-form vectors in xyz space, defined by ordered triples as
a = (xa,ya,za)
 
 and
b = (xb,yb,zb)
 
 Now consider the quantity
n = xaxb + yayb + zazb
 
 What does n represent?
(a) The dot product of a and b.
(b) The product of the magnitudes of a and b.
(c) The sum of the magnitudes of a and b.
(d) The arithmetic mean of a and b.
(e) The magnitude of the cross product of a and b.
 41. Here’s a claim concerning coordinate conversions. Suppose we have a point (q,r,h) in 
cylindrical coordinates. We can find the Cartesian x value of this point using the formula
x = r cos q
 
 The Cartesian y value is
y = r sin q
 
 The Cartesian z value is
z = h
 
 What, if anything, is wrong with this claim as stated? If anything is wrong with it, 
how can it be made right?
(a) The x and y conversions are wrong. It should say x = r sin q and y = r cos q.
(b) The x and y conversions are wrong. It should say x = h cos q and y = h sin q.

448  Final Exam
(c) The z conversion is wrong. It should say z = (r 2 + h 2)1/2.
(d) The z conversion is wrong. It should say z = h tan q.
(e) Nothing is wrong with the claim as stated.
 42. If we graph the unit circle in the Cartesian xy plane and then pick a point (x 0,y0) on 
that circle such that x0 ≠ 0, then y0/x0 is equal to
(a) the cosine of the counterclockwise angle between the positive x axis and a ray 
going out from the origin through (x0,y0).
(b) the Arccosine of the counterclockwise angle between the positive x axis and a ray 
going out from the origin through (x0,y0).
(c) the tangent of the counterclockwise angle between the positive x axis and a ray 
going out from the origin through (x0,y0).
(d) the Arctangent of the counterclockwise angle between the positive x axis and a ray 
going out from the origin through (x0,y0).
(e) the secant of the counterclockwise angle between the positive x axis and a ray 
going out from the origin through (x0,y0).
 43. Figure FE-7 illustrates a general cylindrical coordinate system. Note that the line 
segment connecting the origin and point P′ is always perpendicular to the line 
segment connecting points P′ and P. Based on this knowledge and the information in 
the diagram, the straight-line distance d between the origin and point P is
(a) (r 2 + h 2)1/2.
(b) r sin q.
(c) r cos q.
(d) rh cos q.
(e) impossible to determine unless we have more information.
P
r
–x
+z
–z
+y
–y
P¢
h
Reference
plane
+x
Reference
axis
d
q
Figure FE-7 Illustration for Question 43.

Final Exam  449
 44. The Arctangent function
(a) reverses the work of the tangent function.
(b) is the reciprocal of the tangent function.
(c) tells us the tangent of an angle measuring an integer multiple of p radians.
(d) tells us the tangent of an angle measuring an odd-integer multiple of p /2 radians.
(e) tells us the length of an arc having a measure of a given angle.
 45. Which of the three variables portray the same geometric dimension in both spherical 
and cylindrical coordinates?
(a) The radius.
(b) The vertical direction angle.
(c) The radius and the vertical direction angle.
(d) The horizontal direction angle.
(e) The horizontal and vertical direction angles.
 46. In Cartesian coordinates, the point (−5,−12) is the same distance from the origin as 
the point
(a) (0,17).
(b) (10,7).
(c) (0,−13).
(d) (6,11).
(e) All of the above.
 47. Imagine two generic standard-form vectors in xyz space, defined by ordered triples as
a = (xa,ya,za)
 
 and
b = (xb,yb,zb)
 
 Now consider the quantity
q = [(xa
2 + ya
2 + z a
2)(x b
2 + y b
2 + zb
2)]1/2 sin qab
 
 where qab is the smaller angle between a and b as determined in the plane containing 
them both. What does q represent?
(a) The dot product of a and b.
(b) The product of the magnitudes of a and b.
(c) The ratio of the magnitudes of a and b.
(d) The Cartesian product of a and b.
(e) The magnitude of the cross product of a and b.

450  Final Exam
 48. In spherical coordinates, the graph of the equation r = 0 is
(a) an infinitely tall vertical cylinder.
(b) an infinitely long vertical line.
(c) a sphere.
(d) a point.
(e) undefined.
 49. How can we add two polar-coordinate vectors?
(a) Convert them to standard form in Cartesian coordinates, add the Cartesian 
vectors, and then convert the Cartesian sum back to polar form.
(b) Convert them to standard form in cylindrical coordinates, add the cylindrical 
vectors, and then convert the cylindrical sum back to polar form.
(c) Convert them to standard form in spherical coordinates, add the spherical vectors, 
and then convert the spherical sum back to polar form.
(d) Add the direction angles of the addend vectors to get the direction angle of the 
sum vector, and add the magnitudes of the addend vectors to get the magnitude of 
the sum vector.
(e) We can’t! Addition of polar vectors is not defined.
 50. In a system of spherical coordinates, the constant-radius increments appear as
(a) concentric circles.
(b) concentric cylinders.
(c) concentric spheres.
(d) straight lines passing through the origin.
(e) parallel planes.
 51. Consider the sum of the tangent and the cotangent. Let
f (q) = tan q + cot q
 
 What’s the positive peak amplitude in the graph of f   ?
(a) 1
(b) 2
(c) p
(d) 2p
(e) It’s not defined.
 52. Consider the following system of parametric equations representing a straight line in 
Cartesian xyz space:
x = –4 + 7t
y = 3 − 5t
z = 2 + 6t

Final Exam  451
 
 Which of the following is a valid expression of the line’s direction numbers?
(a) (−4,3,2)
(b) (3,−2,8)
(c) (−11,8,−4)
(d) (11,−8,4)
(e) (−14,10,−12)
 53. When we add, subtract, or multiply one function by another function of the same 
variable, the domain of the resultant function is
(a) the intersection of the ranges of the two functions.
(b) the union of the ranges of the two functions.
(c) the intersection of the domains of the two functions.
(d) the union of the domains of the two functions.
(e) None of the above.
 54. Consider the following equation in three variables x, y, and z:
(x + 2)2/4 + (x + 3)2/9 + (x + 4)2/16 = 1
 
 In Cartesian xyz-space, this equation represents
(a) an elliptic cone.
(b) an oblate ellipsoid.
(c) a cylinder.
(d) a hyperboloid.
(e) a paraboloid.
 55. The solid black curve in Fig. FE-8 shows the graph of a relation f  in the Cartesian 
xy plane. Which, if any, of the four dashed gray curves portrays the graph of f   −1?
(a) Curve A
(b) Curve B
(c) Curve C
(d) Curve D
(e) None of the above
 56. Which, if any, of the curves in Fig. FE-8 represents a relation that’s not a true function 
of either x or y?
(a) Curve A
(b) Curve B
(c) Curve C
(d) Curve D
(e) The solid black curve
 57. In the Cartesian xy plane, the unit hyperbola intersects the line x = 3 at
(a) no points.
(b) one point.

452  Final Exam
(c) two points.
(d) four points.
(e) infinitely many points.
 58. Which of the following is an arithmetic sequence and also a geometric sequence?
(a) 4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4, ...
(b) 4, 2, 4, 2, 4, 2, ...
(c) 1, −1, 1, −1, 1, −1, ...
(d) 3, 2, 1, 0, −1, −2, ...
(e) 1, 1/2, 1/3, 1/4, 1/5, 1/6, ...
 59. What does the following expression represent?
i=
∞
∑
0
2−i
(a) A divergent harmonic series
(b) A divergent geometric series
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
4
Curve A
Curve B
Curve C
Curve D
Graph of
relation f
Graph of
relation f
Figure FE-8 Illustration for Questions 55 and 56.

Final Exam  453
(c) A convergent harmonic series
(d) A convergent geometric series
(e) An undefined series
 60. What’s the value of the following limit?
Lim
x→−
0 ln (−x)
(a) 1
(b) −1
(c) e
(d) −e
(e) It’s not defined.
 61. Consider a relation whose graph in the Cartesian xy plane looks like Fig. FE-9. What 
can we say about this relation?
(a) It has no inverse.
(b) It’s a function of x, but not y.
(c) It’s a function of y, but not x.
(d) It’s a function of both x and y.
(e) It’s identical to its inverse.
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
4
(0, 4)
(4, 0)
(0, –4)
(–4, 0)
Graph of
relation
All four sides
of the graph ...
... are straight
line segments
Figure FE-9 Illustration for Question 61.

454  Final Exam
 62. We can uniquely identify a plane in Cartesian three-space if we know
(a) the locations of two points in the plane.
(b) the direction of a vector normal to the plane.
(c) the location of a point in the plane, and the direction of a vector normal to the plane.
(d) the direction of a vector in the plane.
(e) the direction numbers of a line that passes through the plane and the coordinate origin.
 63. Which of the following functions has an inverse that’s also a function when we allow x
to span the entire set of real numbers?
(a) f1(x) = x 5 + 2
(b) f2(x) = 3x 4 − 1
(c) f3(x) = sin x
(d) f4(x) = x 2 + 10
(e) f5(x) = −tan x + 3
 64. Consider the sum of twice the secant and twice the cosecant. Let
f (q) = 2 sec q + 2 csc q
 
 The range of f is
(a) the set of all real numbers.
(b) the set of all positive real numbers.
(c) the set of all real numbers except those in the interval [−1,1].
(d) the set of all real numbers except those in the interval [−2,2].
(e) the set of all real numbers except those in the interval [−p,p ].
 65. Figure FE-10 illustrates a parabola in the Cartesian xy plane, along with the generalized 
standard equation for that type of curve. Based on the information shown, we know that
(a) c > 0, because the curve has an absolute maximum.
(b) b = 0, because the curve’s axis is vertical.
(c) c < 0, because the x-value of the curve’s vertex point is negative.
(d) a < 0, because the curve opens downward.
(e) a = 0, because the curve doesn’t turn any sharp corners.
 66. Imagine a double right circular cone, through which a flat plane passes. Suppose that 
the plane has a Cartesian coordinate xy coordinate grid drawn on it. Which of the 
following equations cannot, under any circumstances, represent the intersection of the 
plane and the cone?
(a) x 2 + y 2 = 4
(b) 3x 2 − 4y 2 = 12
(c) y = x 3 − 2x 2 + 1
(d) y = 3x
(e) x2/4 + y 2/9 = 1

Final Exam  455
 67. In Fig. FE-11, line L is a good portrayal of the graph of
(a) the product of the natural exponential function and its reciprocal.
(b) the sum of the natural exponential function and its reciprocal.
(c) the difference between the natural exponential function and its reciprocal.
(d) the natural exponential function divided by its reciprocal.
(e) the reciprocal of the natural exponential function divided by the natural 
exponential function.
 68. In Fig. FE-11, curve C is a good portrayal of the graph of
(a) the product of the natural exponential function and its reciprocal.
(b) the sum of the natural exponential function and its reciprocal.
(c) the difference between the natural exponential function and its reciprocal.
(d) the natural exponential function divided by its reciprocal.
(e) the reciprocal of the natural exponential function divided by the natural 
exponential function.
 69. A relation that’s both one-to-one and onto is known as
(a) a surjection.
(b) a bijection.
(c) a monojection.
(d) an injection.
(e) a superjection.
+x
–x
+y
–y
y = ax 2 + bx + c
Equation of curve
is
Figure FE-10 Illustration for Question 65.

456  Final Exam
 70. Which of the following pairs of graphs have identical asymptotes in the Cartesian xy
plane?
(a) The graphs of y = log10 x and y = tan x
(b) The graphs of y = log10 x and y = ln x
(c) The graphs of y = ln x and x2 −y2 = 1
(d) The graphs of y = ln x and y = csc x
(e) The graphs of x2 −y2 = 1 and x2 + y2 = 1
 71. Consider the relation in the Cartesian xy plane represented by
9(x − 2)2 + 4(y + 3)2 = 36
 
 The graph of this relation intersects the y axis at 
(a) no points.
(b) one point.
(c) two points.
(d) four points.
(e) infinitely many points.
 72. Consider the function that we get when we multiply the square of the tangent by the 
square of the cotangent. Let
f (q) = tan2 q cot2 q
2
y
x
–2
–1
0
1
10
5
Line L
Curve C
Reciprocal
of natural
exponential
function
Natural
exponential
function
Figure FE-11 Illustration for Questions 67 and 68.

Final Exam  457
 
 What’s the range of f   ?
(a) {−p }
(b) {p }
(c) {−1}
(d) {1}
(e) {0}
 73. Which of the following statements is true of all conic sections?
(a) For a circle, the eccentricity is 0; for an ellipse, the eccentricity is positive but 
less than 1; for a parabola, the eccentricity is equal to 1; for a hyperbola, the 
eccentricity is greater than 1.
(b) For a parabola, the eccentricity is 0; for an ellipse, the eccentricity is positive 
but less than 1; for a circle, the eccentricity is equal to 1; for a hyperbola, the 
eccentricity is greater than 1.
(c) For a hyperbola, the eccentricity is 0; for a parabola, the eccentricity is positive but 
less than 1; for an ellipse, the eccentricity is equal to 1; for a circle, the eccentricity 
is greater than 1.
(d) For an ellipse, the eccentricity is 0; for a parabola, the eccentricity is positive 
but less than 1; for a circle, the eccentricity is equal to 1; for a hyperbola, the 
eccentricity is greater than 1.
(e) For an ellipse, the eccentricity is 0; for a hyperbola, the eccentricity is positive 
but less than 1; for a circle, the eccentricity is equal to 1; for a parabola, the 
eccentricity is greater than 1.
 74. Which of the following functions appears as a straight line in log-log coordinates, meaning 
that both axes are graduated according to the common logarithm of the displacement?
(a) y = 3
(b) y = ln x
(c) y = e x
(d) y = log10 x
(e) y = 10x
 75. Suppose that t is a parameter on which two variables x and y depend. Which of the 
following pairs of parametric equations can represent the straight line graphed in 
Fig. FE-12?
(a) x = t − 3  and y = t − 4
(b) x = t + 3  and y = t + 4
(c) x = 3t/4  and y = 4t/3
(d) x = t  and y = 3t/4
(e) x = 3t  and y = 4t
 76. Consider the following pair of parametric equations:
x = 3 cos t

458  Final Exam
 
 and
y = 4 sin t
 
 In the Cartesian xy plane, the graph of this system appears as
(a) an ellipse centered at the origin.
(b) an ellipse passing through the origin.
(c) a hyperbola centered at the origin.
(d) a hyperbola passing through the origin.
(e) a parabola whose focus is at the origin.
 77. The peak-to-peak amplitude of the wave representing the function y = sin p x is
(a) 2p.
(b) p /2.
(c) 2.
(d) 1/2.
(e) impossible to determine without more information.
 78. If we divide a function by another function, the resultant function is undefined for 
any value of the independent variable where
(a) the value of the numerator function is negative.
(b) the value of the denominator function is equal to 0.
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
4
(0, 0)
(3, 4)
Figure FE-12 Illustration for Question 75.

Final Exam  459
(c) the value of the denominator function is negative.
(d) the values of both the numerator and denominator function are negative.
(e) the values of the numerator and denominator function have opposite signs.
 79. Consider the following system of parametric equations in Cartesian xyz space:
x = t
y = −1
z = −2t 2 − 7t
 
 This system represents
(a) a straight line in a plane parallel to the xy plane.
(b) a hyperbola in a plane parallel to the xy plane.
(c) a circle in a plane parallel to the yz plane.
(d) a parabola in a plane parallel to the xz plane.
(e) an ellipse that intersects the z axis at two points.
 80. What does the following expression portray?
S = −1/2 + 1/2 −1/2 + 1/2 −1/2 + 1/2 −1/2 + ···
(a) An infinite arithmetic series
(b) An infinite harmonic series
(c) An infinite geometric series
(d) An infinite hyperbolic series
(e) An infinite circular series
 81. Suppose that t is a parameter on which two variables x and y depend. Which of the 
following pairs of parametric equations can represent the straight line graphed in 
Fig. FE-13?
(a) x = t − 5  and y = t − 3
(b) x = 5t  and y = 3t
(c) x = 3t/5  and y = 5t/3
(d) x = t  and y = 3 − 3t/5
(e) x = 3t  and y = 5t
 82. Consider an object in Cartesian xyz space whose parametric equations are
x = (cos t)/p
y = p sin t
z = p t
 
 The graph of this object is an elliptical

460  Final Exam
(a) hyperboloid.
(b) helix.
(c) paraboloid.
(d) cylinder.
(e) cone.
 83. In an infinite arithmetic sequence, we can find a constant that determines
(a) the ratio of any term to its successor.
(b) the difference between any term and its successor.
(c) the product of any term and its successor.
(d) the sum of all the terms.
(e) the product of all the terms.
 84. If the ordered pair (−1,8) represents a point that lies on the graph of a relation f  in 
the Cartesian xy plane, then its counterpoint on the graph of the inverse relation f −1 is 
represented by the ordered pair
(a) (1,−8).
(b) (−1,1/8).
(c) (8,−1).
(d) (1/8,−1).
(e) (−1/8,1).
2
4
–2
–4
–6
2
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
4
(5, 0)
(0, 3)
Figure FE-13 Illustration for Question 81.

Final Exam  461
 85. In the Cartesian xy plane, a unit hyperbola can be represented by which one of the 
following pairs of parametric equations, where t is the parameter?
(a) x = t 2  and y = −t 2
(b) x = cos t  and y = −sin t
(c) x = sin t  and y = −sin t
(d) x = cos t  and y = −cos t
(e) x = t  and y = ±(t 2 − 1)1/2
 86. Which of the following equations might describe the hyperboloid of two sheets shown 
in Fig. FE-14? Assume the center of the entire object is at the origin.
(a) −x 2/2 + y 2/2 −z 2/3 = 1
(b) x 2/2 + y 2/2 + z 2/3 = 1
(c) x 2/2 + y 2/2 + z 2/3 = 0
(d) x/2 + y/2 + z/3 = 1
(e) (x − 2)(y + 2)(z − 3) = 1
 87. If we move the entire object in Fig. FE-14 to place its center at the point (5,5,5) rather 
than at the origin, its equation becomes which one of the following?
(a) x 2/2 + y 2/2 + z 2/3 = 5
(b) 5x 2/2 + 5y 2/2 + 5z 2/3 = 0
+x
+y
+z
–y
–z
–x
Figure FE-14 Illustration for Questions 86 and 87.

462  Final Exam
(c) x/10 + y/10 + z/15 = 1
(d) (5x − 10)(5y + 10)(5z − 15) = 1
(e) −(x − 5)2/2 + (y − 5)2/2 − (z − 5)2/3 = 1
 88. Consider the graph of the pair of parametric equations
q = p /3
 
 and
r = −3t
 
 In the polar coordinate plane, the graph of this system is a
(a) spiral that expands as we rotate clockwise.
(b) circle passing through the origin.
(c) circle centered at the origin.
(d) straight line that doesn’t pass through the origin.
(e) straight line passing through the origin.
 89. The period of the graph representing the function y = 2p csc x is
(a) 2p.
(b) p /2.
(c) 2.
(d) 1/2.
(e) undefined.
 90. In two-space, a relation can always be represented as a set of
(a) lines.
(b) circles.
(c) parabolas.
(d) closed curves.
(e) ordered pairs.
 91. Consider the two functions
y = ln x
 
 and
y = ln (1/x)

Final Exam  463
 
 When we graph the sum of these two functions in the Cartesian xy plane, we get
(a) an open-ended ray corresponding to the line y = x in the first quadrant.
(b) an open-ended ray corresponding to the positive y axis.
(c) an open-ended ray corresponding to the positive x axis.
(d) an open-ended ray corresponding to the line y = −x in the fourth quadrant.
(e) a circle centered at the origin and having a radius of e units.
 92. Which of the following relations is not a true function of x?
(a) y = 2x + 3
(b) x = 2y + 3
(c) y = x2 + 3
(d) x = y2 + 3
(e) y = x/2 + 3
 93. Consider the following equation in three variables x, y, and z:
−2x + y + 7z = 3
 
 In Cartesian xyz space, this equation represents a
(a) straight line.
(b) circle.
(c) sphere.
(d) hyperboloid.
(e) plane.
 94. Consider again the equation in Question 93, and the geometric figure it represents in 
Cartesian xyz space. At what coordinates, if any, does the figure cross the z axis?
(a) (0,0,−3/2)
(b) (0,0,1/3)
(c) (0,0,3/7)
(d) (0,0,1/2)
(e) The figure doesn’t cross the z axis anywhere.
 95. Which of the following types of graphs is not a conic section?
(a) A circular curve
(b) An elliptical curve
(c) A logarithmic curve
(d) A parabolic curve
(e) A hyperbolic curve
 96. Consider the following equation in three variables x, y, and z:
x 2 + y 2 + z 2 + 2z + 1 = 20

464  Final Exam
 
 In Cartesian xyz-space, this equation represents a
(a) plane.
(b) cone.
(c) cylinder.
(d) hyperboloid.
(e) sphere.
 97. In two-space, a function is a relation that 
(a) never maps any specific value of the independent variable to more than one value 
of the dependent variable.
(b) never maps more than one value of the independent variable to any specific value 
of the dependent variable.
(c) has a domain and range that both encompass the entire set of real numbers.
(d) has a domain that’s a proper subset of the range.
(e) has a range that’s a proper subset of the domain.
 98. Consider the following three-way equation:
x/3 = y/4 = −z/2
 
 In Cartesian xyz space, this equation represents a
(a) straight line through the origin.
(b) circle centered at the origin.
(c) circular cone centered at the origin.
(d) circle centered at the point (3,4,−2).
(e) circular cone whose apex is at the point (3,4,−2).
 99. Consider the following system of parametric equations:
x = p cos t
y = −p
z = 2p sin t
 
 The graph of this system in Cartesian xyz space is
(a) an ellipse that lies in a plane perpendicular to the y axis.
(b) a parabola that lies in the xz plane.
(c) a circle that passes through all three axes.
(d) a hyperbola that’s centered on the y axis.
(e) impossible to figure out based on the information given here.

Final Exam  465
 100. The period of the wave representing the function y = sin p x is equal to
(a) 2p.
(b) p /2.
(c) 1/2.
(d) 2.
(e) impossible to determine without more information.

466
These solutions do not necessarily represent the only ways the chapter-end problems can be 
figured out. If you think you can solve a particular problem in a quicker or better way than 
you see here, by all means go ahead! But always check your work to be sure your alternative 
answer is correct.
Chapter 1
 1.  As shown in the graph of Fig. 1-10, the x axis is horizontal and the y axis is vertical. 
Unless otherwise stated, the horizontal axis represents the independent variable in 
Cartesian coordinates, and the vertical axis represents the dependent variable. The 
independent variable is listed first in an ordered pair, and the dependent variable is 
listed second. According to the following rules:
•   The point (0,0) has x = 0 and y = 0
•   The point (−4,5) has x = −4 and y = 5
•   The point (−5,−3) has x = −5 and y = −3
•   The point (1,−6) has x = 1 and y = −6
 2. Let’s call our point P, so we have P = (−4,5). That means xp = −4 and yp = 5. When we 
plug these values into the formula for the distance d of a point from the origin, we get
d = (xp
2 + yp
2)1/2 = [(−4)2 + 52]1/2 = (16 + 25)1/2 = 411/2
 
 That’s an irrational number. We can use a calculator to approximate its value to three 
decimal places, getting
d ≈ 6.403
 
 The “wavy” or “squiggly” equals sign means “is approximately equal to.”
APPENDIX 
A
Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: 
Chapter 1-9

 3. This time, let’s say that P = (−5,−3), so xp = −5 and yp = −3. Plugging these values into 
the formula for d gives us
d = (xp
2 + yp
2)1/2 = [(−5)2 + (−3)2]1/2 = (25 + 9)1/2 = 341/2
 
 Once again, we have an irrational number. Using a calculator, we can approximate it to 
three decimal places as
d ≈ 5.831
 
 Note that we’ve rounded off the value here, because that’s what we were asked to do. 
Remember that rounding is not the same thing as truncation, where we simply delete 
all the digits after a certain place. Whenever we want to approximate a value to a 
certain number of decimal places or significant figures, we should round it either up 
or down as necessary, not truncate it, unless we’re specifically told to truncate it. (If 
you’ve forgotten the rules for rounding, this is a good time to review your pre-algebra 
book!)
 4. We can call P = (1,−6), so we have xp = 1 and yp = −6. Plugging these values into the 
formula, we obtain
d = (xp
2 + yp
2)1/2 = [12 + (−6)2]1/2 = (1 + 36)1/2 = 371/2
 
 Our answer is irrational again. Approximating to three decimal places, we get
d ≈ 6.083
 5. Let’s call the points P and Q, and assign them the ordered pairs
P = (−4,5)
 
 and
Q = (−5,−3)
 
 The values of the coordinates are
 
xp = −4
 
yp = 5
 
xq = −5
 
yq = −3
 
 Plugging these numbers into the formula for the distance d between two points, we get
 
d = [(xp −xq)2 + ( yp −yq)2]1/2 = {[−4 − (−5)]2 + [5 − (−3)]2}1/2
 
= [12 + 82]1/2 = (1 + 64)1/2 = 651/2
Chapter 1  467

468  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 1-9
 
 When we use a calculator to work this out and round d off to three decimal places, 
we get
d ≈ 8.062
 6. This time, let’s call the points
P = (−5,−3)
 
 and
Q = (1,−6)
 
 The individual coordinates are
 
xp = −5
 
yp = −3
 
xq = 1
 
yq = −6
 
 Plugging these numbers into the formula, we get
 
d = [(xp −xq)2 + ( yp −yq)2]1/2 = {(−5 − 1)2 + [−3 − (−6)]2}1/2
 
= [(−6)2 + 32]1/2 = (36 + 9)1/2 = 451/2
 
 Using a calculator and rounding to three decimal places, we get
d ≈ 6.708
 7. Let’s call the points P and Q once again, and give them the ordered pairs
P = (1,−6)
 
 and
Q = (−4,5)
 
 The coordinates are
 
xp = 1
 
yp = −6
 
xq = −4
 
yq = 5

 
 Plugging these numbers into the formula yields
 
d = [(xp −xq)2 + ( yp −yq)2]1/2 = {[1 − (−4)]2 + (−6 − 5)2}1/2
 
= [32 + (−11)2]1/2 = (9 + 121)1/2 = 1301/2
 
 Using a calculator and rounding off to three decimal places, we get
d ≈ 11.402
 8. Let’s call the endpoints of our line segment L by the names P and Q, such that
P = (−4,5)
 
 and
Q = (−5,−3)
 
 The coordinate values of these points are
 
xp = −4
 
yp = 5
 
xq = −5
 
yq = −3
 
 Using the formula to find the midpoint (xm,ym), we obtain
 
(xm,ym) = [(xp + xq)/2,( yp + yq)/2] = {[−4 + (−5)]/2,[5 + (−3)]/2}
 
= (−9/2,2/2) = (−9/2,1)
 
 In decimal form, the ordered pair is exactly
(xm,ym) = (−4.5,1)
 9. Let’s call the endpoints of M by the names P and Q, such that
P = (−5,−3)
 
 and
Q = (1,−6)
 
 The coordinates are
xp = −5
 
yp = −3
 
xq = 1
 
yq = −6
Chapter 1  469

470  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 1-9
 
 Plugging these numbers into the midpoint formula, we get
 
(xm,ym) = [(xp + xq)/2,( yp + yq)/2] = {(−5 + 1)/2,[−3 + (−6)]/2}
 
= (−4/2,−9/2) = (−2,−9/2)
 
 When we express this ordered pair in decimal form, we have exactly
(xm,ym) = (−2,−4.5)
 10. We can call the endpoints of N by the names P and Q, such that
P = (1,−6)
 
 and
Q = (−4,5)
 
 This time, we have
 
xp = 1
 
yp = −6
 
xq = −4
 
yq = 5
 
 When we put these values into the formula for the midpoint, we come up with
 
(xm,ym) = [(xp + xq)/2,( yp + yq)/2] = {[1 + (−4)]/2,(−6 + 5)/2}
 
= (−3/2,−1/2)
 
 In decimal form, this is exactly
 (xm,ym) = (−1.5,−0.5)
Chapter 2
 1. There are 2p radians in a full circle of 360º. If we assume that p ≈ 3.14159, then a full 
circle has a radian measure of
2p ≈ 2 × 3.14159 ≈ 6.28318
 
 To get the radian measure in 1º, we divide 2p by 360. That gives us
1º ≈ 6.28318/360 ≈ 0.0175
 
 rounded off to four decimal places.

 2. If we go 7/8 of the way around a circle counterclockwise, we rotate thorough an angle 
of 7/8 × 2p, or 7p /4.
 3. An angle of 120º is 1/3 of a circular rotation, because 120º is 1/3 of 360º. If we go 1/3 
of the way around a circle counterclockwise, that’s an angle of 1/3 × 2p, or 2p /3.
 4. Imagine that we travel over the earth in a great circle (the shortest path between two 
points on the surface of a sphere, as measured on that surface) for 1000 /p km. If the 
earth’s circumference is 40,000 km and the planet is a perfectly smooth sphere, then 
our distance traveled is
 (1,000 /p )/40,000 = 1000/(40,000p) = 1/(40p)
 
 of a complete circumnavigation. If we travel exactly once around the earth along a great 
circle, we go through an angle of 2p. The angular separation, in radians, of two points 
located 1000 /p km apart on the surface is therefore
[1/(40p)] × 2p = (2p)/(40p) = 2/40 = 1/20
 5. Figure A-1 shows the graphs of y = 2 sin x (solid curve) and y = sin x (dashed curve). 
The graph of y = 2 sin x resembles the graph of y = sin x, but the amplitude is doubled.
 6. Figure A-2 shows the graphs of y = sin 2x (solid curve) and y = sin x (dashed curve). The 
graph of y = sin 2x resembles the graph of y = sin x, but the frequency is doubled.
Figure A-1  Illustration for the solution to Problem 5 
in Chap. 2.
Chapter 2  471

472  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 1-9
 7. The secant is the reciprocal of the cosine. The cosine has a range of output values 
covering the closed interval [−1,1]. That means
−1 ≤ cos x ≤ 1
 
  for all real-number input values x. We can break this fact down into the two statements
−1 ≤ cos x ≤ 0
 
 and
0 ≤ cos x ≤ 1
 
 The reciprocals are the one-ended ranges
1/cos x ≤−1
 
 and
1 ≤ 1/cos x
 
 We can rewrite the above as
sec x ≤−1
–3p
3p
3
2
1
–1
–2
–3
x
y
y = sin x
y = sin 2x
Figure A-2  Illustration for the solution to Problem 6 
in Chap. 2.

 
 and
1 ≤ sec x
 
 These two inequalities tell us that the secant function never attains any values in the 
open interval (−1,1).
 8. The cosecant is the reciprocal of the sine. The sine has a range of output values covering 
the closed interval [−1,1]. In other words, no matter what the real-number input x, we 
always have
−1 ≤ sin x ≤ 1
 
 We can split this into the statements
−1 ≤ sin x ≤ 0
 
 and
0 ≤ sin x ≤ 1
 
 Therefore,
1/sin x ≤−1
 
 and
1 ≤ 1/sin x
 
 We can rewrite the above as
csc x ≤−1
 
 and
1 ≤ csc x
 
 The output of the cosecant function, like the output of the secant, is never equal to 
anything in the open interval (−1,1).
 9. We start with the Pythagorean theorem for the sine and cosine, which is
sin2 q + cos2 q = 1
 
 When we subtract sin2 q from either side, we get
cos2 q = 1 − sin2 q
Chapter 2  473

474  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 1-9
 
 We can divide through by the square of the cosine, as long as we don’t allow q to be an 
odd-integer multiple of p /2. (If it is, then cos q = 0, which means that cos2 q = 0 and 
we end up dividing by 0.) Performing the division, we get
cos2 q /cos2 q = 1/cos2 q − sin2 q /cos2 q
 
 The left-hand side of this equation is equal to 1 regardless of the value of q, as 
long as it’s not one of the forbidden values. The first term on the right-hand side is 
the reciprocal of the cosine squared, which is the same as the secant squared. The 
second term on the right-hand side is the ratio of the sine squared to the cosine 
squared, which is same as the tangent squared. We can therefore simplify the above 
equation to
1 = sec2 q − tan2 q
 
 which is, of course, the same as
sec2 q − tan2 q = 1
 10. Again, we start with the Pythagorean theorem for the sine and cosine
sin2 q + cos2 q = 1
 
 This derivation goes a lot like the solution to Problem 9. Let’s subtract cos2 q from 
either side to get
sin2 q = 1 − cos2 q
 
 We can divide through by the square of the sine, provided that we don’t allow q to be 
an integer multiple of p. (If it is, then we end up dividing by 0.) This gives us
sin2 q / sin2 q = 1/sin2 q − cos2 q /sin2 q
 
 The left-hand side of the above equation is always equal to 1, as long as q is not one 
of the forbidden values. The first term on the right-hand side is the reciprocal of the 
sine squared; that’s the same as the cosecant squared. The second term on the right-
hand side is the ratio of the cosine squared to the sine squared. That’s the same as the 
cotangent squared. We can therefore simplify the above equation to
1 = csc2 q − cot2 q
 
 which can be rearranged to
csc2 q − cot2 q = 1

Chapter 3
 1. Figure A-3 shows the graphs of the equations q = p /4 and q = p /2 in polar coordinates, 
where q is the independent variable and r is the dependent variable. Neither of these are 
functions of q. In the first case, r can be any real number when q = p /4. In the second 
case, r can be any real number when q = p /2.
 2. The graph of q = p /4 is a sloping line through the origin in the Cartesian xy plane. 
The graph of q = p /2 is a vertical line that coincides with the y axis. Figure A-4 shows 
both graphs. The line representing q = p /4 portrays a function of x in the Cartesian xy
plane, because there is never more than one value of y for any value of x. But the line 
representing q = p /2 does not portray a function of x in the Cartesian xy plane, because 
when x = 0, y can be any real number.
0
3p/2
p/2
p
q = p/4
q = p/2
Figure A-3  Illustration for the 
solution to Problem 1 
in Chap. 3.
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
q = p/4
q = p/2
Figure A-4  Illustration for the 
solution to Problem 2 
in Chap. 3.
Chapter 3  475

476  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 1-9
 3. The equation r = −a represents the same circle as the equation r = a.
 4. Imagine a ray that points straight to the right along the reference axis labeled 0. As 
the ray rotates counterclockwise so that q starts out at 0 and increases positively, the 
corresponding radius r starts out at 0 and increases negatively. This tells us that the 
constant a is negative. When the ray has turned through 1/2 rotation so that q = p, the 
radius of the solid spiral reaches the value r = −2p. (Don’t get this confused with the 
apparent radius of r = 4p on the solid spiral! The larger value is actually r = −4p, which 
we get when the ray has rotated through a complete circle so that q = 2p.) We can solve 
for a by substituting the number pair (q,r) = (p,−2p) in the general spiral equation
r = aq
 
 This gives us
−2p = ap
 
 which solves to a = −2. Therefore, the equation of the pair of spirals is
r = −2q
 5. Line L runs through the origin and up to the left at an angle halfway between the p /2
axis and the p axis. That direction is represented by
q = 3p /4
 
 This is the equation of L. But we can also imagine that line L runs down and to the 
right at an angle corresponding to
q = 7p /4
 
 so this can also serve as the equation of L. Theoretically, we can add or subtract any 
integer multiple of p from 3p /4 and get a valid equation for L. By convention, we stick 
to the range of angles 0 ≤q < 2p, so the above two equations are preferred over any 
others.
 
  Circle C is centered at the origin and has a radius of 3 units, as we can see by 
inspecting the graph and remembering that each radial division equals 1 unit. 
Therefore, C can be represented by
r = 3
 
 We can also consider the radius to be −3 units, so
r = −3
 
 is an equally valid equation for C.

 6. Based on the solution to Problem 5, we can represent the intersection point at the 
upper left as either
P = (3p /4,3)
 
 or
P = (7p /4,−3)
 
 We can represent the intersection point at the lower right as either
Q = (7p /4,3)
 
 or
Q = (3p /4,−3)
 
 The more intuitive representations are the coordinates with positive radii, which are
P = (3p /4,3)
 
 and
Q = (7p /4,3)
 7. Before we can solve the system of equations for L and C as they are shown in Fig. 3-8, 
we must be certain that we’ve completely identified the system. For L, we have
q = 3p /4
 
 or
q = 7p /4
 
 and for C, we have
r = 3
 
 or
r = −3
 
 Solving this system is deceptively simple. It doesn’t require algebra at all! We merely 
combine all the possible combinations of angles and radii we’ve listed above to get the 
following four ordered pairs:
 
(q,r) = (3p /4,3)
 
(q,r) = (3p /4,−3)
 
(q,r) = (7p /4,3)
 
(q,r) = (7p /4,−3)
Chapter 3  477

478  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 1-9
 
 Using plus-and-minus notation for the radii, we can reduce this list to two items:
(q,r) = (3p /4,±3)
 
 and
(q,r) = (7p /4,±3)
 
 That’s redundant, but it’s valid. If we want to be more elegant, we can get rid of the 
redundancy and list the solutions as
(q,r) = (3p /4,3)
 
 and
(q,r) = (7p /4,3)
 
 We can tell which ordered pair represents P and which one represents Q by looking 
again at Fig. 3-8. It’s obvious that
P = (3p /4,3)
 
 and
Q = (7p /4,3)
 8. Let’s take away the polar grid in Fig. 3-8 and put a Cartesian grid in its place, as shown 
in Fig. A-5. Because we’ve been told that line L is equally distant from the vertical and 
Line L
Circle C
Intersection
point P
Intersection
point Q
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
4
Figure A-5  Illustration for the solutions to Problems 8 
through 10 in Chap. 3.

horizontal axes, we know that its slope is −1. Because we’ve been told that line L passes 
through the origin, we know that its y-intercept is 0. From algebra, we remember that 
the slope-intercept form of the Cartesian equation for a straight line is
y = mx + b
 
 where m is the slope and b is the y-intercept. Plugging in −1 for m and 0 for b, we find 
that the Cartesian equation for line L is
y = −x
 
  We’ve been told that circle C is centered at the origin and has a radius of 3 units. From 
algebra, we recall that the general form for the equation of a circle centered at the origin is
x2 + y2 = r2
 
 where r is the radius. When we plug in either 3 or −3 for r, we find that the Cartesian 
equation for circle C is
x2 + y2 = 9
 9. Here’s the system of Cartesian equations that we’ve found, representing line L and circle 
C as shown in Figs. 3-8 and A-5:
y = −x
 
 and
x2 + y2 = 9
 
 Let’s replace y in the second equation by −x, so we get
x2 + (−x)2 = 9
 
 Because (−x)2 = x2 for any real number x, we can rewrite the above equation as
x2 + x2 = 9
 
 which simplifies to
2x2 = 9
 
 and further to
x2 = 9/2
 
 The solutions to this equation are
x = (9/2)1/2
Chapter 3  479

480  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 1-9
 
 or
x = −(9/2)1/2
 
 To solve for y, we must plug in these values of x to either of the equations in our 
original system. Let’s use y = −x. When we put the first of these solutions into that 
equation, we obtain
y = −(9/2)1/2
 
 which tells us that one of the points is (x,y) = [(9/2)1/2,−(9/2)1/2]. When we plug the 
second solution for x into the equation y = −x, we get
y = −[−(9/2)1/2] = (9/2)1/2
 
 so we know that the other point is (x,y) = [−(9/2)1/2,(9/2)1/2]. By inspecting Fig. A-5, we 
can see that the points must be
P = [−(9/2)1/2,(9/2)1/2]
 
 and
Q = [(9/2)1/2,−(9/2)1/2]
 10. To get the Cartesian equivalents of the points we found when we solved Problems 6 and 7, 
we use the conversion formulas
x = r cos q
 
 and
y = r sin q
 
 The polar form of point P is
(q,r) = (3p /4,3)
 
 In this case, we have
x = 3 cos (3p /4) = 3 × (−21/2)/2 = −(9/2)1/2
 
 and
y = 3 sin (3p /4) = 3 × 21/2/2 = (9/2)1/2
 
 so the ordered pair is
(x,y) = [−(9/2)1/2,(9/2)1/2]

 
 The polar form of point Q is
(q,r) = (7p /4,3)
 
 In this case, we have
x = 3 cos (7p /4) = 3 × 21/2/2 = (9/2)1/2
 
 and
y = 3 sin (7p /4) = 3 × (−21/2)/2 = −(9/2)1/2
 
 so the ordered pair is
(x,y) = [(9/2)1/2,−(9/2)1/2]
 
We have found that
P = [−(9/2)1/2,(9/2)1/2]
 
and
Q = [(9/2)1/2,−(9/2)1/2]
 
 These results agree with what we got when we solved Problem 9. They are the Cartesian 
coordinates of points P and Q as shown in Figs. 3-8 and A-5.
Chapter 4
 1. Here are the two vectors we’ve been told to work with:
a = (−3,6)
 
 and
b = (2,5)
 
 In this situation, xa = −3, xb = 2, ya = 6, and yb = 5. The Cartesian sum a + b is
a + b = [(xa + xb),( ya + yb)] = [(−3 + 2),(6 + 5)] = (−1,11)
 
 Reversing the order of the sum, we get
b + a = [(xb + xa),( yb + ya)] = [2 + (−3),(5 + 6)] = (−1,11)
Chapter 4  481

482  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 1-9
 
 The Cartesian difference a - b is
a - b = [(xa −xb),( ya −yb)] = [(−3 − 2),(6 − 5)] = (−5,1)
 
 Reversing the order of the difference, we obtain
 
b - a = [(xb −xa),( yb −ya)] = {[2 − (−3)],(5 − 6)}
 
= [(2 + 3),(5 − 6)] = (5,−1)
 2. Imagine that we have an arbitrary Cartesian vector
a = (xa,ya)
 
 Its Cartesian negative is
-a = (−xa,−ya)
 
 By definition, the Cartesian sum vector a + (−a) is
a + (−a) = {[xa + (−xa)],[ya + (−ya)]} = [(xa −xa),( ya −ya)] = (0,0) = 0
 
 Reversing the order of the sum, we get
 
−a + a = [(−xa + xa),(−ya + ya)] = {[xa + (−xa)],[ya + (−ya)]}
 
= [(xa −xa),( ya −ya)] = (0,0) = 0
 3. As with the solutions to Problems 1 and 2, demonstrating this fact is a mere exercise in 
arithmetic. Nevertheless, we can get some practice in mathematical rigor by carefully 
working our way through each step in the process. According to the formula for the 
Cartesian difference between two vectors from the chapter text, we have
a - b = [(xa −xb),( ya −yb)]
 
 and
b - a = [(xb −xa),( yb −ya)]
 
 Now let’s look closely at the coordinates for these two vectors, and compare them. The 
x coordinate of a - b is the real number xa −xb, while the x coordinate of b - a is the 
real number xb −xa. From pre-algebra, we remember that when we reverse the order of 
the difference between two numbers, we get the negative. In this case, it means
xb −xa = −(xa −xb)

 
 The same thing happens with the other elements. The y coordinate of a - b is ya −yb,
and the y coordinate of b - a is yb −ya. The rules of pre-algebra tell us that
yb −ya = −( ya −yb)
 
 Therefore, we know that
b - a = [−(xa −xb),−( ya −yb)]
 
 By definition, that’s the Cartesian negative of a - b.
 4. We are given the two Cartesian vectors
a = (4,5)
 
 and
b = (−2,−3)
 
 Their Cartesian sum is
a + b = {[4 + (−2)],[5 + (−3)]} = (2,2)
 
 The individual Cartesian negatives are
-a = (−4,−5)
 
 and
-b = (2,3)
 
 These vectors add up to
−a + (−b) = [(−4 + 2),(−5 + 3)] = (−2,−2)
 
 In this case, the sum of the Cartesian negatives is equal to the negative of the Cartesian 
sum.
 5. Let’s begin by working out a formula for the negative of a vector sum. Suppose we’re 
given two Cartesian vectors
a = (xa,ya)
 
 and
b = (xb,yb)
Chapter 4  483

484  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 1-9
 
 The sum vector a + b is
a + b = [(xa + xb),( ya + yb)]
 
 The negative of this sum vector is
-(a + b) = [−(xa + xb),−( ya + yb)]
 
 Using the rules of pre-algebra, we can rewrite the right-hand side of this equation to get
-(a + b) = [−xa + (−xb)],[−ya + (−yb)]
 
 Now let’s go back to the original two vectors. We can state their Cartesian negatives as
-a = (−xa,−ya)
 
 and
-b = (−xb,−yb)
 
 When we add these, we obtain
-a + (-b) = [−xa + (−xb)],[−ya + (−yb)]
 
 That’s the same thing we got when we worked out -(a + b), so we know that
-(a + b) = −a + (-b)
 6. We are given the two polar vectors
a = (p /2,4)
 
 and
b = (p,3)
 
 We want to find their polar sum. First, we convert the vectors to Cartesian form. When 
we do that, we get
a = {[4 cos (p /2)],[4 sin (p /2)]} = [(4 × 0),(4 × 1)] = (0,4)
 
 and
b = [(3 cos p),(3 sin p)] = {[(3 × (−1)],(3 × 0)]} = (−3,0)
 
 When we add these, we obtain
a + b = {[0 + (−3)],(4 + 0)} = (−3,4)

 
 Let’s call this Cartesian sum vector c = (xc,yc), so we have
 
xc = −3
 
 and
yc = 4
 
 The point defined by these coordinates lies in the second quadrant of the Cartesian 
plane. We want to know the polar sum vector c = (qc,rc), where qc is the direction angle 
of c and rc is the magnitude of c. Using the applicable angle-conversion formula, we get
qc = p + Arctan [4/(−3)] = p + Arctan (−4/3)
 
 That’s an irrational number. If we want to be exact, we must leave it in this form; there’s 
no way to make it simpler! A calculator set to work in radians can give us approximate 
values to four decimal places of 
Arctan (−4/3) ≈−0.9273
 
 and
p ≈ 3.1416
 
 From this, we can calculate
qc ≈ 2.2143
 
 Using the formula for the polar magnitude, we obtain
rc = (xc
2 + yc
2)1/2 = [(−3)2 + 42]1/2 = (9 + 16)1/2 = 251/2 = 5
 
 This value is exact. Putting the coordinates into an ordered pair, we derive our exact 
final answer as
c = a + b = (qc,rc) = {[p + Arctan (−4/3)],5}
 
 The approximate-angle version is
c = a + b ≈ (2.2143,5)
 
 Don’t get confused here. This ordered pair looks deceptively like the rendition of a 
vector in the Cartesian plane, but it really defines the vector in the polar coordinate 
plane. The first coordinate is in radians, and the second coordinate is in linear 
units.
Chapter 4  485

486  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 1-9
 7. To find the polar negative of the vector we derived in the solution to Problem 6, we 
reverse the direction but leave the magnitude the same. In this situation, 0 ≤qc < p, so 
we should add p to the angle to reverse the direction. That gives us the exact answer as
 
-(a + b) = {[p + p + Arctan (−4/3)],5}
 
= {[2p + Arctan (−4/3)],5}
 
 If we say that 2p ≈ 6.2832, then we can approximate the angle to four decimal places 
and define the vector as
-(a + b) ≈ (5.3559,5)
 8. The original two vectors are
a = (p /2,4)
 
 and
b = (p,3)
 
 To find the polar negatives, we reverse the directions but leave the magnitudes the 
same. We want to keep the angles less than 2p without letting either of them become 
negative. In this case, that means we should add p to qa, but we should subtract p from 
qb. When we make these changes, we get
-a = (3p /2,4)
 
 and
-b = (0,3)
 
 We must be careful to avoid confusion about what the coordinates of −b actually mean. 
The first entry in the ordered pair is an angle, while the second entry is a radius.
 9. This time, we want to find the polar sum of the vectors
-a = (3p /2,4)
 
 and
-b = (0,3)
 
 Converting them to Cartesian form, we get
-a = {[4 cos (3p /2)],[4 sin (3p /2)]} = {(4 × 0),[ 4 × (−1)]} = (0,−4)

 
 and
-b = [(3 cos 0),(3 sin 0)] = [(3 × 1),(3 × 0)] = (3,0)
 
 Adding, we get the Cartesian vector sum
-a + (-b) = [(0 + 3),(−4 + 0)] = (3,−4)
 
 Let’s call this Cartesian sum vector d = (xd,yd ). We have
xd = 3
 
 and
yd = −4
 
 This is in the fourth quadrant of the Cartesian plane. We seek the polar sum vector 
d = (qd,rd ), where qd is the direction angle of d and rd is the magnitude of d. Using the 
applicable angle-conversion formula, we get
qd = 2p + Arctan (−4/3)
 
 The formula for the polar magnitude tells us that
rd = (xd
 2 + yd
 2)1/2 = [32 + (−4)2]1/2 = (9 + 16)1/2 = 251/2 = 5
 
 This gives us the ordered pair
d = -a + (-b) = (qd,rd ) = {[2p + Arctan (−4/3)],5}
 
 This is precisely the same vector that we got when we solved Problem 7. Now we know 
that in the specific polar-vector case where
a = (p /2,4)
 
 and
b = (p,3)
 
 the following formula holds:
-(a + b) = -a + (-b)
 
 Of course, demonstrating this single example doesn’t prove the general case. We know 
it works in general for Cartesian vectors. If you’re ambitious and would like some 
extra credit, go ahead and rigorously prove that polar vector negation always distributes 
through polar vector addition. You’re on your own!
Chapter 4  487

488  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 1-9
 10. Here are the original two polar vectors, stated once again for reference:
a = (p /2,4)
 
 and
b = (p,3)
 
 We want to find their polar differences both ways. Before we do that, we must know the 
Cartesian forms of the vectors. We worked them out in the solution to Problem 6, getting
a = (0,4)
 
 and
b = (−3,0)
 
 When we subtract b from a, we get
a - b = {[0 − (−3)],(4 − 0)} = (3,4)
 
 Let’s call this Cartesian difference vector p = (xp,yp). The individual coordinates are
xp = 3
 
 and
yp = 4
 
 This puts us in the first quadrant of the Cartesian plane. We seek the polar sum vector 
p = (qp,rp), where qp is the direction angle of p and rp is the magnitude of p. Using the 
appropriate Cartesian-to-polar angle-conversion formula, we come up with
qp = Arctan (4/3)
 
 A calculator set to work in radians can give us an approximate value to four decimal 
places of
Arctan (4/3) ≈ 0.9273
 
 Using the formula for the polar magnitude, we obtain the exact result
rp = (xp
2 + yp
2)1/2 = (32 + 42)1/2 = (9 + 16)1/2 = 251/2 = 5
 
 Putting the angle and magnitude coordinates into an ordered pair, we derive our exact 
answer as
p = a - b = (qp,rp) = [Arctan (4/3),5]

 
 The approximate-angle version is
p = a - b ≈ (0.9273,5)
 
 We must remember that the first coordinate is in radians, and the second is in linear 
units. Now let’s go the other way. When we subtract a from b, we get
b - a = [(−3 − 0),(0 − 4)] = (−3,−4)
 
 Let’s call this Cartesian difference vector q = (xq,yq). We have
xq = −3
 
 and
yq = −4
 
 This time, we’re in the third quadrant. We seek the polar sum vector q = (qq,rq), where 
qq is the direction angle of q and rq is the magnitude of q. Converting the angle to polar 
form using the applicable formula, we get
qq = p + Arctan [−4/(−3)] = p + Arctan (4/3)
 
 As before, a calculator tells us that
Arctan (4/3) ≈ 0.9273
 
 Using the formula for the polar magnitude yields the exact value
rq = (xq
2 + yq
2)1/2 = [(−3)2 + (−4)2)]1/2 = (9 + 16)1/2 = 251/2 = 5
 
 Our exact final answer is therefore
q = b - a = (qq,rq) = {[p + Arctan (4/3)],5}
 
 If we let p ≈ 3.1416, the approximate-angle version is
q = b - a ≈ (4.0689,5)
 
 The first coordinate is in radians, and the second is in linear units.
Chapter 5
 1. We’ve been given the Cartesian vectors
a = (5,−5)
 
 and
b = (−5,5)
Chapter 5  489

490  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 1-9
 
 When we multiply a on the left by 4, we get
4a = 4 × (5,−5) = {(4 × 5), [4 × (−5)]} = (20,−20)
 
 When we multiply b on the left by −4, we get
−4b = −4 × (−5,5) = {[−4 × (−5)],(−4 × 5)} = (20,−20)
 2. The Cartesian vector a has the coordinates xa = 5 and ya = −5, so it terminates in the 
fourth quadrant. The direction angle for the polar form of a can be found using the 
conversion formula for a vector in the fourth quadrant, giving us
qa = 2p + Arctan (−5/5) = 2p + Arctan (−1) = 2p + (−p /4)
 
= 7p /4
 
 The magnitude of a is found by the distance formula
ra = [52 + (−5)2]1/2 = (25 + 25)1/2 = 501/2
 
 Therefore, the polar version of a is
 
a = (7p /4,501/2)
 
 The Cartesian version of b has xb = −5 and yb = 5. It terminates in the second quadrant. 
Using the conversion formula for the direction angle of a vector in that quadrant, we get
 
qb = p + Arctan [5/(−5)] = p + Arctan (−1) = p + (−p /4)
 
= 3p /4
 
 The magnitude of b is
rb = [(−5)2 + 52]1/2 = (25 + 25)1/2 = 501/2
 
 Therefore, the polar version of b is
b = (3p /4,501/2)
 
 When we multiply a on the left by 4, we get
4a = 4 × (7p /4,501/2) = (7p /4,8001/2)
 
 When we multiply b on the left by −4, we get
−4b = −4 × (3p /4,501/2) = (3p /4,−8001/2) = (7p /4,8001/2)

 
 In the last step in the equation for −4b, we must take the absolute value of the negative 
magnitude coordinate, because we can’t allow a vector to have negative magnitude. We 
do this by reversing the direction, in this case by adding p to the angle.
 3. We want to prove that positive-scalar multiplication is right-hand distributive over 
vector subtraction in the Cartesian xy plane. Let’s start with
(a − b)k+
 
 where a = (xa,ya), b = (xb,yb), and k+ is a positive real number. Expanding the vectors into 
their ordered pairs in our initial expression, we get
(a − b)k+ = [(xa −xb),( ya −yb)]k+
 
 The definition of right-hand scalar multiplication tells us that we can morph this 
equation to obtain
(a − b)k+ = {[(xa −xb)k+],[( ya −yb)]k+}
 
 The right-hand distributive law for real numbers allows us to transform the equation 
further, getting
(a − b)k+ = [(xak+ −xbk+),( yak+ −ybk+)]
 
 Let’s put this equation aside for moment. We’ll come back to it!
 
  Now, instead of the product of the vector difference and the constant, let’s start with 
the difference between the products
ak+ −bk+
 
 We can expand the individual vectors into ordered pairs to get
ak+ −bk+ = (xa,ya)k+ − (xb,yb)k+
 
 By the definition of right-hand scalar multiplication, we have
ak+ −bk+ = (xak+,yak+) − (xbk+,ybk+)
 
 When we add the elements of the ordered pairs individually to get a new ordered pair, 
we obtain
ak+ −bk+ = [(xak+ −xbk+),( yak+ −ybk+)]
 
 The right-hand side of this equation is the same as the right-hand side of the equation 
we put aside a minute ago. That equation, once again, is
(a − b)k+ = [(xak+ −xbk+),( yak+ −ybk+)]
Chapter 5  491

492  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 1-9
 
 Taken together, the above two equations show us that
(a − b)k+ = ak+ −bk+
 4. We’ve been given the Cartesian vectors
a = (4,4)
 
 and
b = (−7,7)
 
 We can define the coordinate values as xa = 4, xb = −7, ya = 4, and yb = 7. The Cartesian 
dot product of a and b, in that order, is therefore
a • b = xaxb + yayb = 4 × (−7) + 4 × 7 = −28 + 28 = 0
 
 The Cartesian dot product of b and a, in that order, is
b • a = xbxa + ybya = −7 × 4 + 7 × 4 = −28 + 28 = 0
 5. The Cartesian vector a has the coordinates xa = 4 and ya = 4, so it terminates in the first 
quadrant. The direction angle for the polar form of a is therefore
qa = Arctan (4/4) = Arctan 1 = p /4
 
 The magnitude of a is
ra = [42 + 42]1/2 = (16 + 16)1/2 = 321/2
 
 so the polar form of a is
a = (p /4,321/2)
 
 The Cartesian vector b has xb = −7 and yb = 7. It terminates in the second quadrant. 
Using the conversion formula for the direction angle of a vector in the second 
quadrant, we get
qb = p + Arctan [7/(−7)] = p + Arctan (−1) = p + (−p /4)
= 3p /4
 
 The magnitude of b is
rb = [(−7)2 + 72]1/2 = (49 + 49)1/2 = 981/2
 
 Therefore, the polar version of b is
b = (3p /4,981/2)

 
 Let’s assign the coordinate values qa = p /4, qb = 3p /4, ra = 321/2, and rb = 981/2. The 
Cartesian polar product of a and b, in that order, is
 
a • b = rarb cos (qb −qa) = 321/2 × 981/2 × cos (3p /4 −p /4)
 
= 3,1361/2 cos (p /2) = 56 × 0 = 0
 
 The Cartesian dot product of b and a, in that order, is
 
b • a = rbra cos (qa −qb) = 981/2 × 321/2 × cos (p /4 − 3p /4)
 
= 3,1361/2 cos (−p /2) = 56 × 0 = 0
 6. Consider two standard-form vectors a and b in Cartesian coordinates, defined by the 
ordered pairs
a = (xa,ya)
 
 and
b = (xb,yb)
 
 By definition, the Cartesian dot product of a and b, in that order, is
a • b = xaxb + yayb
 
 The commutative law for real-number multiplication allows us to reverse the order of 
both terms in the sum on the right-hand side of this equation, getting
a • b = xbxa + ybya
 
 By definition, the right-hand side of the above equation is the Cartesian dot product of 
b and a, in that order. Therefore
a • b = b • a
 
 for any two standard-form Cartesian-plane vectors a and b.
 7. Suppose we’re given two vectors a and b in the polar plane, defined by
a = (qa,ra)
 
 and
b = (qb,rb)
 
 The polar dot product of a and b, in that order, is
a • b = rarb cos (qb −qa)
Chapter 5  493

494  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 1-9
 
 The commutative law for real-number multiplication allows us to reverse the order of 
the multiplication on the right-hand side of this equation to obtain
a • b = rbra cos (qb −qa)
 
 Now let’s look at the difference between the direction angles. From pre-algebra, we recall 
that when we reverse the order of a difference, we get the negative of that difference. 
Using this rule, we can modify the angular difference in the above equation to get
a • b = rbra cos [−(qa −qb)]
 
 Basic trigonometry tells us that the cosine of the negative of an angle is the same as the 
cosine of the angle itself. Therefore
a • b = rbra cos (qa −qb)
 
 By definition, the right-hand side of this equation is the polar dot product of b and a,
in that order, telling us that
a • b = b • a
 
 for any two vectors a and b in the polar plane.
 8. Let’s do the Cartesian proof first. We have a positive scalar k+ along with two standard-
form vectors a and b in the xy plane. Suppose that the coordinates are
a = (xa,ya)
 
 and
b = (xb,yb)
 
 When we multiply these vectors individually on the left by k+, we get
k+a = (k+xa,k+ya)
 
 and
k+b = (k+xb,k+yb)
 
 The Cartesian dot product of these vectors is
 
k+a • k+b = (k+xak+xb + k+yak+yb) = (k+
2xaxb + k+
2yayb)
 
= k+
2(xaxb + yayb) = k+
2(a • b)
 
 Now let’s work through the polar case. Suppose that the coordinates of a and b are
a = (qa,ra)

 
 and
b = (qb,rb)
 
 When we multiply the individual vectors on the left by the positive scalar k+ and expand 
the results into ordered pairs, we get
k+a = (qa,k+ra)
 
 and
k+b = (qb,k+rb)
 
 Does this step confuse you? If so, remember that because the scalar k+ is positive, 
multiplying any polar vector by k+ doesn’t change the vector direction. It only affects 
the magnitude, making it k+ times as large. When we take the polar dot product of 
these new vectors, we get
 
k+a • k+b = k+rak+rb cos (qb −qa)
 
= k+
2rarb cos (qb −qa) = k+
2(a • b)
 9. We want to find the cross product a ë b of the polar vectors
a = (p /3,4)
 
 and
b = (3p /2,1)
 
 The coordinate values are qa = p /3, qb = 3p /2, ra = 4, and rb = 1. Before we begin our 
calculations, we should note that
qb −qa = 3p /2 −p /3 = 7p /6
 
 That’s larger than p, so a × b points straight away from us as we look down on the polar 
plane. To find the magnitude ra×b, we use the formula for cases where p < qb −qa < 2p.
That gives us
 
ra×b = rarb sin (2p + qa −qb) = 4 × 1 × sin (5p /6)
 
= 4 × 1 × 1/2 = 2
 
 so we know that the magnitude of a × b is 2.
 10. We’ve been told to find the cross product of the polar vectors
a = (p,8)
Chapter 5  495

496  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 1-9
 
 and
b = (7p /6,5)
 
 The coordinate values are qa = p, qb = 7p /6, ra = 8, and rb = 5. In this situation, we 
have
qb −qa = 7p /6 −p = p /6
 
 That’s smaller than p, so the cross product vector points directly toward us as we look 
down on the polar plane and imagine going counterclockwise from a to b. To find the 
magnitude ra×b, we use the formula for situations in which 0 < qb −qa < p, getting
 
ra×b = rarb sin (qb −qa) = 8 × 5 × sin (p /6)
 
= 8 × 5 × 1/2 = 20
 
 so we know that the magnitude of a × b is 20.
Chapter 6
 1. We know that j 2 = −1 by definition, and we derived the fact that (−j )2 = −1 in the 
chapter text. We might think that
−j = j
 
 Let’s suppose, for the sake of argument, that the above equation is true. Multiplying 
each side by j gives us
−j × j = j × j
 
 which can be rewritten as
−1 × j × j = j × j
 
 Because j × j = j 2 = −1 by definition, we can rewrite the above as
−1 × (−1) = −1
 
 and finally simplify it to
1 = −1
 
 This statement is obviously false. By reductio ad absurdum, we must conclude that our 
original assumption, −j = j, is also false. Therefore
−j ≠j

 2. The quantity j −1 can also be written as 1/j. It’s an unknown, so let’s call it x and then set 
up the simple equation
1/j = x
 
 We can multiply through by j to get
j/j = jx
 
 Because any nonzero quantity divided by itself is equal to 1, we can simplify to
1 = jx
 
 Multiplying through by −j gives us
−j = −jjx
 
 which can be rewritten as
−j = −j 2x
 
 We know that j 2 = −1, so the above equation becomes
−j = −(−1)x
 
 which simplifies to
−j = x
 
 Our unknown quantity is equal to −j. We have just demonstrated that
j –1 = −j
 
 The multiplicative inverse (reciprocal) of j is the same as its additive inverse (negative). 
No real number behaves like that!
 3. First, let’s add −3 + j4 and 1 + j5. When we add the real parts, we get
−3 + 1 = −2
 
 When we add the imaginary parts, we get
j4 + j5 = j9
 
 The sum can be expressed directly as
(−3 + j4) + (1 + j5) = −2 + j9
Chapter 6  497

498  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 1-9
 
 The parentheses are superfluous, but they help to separate the individual complex-
number addends on the left-hand side of the equation. Now let’s subtract 1 + j5 from 
−3 + j4. First, we multiply (1 + j5) by −1, getting
−1 × (1 + j5) = −1 −j5
 
 Now we add −3 + j4 to −1 −j5. When we sum the real parts, we get
−3 + (−1) = −4
 
 Adding the imaginary parts gives us
j4 + (−j5) = −j
 
 The difference can be expressed directly as
(−3 + j4) − (1 + j5) = −4 −j
 4. We want to find a general formula for the ratio of a complex number to its conjugate. 
We can do this by evaluating
(a + jb)/(a −jb)
 
 where a and b are real numbers, and neither a nor b is equal to 0. The general ratio 
formula is
(a + jb)/(c + jd ) = [(ac + bd )/(c2 + d 2)] + j [(bc −ad )/(c2 + d 2)]
 
 In this situation, we can let c = a and d = −b. Then we can substitute in the ratio 
formula to get
 
(a + jb)/(a −jb) = {[aa + b(−b)]/[a2 + (−b)2]} + j {[ba −a(−b)]/[a2 + (−b)2]}
 
= [(a2 −b2)/(a2 + b2)] + j [(2ab)/(a2 + b2)]
 
 The curly braces in the second part, and the square brackets in the third part, are 
technically unnecessary. But they help to visually set apart the real and imaginary 
components of the complex quantities.
 5. First, let’s work out the square of a + jb. When we go through the arithmetic, we obtain
 
(a + jb)2 = (a + jb)(a + jb)
 
= a2 + jab + jba + j 2b2
 
= a2 + j 2ab −b2
 
= (a2 −b2) + j 2ab

 
 Note that in the expression j 2ab, the numeral 2 is not an exponent! Now let’s find the 
square of the complex number a −jb. Paying careful attention to the signs, we get
 
(a −jb)2 = (a −jb)(a −jb)
 
= a2 + a(−jb) + (−jb)a + (−jb)2
 
= a2 −jab −jba + (−j )2b2
 
= a2 −j 2ab −b2
 
= (a2 −b2) −j 2ab
 
 The two final products we’ve derived are
(a2 −b2) + j 2ab
 
 and
(a2 −b2) −j 2ab
 
 which, by definition, are complex conjugates.
 6. First, let’s find the product of the polar complex vectors (p /4,21/2) and (3p /4,21/2). We 
must add the direction angles and multiply the magnitudes. The sum of the angles is
p /4 + 3p /4 = p
 
 The product of the magnitudes is
21/2 × 21/2 = 2
 
 Therefore, the product vector is (p,2). The angle q is equal to p, and the magnitude r is 
equal to 2. To convert this polar vector (q,r) = (p,2) to the complex-number form 
a + jb where a and b are real-number coefficients, we use the formula for that purpose, 
getting
 
a + jb = r cos q + j(r sin q) = 2 cos p + j(2 sin p)
 
= 2 × (−1) + j × 2 × 0 = −2 + j0 = −2
 
 The product of the two original polar complex vectors (p /4,21/2) and (3p /4,21/2) is a 
vector representing the pure real number −2.
 7. Let’s convert the polar vector (q,r) = (p /4,21/2) to a complex number in the traditional 
“real-plus-imaginary” form. The conversion formula tells us that
 
r cos q + j(r sin q) = 21/2 cos (p /4) + j[21/2 sin (p /4)]
 
= 21/2 × 21/2/2 + j(21/2 × 21/2/2) = 1 + j
 
 Repeating the process with the polar vector (q,r) = (3p /4,21/2), we get
 
r cos q + j(r sin q) = 21/2 cos (3p /4) + j[21/2 sin (3p /4)]
 
= 21/2 × (−21/2/2) + j(21/2 × 21/2/2) = −1 + j
Chapter 6  499

500  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 1-9
 
 When we multiply these two complex numbers as binomials, we get
 
(1 + j )(−1 + j ) = 1 × (−1) + 1 × j + j × (−1) + j × j
 
= −1 + j + (−j ) + (−1) = −2
 
 This agrees with the solution to Problem 6. It should! We’ve been multiplying the same 
two vectors, representing the same two complex numbers, all along. If we hadn’t gotten 
identical results using the polar method and the Cartesian method, we’d have made a 
mistake somewhere.
 8. Let’s convert the polar vector (q,r) = (2p /3,1) to the “real-plus-imaginary” complex-
number form. The conversion formula tells us that
 
r cos q + j(r sin q) = cos (2p /3) + j sin (2p /3)]
 
= −1/2 + j(31/2/2)
 
 If you don’t remember why sin (2p /3) = 31/2/2, you might want to verify it for extra 
credit. (Here’s a hint: Use the Pythagorean theorem to solve for the height of a right 
triangle whose base is 1/2 unit wide and whose hypotenuse is 1 unit long.) Now let’s 
repeat the process with the polar vector (q,r) = (4p /3,1). The conversion formula gives us
 
r cos q + j(r sin q) = cos (4p /3) + j sin (4p /3)]
 
= −1/2 + j(−31/2/2)
 
= −1/2 −j(31/2/2)
 9. Figure A-6 is a graph of the three cube roots of 1 as polar complex vectors. Each radial 
division represents 1/5 unit.
0
3p/2
(0, 1)
(2p/3, 1)
(4p/3, 1)
p
p/2
Figure A-6  Illustration for the solution to 
Problem 9 in Chap. 6. Each radial 
division represents 1/5 unit.

 10. Figure A-7 is a graph of three cube roots of 1 as Cartesian complex vectors. Each radial 
division represents 1/5 unit. All three vectors terminate on the unit circle.
Chapter 7
 1. In Fig. 7-7, the x axis goes from left to right, the y axis goes from bottom to top, and 
the z axis goes from far to near. According to the following rules:
•   The origin has x = 0, y = 0, and z = 0
•   The point P has x = 3, y = −3, and z = 4
•   The point Q has x = −5, y = 4, and z = 0
•   The point R has x = 0, y = 0, and z = 6
 2. We have P = (3,−3,4). Let’s call the coordinates xp = 3, yp = −3, and zp = 4. When we 
plug these values into the formula for the distance c of a point from the origin, we get
 
c = (xp
2 + yp
2 + zp
2)1/2 = [32 + (−3)2 + 42]1/2
 
= (9 + 9 + 16)1/2 = 341/2
x
jy
Unit circle
–1/2 + j(31/2/2)
Complex number
–1/2 – j(31/2/2)
Complex number
Pure real
number
1 + j0
= 1
Figure A-7  Illustration for the solution to Problem 10 
in Chap. 6. Each axis division represents 
1/5 unit.
Chapter 7  501

502  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 1-9
 
 That’s an irrational number. When we use a calculator to approximate its value to three 
decimal places, we get
c ≈ 5.831
 3. In this case, Q = (−5,4,0), so we can say that xq = −5, yq = 4, and zq = 0. When we plug 
these values into the distance-from-the-origin formula, we get
 
c = (xq
2 + yq
2 + zq
2)1/2 = [(−5)2 + 42 + 02]1/2
 
= (25 + 16 + 0)1/2 = 411/2
 
 A calculator approximates this irrational number to
c ≈ 6.403
 4. This distance can be read straightaway from the graph if we use the z axis as a 
measuring stick. If we want to go through the mathematics, we have R = (0,0,6), so we 
can assign xr = 0, yr = 0, and zr = 6. The distance formula yields
c = (xr
2 + yr
2 + zr
2)1/2 = (02 + 02 + 62)1/2 = 361/2 = 6 
 
 This value is exact.
 5. Line segment L connects points Q and R, where
Q = (xq,yq,zq) = (−5,4,0)
 
 and
R = (xr,yr,zr) = (0,0,6)
 
 Plugging the coordinates into the formula for the distance d between two points in 
Cartesian three-space, we get
 
d = [(xr −xq)2 + ( yr −yq)2 + (zr −zq)2]1/2
 
= {[0 − (−5)]2 + (0 − 4)2 + (6 − 0)2}1/2
 
= [52 + (−4)2 + 62]1/2 = (25 + 16 + 36)1/2 = 771/2
 
 When we use a calculator to round this irrational number off to three decimal places, 
we get
d ≈ 8.775
 6. Line segment M connects points P and R, where
P = (xp,yp,zp) = (3,−3,4)

 
 and
R = (xr,yr,zr) = (0,0,6)
 
 Plugging the coordinates into the formula for the distance d between P and R gives us
 
d = [(xr −xp)2 + ( yr −yp)2 + (zr −zp)2]1/2
 
= {(0 − 3)2 + [0 − (−3)]2 + (6 − 4)2}1/2
 
= [(−3)2 + 32 + 22]1/2 = (9 + 9 + 4)1/2 = 221/2
 
 A calculator rounds this value to three decimal places as
d ≈ 4.690
 7. Line segment N connects points P and Q, where
P = (xp,yp,zp) = (3,−3,4)
 
 and
Q = (xq,yq,zq) = (−5,4,0)
 
 The distance d between these points is
 
d = [(xq −xp)2 + ( yq −yp)2 + (zq −zp)2]1/2
 
= {(−5 − 3)2 + [4 − (−3)]2 + (0 − 4)2}1/2
 
= [(−8)2 + 72 + (−4)2]1/2 = (64 + 49 + 16)1/2 = 1291/2
 
 A calculator rounds this to three decimal places as
d ≈ 11.358
 8. We want to find the midpoint of the line segment L connecting the points
Q = (xq,yq,zq) = (−5,4,0)
 
 and
R = (xr,yr,zr) = (0,0,6)
 
 Let’s call the midpoint A (for “average”) in this situation, because we’re already using M as 
the name of a line segment. The midpoint formula tells us that the coordinates of A are
 
(xa,ya,za) = [(xq + xr)/2,(  yq + yr)/2,(zq + zr)/2]
 
= {(−5 + 0)/2,(4 + 0)/2,(0 + 6)/2}
 
= (−5/2,4/2,6/2) = (−5/2,2,3)
Chapter 7  503

504  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 1-9
 9. We want to find the midpoint of the line segment M connecting the points
P = (xp,yp,zp) = (3,−3,4)
 
 and
R = (xr,yr,zr) = (0,0,6)
 
 If we again call the midpoint A, our formula tells us that the coordinates of A are
 
(xa,ya,za) = [(xp + xr)/2,( yp + yr)/2,(zp + zr)/2]
 
= [(3 + 0)/2,(−3 + 0)/2,(4 + 6)/2}
 
= (3/2,−3/2,10/2) = (3/2,−3/2,5)
 10. We want to identify the midpoint of the line segment N connecting the points
P = (xp,yp,zp) = (3,−3,4)
 
 and
Q = (xq,yq,zq) = (−5,4,0)
 
 Let’s call the midpoint A once more. Plugging the values into the formula, we obtain 
the coordinates
 
(xa,ya,za) = [(xp + xq)/2,( yp + yq)/2,(zp + zq)/2]
 
= {[(3 + (−5)]/2,(−3 + 4)/2,(4 + 0)/2}
 
= (−2/2,1/2,4/2) = (−1,1/2,2)
Chapter 8
 1. We want to find the magnitude ra of the standard-form vector
a = (8,−1,−6)
 
 Let’s call the coordinates xa = 8, ya = −1, and za = −6. Using the formula for vector 
magnitude, we obtain
 
ra = (xa
2 + ya
2 + za
2)1/2 = [82 + (−1)2 + (−6)2]1/2
 
= (64 + 1 + 36)1/2 = 1011/2
 
 When we round this irrational number to three decimal places, we get
ra ≈ 10.050

 2. The vector a′ originates at (−2,0,4) and terminates at (0,0,0) in xyz space. To find the 
standard form of this vector (let’s call it a), we subtract the originating coordinates from 
the terminating ones. According to that rule, the x coordinate of a is
xa = 0 − (−2) = 2
 
 The y coordinate of a is
ya = 0 − 0 = 0
 
 The z coordinate of a is
za = 0 − 4 = −4
 
 Putting these together, we get
a = (xa,ya,za) = (2,0,−4)
 3. The vector b′ originates at (2,3,4) and terminates at (6,7,8). Let b be the standard form 
of this vector. We find the terminating coordinates of b by subtracting the starting 
coordinates of b′ from its ending coordinates. For the x value of b, we get
xb = 6 − 2 = 4
 
 For the y value of b, we get
yb = 7 − 3 = 4
 
 For the z value of b, we get
zb = 8 − 4 = 4
 
 Assembling these coordinates into an ordered triple, we have
b = (xb,yb,zb) = (4,4,4)
 
 When we multiply b on the left by the scalar 4, we obtain
 
4b = 4 (xb,yb,zb) = (4xb,4yb,4zb)
= [(4 × 4),(4 × 4),(4 × 4)] = (16,16,16)
 
 That’s the standard form of 4b, so it must also be the standard form of 4b′.
 4. We have the two standard-form vectors
a = (−7,−10,0)
 
 and
b = (8,−1,−6)
Chapter 8  505

506  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 1-9
 
 Let’s assign the coordinates and pair them off as follows:
 
xa = −7   and xb = 8
 
ya = −10 and yb = −1
 
za = 0     and zb = −6
 
 When we plug these values into the formula for the dot product of two vectors in 
Cartesian xyz space, we get
 
a • b = xaxb + yayb + zazb
 
= −7 × 8 + (−10) × (−1) + 0 × (−6)
 
= −56 + 10 + 0
 
= −46
 5. We have the two standard-form vectors
a = (2,6,0)
 
 and
b = (7,4,3)
 
 Let’s call the coordinates xa = 2, ya = 6, za = 0, xb = 7, yb = 4, and zb = 3. We can use the 
formula for the cross product of two vectors in xyz space to get
 
a ë b = [( yazb −zayb),(zaxb −xazb),(xayb −yaxb)]
 
= [(6 × 3 − 0 × 4),(0 × 7 − 2 × 3),(2 × 4 − 6 × 7)]
 
= [(18 − 0),(0 − 6),(8 − 42)] = (18,−6,−34)
 6. We can use the formula for the dot product of two vectors, based on their magnitudes 
and the angle between them. In this case, rf = 4 and rg = 7, and the angle between 
them, expressible as qfg, is 0 because the vectors point in the same direction. Therefore
 
f • g = rfrg cos qfg = 4 × 7 × cos 0
 
= 4 × 7 × 1 = 28
 7. As in the previous solution, we can use the formula for the dot product of two vectors, 
based on their magnitudes and the angle between them. Here, rf = 4 and rg = 7, and the 
angle between them, qfg, is p because the vectors point in opposite directions. Therefore
 
f • g = rfrg cos qfg = 4 × 7 × cos p
 
= 4 × 7 × (−1) = −28
 8. Once again, let’s use the formula for the dot product of two vectors, based on their 
magnitudes and the angle between them. The magnitudes are rf = 4 and rg = 7. We see 
the angle qfg, going counterclockwise from f to g, as p /2. Then
 
f • g = rfrg cos qfg = 4 × 7 × cos (p /2)
 
= 4 × 7 × 0 = 0

 
 When we go clockwise from g to f, we negate the angle between them because we’ve 
reversed our direction. The angle qgf, going clockwise from g to f, is −p /2. In this case 
we have
 
g • f = rgrf cos qgf = 7 × 4 × cos (−p /2)
 
= 7 × 4 × 0 = 0
 9. Let’s use the formula for the magnitude of the cross product of two vectors, based on 
their individual magnitudes and the angle between them. We have rf = 4 and rg = 7. 
The angle qfg, going counterclockwise from f to g, is p /2. The magnitude rf×g of the 
cross product vector f ë g is therefore
 
rf×g = rfrg sin qfg = 4 × 7 × sin (p /2)
 
= 4 × 7 × 1 = 28
 
 Because we see the rotation going counterclockwise from f to g, the vector f ë g points 
toward us. According to the reverse-directional commutative law for cross products, 
we know that g ë f has the same magnitude as f ë g, but g ë f points in the opposite 
direction (that is, away from us).
 10. Our vector b starts out (2,0,0), so b points in the same direction as a. This fact tells us 
that the cross product a ë b is the zero vector. As b starts rotating counterclockwise, the
vector a ë b “sprouts and grows” toward us along the +z axis. When b = (0,2,0), having 
gone through p /2 radians of rotation in the xy plane, the magnitude ra×b of the cross 
product vector is 2 × 2 = 4, and a ë b points toward us. As b keeps rotating, a ë b starts
 to “shrink” while continuing to point toward us along the +z axis. When b = (−2,0,0),
having gone through p radians of rotation, vector b points in the opposite direction 
from vector a, so a ë b is the zero vector again. As the rotation continues, a ë b “sprouts 
and grows” directly away from us along the −z axis. When b = (0,−2,0), having turned 
through 3p /2 radians of rotation, ra×b = 2 × 2 = 4, and a ë b points away from us. After 
that, a ë b “shrinks” again while continuing to point away from us along the −z axis, 
vanishing to the zero vector when b = (2,0,0), having passed through a full rotation in 
the xy plane. If b keeps rotating indefinitely, the cross product vector a ë b oscillates 
alternately toward and away from us along the z axis, attaining peak magnitudes of 4 at 
the instants when b lies along the y axis, and vanishing to the zero vector at the instants 
when b lies along the x axis.
Chapter 9
 1. In cylindrical coordinates, the graph of the equation q = 0 appears as a vertical plane 
perpendicular to the reference plane, and passing through the reference axis. In xyz
space, this would be the xz plane. The graph of r = 0 is a vertical straight line that 
coincides with the h axis. In xyz space, this would be the z axis. The graph of h = 0 is a 
horizontal plane that coincides with the reference plane. In xyz space, this would be the 
xy plane.
Chapter 9  507

508  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 1-9
r = 6
Each radial division
= 2 units
Each vertical division
= 2 units
h = 8
Reference
axis: q = 0
(3p/4, 6, 8)
+x
–x
+y
–y
+z
–z
q = 3p/4
Figure A-8  Illustration for the solution to Problem 2 in 
Chap. 9. Each radial division represents 2 units. 
Each vertical division also represents 2 units.
 2. Figure A-8 is a plot of the point (q,r,h) = (3p /4,6,8) in cylindrical coordinates.
 3. We want to find the (x,y,z) representation of the point (q,r,h) = (p /4,0,1). Let’s use the 
conversion formulas we learned. Here are the formulas again:
 
x = r cos q
 
y = r sin q
 
z = h
 
 Plugging in the values, we get
 
x = 0 cos p /4 = 0
 
y = 0 sin p /4 = 0
 
z = h = 1
 
 Therefore, the Cartesian equivalent point is
(x,y,z) = (0,0,1)
 4. We want to convert the xyz space point (−4,1,0) to cylindrical coordinates. In this 
situation, we have x = −4 and y = 1. To find the angle, we should use the formula
q = p + Arctan ( y /x)
 
 because x < 0 and y > 0. When we plug in the values for x and y, we get
q = p + Arctan [1/(−4)] = p + Arctan (−1/4)

 
 When we input the values for x and y to the formula for r, we get
r = [(−4)2 + 12]1/2 = (16 + 1)1/2 = 171/2
 
 Because z = 0, we know that
h = z = 0
 
 The exact cylindrical equivalent point is
(q,r,h) = {[p + Arctan (−1/4)],171/2,0}
 
 Using a calculator set for radians to approximate the angle coordinate to four decimal 
places, we get
q = p + Arctan (−1/4) ≈ 3.1416 + (−0.2450) ≈ 2.8966
 
 When we approximate the radius coordinate to four decimal places, we obtain
r = 171/2 ≈ 4.1231
 
 The approximate ordered triple representing our point in cylindrical coordinates is 
therefore
(q,r,h) ≈ (2.8966,4.1231,0)
 
 The first coordinate represents an angle in radians. The second and third coordinates 
represent linear displacements in space.
 5. We want to find the (x,y,z) equivalent of (q,r,h) = (p /4,21/2,1). First, let’s find x. Using 
the cylindrical-to-Cartesian conversion equation, we get
x = r cos q = 21/2 cos (p /4) = 21/2 × 21/2/2 = 2/2 = 1
 
 The cylindrical-to-Cartesian conversion equation for y tells us that
y = r sin q = 21/2 sin (p /4) = 21/2 × 21/2/2 = 2/2 = 1
 
 Finding z involves no conversion at all. We have simply
z = h = 1
 
 Therefore, the Cartesian equivalent point of the cylindrical (q,r,h) = (p /4,21/2,1) is
(x,y,z) = (1,1,1)
 
 That’s what we began with when we worked out the example in the chapter text.
Chapter 9  509

510  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 1-9
 6. In spherical coordinates, the graph of the equation q = 0 appears as a vertical plane 
containing the reference axis. In xyz space, this would be the xz plane. It’s exactly the 
same situation as we had in the cylindrical coordinate system when we solved Problem 1,
because the horizontal direction angles are identical in both systems. The graph of 
f = 0 in spherical coordinates is a vertical straight line that coincides with the Cartesian 
z axis. The graph of r = 0 in spherical coordinates is the origin point. In xyz space, it’s 
(0,0,0).
 7. Figure A-9 is a plot of the point (q,f,r) = (3p /4,p /4,8) in spherical coordinates.
 8. We have a point in spherical three-space whose coordinates are given by
P = (q,f,r) = (p /4,0,1)
 
 The formula for x is
x = r sin f cos q
 
 When we plug in the spherical values, we get
x = 1 sin 0 cos (p /4) = 1 × 0 × 21/2/2 = 0
 
 The formula for y is
y = r sin f sin q
 
 Plugging in the spherical values, we get
y = 1 sin 0 sin (p /4) = 1 × 0 × 21/2/2 = 0
+x
–x
+z
–z
+y
f = p/4
Reference
plane
r = 8
(3p/4, p/4, 8)
Each
radial
division
= 1 unit
–y
q = 3p/4
Figure A-9  Illustration for the solution to Problem 7 in 
Chap. 9. Each radial division represents 1 unit.

 
 The formula for z is
z = r cos f
 
 Plugging in the spherical values, we get
z = 1 cos 0 = 1 × 1 = 1
 
 Therefore, the coordinates in xyz space are
P = (0,0,1)
 9. We want to convert the xyz space point (−4,1,0) to spherical coordinates. To find the 
radius, we use the formula
r = (x2 + y2 + z2)1/2
 
 Plugging in the values, we get
r = [(−4)2 + 12 + 02]1/2 = (16 + 1 + 0)1/2 = 171/2
 
 To find the horizontal angle, we use the formula
q = p + Arctan ( y /x)
 
 because x < 0 and y > 0. When we plug in the values for x and y, we get
q = p + Arctan [1/(−4)] = p + Arctan (−1/4)
 
 To find the vertical angle, we can use the formula
f = Arccos (z /r)
 
 We already know that r = 171/2, so
f = Arccos (0/171/2) = Arccos 0 = p /2
 
 Our spherical ordered triple, listing the coordinates in the order P = (q,f,r), is
P = {[p + Arctan (−1/4)],p /2,171/2}
 
 Using a calculator set for radians and rounding the irrational values to four decimal 
places, we get
 
q = p + Arctan (−1/4) ≈ 3.1416 + (−0.2450) ≈ 2.8966
 
f = p /2 ≈ 3.1416 / 2 ≈ 1.5708
 
r = 171/2 ≈ 4.1231
Chapter 9  511

512  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 1-9
 
 Therefore, we can approximate the spherical coordinates as
P ≈ (2.8966,1.5708,4.1231}
 10. We’re given the point P in cylindrical three-space as
P = (q,r,h) = [3p /4,61/2/2,61/2/2]
 
 Our first task is to find the equivalent coordinates in xyz space. Here are the conversion 
formulas once again, for reference:
x = r cos q
 
y = r sin q
 
z = h
 
 Plugging in the numbers to these formulas gives us
 
x = 61/2/2 cos (3p /4) = 61/2/2 × (–21/2/2) = –31/2/2
 
y = 61/2/2 sin (3p /4) = 61/2/2 × 21/2/2 = 31/2/2
 
z = h = 61/2/2
 
 Therefore, we have the Cartesian equivalent point
P = (x,y,z) = (−31/2/2,31/2/2,61/2/2)
 
 When we check this against the intermediate result we got as we solved the last 
challenge in the chapter text, we see that the two agree. So far, we’re doing okay! Now 
let’s convert this Cartesian ordered triple to spherical coordinates. To find the spherical 
radius, we use the formula
r = (x2 + y2 + z2)1/2
 
 Plugging in the values, we get
 
r = [(−31/2/2)2 + (31/2/2)2 + (61/2/2)2]1/2 = (3/4 + 3/4 + 6/4)1/2
 
= (12/4)1/2 = 31/2
 
 To find the horizontal angle, we use the formula
q = p + Arctan ( y /x)
 
 because x < 0 and y > 0. When we plug in the values for x and y, we get
q = p + Arctan [31/2/(−31/2)] = p + Arctan (−1) = p + (−p /4) = 3p /4
 
 To find the vertical angle, we can use the formula
f = Arccos (z /r)

 
 We already know that r = 31/2, so
f = Arccos [(61/2/2)/31/2] = Arccos (21/2/2) = p /4
 
 Our spherical ordered triple, listing the coordinates in the order P = (q,f,r), is therefore
P = (3p /4,p /4,31/2)
 
 This is the original spherical angle in the challenge from the chapter text. We’ve worked 
the problem out in both directions without running into any trouble, so we can be 
confident that we didn’t make any errors either way.
Chapter 9  513

514
These solutions do not necessarily represent the only ways the chapter-end problems can be 
figured out. If you think you can solve a particular problem in a quicker or better way than 
you see here, by all means go ahead! But always check your work to be sure your alternative 
answer is correct.
Chapter 11
 1. The domain of the relation shown in Fig. 11-10 is set X. We’ve been told that the 
relation never maps any element of set X into more than one element of set Y. Set Y
contains no elements outside the co-domain. Therefore, the relation is an injection. 
The illustration shows that the relation maps elements X completely onto set Y, so the 
relation is a surjection. Because the relation is both an injection and a surjection, it’s 
a bijection by definition. In this example, the range happens to be the same as the co-
domain. That’s not true of all relations. This relation is a function, because no element 
in the domain maps to more than one element in the range.
 2. Every positive integer y in set Y (the range) has infinitely many rational numbers x from 
set X (the domain) assigned to it. For example, if we take the integer y = 5 in set Y, it 
can correspond to any rational x in set X such that 4 < x ≤ 5. The relation is clearly 
not one-to-one, so it’s not an injection. For any positive integer y in set Y, we can find 
at least one positive rational x in set X that maps to it, so the relation is a surjection. 
The relation is not a bijection; it would have to be both an injection and a surjection 
to “qualify” for that status. If we take any positive rational number x in the domain X,
we can never map it to more than one positive integer y in the range Y. Therefore, our 
relation is a function of x.
 3. This relation, like the one described in Problem 2, is not one-to-one, so it isn’t an 
injection. For any positive rational number y in set Y, we can find a positive integer x in 
set X that maps to it, so we have a surjection. The relation is not a bijection, because it isn’t 
both an injection and a surjection. If we take any positive integer x in the domain X,
APPENDIX 
B
Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: 
Chapter 11-19

we can map it to infinitely many positive rationals y in the range Y. Therefore, this 
relation is not a function of x.
 4. A relation whose graph is a circle or ellipse in the Cartesian xy plane can never be a 
function of x, because such a graph always fails the vertical-line test. Figure B-1 shows 
several examples.
 5. A relation whose graph is a circle or ellipse in the polar qr plane is a function of qr if
the origin is inside the circle or ellipse. Figure B-2A shows a simple example in which 
a circle is centered at the origin in the polar plane. When we graph this relation the 
“Cartesian way” as shown in Fig. B-2B, we get a straight, horizontal line that passes the 
vertical-line test.
 6. We’ve been given the functions
f (x) = x + 2
 
 and
g (x) = 3
 
 Their sums are
( f + g)(x) = f (x) + g (x) = (x + 2) + 3 = x + 5
x
y
Movable
vertical
line
Figure B-1  Illustration for the solution to Problem 4 in 
Chap. 11.
Chapter 11  515

516  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
Figure B-2  Illustration for the solution to Problem 5 
in Chap. 11. At A, each radial division 
represents 1 unit. At B, the divisions are 
as labeled.

 
 and
( g + f   )(x) = g (x) + f (x) = 3 + (x + 2) = x + 5
 
 Their differences are
( f −g)(x) = f (x) −g (x) = (x + 2) − 3 = x − 1
 
 and
( g −f   )(x) = g (x) −f (x) = 3 − (x + 2) = −x + 1
 
 Their products are
( f  × g)(x) = f (x) × g (x) = (x + 2) × 3 = 3x + 6
 
 and
( g × f   )(x) = g (x) × f (x) = 3 × (x + 2) = 3x + 6
 
 Their ratios are
( f /g)(x) = f (x)/g (x) = (x + 2)/3 = x /3 + 2 /3
 
 and
( g /f   )(x) = g (x)/f (x) = 3/(x + 2)
 7. We’ve been given the functions
f (x) = x + 1
 
 and
g (x) = x − 1
 
 Their sums are
( f + g)(x) = f (x) + g (x) = (x + 1) + (x − 1) = 2x
 
 and
( g + f   )(x) = g (x) + f (x) = (x − 1) + (x + 1) = 2x
 
 Their differences are
( f −g)(x) = f (x) −g (x) = (x + 1) − (x − 1) = 2
Chapter 11  517

518  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 
 and
( g −f   )(x) = g (x) −f (x) = (x − 1) − (x + 1) = −2
 
 Their products are
( f  × g)(x) = f (x) × g (x) = (x + 1)(x − 1) = x 2 − 1
 
 and
( g × f   )(x) = g (x) × f (x) = (x − 1)(x + 1) = x 2 − 1
 
 Their ratios are
( f  /g)(x) = f (x)/g (x) = (x + 1)/(x − 1)
 
 and
( g /f   )(x) = g (x)/f (x) = (x − 1)/(x + 1)
 8. We’ve been given the functions
f (x) = x−1
 
 and
g (x) = x−2
 
 Their sums are
 ( f + g)(x) = f (x) + g (x) = x−1 + x−2
 
 and
( g + f   )(x) = g (x) + f (x) = x−2 + x−1 = x−1 + x−2
 
 Their differences are
 ( f −g)(x) = f (x) −g (x) = x−1 −x−2
 
 and
( g −f   )(x) = g (x) −f (x) = x−2 −x−1 = −x−1 + x−2
 
 Their products are
 ( f  × g)(x) = f (x) × g (x) = x−1x−2 = x−3

 
 and
( g × f   )(x) = g (x) × f (x) = x−2x−1 = x−3
 
 Their ratios are
 ( f  /g)(x) = f (x)/g (x) = (x−1)/(x−2) = x−1x 2 = x
and
( g /f   )(x) = g (x)/f (x) = (x−2)/(x−1) = x−2x = x−1
 9. We’ve been given the functions
f (x) = sin2 q
 
 and
g (x) = cos2 q
 
 Their sums are
 ( f + g)(x) = f (x) + g (x) = sin2 q + cos2 q = 1
 
 and
( g + f   )(x) = g (x) + f (x) = cos2 q + sin2 q = 1
 
 Their differences are
 ( f −g)(x) = f (x) −g (x) = sin2 q − cos2 q
 
 and
( g −f   )(x) = g (x) −f (x) = cos2 q − sin2 q
 
 Their products are
( f  × g)(x) = f (x) × g (x) = sin2 q cos2 q
 
 and
( g × f   )(x) = g (x) × f (x) = cos2 q sin2 q = sin2 q cos2 q
 
 Their ratios are
( f  /g)(x) = f (x)/g (x) = (sin2 q)/(cos2 q) = tan2 q
 
 and
( g /f   )(x) = g (x)/f (x) = (cos2 q)/(sin2 q) = cot2 q
Chapter 11  519

520  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 10. We must remember that the domain of a sum, difference, product, or ratio function is 
the intersection between the domains of the constituent functions. Also, in the case of 
a ratio, the domain can’t include any value where the denominator becomes 0. With 
these facts in mind, let’s go through the solutions we derived for Problems 6 through 9 
and evaluate all the possible real-number domains:
 
 Problem 6 and its solutions: The domains of both f and g encompass all real numbers. 
Therefore, the domains of all the sum, difference, and product functions are the entire 
set of reals. The domain of f  /g is the entire set of reals, because g never attains the 
value 0. The domain of g /f is the set of all reals except −2, because
f (−2) = −2 + 2 = 0
 
 Problem 7 and its solution: The domains of both f and g encompass all reals, so the 
domains of all the sum, difference, and product functions are the entire set of reals. The 
domain of f  /g is the entire set of reals except 1, because
g (1) = 1 − 1 = 0
 
 The domain of g /f is the entire set of reals except −1, because
f (−1) = −1 + 1 = 0
 
 Problem 8 and its solutions: The domains of both f and g include all reals except 0, so the 
domains of all the sum, difference, and product functions encompass all reals except 0. 
The same holds for both ratio functions. There are no additional restrictions, because 
neither denominator can ever become 0.
 
 Problem 9 and its solutions: The domains of both f and g are the entire set of reals, so 
the domains of all the sum, difference, and product functions encompass all reals. The 
domain of f /g is the entire set of reals except all odd-integer multiples of p /2, because 
the square of the cosine of any odd-integer multiple of p /2 is equal to 0. The domain 
of g /f is the entire set of reals except all integer multiples of p, because the square of the 
sine of any integer multiple of p is equal to 0.
Chapter 12
 1. We want to find the inverse of the relation
f (x) = 2x + 4
 
 If we call the dependent variable y, then
y = 2x + 4
 
 Swapping the names of the variables, we get
x = 2y + 4

 
 which can be manipulated with algebra to obtain
y = x / 2 − 2
 
 If we replace the new variable y by the relation notation f −1 (x), we get
f −1 (x) = x / 2 − 2
 2. We want to find the inverse of the relation
g (x) = x 2 − 4x + 4
 
 Calling the dependent variable y, we can write this as
y = x 2 − 4x + 4
 
 which factors to
y = (x − 2)2
 
 When we swap the names of the variables, we get
x = (y − 2)2
 
 Taking the complete square root of both sides produces
± x1/2 = y − 2
 
 which can be manipulated with algebra to obtain
y = 2 ± x1/2
 
 Replacing y by g −1 (x), we get
g −1(x) = 2 ± x1/2
 3. We want to find the inverse of the relation
h (x) = x 3 − 5
 
 Calling the dependent variable y, we have
y = x 3 − 5
 
 Swapping the names of the variables yields
x = y3 − 5
Chapter 12  521

522  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 
 which can be morphed algebraically into
y = (x + 5)1/3
 
 Replacing y by h −1 (x), we get
h −1 (x) = (x + 5)1/3
 4. Let’s examine each situation by imagining what happens when we try to input real 
numbers to the original relations, and working from there:
 
 Problem 1 and its solution: The relation and its inverse are
f (x) = 2x + 4
 
 and
f −1(x) = x / 2 − 2
 
 We can input any real number into either of these relations, and we always get a 
meaningful result. Therefore, the domains of f and f   −1 both span the entire set of real 
numbers. The range of f −1 is the same as the domain of f, and the range of f is the same 
as the domain of f   −1. Therefore, the ranges of f and f   −1 both include all real numbers.
 
 Problem 2 and its solution: The relation and its inverse are
g (x) = x 2 − 4x + 4
 
 and
g −1(x) = 2 ± x1/2
 
 We can input any real number we choose into g, and we always get a meaningful result. 
However, that result is always nonnegative, because it’s the square of the real-number 
quantity (x − 2). It’s possible for the output of g to equal 0; that happens when the 
input is 2. The range of g is therefore the set of all nonnegative reals. The domain of g −1
is identical to the range of g, so the domain of g −1 spans the set of all nonnegative reals. 
The range of g −1 is the same as the domain of g, which is the set of all reals.
 
 Problem 3 and its solution: The relation and its inverse are
h (x) = x 3 − 5
 
 and
h −1(x) = (x + 5)1/3
 
 We can input any real number into h, and we always get a real-number output value. 
Therefore, the domain of h spans the entire set of reals. The same is true of the domain 

of h −1; the relation is defined for all possible real-number input values. The range of 
h −1 is the same as the domain of h, and the range of h is the same as the domain of h −1.
Therefore, the ranges of h and h −1 both span the set of all reals.
 5. The equation of our relation, as given in the problem, is
x 2 /4 −y 2 /9 = 1
 
 Let’s use algebra to morph this equation so it’s stated with y all by itself on the left-hand 
side and an expression containing only the variable x on the right-hand side. If we 
multiply through by 36, we get
9x 2 − 4y 2 = 36
 
 which can be rewritten as
−4y 2 = 36 − 9x 2
 
 Multiplying through by −1, we get
4y 2 = 9x 2 − 36
 
 When we divide through by 4, we obtain
y 2 = 9x 2 /4 − 9
 
 Taking the complete square root of both sides yields
y = ±(9x 2 /4 − 9)1/2
 
 Using relation notation to express this equation and name the relation f, we get
f (x) = ±(9x 2 /4 − 9)1/2
 
 That’s the relation! Now let’s find its inverse. We begin by restating the relation with y
on the left instead of f (x), so we have
y = ±(9x 2 /4 − 9)1/2
 
 Swapping the names of the variables gives us
x = ±(9y 2 /4 − 9)1/2
 
 When we square both sides, we obtain
x 2 = 9y 2 /4 − 9
Chapter 12  523

524  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 
 Adding 9 to each side, we get
x 2 + 9 = 9y 2 /4
 
 Multiplying through by 4, and then transposing the left- and right-hand sides of the 
equation, we come up with
9y 2 = 4x 2 + 36
 
 Dividing through by 9 yields
y 2 = 4x 2 /9 + 4
 
 After we take the complete square root of both sides, we have
y = ±(4x 2 /9 + 4)1/2
 
 Replacing the variable y by the relation notation f −1 (x), we conclude that
f −1 (x) = ±(4x 2 /9 + 4)1/2
 6. With the information stated in Problem 5, along with the graph of the relation shown 
in Fig. 12-2, we can see that the real-number domain of f is the set of all reals greater 
than or equal to 2, or smaller than or equal to −2. Another way of stating this is to say 
that the domain of f is the set of all reals except those in the open interval (−2,2). The 
range of f is clearly the set of all reals.
 7. Figure B-3 shows the graph of the original relation
f (x) = ±(9x 2 /4 − 9)1/2
 
 as a pair of gray curves, and the graph of the inverse relation
f −1 (x) = ±(4x 2 /9 + 4)1/2
 
 as a pair of black curves. The “point reflector” is the dashed line. The real-number 
domain of f   −1 is the same as the real-number range of f ; that’s the set of all reals. The 
real-number range of f   −1 is identical to the real-number domain of f ; that’s the set of all 
reals except those in the open interval (−2,2).
 8. Figure B-4 shows the graph of the original relation with its domain restricted to the 
reals greater than or equal to 2 ( gray curve) and its inverse (black curve). The curve for 
the inverse relation is a half-hyperbola that opens upward and intersects the y axis at 
(0,2). A movable vertical line never intersects the black curve at more than one point. 
Therefore, the inverse relation
f −1 (x) = (4x 2 /9 + 4)1/2
 
 is a true function of x.

Figure B-3  Illustration for the solution to 
Problem 7 in Chap. 12.
4
6
–4
–6
6
–4
–6
x
y
4
“Point
reflector”
line
Original
relation
Inverse
relation
Chapter 12  525
Figure B-4  Illustration for the solution to 
Problem 8 in Chap. 12.
4
6
–4
–6
6
–4
–6
x
y
4
Original
restricted
relation
Inverse of
original
restricted
relation
Movable
vertical
line
–2
–2

526  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 9. Figure B-5 shows the graph of the original relation with its domain restricted to the 
reals smaller than or equal to −2 ( gray curve) and its inverse (black curve). The curve 
for the inverse relation is a half-hyperbola that opens downward and intersects the y
axis at (0,−2). A movable vertical line never intersects the black curve at more than one 
point. Therefore, the inverse relation
f −1 (x) = −(4x 2 /9 + 4)1/2
 
 is a true function of x.
 10. Figure B-6 shows the graph of the original relation with its range restricted to the 
nonnegative reals (pair of gray curves) and the graph of its inverse (pair of black 
curves). A movable vertical line never intersects the graph of the original restricted 
relation at more than one point, so it’s a true function. Whenever the movable 
vertical line intersects the graph of the inverse, that line crosses both curves. On 
this basis, we know that the inverse of the original restricted relation is not a true 
function.
4
6
–4
–6
6
–4
–6
x
y
4
Original
restricted
relation
Inverse of
original
restricted
relation
Movable
vertical
line
2
2
Figure B-5  Illustration for the solution to Problem 9 in 
Chap. 12.

Chapter 13
 1. If the plane passes through the point where the apexes of the two cones meet, the 
intersection is a point, a straight line, or a pair of lines that intersect. Here’s how the 
situations break down:
• If the plane is slanted so that we’d get a circle or ellipse if the plane didn’t pass through 
the apexes, then we get a single point ( figs. B-7A and B).
• If the plane slants so that we’d get a parabola if the plane didn’t pass through the apexes, 
then we get a straight line ( fig. B-7C).
• If the plane slants so that we’d get a hyperbola if the plane didn’t pass through the 
apexes, we get a pair of lines that cross ( fig. B-7D).
 2. When we examine the graph of the ellipse, we see that the lower focus is at (0,0) and 
the lower vertex is at (0,−2). Therefore, the distance between the lower focus and the 
lower vertex is 2 units, telling us that the focal length is
f   = 2
4
6
–4
–6
6
–4
–6
x
y
4
“Point
reflector”
line
Movable
vertical
line
Original
restricted
relation
Inverse
of
original
restricted
relation
–2
2
–2
2
Figure B-6  Illustration for the solution to Problem 10 in 
Chap. 12.
Chapter 13  527

528  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 
 We can also see that the distance between the lower vertex and the directrix is 4 units, 
because the lower vertex is at (0,−2) and the directrix passes through (0,−6). Therefore
f  /e = 4
 
 Combining the above two equations and solving, we get
e = 1/2
 
 That’s the eccentricity of the ellipse.
 3. When we solved Problem 2, we determined that f   = 2 and e = 1/2. Plugging these 
values into the formulas relating the parameters of the ellipse, we obtain
u = 2 + 2 /(1/2) + y
 
 and
x 2 + y 2 = [(1/2) u]2
A
B
C
D
Double
circular
cone
Double
circular
cone
Flat
plane
Flat
plane
Double
circular
cone
Double
circular
cone
Flat
plane
Flat
plane
Figure B-7  Illustrations for the solution to Problem 1 in Chap. 13.

 
 These simplify to
u = 6 + y
 
 and
x 2 + y 2 = u2/4
 
 Let’s substitute the quantity (6 + y) for u in the second equation above. That gives us
x 2 + y 2 = (6 + y)2/4
 
 This is an equation for our ellipse, although it’s not in standard form.
 4. We’ve been told that both foci and both vertices lie on the y axis, so x = 0 at the lower 
vertex and also at the upper vertex. If we plug x = 0 into the equation we got in the 
solution to Problem 3, we’ll be left with an equation that tells us the y values at both 
vertices of the ellipse. Here it is
y 2 = (6 + y)2/4
 
 Multiplying through by 4, we obtain
4y 2 = (6 + y)2
 
 When we multiply out the squared binomial on the right-hand side, we get
4y 2 = 36 + 12y + y 2
 
 This is a quadratic equation. Let’s morph it with algebra into the standard form for a 
quadratic. That gives us
3y 2 − 12y − 36 = 0
 
 which factors into
(3y + 6)(y − 6) = 0
 
 The solutions are therefore
y = −2
 
 or
y = 6
 
 The first solution corresponds to the point (0,−2) on the ellipse. The second solution 
corresponds to (0,6) on the ellipse. We already know that the coordinates of the lower 
vertex are (0,−2), so the coordinates of the upper vertex must be (0,6).
Chapter 13  529

530  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 
 Now let’s find the coordinates of the upper focus. We already know that the lower focus 
is at (0,0). We also know that the lower vertex is at (0,−2), which is 2 units below the 
lower focus on the y axis. Because all ellipses are symmetrical with respect to the foci, 
the upper focus must be 2 units below the upper vertex on the y axis. Therefore, the 
coordinates of the upper focus must be (0,4).
 5. We can find the coordinates of our ellipse’s center by averaging the coordinates of the 
foci. The lower focus is at (0,0), while the upper focus is at (0,4). Therefore, the center 
must be at (0,2).
 
 The length of the vertical semi-axis (let’s call it b) is the distance between the center and 
the lower vertex, as shown in Fig. B-8. The center is at (0,2) and the lower vertex is at 
(0,−2), so the vertical semi-axis is 4 units long. (We get the same result if we use the 
center and the upper vertex.)
 
 To find the length of the horizontal semi-axis, we must know the coordinates of either 
the left-most point or the right-most point on the ellipse. These are the points where 
the horizontal line y = 2, which passes through the center of the ellipse, intersects the 
curve. To find these points, we can plug y = 2 into the equation we got for the ellipse 
when we solved Problem 3. When we make the substitutions, we obtain
x 2 + 22 = (6 + 2)2/4
x
y
Upper vertex is at (0, 6)
Lower vertex is at (0, –2)
b
a
Line y = 2
Left-most
point
on curve
Right-most
point
on curve
Center
(0, 2)
Figure B-8 
 Illustration for the solution to Problem 5 in 
Chap. 13.

 
 which simplifies to
x 2 = 12
 
 This equation solves easily to
x = 121/2
 
 or
x = −121/2
 
 telling us that the left-most point on the curve is at (−121/2,2), and the right-most point 
on the curve is at (121/2,2). The horizontal semi-axis (call it a) is therefore 121/2 units 
long.
 
 In the generalized standard form for the equation of an ellipse, the ordered pair (x0,y0)
represents the coordinates of the center point. We know that this point is (0,2). We’ve 
now figured out these four values:
x0 = 0
y0 = 2
a = 121/2
b = 4
 
 As you can guess, we chose the names of these parameters so that they’d fit neatly into 
the generalized standard form for the equation of an ellipse. That form is
 (x −x0)2/a2 + (y −y0)2 /b2 = 1
 
 Plugging in the numbers straightaway, we obtain
 (x − 0)2/(121/2)2 + (y − 2)2 /42 = 1
 
 which simplifies to
x 2/12 + (y − 2)2/16 = 1
 
 At last, we’ve found the standard-form equation for the ellipse graphed in Fig. 13-12! 
If you’re skeptical and ambitious, you’ll demand proof that this equation is equivalent 
to the one we got in the solution to Problem 3. Why not demonstrate that fact as an 
extra-credit exercise? Start with
x 2/12 + (y − 2)2/16 = 1
 
 and morph it into
x 2 + y 2 = (6 + y)2 /4
Chapter 13  531

532  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 6. Here’s the original equation again, for reference:
x 2 + 9y 2 = 9
 
 We can divide this equation through by 9 to obtain
x 2 /9 + y 2 = 1
 
 This equation is in the standard form for an ellipse. We recall that the general version is
(x −x0)2 /a2 + (y −y0)2 /b2 = 1
 
 where x0 and y0 are the coordinates of the center, a is the length of the horizontal semi-
axis, and b is the length of the vertical semi-axis. In this case, we have
x0 = 0
y0 = 0
a = 91/2 = 3
b = 11/2 = 1
 
 The center is at (0,0). The horizontal semi-axis measures 3 units. The vertical semi-axis 
measures 1 unit. We can now sketch the graph as shown in Fig. B-9.
x
y
a = 3
b = 1
Each axis increment
is 1/2 unit
x
y
0
0
,
(
) = (0, 0)
a
b
Figure B-9 
 Illustration for the solution to Problem 6 
in Chap. 13. Each axis division represents 
1/2 unit.

 7. Here’s the original equation again, for reference:
x 2 + y 2 + 2x − 2y + 2 = 4
 
 It takes some mathematical intuition to see how this can be morphed into the standard 
form for a conic section. We can split it into the sum of two trinomials as
(x 2 + 2x + 1) + (y 2 − 2y + 1) = 4
 
 The parentheses, while not technically necessary, clarify the identities of the trinomials. 
Both of these trinomials happen to be perfect squares. They can be factored to get
(x + 1)2 + (y − 1)2 = 4
 
 which is in the standard form for a circle. We remember that the general equation for a 
circle is
(x −x0)2 + (y −y0)2 = r2
 
 where (x0,y0) are the coordinates of the center, and r the radius. In this particular 
example, we have
x0 = −1
y0 = 1
r = 41/2 = 2
 
 The center is at (−1,1). The radius is 2 units. We can now sketch the graph as shown in 
Fig. B-10.
Figure B-10  Illustration for the 
solution to Problem 
7 in Chap. 13. 
Each axis division 
represents 1/2 unit.
x
y
(x0, y0) = (–1, 1)
r = 2
r
Each axis increment
is 1/2 unit
Chapter 13  533

534  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 8. Here’s the original equation again, for reference:
x 2 −y 2 + 2x + 2y = 4
 
 As in Problem 7, we must rely on our algebra experience to see how this can be 
transformed into an equation that’s in the standard form for a conic section. We can 
split it into a difference between two trinomials as
(x 2 + 2x + 1) − (y 2 − 2y + 1) = 4
 
 In this equation, the parentheses are necessary! The trinomials can be factored exactly as 
they were in the solution to Problem 7; when we do that, we obtain
(x + 1)2 − (y − 1)2 = 4
 
 We can divide through by 4, getting
(x + 1)2 /4 − (y − 1)2 /4 = 1
 
 This equation is in the standard form for a hyperbola. The general version, as we’ve 
learned, is
(x −x0)2 /a2 − (y −y0)2 /b2 = 1
 
 where (x0,y0) are the coordinates of the center, a is the length of the horizontal semi-axis, 
and b is the length of the vertical semi-axis. In this case, we have
x0 = −1
y0 = 1
a = 41/2 = 2
b = 41/2 = 2
 
 The center is at (−1,1). The horizontal and vertical semi-axes are both 2 units long. 
With this information, we can sketch the graph as shown in Fig. B-11.
 9. Here’s the original equation again, for reference:
x 2 − 3x −y + 3 = 1
 
 We can subtract 1 from each side to get
x 2 − 3x −y + 2 = 0
 
 Adding y to each side and then transposing the sides left-to-right yields
y = x 2 − 3x + 2

 
 This equation is in the standard form for a parabola. The coefficient of x 2 is positive, 
so we know that the parabola opens upward. When we divide the negative of the 
coefficient for x by twice the coefficient for x 2, we get the x value of the vertex point, 
which we can call x0. We have
x0 = −(−3)/(2 × 1) = 3/2
 
 To find the y value of the vertex point (let’s call it y0), we plug 3/2 into the function for 
x and grind out the arithmetic:
 
y0 = (3/2)2 − 3 × 3/2 + 2 = 9/4 − 9/2 + 2
 
= 9/4 − 18/4 + 8/4 = (9 − 18 + 8)/4
 
= −1/4
 
 Now we know that the coordinates of the vertex are (3/2,−1/4). Because the parabola 
opens upward, we know that this vertex is the absolute minimum point.
 
 The right-hand side of the standard-form equation factors into a product of two clean-
cut binomials
y = (x − 1)(x − 2)
x
y
a
b
a = 2
b = 2
(x0, y0) = (–1, 1)
Each axis
increment
is 1 unit
Figure B-11  Illustration for the solution to Problem 8 in 
Chap. 13. Each axis division represents 1 unit.
Chapter 13  535

536  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 
 If we set y = 0 and then solve the resulting quadratic equation, we get two roots that tell 
us the x-intercepts of the curve. The roots here can be read straight from the factors as
x = 1
 
 or
x = 2
 
 revealing that (1,0) and (2,0) lie on the parabola. These two points are close together, 
and they’re also close to the vertex. It’s difficult to draw a good image of the parabola 
based on these three points alone. But we can find the y-intercept, which is “farther 
out,” to help us draw the curve. When we plug in 0 for x, we get
y = 02 − 3 × 0 + 2 = 0 − 0 + 2 = 2
 
 indicating that (0,2) is on the parabola. Now that we know the coordinates of four 
points that lie on the parabola, we can do some “mental curve-fitting” and sketch the 
graph as shown in Fig. B-12.
x
y
(0, 2)
(1, 0)
(2, 0)
(3/2, –1/4)
Each axis increment
is 1/4 unit
Figure B-12  Illustration for the solution to Problem 9 
in Chap. 13. Each axis division represents 
1/4 unit.

 10. The standard-form general equation for a hyperbola in the xy plane is
(x −x0)2 /a2 − (y −y0)2 /b2 = 1
 
 where (x0,y0) are the coordinates of the center, a is the length of the horizontal semi-axis, 
and b is the length of the vertical semi-axis. The specific equation of our hyperbola is
(x − 1)2 /4 − (y + 2)2 /9 = 1
 
 From this equation, we can see that the constants are
x0 = 1
y0 = −2
a = 41/2 = 2
b = 91/2 = 3
 
 This information tells us that the hyperbola’s center is at (1,−2). The horizontal semi-
axis is 2 units wide. The vertical semi-axis is 3 units tall. We can therefore sketch the 
graph as shown in Fig. B-13.
x
y
D
b
a
Each axis
increment
is 1 unit
a = 2
b = 3
(x0, y0) = (1, –2)
Figure B-13  Illustration for the solution to Problem 10 in 
Chap. 13. Each axis division represents 1 unit.
Chapter 13  537

538  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 
 To find the equations of the asymptotes, we must know the coordinates of a point on 
each of them, and we must also know their slopes. The asymptotes intersect at the 
center of the hyperbola, which is at
 (x0,y0) = (1,−2)
 
 We know that this point lies on both asymptote lines. Let’s construct a rectangle D
whose width is twice the length of the horizontal semi-axis, and whose height is twice 
the length of the vertical semi-axis. The asymptotes pass through the corners of this 
rectangle, as shown in Fig. B-13. When we go from the center to the upper right-hand 
corner of D, the “rise over run” (an informal term for slope) is
b/a = 3/2
 
 so m = 3/2. We can therefore write the equation of the “up-ramping” asymptote in 
point-slope form as
y + 2 = (3/2)(x − 1)
 
 When we travel from the center to the lower right-hand corner of D, the “rise over run” 
is
b/a = −3/2
 
 so m = −3/2. We can therefore write the equation of the “down-ramping” asymptote in 
point-slope form as
y + 2 = (−3/2)(x − 1)
 
 If you insist on having the equations of these lines appear in the standard form for a 
linear equation in two-space, feel free to convert them to that form!
Chapter 14
 1. Suppose that there’s a real number x that satisfies the equation
ex = 0
 
 We know that our mystery number x can’t be equal to 0, because we can plug x = 0 
straightaway into the equation and get
e0 = 1
 
 based on the fact that any positive real number (including e) raised to the zeroth power 
is equal to 1. We’ve assumed that x is real, and we’ve discovered that x ≠ 0, so we can be 

certain that 1/x is a nonzero real number. Therefore, it’s okay for us to take the (1/x)th
power of both sides of the original equation to obtain
(ex)(1/x) = 0(1/x)
 
 which we can rewrite using the algebraic rules for exponents as
e[x(1/x)] = 0(1/x)
 
 When 0 is raised to any nonzero real power, the result is 0. That fact, along with 
another “dose” of the algebraic rules for exponents, allows us to streamline the above 
equation, getting
e(x /x) = 0
 
 which simplifies further to
e1 = 0
 
 and finally to
e = 0
 
 This statement is patently untrue. According to reductio ad absurdum, it follows that 
our original assumption must be false. We must conclude that no real-number power of 
e is equal to 0.
 2. The dashed gray curves in Fig. B-14 are the graphs of
y = ex
2
y
x
–2
–1
0
1
10
5
Figure B-14  Illustration for the 
solution to Problem 2 
in Chap. 14.
Chapter 14  539

540  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 
 and
y = e−x
 
 taken directly from Figs. 14-1A and 14-2A. Now let’s consider the function
y = ex e−x
 
 Using the algebraic rules for exponents, we can rewrite this as
y = e[x+(−x)]
 
 which simplifies to
y = e0
 
 and further to
y = 1
 
 The domain of this constant function encompasses all real numbers. The range is the 
set containing the single element 1. The graph is a solid black horizontal line passing 
through the point (0,1) in Fig. B-14.
 3. The dashed gray curves in Fig. B-15 are the graphs of
y = 10x
 
 and
y = 10−x
5
10
x
–1
0
1
y
Figure B-15  Illustration for the 
solution to Problem 3 
in Chap. 14.

 
 taken directly from Figs. 14-1B and 14-2B. Now let’s look at the ratio function
y = 10x /10−x
 
 Using the algebraic rules for exponents, we can rewrite this as
y = 10[x−(−x)]
 
 which simplifies to
y = 102x
 
 The domain encompasses all real numbers. The range is the set of all positive real 
numbers. The graph is the solid black curve in Fig. B-15.
 4. Figure B-16 shows the same graphs as Fig. B-15. However, in this illustration, the y axis 
is logarithmic, spanning the three orders of magnitude from 0.1 to 100. The dashed 
gray lines are the graphs of
y = 10x
 
 and
y = 10−x
y
10
1
3
0.3
30
100
x
–1
0
1
Figure B-16  Illustration for the 
solution to Problem 4 
in Chap. 14.
Chapter 14  541

542  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 
 The solid black line is the graph of
y = 102x
 5. Figure B-17 is the graph of the function
y = 10(1/x)
 
 for values of x ranging from −10 to 10. When we input x = 0, we get 101/0, which is 
undefined. For any other real value of x, the output value y is a positive real, so the 
domain is the set of all nonzero reals. No matter how large we want y to be when y > 1, 
we can always find some value of x that will produce it. No matter how small we want y
to be when 0 < y < 1, we can always find some value of x that will produce it. However, 
we can’t find any value for x that will give us y = 1. For that to happen, we must raise 
10 to the zeroth power, meaning that we must find some x such that 1/x = 0. No such x
exists, so the range of the function is the set of all positive reals except 1. The graph has 
a horizontal asymptote whose equation is y = 1, and a vertical asymptote corresponding 
to the y axis. The open circle at (0,0) tells us that this point is not part of the graph.
 6. Suppose that there’s a real number x that satisfies the equation
ln 0 = x
y
x
10
5
5
–10
10
–5
0
Asymptote
at y = 1
Domain includes all nonzero real numbers
Range includes
all positive
real numbers
except 1
Asymptote
along y axis
Figure B-17  Illustration for the solution to Problem 5 in Chap. 14.

 
 Let’s take the natural exponential of each side of this equation. That gives us
e(ln 0) = e x
 
 We know that the natural log function and the natural exponential function are inverses 
of each other. They “undo” each other’s work, as long as we stay within the domain of 
the natural log function. We’ve assumed that ln 0 is a real number, and therefore that 
it’s in the domain of the natural log function. Based on that assumption, we can rewrite 
the above equation as
0 = e x
 
 In the solution to Problem 1, we proved that no real number x can satisfy this equation. 
That result contradicts our original assumption here. By reductio ad absurdum, we are 
forced to conclude that the natural log of 0 is not a real number.
 7. The dashed gray curves in Fig. B-18 are the graphs of
y = ln x
 
 and
y = log10 x
 
 We want to graph the sum function
y = ln x + log10 x
 
 When we input several values, use a calculator to obtain the outputs, plot the points, 
and then connect the points by curve fitting, we get the solid black curve. The domain 
of this sum function is the set of positive reals, and the range is the set of all reals.
Figure B-18 
 Illustration for 
the solution to 
Problem 7 in 
Chap. 14.
0
10
5
y
x
–5
5
Chapter 14  543

544  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 8. The dashed gray curves in Fig. B-19 are the graphs of
y = ln x
 
 and
y = log10 x
 
 The portions of these curves below the x axis (that is, where y < 0) are cut off here, 
because we haven’t included any of the negative y axis. But the function values are still 
there, of course! We want to graph the product function
y = (ln x)(log10 x)
 
 When we input several values for x, use a calculator to obtain the outputs, plot the 
points, and then connect the points by curve fitting, we get the solid black curve. The 
domain of this product function is the set of all positive reals, and the range is the set of 
all nonnegative reals.
 9. Figure B-20 shows the same graphs as Fig. B-18. Here, the x axis is logarithmic, 
spanning the two orders of magnitude from 0.1 to 10. The dashed gray lines are the 
graphs of
y = ln x
 
 and
y = log10 x
 
 The solid black line is the graph of the sum function
y = ln x + log10 x
0
10
5
y
x
0
2
4
Figure B-19  Illustration for the 
solution to Problem 8 
in Chap. 14.

 10. Figure B-21 shows the same graphs as Fig. B-19. In this coordinate system, the x axis is 
logarithmic, spanning the single order of magnitude from 1 to 10. The y axis is linear, 
spanning the values from 0 to 2.5. The dashed gray lines are the graphs of
y = ln x
 
 and
y = log10 x
 
 The solid black curve is the graph of the product function
y = (ln x)(log10 x)
x
y
0
10
1
0.3
3
–5
5
Figure B-20  Illustration for the 
solution to Problem 9 
in Chap. 14.
0
y
x
10
1
3
1
2
Figure B-21  Illustration for the 
solution to 
Problem 10 in 
Chap. 14.
Chapter 14  545

546  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
Chapter 15
 1. Figure B-22 shows superimposed graphs of the sine and cosine functions (dashed gray 
curves) along with a graph of their difference function
h (q) = sin q − cos q
 
 shown as a solid black curve. The domain of h includes all real numbers. The range of h
is the set of all reals in the closed interval [−21/2,21/2].
 2. The solid black curve in Fig. B-23 is a graph of the difference between the squares of 
the sine and the cosine functions, which are shown as superimposed dashed gray curves. 
We have
h (q) = sin2 q − cos2 q
 
 The domain of h includes all of the real numbers. The range is the set of all real 
numbers in the closed interval [−1,1].
Each horizontal
division
is
/2 units
Each vertical
division
is 1/2 unit
h(q)
p
q
Figure B-22  Illustration for the solution to Problem 1
in Chap. 15. Each horizontal division 
represents p /2 units. Each vertical 
division represents 1/2 unit.

Each horizontal
division
is
/2 units
Each vertical
division
is 1/2 unit
h(q)
q
p
Figure B-24  Illustration for the 
solution to 
Problem 3 in 
Chap. 15. Each 
horizontal division 
represents p /2
units. Each vertical 
division represents 
1/2 unit. The 
vertical dashed 
lines are asymptotes 
of h. The positive 
dependent-variable 
axis is also an 
asymptote of h.
h(q)
Each horizontal division is /2 units
Each vertical division is 1/4 unit
q
p
Figure B-23  Illustration for the 
solution to 
Problem 2 in 
Chap. 15. Each 
horizontal division 
represents p /2
units. Each vertical 
division represents 
1/4 unit.
 3. The solid black complex of curves in Fig. B-24 is the graph of the ratio of the square of 
the cosine to the square of the sine. If we call the function h, then
h (q) = (cos2 q)/(sin2 q)
 
 The superimposed gray curves are graphs of the original sine-squared and cosine-
squared functions. The domain of h includes all real numbers except the integer 
multiples of p. The range of h spans the set of all nonnegative reals.
Chapter 15  547

548  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 4. The dashed gray curves in Fig. B-25 are the superimposed graphs of the secant and 
cosecant functions. The complex of solid black curves is a graph of the difference 
function
h (q) = sec q − csc q
 
 The domain of h includes all real numbers except the integer multiples of p /2. The 
range of h spans the set of all real numbers.
 5. The dashed gray curves in Fig. B-26 are the superimposed graphs of the secant-squared 
and cosecant-squared functions. The complex of solid black curves is a graph of the 
difference function
h (q) = sec2 q − csc2 q
 
 The domain of h includes all real numbers except the integer multiples of p /2. The 
range of h includes all real numbers.
Each horizontal division is /2 units
Each vertical division is 1 unit
h(q)
q
p
Figure B-25  Illustration for the solution to 
Problem 4 in Chap. 15. Each 
horizontal division represents 
p /2 units. Each vertical division 
represents 1 unit. The vertical 
dashed lines are asymptotes of h.
The dependent-variable axis is also 
an asymptote of h.

 6. We want to find a graph of the ratio function
h (q) = (csc2 q)/(sec2 q)
 
 We can simplify this function with some algebra, along with our knowledge of 
trigonometry. The secant is the reciprocal of the cosine, so the converse is also true. 
We have
1/(sec q) = cos q
 
 Squaring both sides, we get
1/(sec2 q) = cos2 q
 
 Substituting in the equation for our original ratio function, we get
h (q) = (csc2 q)(cos2 q)
h(q)
Each horizontal division is /2 units
Each vertical division is 1 unit
q
p
Figure B-26  Illustration for the solution to 
Problem 5 in Chap. 15. Each 
horizontal division represents 
p /2 units. Each vertical division 
represents 1 unit. The vertical
 dashed lines are asymptotes of h.
The dependent-variable axis is also 
an asymptote of h.
Chapter 15  549

550  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 
 The cosecant is the reciprocal of the sine, so
csc q = 1/(sin q)
 
 Squaring both sides gives us
csc2 q = 1/(sin2 q)
 
 Substituting in the modified equation for our original function, we obtain
f (q) = [1/(sin2 q)] (cos2 q) = [(cos q)/(sin q)]2
 
 The cosine divided by the sine is the cotangent, so we can substitute again to conclude 
that our original function is
h (q) = cot2 q
 
 with the restriction that we can’t define h for any input value where either the secant or 
the cosecant become singular.
 
 The solid black curves in Fig. B-27 show the result of squaring all the values of the 
cotangent function, noting the undefined values as asymptotes or open circles. The 
domain includes all real numbers except integer multiples of p /2, where one or the other 
of the original squared functions is singular. The range is the set of all positive reals.
Each horizontal
division
is
/2 units
Each vertical
division
is 1 unit
h(q)
q
p
Figure B-27  Illustration for the solution to 
Problem 6 in Chap. 15. Each 
horizontal division represents 
p /2 units. Each vertical division 
represents 1 unit. The vertical 
dashed lines are asymptotes of h.
The positive dependent-variable 
axis is also an asymptote of h.

 7. In Fig. B-28, the dashed gray curves are graphs of the tangent and cotangent functions. 
The solid black curves compose the graph of
h (q) = tan q − cot q
 
 The domain of h is the set of all reals except the integer multiples of p /2. The range is 
the set of all real numbers.
 8. In Fig. B-29, the dashed gray curves are graphs of the tangent-squared and cotangent-
squared functions. The solid black curves compose the graph of
h (q) = tan2 q − cot2 q
 
 The domain of h includes all reals except the integer multiples of p /2. The range is the 
set of all real numbers.
 9. In Fig. B-30, the dashed gray curves represent the squares of the secant and tangent 
functions. The solid black line with holes is a graph of
f (q) = sec2 q − tan2 q
Each horizontal division is /2 units
Each vertical division is 1 unit
h(q)
q
p
Figure B-28  Illustration for the solution to 
Problem 7 in Chap. 15. Each 
horizontal division represents 
p /2 units. Each vertical division 
represents 1 unit. The vertical 
dashed lines are asymptotes of h.
The dependent-variable axis is also 
an asymptote of h.
Chapter 15  551

552  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
h(q)
Each horizontal division is /2 units
Each vertical division is 1 unit
q
p
Figure B-29  Illustration for the 
solution to 
Problem 8 in 
Chap. 15. Each 
horizontal division 
represents p /2 units. 
Each vertical division 
represents 1 unit. 
The vertical dashed 
lines are asymptotes 
of h. The dependent-
variable axis is also an 
asymptote of h.
f(q)
Each horizontal
division
is
/2 units
Each vertical
division
is 1 unit
q
p
Figure B-30  Illustration for the 
solution to 
Problem 9 in 
Chap. 15. Each 
horizontal division 
represents p /2
units. Each vertical 
division represents 
1 unit.
 
 The domain of f is the set of all reals except the odd-integer multiples of p /2. The range 
of f is the set containing the number 1.
 10. In Fig. B-31, the dashed gray curves represent the squares of the cosecant and cotangent 
functions. The solid black line with “holes” is a graph of
f (q) = csc2 q − cot2 q
 
 The domain of f is the set of all reals except the integer multiples of p. The range of f is 
the set containing the number 1.

Chapter 16
 1. For reference, the parametric equations are
x = t 2
 
 and
y = t 3
 
 We can take the 1/3  power of both sides of the second equation to get
y1/3 = t
 
 Substituting y1/3 for t in the first equation yields
x = (y1/3)2
 
 which can be simplified to
x = y 2 /3
 
 This equation contains the variables x and y only, without the parameter t. There’s 
another way to approach this problem. We can take the positive-or-negative 1/2 power 
of both sides of the first original equation, getting
± x1/2 = t
f(q)
Each horizontal
division
is
/2 units
Each vertical
division
is 1 unit
q
p
Figure B-31  Illustration for the 
solution to 
Problem 10 in 
Chap. 15. Each 
horizontal division 
represents 
p /2 units. Each 
vertical division 
represents 1 unit.
Chapter 16  553

554  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 
 Then we can substitute ± x1/2 for t in the second original equation to obtain
y = (± x1/2)3 = ± x 3/2
 
 which contains the variables x and y only, without the parameter t.
 2. The second answer to Problem 1 is an expression of the relation in which x is the 
independent variable and y is the dependent variable. This relation is not a function of x.
We can see this by applying the vertical-line test to the graph of Fig. 16-4. The graph 
fails the test because, for all positive values of x, there are two values of y.
 3. For reference, the parametric equations are
q = t −1
 
 and
r = ln t
 
 We can take the natural exponential of both sides of the second equation to obtain
e r = e(ln t)
 
 which simplifies to
e r = t
 
 provided that t > 0, so we’re sure that ln t is defined. Substituting e r for t in the first 
original parametric equation yields
q = (e r)−1
 
 which simplifies to
q = e−r
 
 This equation contains the variables q and r only, without the parameter t. We can 
approach this problem another way. If we take the reciprocal of both sides of the first 
original parametric equation, we get
q −1 = (t −1)−1
 
 as long as t ≠ 0, so we’re sure that t −1 is defined. This simplifies to
q −1 = t
 
 When we substitute q −1 for t in the second parametric equation, we get
r = ln (q −1) = −ln q

 
 which, again, contains the variables q and r only, without the parameter t. This relation 
is defined only for positive real-number values of q.
 4. The second answer to Problem 3 is an expression of the relation in which q is the 
independent variable and r is the dependent variable. We can’t apply a line test directly
to Fig. 16-7, but we can graph the relation in a Cartesian coordinate plane with q on 
the horizontal axis and r on the vertical axis. When we do that, we get the curve shown 
in Fig. 16-6, with q in place of x and r in place of y. This graph passes the vertical-line 
test, indicating that r is a function of q.
 5. For reference, the parametric equations are
x = a cos t
 
 and
y = a sin t
 
 We’ve been assured that a ≠ 0, so we can divide the equations both through by a to 
obtain
x /a = cos t
 
 and
y /a = sin t
 
 Squaring both sides of both equations gives us
 (x /a)2 = cos2 t
 
 and
(y /a)2 = sin2 t
 
 When we add these two equations, left-to-left and right-to-right, we have
(x /a)2 + (y /a)2 = cos2 t + sin2 t
 
 The Pythagorean trigonometric identity for the sine and the cosine tells us that
cos2 t + sin2 t = 1
 
 for all real numbers t. Therefore, the preceding equation can be rewritten as
(x /a)2 + ( y /a)2 = 1
 
 Expanding the squared ratios on the left-hand side gives us
x 2 /a2 + y 2 /a2 = 1
Chapter 16  555

556  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 
 Multiplying through by a2, we get
x 2 + y 2 = a2
 
 which is the equation of a circle of radius a, centered at the origin. 
 6. When we subtract x 2 from both sides of the solution to Problem 5, we obtain
y 2 = a2 −x 2
 
 Taking the positive-or-negative square root of both sides gives us
y = ±(a2 −x 2)1/2
 
 This relation is not a function of x, as we can see when we apply the vertical-line test to 
the graph of Fig. 16-10. Whenever we input any value of the independent variable x that 
lies within the open interval (−a,a), our relation produces two values of the dependent 
variable y.
 7. For reference, the parametric equations are
x = sec t
 
 and
y = tan t
 
 When we square both sides of both equations, we obtain
x 2 = sec2 t
 
 and
y 2 = tan2 t
 
 Subtracting the second equation from the first, left-to-left and right-to-right, we get
x 2 −y 2 = sec2 t − tan2 t
 
 From trigonometry, the Pythagorean identity for the secant and the tangent tells us that
sec2 t − tan2 t = 1
 
 for all real numbers t except odd-integer multiples of p /2. The preceding equation can 
therefore be rewritten as
x 2 −y 2 = 1
 
 which represents the unit hyperbola in the Cartesian xy plane.

 8. For reference, the parametric equations are
x = a csc t
 
 and
y = b cot t
 
 We’ve been assured that a ≠ 0, so we can divide the first equation through by a to 
obtain
x /a = csc t
 
 We’ve also been told that b ≠ 0, so we can divide the second equation through by b,
getting
y /b = cot t
 
 Squaring both sides of both equations gives us
(x /a)2 = csc2 t
 
 and
(y /b)2 = cot2 t
 
 When we subtract the second equation, left-to-left and right-to-right, from the first 
one, we obtain
(x /a)2 − (y /b)2 = csc2 t − cot2 t
 
 The Pythagorean identity for the cosecant and the cotangent tells us that
csc2 t − cot2 t = 1
 
 for all real numbers t except integer multiples of p. Knowing this, we can rewrite the 
preceding equation as
(x /a)2 − (y /b)2 = 1
 
 Expanding the squared ratios on the left-hand side gives us
x 2/a2 −y 2 /b2 = 1
 
 which represents a hyperbola centered at the origin in the Cartesian xy plane. The width 
of the horizontal (x-coordinate) semi-axis is a units, and the height of the vertical 
(y-coordinate) semi-axis is b units.
Chapter 16  557

558  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 9. We start with the relation
x = sin (cos y)
 
 Suppose we assign our parameter t such that
cos y = t
 
 Taking the arccosine of both sides, we get
arccos (cos y) = arccos t
 
 which simplifies to
y = arccos t
 
 That’s one of our parametric equations. We can substitute t for cos y in the original 
equation to get
x = sin t
 
 That’s the other parametric equation.
 10. As in Problem 9, we start with the relation
x = sin (cos y)
 
 Taking the arcsine of both sides gives us
arcsin x = arcsin [sin (cos y)]
 
 which simplifies to
arcsin x = cos y
 
 When we take the arccosine of both sides, we obtain
arccos (arcsin x) = arccos (cos y)
 
 which simplifies to
arccos (arcsin x) = y
 
 Transposing the left- and right-hand sides, we get the sought-after equation
y = arccos (arcsin x)

 
 Now let’s derive this equation from the parametric equations in the solution to Problem 9. 
Those equations are
x = sin t
 
 and
y = arccos t
 
 We can take the arcsine of both sides of the first equation, getting
arcsin x = arcsin (sin t)
 
 This simplifies to
arcsin x = t
 
 Substituting arcsin x for t in the right-hand side of the second parametric equation, we 
obtain
y = arccos (arcsin x)
 
 which is the same equation we got from the original relation in terms of x and y without 
the parameter t.
Chapter 17
 1. The standard-form vector
−4i + 4j − 4k
 
 can be described by the ordered triple
(a,b,c) = (−4,4,−4)
 
 We’ve been told that one of the points in our plane is
(x0,y0,z0) = (0,0,0)
 
 The general formula for a plane in Cartesian xyz space is
a(x – x0) + b(y – y0) + c(z – z0) = 0
 
 Plugging in the known values, we get
–4(x – 0) + 4[y – 0] + (–4)(z – 0) = 0
Chapter 17  559

560  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 
 which simplifies to
–4x + 4y – 4z = 0
 2. The standard-form vector
−2i + 0j + 0k
 
 can be described by the ordered triple
(a,b,c) = (−2,0,0)
 
 One of the points in the plane is
(x0,y0,z0) = (4,5,6)
 
 The general formula for a plane in Cartesian xyz space is
a(x – x0) + b(y – y0) + c(z – z0) = 0
 
 Plugging in the known values, we get
–2(x – 4) + 0[y – 5] + 0(z – 6) = 0
 
 which simplifies to
–2x + 8 = 0
 3. We’ve been told that the equation of a certain sphere is
x 2 + 2x + 1 + y 2 − 2y + 1 + z2 + 8z + 16 = 64
 
 Grouping the addends by threes, we get
(x 2 + 2x + 1) + (y 2 − 2y + 1) + (z2 + 8z + 16) = 64
 
 Factoring each of the trinomials enclosed by parentheses, we obtain
(x + 1)2 + (y − 1)2 + (z + 4)2 = 64
 
 The general equation for a sphere in Cartesian xyz space is
(x −x0)2 + (y −y0)2 + (z −z0)2 = r2
 
 where (x0,y0,z0) are the coordinates of the center, and r is the radius. Based on this 
information, we can deduce that the coordinates of this sphere’s center are
(x0,y0,z0) = (−1,1,−4)
 
 and the radius r is the positive square root of 64, which is 8.

 4. We’ve been told that the coordinates of the center of a certain sphere are
(x0,y0,z0) = (5,7,−3)
 
 and the radius is
r = 231/2
 
 Once again, the general equation for a sphere in Cartesian xyz space is
(x −x0)2 + (y −y0)2 + (z −z0)2 = r2
 
 where (x0,y0,z0) are the coordinates of the center, and r is the radius. Plugging in the 
known values directly, we conclude that the equation for this particular sphere is
(x − 5)2 + (y − 7)2 + (z + 3)2 = 23
 5. Stated again for reference, the equation of our object is
8(x − 1)2 + 8(y + 2)2 + 6(z + 7)2 = 24
 
 Dividing through by 24, we obtain
(x − 1)2 /3 + (y + 2)2 /3 + (z + 7)2 /4 = 1
 
 This is the equation for a distorted sphere centered at
(x0,y0,z0) = (1,−2,−7)
 
 The length of the axial radius in the x direction is the positive square root of 3. The 
length of the axial radius in the y direction is also the positive square root of 3. The 
length of the axial radius in the z direction is the positive square root of 4, or 2, which 
is a little longer than the other two axes. Therefore, our object is an ellipsoid.
 6. Stated again for reference, the equation for the object under scrutiny is
400(x + 2)2 + 225(y − 4)2 + 144z2 − 3600 = 0
 
 When we add 3600 to each side, we get
400(x + 2)2 + 225(y − 4)2 + 144z2 = 3600
 
 Dividing through by 3600 yields
(x + 2)2 /9 + (y − 4)2 /16 + z2 /25 = 1
 
 This is the equation for a distorted sphere centered at
(x0,y0,z0) = (−2,4,0)
Chapter 17  561

562  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 
 The length of the axial radius in the x direction is 91/2, which is 3. The length of the 
axial radius in the y direction is 161/2, which is 4. The length of the axial radius in the z
direction is 251/2, which is 5. Because no two of the axial radii are the same, our object 
is an oblate ellipsoid.
 7. We’ve been told that the equation of a certain object is
x 2 + 2x + 1 + y 2 − 2y + 1 −z2 + 6z − 9 = 36
 
 Grouping the terms by threes, we get
(x 2 + 2x + 1) + (y 2 − 2y + 1) + (−z2 + 6z − 9) = 36
 
 which can be rewritten as
(x 2 + 2x + 1) + (y 2 − 2y + 1) − (z2 − 6z + 9) = 36
 
 Factoring each of the trinomials enclosed by parentheses, we obtain
(x + 1)2 + (y − 1)2 − (z − 3)2 = 36
 
 Dividing through by 36 gives us
(x + 1)2 /36 + (y − 1)2 /36 − (z − 3)2 /36 = 1
 
 This equation represents a hyperboloid of one sheet whose center is at 
(x0,y0,z0) = (−1,1,3)
 
 and whose axis is a line parallel to the coordinate z axis.
 8. We’ve been told that the coordinates of the vertex of an elliptic cone are (−2,3,4), and 
that the cone’s axis is parallel to the coordinate y axis. The equation must therefore be of 
the form
(x + 2)2 /a2 − (y − 3)2 /b2 + (z − 4)2 /c2 = 0
 
 where a, b, and c determine the eccentricity and orientation of the cross-sectional 
ellipses that we get when we slice through the cone with planes perpendicular to its 
axis. On the basis of the information given, all we can say about these constants is that 
they’re positive real numbers.
 9. Here’s the generalized equation for the elliptic cone described in Problem 8:
(x + 2)2 /a2 − (y − 3)2 /b2 + (z − 4)2 /c2 = 0
 
 This cone intersects the xz plane in a curve where the y value is always equal to 0. If we 
set y = 0 in the above equation, we get
(x + 2)2 /a2 − (0 − 3)2 /b2 + (z − 4)2 /c2 = 0

 
 which simplifies to
(x + 2)2 /a2 − 9/b2 + (z − 4)2 /c2 = 0
 
 If we add the quantity 9/b2 to both sides, we obtain
(x + 2)2 /a2 + (z − 4)2 /c2 = 9/b2
 
 Now we can divide through by the quantity 9/b2, getting
(x + 2)2 /(9a2 /b2) + (z − 4)2 /(9c2 /b2) = 1
 
 which can also be expressed as
(x + 2)2 /(3a/b)2 + (z − 4)2 /(3c/b)2 = 1
 
 This is a generalized equation for an ellipse in the Cartesian plane, where the variables 
are x and z. The center of the ellipse has the coordinates
(x0,z0) = (−2,4)
 
 The semi-axes have lengths 3a/b and 3c/b.
 10. Here, once again, is the generalized equation that we derived for the elliptic cone 
described in Problem 8:
 (x + 2)2 /a2 − (y − 3)2 /b2 + (z − 4)2 /c2 = 0
 
 This cone intersects the xy plane in a curve where z = 0 at every point. If we set z = 0 in 
the above equation, we get
(x + 2)2 /a2 − (y − 3)2 /b2 + (0 − 4)2 /c2 = 0
 
 We can simplify this equation to
(x + 2)2 /a2 − (y − 3)2 /b2 + 16/c2 = 0
 
 If we subtract the quantity 16/c2 from both sides, we obtain
(x + 2)2 /a2 − (y − 3)2 /b2 = −16/c2
 
 Dividing through by the quantity 16/c2, we obtain
(x + 2)2 /(16a2 /c2) − (y − 3)2 /(16b2 /c2) = −1
 
 which can be rewritten as
(x + 2)2 /(4a/c)2 − (y − 3)2 /(4b/c)2 = −1
Chapter 17  563

564  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 
 Finally, we can multiply the entire equation through by −1 to obtain
(y − 3)2 /(4b/c)2 − (x + 2)2 /(4a/c)2 = 1
 
 This is a generalized equation for a hyperbola in the Cartesian xy plane. It’s oriented 
differently than the hyperbolas in Chap. 13, however. Instead of opening in the positive 
and negative x directions as the hyperbolas in Chap. 13 do, this pair of curves opens in 
the positive and negative y directions. The coordinates of the center are
(x0,y0) = (−2,3)
 
 The lengths of the semi-axes are 4a/c and 4b/c.
Chapter 18
 1. We have a three-way equation for a straight line. We want to find the preferred (lowest) 
direction numbers, and then find the direction vector based on those numbers. We 
also want to know the coordinates of a specific point on the line; any point will suffice. 
Stated again for reference, our three-way equation is
x − 1 = y − 2 = z − 4
 
 This equation is in the standard symmetric form for a straight line in Cartesian xyz
space, so we don’t have to manipulate anything. The generalized standard-form 
symmetric equation is
 (x – x0)/a =  (y – y0)/b =  (z – z0)/c
 
 where (x0,y0,z0) are the coordinates of a specific point on the line, and a, b, and c are 
the direction numbers. Comparing the symmetric equation we’ve been given with the 
generalized form, we can see that
x0 = 1
y0 = 2
z0 = 4
 
 This tells us that (1,2,4) is a point on the line. We can also see that
a = 1
b = 1
c = 1
 
 so the direction numbers are (1,1,1). This set of numbers is in lowest form, because 
there’s no common divisor other than 1. We can write down a standard-form direction 
vector m from these values as
m = i + j + k

 2. Stated again for reference, the three-way equation for our line is
4x =  5y =  6z
 
 Dividing the entire equation through by 60, we obtain
x /15  = y /12  = z/10
 
 The generalized standard-form symmetric equation is
 (x – x0)/a =  (y – y0)/b =  (z – z0)/c
 
 where (x0,y0,z0) are the coordinates of a specific point on the line, and a, b, and c are the 
direction numbers. In this case, we have
x0 = 0
y0 = 0
z0 = 0
 
 This tells us that the origin (0,0,0) is on the line. We also have
a = 15
b = 12
c = 10
 
 so the line’s direction numbers are (15,12,10). This ordered triple is in lowest form, so 
the direction vector m is
m = 15i + 12j + 10k
 3. We’ve been given the symmetric equation
(x − 2)/3 =  (4y − 8)/4 =  (z + 5)/(−2)
 
 We can divide out the middle portion to get
(x − 2)/3 = y − 2 =  (z + 5)/(−2)
 
 This equation is in the standard symmetric form. Once again, the generalized standard-
form symmetric equation is
 (x – x0)/a =  (y – y0)/b =  (z – z0)/c
 
 In this situation, we have
x0 = 2
y0 = 2
z0 = −5
Chapter 18  565

566  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 
 so we know that the point (2,2,−5) is on the line. We can also see that
a = 3
b = 1
c = −2
 
 so the line’s direction numbers are (3,1,−2). This ordered triple is in lowest form. (We 
could divide it through by −1, but then we’d get two negative elements instead of only 
one.) The direction vector m is therefore
m = 3i + j − 2k
 4. Stated again for convenience, the parametric equations for our object are
x = −4
y = t
z = −t 2 − 1
 
 The first equation tells us that the object lies in the plane x = −4, which is perpendicular 
to the x axis, parallel to the yz plane, and 4 units distant from the yz plane on the 
−x side. We can draw projections of the coordinate y and z axes into the plane x = −4,
obtaining a Cartesian yz grid. In that system, our object is a parabola defined by
y = t
 
 and
z = −t2 − 1
 
 Substituting y for t in the second equation gives us
z = −y 2 − 1
 
 Figure B-32 is a graph of this curve as it looks when we see the plane x = −4 broadside 
from a point on the positive x axis at a considerable distance from the origin.
–4
–6
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
y
z
–8
–10
–12
Figure B-32 Illustration for the 
solution to Problem 4 in Chap. 18.

 5. Stated again for convenience, the parametric equations are
x = t2 + 2t
y = t
z = 0
 
 According to the last equation, the whole object lies in the plane z = 0, which coincides 
with the xy plane. In that system, the object is a parabola defined by
x = t2 + 2t
 
 and
y = t
 
 Substituting y for t in the first equation, we obtain
x = y 2 + 2y
 
 Figure B-33 is a graph of this curve as it looks when we observe the xy plane broadside 
from a point on the +z axis at a considerable distance from the origin.
x
y
6
–4
–6
4
–2
2
4
6
8
10
2
Figure B-33  Illustration for the solution to Problem 5 
in Chap. 18.
Chapter 18  567

568  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 6. We have been given the parametric equations
x = t
y = −7
z = t 2 /2 − 5
 
 According to the second equation, our object lies entirely in the plane y = −7. This 
plane is perpendicular to the y axis, parallel to the xz plane, and 7 units distant from the 
xz plane on the −y side. When we draw projections of the three-space x and z axes onto 
the plane y = −7, we create a coordinate grid for a parabola defined by
x = t
 
 and
z = t2 /2 − 5
 
 Let’s substitute x directly into the second of these equations to obtain
z = x 2 /2 − 5
 
 Figure B-34 is a graph of this equation as it appears when seen from a point of view 
broadside to the plane y = −7. We’re looking in the +y direction from somewhere along 
the −y axis, but quite a lot farther away from the origin than the point where y = −7.
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
6
–2
–4
–6
x
4
z
Figure B-34  Illustration for the solution to Problem 6 
in Chap. 18.

 7. Repeated for convenience, the parametric equations are
x = 4 cos t
y = 4 sin t
z = 1
 
 According to the last equation, the object is contained entirely in the plane z = 1, which 
is parallel to the xy plane and 1 unit away from it on the +z side. Within this plane, the 
parametric equations of the object reduce to
x = 4 cos t
 
 and
y = 4 sin t
 
 The graph is a circle in the plane z = 1, centered on the point (0,0,1) and having 
a radius of 4 units. Figure B-35 is a graph of this object as we would see it looking 
broadside at the plane z = 1, from a point fairly far from the origin on the +z axis.
2
6
–2
–6
2
6
–2
–6
x
y
Figure B-35  Illustration for the solution to Problem 7 
in Chap. 18.
Chapter 18  569

570  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 8. Repeated for convenience, the parametric equations are
x = 5 cos t
y = 0
z = 5 sin t
 
 According to the middle equation, the entire object lies in the plane y = 0, which 
is the xz plane. Within the Cartesian xz system, the equations describing the 
object are
x = 5 cos t
 
 and
z = 5 sin t
 
 The graph is a circle in the xz plane, centered at the origin and having a radius of 
5 units. Figure B-36 illustrates this circle as seen from somewhere along the −y axis. 
We’re fairly far from the origin, and we’re looking in the +y direction.
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
6
–2
–4
–6
x
4
z
Figure B-36 Illustration for the solution to Problem 8 
in Chap. 18.

 9. Repeated for convenience, the parametric equations are
x = 5 cos t
y = 3 sin t
z = p
 
 According to the last equation, the object is contained entirely in the plane z = p, which 
is parallel to the xy plane and p  units away from it on the +z side. Within that plane, 
the parametric equations are
x = 5 cos t
 
 and
y = 3 sin t
 
 The graph is an ellipse in the plane z = p  and centered on (0,0,p ). The major semi-axis 
is parallel to the x axis, and measures 5 units wide. The minor semi-axis is parallel to 
the y axis, and measures 3 units high. Figure B-37 is a graph of this ellipse as we gaze 
broadside at the plane z = p, from some location on the +z axis that’s considerably 
farther from the origin than (0,0,p ).
 10. Stated again for reference, the parametric equations are
x = 2 cos t
y = t/(2p )
z = 2 sin t
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
2
6
–2
–4
–6
x
y
4
Figure B-37  Illustration for the solution to 
Problem 9 in Chap. 18.
Chapter 18  571

572  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 
 The object described by these equations is a circular helix having a radius of 2 units, 
and centered on the y axis. Here are some values of x, y, and z that we can calculate as 
t varies, causing a point on the helix to complete a single revolution in a moving plane 
perpendicular to the y axis:
• When t = 0, we have x = 2, y = 0, and z = 0.
• When t = p /2, we have x = 0, y = 1/4, and z = 2.
• When t = p, we have x = −2, y = 1/2, and z = 0.
• When t = 3p /2, we have x = 0, y = 3/4, and z = −2.
• When t = 2p, we have x = 2, y = 1, and z = 0.
 
 Every time t increases by 2p, our point makes exactly one revolution in a moving 
plane that’s always perpendicular to the y axis. In addition, we can see that every 
time t increases by 2p, our point gets 1 unit more distant from the xz plane in the +y
direction. The pitch of the helix is therefore 1 linear unit per revolution.
 
  The sense of rotation is rather tricky to describe. Suppose that we’re somewhere on 
the y axis, and we direct our gaze in the −y direction. As the value of the parameter t
increases, causing a point on the helix to move generally toward us, the point appears 
to revolve counterclockwise around the y axis. The helix’s sense of rotation is therefore 
counterclockwise in the +y direction. Figure B-38 is a perspective drawing of the graph 
of this object in Cartesian xyz space.
z
+z
+y
x
–y
+x
Helix is
centered
on the
y axis
Each axis
division is
1 unit
Radius
of helix
= 2
Pitch
of helix
= 1
Helix turns
counterclockwise
as we move
in the +y direction
Figure B-38  Illustration for the solution to Problem 10 
in Chap. 18. Each axis division represents 
1 unit.

Chapter 19
 1. Here’s the sequence S again, for reference:
S = 5, 3, 1, −1, −3, −5, ...
 
 We can read the value of the first term directly as s0 = 5. After that, the terms proceed as 
follows:
• The second term is 3, which is 2 less than the first term.
• The third term is 1, which is 2 less than the second term.
• The fourth term is −1, which is 2 less than the third term.
• The fifth term is −3, which is 2 less than the fourth term.
• The sixth term is −5, which is 2 less than the fifth term.
 
 We’re told that S is an arithmetic sequence, so we can be sure that the terms always 
differ by the same constant c. The general form is
S = s0, (s0 + c), (s0 + 2c), (s0 + 3c), ...
 
 where s0 is the initial term and c is the constant. In this case, c = −2, giving us
 
S = [5], [5 + (−2)], [5 + 2 × (−2)], [5 + 3 × (−2)], ...
 
= 5, (5 − 2), (5 − 4), (5 − 6), (5 − 8), (5 − 10), ...
 
= 5, 3, 1, −1, −3, −5, ...
 
 The brackets in the first line and the parentheses in the second line aren’t technically 
necessary, but they serve to visually isolate the terms. In general, the nth term of the 
series is what we get when we multiply the constant c by n − 1 and then add it to s0.
The hundredth term in S is therefore
 
s0 + (n − 1)c =  5 + (100 − 1) × (−2)
 
=  5 + 99 × (−2)
 
=  5 + (−198)
 
=  5 − 198
 
= −193
 2. The values of the terms in the sequence S become large negatively without bound. We 
can choose an integer that’s as large negatively as we want, and we’ll always be able to 
find an element in S that’s still more negative. Therefore, S does not converge.
 3. We’re told that t0 = 2 and k = −4. Let’s plug these values into the general formula for an 
infinite geometric sequence
T = t0, t0k, t0k 2, t0k 3, t0k4, ...
Chapter 19  573

574  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 
 When we do that for the first seven terms, we get
t0 = 2
t1 = 2 × (−4) = −8
t2 = 2 × (−4)2 = 2 × 16 = 32
t3 = 2 × (−4)3 = 2 × (−64) = −128
t4 = 2 × (−4)4 = 2 × 256 = 512
t5 = 2 × (−4)5 = 2 × (−1024) = −2048
t6 = 2 × (−4)6 = 2 × 4096 = 8192
 
 This series does not converge. The terms’ actual values alternate between positive and 
negative. The absolute values increase by a factor of 4 with each succeeding term. In an 
intuitive sense, T “approaches both positive infinity and negative infinity.”
 4. This time, we’re given the values t0 = 2 and k = −1/4. We can plug these values into the 
general formula for an infinite geometric sequence
T = t0, t0k, t0k2, t0k3, t0k4, ...
 
 Calculating the first seven terms, we obtain
t0 = 2
t1 = 2 × (−1/4) = −1/2
t2 = 2 × (−1/4)2 = 2 × 1/16 = 1/8
t3 = 2 × (−4)3 = 2 × (−1/64) = −1/32
t4 = 2 × (−4)4 = 2 × 1/256 = 1/128
t5 = 2 × (−4)5 = 2 × (−1/1024) = −1/512
t6 = 2 × (−4)6 = 2 × 1/4096 = 1/2048
 
 This series converges on 0. The terms’ actual values alternate between positive and 
negative. The absolute values decrease by a factor of 4 with each succeeding term. In an 
intuitive sense, T “approaches 0 from both sides.”
 5. Here’s the sequence B again, for reference:
B = 0/1, 1/2, 2 /3, 3/4, 4/5, ..., (n − 1)/n, ...
 
 When we add the elements of B, we obtain the series
B+ = 0/1 + 1/2 + 2 /3 + 3/4 + 4/5 + ··· + (n − 1)/n + ···
 
 In summation notation, we can write
B+ =
n=
∞
∑
1
(n − 1)/n

 
 The first five terms of the sequence B*, listing the partial sums of B+, are
B* = 0/1, 1/2, 7/6, 23/12, 163/60, ...
 
 As we continue to calculate partial sums, we keep adding values that get closer and 
closer to 1. The terms in B* grow at an ever-increasing rate. If we choose any positive 
real number, no matter how large, we can eventually generate an element of B* that 
exceeds it. Therefore, the sequence B* of partial sums does not converge.
 6. Here’s the series again, expressed in summation notation:
S+ =
i
n
=∑
1
1/10i
 
 When we write out the first five terms of S+ as fractions, we get the sum
S+ = 1/10 + 1/100 + 1/1000 + 1/10,000 + 1/100,000 + ···
 
 Expressing the terms as powers of 10, we have
S+ = 10−1 + 10−2 + 10−3 + 10−4 + 10−5 + ···
 
 Expressing the terms as decimal quantities, we have
S+ =  0.1 + 0.01 + 0.001 + 0.0001 + 0.00001 + ···
 
 The first five terms in the sequence of partial sums S* are
S* = 0.1, 0.11, 0.111, 0.1111, 0.11111, ...
 7. We want to find the limit
Lim
n→∞
i
n
=∑
1
1/10i
 
 if it exists. From the results of Problem 6, we see that it’s the limit of the sequence of 
partial sums
S* = 0.1, 0.11, 0.111, 0.1111, 0.11111, ...
 
 so we know that
Lim
n→∞
i
n
=∑
1
1/10i =  0.11111...
 
 We learned in our algebra courses that 0.11111... = 1/9. Therefore
Lim
n→∞
i
n
=∑
1
1/10i =  1/9
Chapter 19  575

576  Worked-Out Solutions to Exercises: Chapter 11-19
 8. When n = 2, the partial sum is
(1 + 2)/22 = 0.75
 
 When n = 6, the partial sum is approximately
 (1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6)/62 = 0.58333
 
 When n = 10, the partial sum is
 (1 + 2 + 3 + ··· + 8 + 9 + 10)/102 = 0.55
 
 When n = 20, the partial sum is
 (1 + 2 + 3 + ··· + 18 + 19 + 20)/202 = 0.525
 
 We’re approaching 1/2 from the right (the positive side). If you’re a computer expert, try 
programming your machine to work out the partial sums for much larger values of n,
and see more clearly that 1/2 (or 0.5) is indeed the limit of this sequence of partial sums.
 9. Refer to Table B-1 for squares of integers from 1 to 20. When n = 2, the partial sum is
 (12 + 22)/23 = 0.625
Table B-1. Squares and cubes of positive 
integers from 1 to 20.
n
n2
n3
1 
1 
1
2 
4 
8
3 
9 
27
4 
16 
64
5 
25 
125
6 
36 
216
7 
49 
343
8 
64 
512
9 
81 
729
10 
100 
1000
11 
121 
1331
12 
144 
1728
13 
169 
2197
14 
196 
2744
15 
225 
3375
16 
256 
4096
17 
289 
4913
18 
324 
5832
19 
361 
6859
20 
400 
8000

 
 When n = 6, the partial sum is approximately
 (12 + 22 + 32 + 42 + 52 + 62)/63 ≈ 0.42130
 
 Remember that the “wavy” equals sign means “is approximately equal to.” When n =
10, the partial sum is
 (12 + 22 + 32 + ··· + 82 + 92 + 102)/103 = 0.385
 
 When n = 20, the partial sum is
 (12 + 22 + 32 + ··· + 182 + 192 + 202)/203 = 0.35875
 
 We’re approaching 1/3 from the right. If you’re a computer expert, try programming 
your machine to work out the partial sums for much larger values of n, and see more 
clearly that 1/3 (or 0.33333...) is indeed the limit of this sequence of partial sums.
 10. Refer to Table B-1 for cubes of integers from 1 to 20. When n = 2, the partial sum is
 (13 + 23)/24 = 0.5625
 
 When n = 6, the partial sum is approximately
(13 + 23 + 33 + 43 + 53 + 63)/64 ≈ 0.34028
 
 When n = 10, the partial sum is
 (13 + 23 + 33 + ··· + 83 + 93 + 103)/104 = 0.3025
 
 When n = 20, the partial sum is
 (13 + 23 + 33 + ··· + 183 + 193 + 203)/204 = 0.27563
 
 We’re approaching 1/4 from the right. If you’re a computer expert, try programming 
your machine to work out the partial sums for much larger values of n, and see more 
clearly that 1/4 (or 0.25) is indeed the limit of this sequence of partial sums.
Chapter 19  577

578
 
1. d 
2. a 
3. b 
4. d 
5. c
 
6. e 
7. e 
8. d 
9. e 
10. c
 
11. c 
12. b 
13. e 
14. c 
15. e
 
16. c 
17. e 
18. d 
19. b 
20. d
 
21. a 
22. a 
23. e 
24. b 
25. c
 
26. b 
27. a 
28. d 
29. e 
30. d
 
31. a 
32. b 
33. c 
34. d 
35. e
 
36. a 
37. a 
38. e 
39. b 
40. a
 
41. e 
42. c 
43. a 
44. a 
45. d
 
46. c 
47. e 
48. d 
49. a 
50. c
 
51. e 
52. e 
53. c 
54. b 
55. a
 
56. b 
57. c 
58. a 
59. d 
60. e
 
61. e 
62. c 
63. a 
64. a 
65. d
 
66. c 
67. a 
68. d 
69. b 
70. b
 
71. b 
72. d 
73. a 
74. a 
75. e
 
76. a 
77. c 
78. b 
79. d 
80. c
 
81. d 
82. b 
83. b 
84. c 
85. e
 
86. a 
87. e 
88. e 
89. a 
90. e
 
91. c 
92. d 
93. e 
94. c 
95. c
 
96. e 
97. a 
98. a 
99. a 
100. d
APPENDIX 
C
Answers to Final Exam Questions

Symbol 
First use 
Meaning
∈ 
Chapter 1 
Set symbol meaning “is an element of”
 
(x,y) 
Chapter 1 
Ordered pair (x,y)
 
 
 
 Open interval where x < y, such that neither x nor y
is included
 
[x,y) 
Chapter 1 
 Half-open interval where x < y, such that x is 
included but y is not
 
(x,y] 
Chapter 1 
 Half-open interval where x < y, such that y is 
included but x is not
 
[x,y] 
Chapter 1 
 Closed interval where x < y, such that x and y are 
both included
Δ 
Chapter 1 
 Uppercase Greek letter delta, symbolizing difference 
in coordinate values
≈ 
Chapter 1 (App. A) 
 “Squiggly” or “wavy” equals sign, symbolizing 
approximate equality
q 
Chapter 2 
 Lowercase Greek letter theta, symbolizing an angular 
variable
f 
Chapter 2 
 Lowercase Greek letter phi, symbolizing an angular 
variable
± 
Chapter 2 
 Positive or negative value
∞ 
Chapter 2 
 Lemniscate, denoting inﬁ nity
• 
Chapter 5 
 Boldface dot, symbolizing the dot product of vectors
× 
Chapter 5 
 Boldface multiplication symbol, denoting the cross 
product of vectors
i 
Chapter 6 
Positive square root of −1
j 
Chapter 6 
 Positive square root of −1, also called j operator
i 
Chapter 8 
 Standard unit vector (1,0,0) in Cartesian xyz space
j 
Chapter 8 
 Standard unit vector (0,1,0) in Cartesian xyz space
k 
Chapter 8 
 Standard unit vector (0,0,1) in Cartesian xyz space
⇔ 
Chapter 10 
 Logical equivalence symbol, meaning “if and only if”
APPENDIX 
D
Special Characters in Order of 
Appearance
579

580  Special Characters in Order of Appearance
f −1 
Chapter 12 
 Inverse of relation or function f
 
loge 
Chapter 14 
 Natural (base-e) logarithm
 
ln
 
log10 
Chapter 14 
 Common (base-10) logarithm
Lim 
Chapter 19 
 Limit of a sequence, series, or function
Σ 
Chapter 19 
 Uppercase Greek letter sigma, symbolizing 
summation of a sequence

Bluman, A., Math Word Problems Demystified, New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005.
Bluman, A., Pre-Algebra Demystified, New York: McGraw-Hill, 2004.
Gibilisco, S., Algebra Know-It-ALL, New York: McGraw-Hill, 2008.
Gibilisco, S., Calculus Know-It-ALL, New York: McGraw-Hill, 2009.
Gibilisco, S., Mastering Technical Mathematics, 3d ed., New York: McGraw-Hill, 2008.
Gibilisco, S., Technical Math Demystified, New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006.
Huettenmueller, R., Algebra Demystified, New York: McGraw-Hill, 2003.
Huettenmueller, R., College Algebra Demystified, New York: McGraw-Hill, 2004.
Huettenmueller, R., Pre-Calculus Demystified, New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005.
Krantz, S., Calculus Demystified, New York: McGraw-Hill, 2003.
Krantz, S., Differential Equations Demystified, New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005.
Olive, J., Maths: A Student’s Survival Guide, 2d ed., Cambridge, England: Cambridge 
University Press, 2003.
Prindle, A., Math the Easy Way, 3d ed., Hauppauge, NY: Barron’s Educational Series, 1996.
Shankar, R., Basic Training in Mathematics: A Fitness Program for Science Students, New York: 
Plenum Publishing Corporation, 1995.
Suggested Additional Reading
581

This page intentionally left blank 

A
absolute minimum, 217
absolute value of complex number, 103–105
acceleration vector, 61
acute angle, 22
addition of functions, 222–223, 401–402
additive inverse, 60
alternative three-space, 152–171
algebra with functions, 222–227
algebraic way to find inverse relation, 
229–231
angle naming, 21–22
anticommutative property of cross 
product, 87
arc, 18
Arccosine function, 166–167
Arctangent function, 47–48, 182
arithmetic mean, 15
arithmetic progression, 374
arithmetic sequence, 373–378, 432–434
arithmetic series, 374
associative law
in algebra of functions, 226
for vector addition, 138
for vector-scalar multiplication, 138
asymptotes of hyperbola, 256–257
axes in Cartesian three-space, 111–112, 
194–195
axes in Cartesian two-space, 4, 6
axis of helix, 364
axis of parabola, 254, 351
B
basic circular functions, 23–30
biaxial planes, 112–113, 195
bijection, 63, 212, 214–215, 
238, 400
C
Cartesian complex-number plane, 92–93, 
191–192
Cartesian direction of vector, 58
Cartesian cross product, 148–150
Cartesian dot product, 79–82, 187
Cartesian magnitude of vector, 56–57
Cartesian model of complex vector, 101
Cartesian negative of vector, 60, 135, 183, 
199–200
Cartesian plane, 3–20, 173
Cartesian product of scalar and vector, 73–75, 
185. 200
Cartesian three-space, 111–127, 194–202
Cartesian-to-cylindrical coordinate 
conversion, 157–159, 204–205
Cartesian-to-polar complex vector conversion, 
102–103, 191–193
583
Index

584
Index
Cartesian-to-polar coordinate conversion, 47–52, 
181–182
Cartesian-to-spherical coordinate conversion, 
166–168, 206–207
Cartesian two-space, 3–20, 173
Cartesian vector difference, 60–61, 71, 135–136, 
184, 199–200
Cartesian vector sum, 59–60, 70, 134–135, 137, 
183, 199
Cartesian xy plane, 3–20, 173
Cartesian xyz space, 111–127, 194–202
circle
centered at origin, 236
in Cartesian three-space, 357–363
in Cartesian two-space, 258–259, 315–316
in polar coordinates, 41
circle eccentricity, 256, 407–408
circle equation, 258–259, 315–316, 
357–363, 411
circle geometry, 249–252, 407–411
circle specifications, 255–256
circular functions, 21–26
circular helix in Cartesian three-space, 363–369, 
431
circular motion, 25–26
closed interval, 5, 172–173
closed surfaces, 336
co-domain, 214–215
coefficients of quadratic equation, 350
common exponential function, 266–267, 
411–413
common logarithmic function, 273–274, 
413–416
commutative law
in algebra of functions, 226
for dot product, 146
for vector addition, 61–62, 138
for vector-scalar multiplication, 138
complex conjugates, 97, 191
complex number difference, 96, 98, 190
complex number product, 96, 98, 190
complex number ratio, 96–97, 99, 190
complex number raised to power, 97, 99–100
complex number sum, 96–98, 190
complex numbers, 90–110, 190–194
complex vector difference, 104
complex vector power in polar coordinates, 105
complex vector product in polar coordinates, 
104–106
complex vector ratio in polar coordinates, 
104–107
complex vector sum, 104
complex vectors, 101–110
conic sections, 249–265
constant angle in polar coordinates, 40
constant radius in polar coordinates, 41
convergence, 379–380, 434–435
convergent sequence, 380, 434–435
convergent series, 380, 434–435
coordinates in Cartesian two-space, 3–4
coordinate transformation, 45–52, 362
cosecant function, 30–31, 34, 177–178, 
290–295
cosine function, 27–28, 33, 177, 285–290
cosine wave, 27–28
cotangent function, 32, 34, 177–179, 296–301
cross product, 82–87, 144–150, 188–189, 202
cubic function, 357
cylindrical conversions, 156–159
cylindrical coordinates, 152–159, 202–205
cylindrical-to-Cartesian coordinate conversion, 
156–157, 204
cylindrical-to-spherical coordinate conversion, 
169–170
D
degree measure, 22–23
degree of arc, 22
“deltas,” 13–14
DeMoivre’s theorem, 107–108, 193–194
dependent variable, 3, 37, 400–401
destination set, 211, 214, 399
difference between functions, 224, 400–401
directed line segment, 55
directional diagonal of parallelogram, 59
direction angle(s) 
in Cartesian three-space, 131, 133–134
in cylindrical coordinates, 152–153, 203
in polar coordinates, 37–38, 179–180
in trigonometry, 23–24
direction numbers in Cartesian 
three-space, 345–346, 348–350, 
428–429

Index  585
direction of vector, 55, 58, 62–63, 131, 
133–134, 182–183, 199
directrix of parabola, 254
distance between two points, 12–15, 120–122, 
174–175, 196–197
distance of point from origin, 8–11, 116–120, 
174, 196
distributive laws 
in algebra of functions, 226
for cross product, 147
for dot product, 147
for scalar addition, 138
for vector addition, 139
distorted sphere in Cartesian xyz space, 328–337, 
426–427
division of functions, 225, 400–401
domain of relation, 211, 214–215, 407
dot product, 79–82, 141–143, 146–148, 
187–188, 201
“dueling spirals,” 221
E
e (exponential constant), 266
eccentricity of conic section, 254–258
ellipse
in Cartesian three-space, 362–363
centered at origin, 237
ellipse eccentricity, 257–258, 407–408
ellipse equation, 258–260, 262, 362–363, 410
ellipse foci, 256
ellipse geometry, 249–252, 407–411
ellipse specifications, 255–256
ellipsoid in Cartesian xyz space, 330–332, 335, 
426–427
elliptical helix, 368–369
elliptic cone, 339–340, 427
equations for conic sections, 258–263, 410–411
equivalent vector, 128
Euler’s constant, 266
exponential constant, 266
exponential functions, 266–272, 411–413
F
flare angle, 250
focal length of parabola, 254–256, 408–410
foci of ellipse, 256
focus of parabola, 253–256, 408–410
force vector, 61
frequency of wave function, 285
function, concept of, 39, 173, 180, 216–228
G
geometric progression, 379
geometric sequence, 378–381, 433–434
geometric series, 379–380, 433–434
graphic way to find inverse relation, 231–238
graph(s)
of arithmetic sequence, 375
of conic sections, 259–261
of geometric sequence, 380–381
involving cosecant function, 290–295
involving cosine function, 285–290
involving exponential functions, 266–272, 
411–413
involving logarithmic functions, 273–282, 
413–416
involving secant function, 290–295
involving sine function, 285–290
involving trigonometric functions, 285–295, 
416–419
of parametric equations, 308–314
H
half-hyperbola, 252
half-open interval, 5, 172–173
harmonic sequence, 382–383
height in cylindrical coordinates, 152–153, 
203–204
helix, 363–369
horizontal angle in spherical coordinates, 
160, 206
horizontal semi-axis, 260
hyperbola asymptotes, 256–257
hyperbola eccentricity, 256, 407–408
hyperbola equation, 261–262, 411
hyperbola geometry, 256–257, 407–411
hyperbola graph, 220
hyperbola specifications, 256–257, 407–411
hyperboloid of one sheet, 337–338, 341, 427
hyperboloid of two sheets, 338–339, 341, 427

586
Index
I
identities, trigonometric, 33–34, 179
imaginary number line, 91–93
imaginary numbers, 90–91, 189
independent variable, 3, 37, 400–401
inflection point, 29
infinity, 29
injection, 212, 214–215, 399–400
interval notation, 3–5, 172–173
“inverse ellipse,” 237–238
inverse function, 238–246, 405–407
inverse relation, 229–248, 402–407
inverse trigonometric function, 47
JKL
j operator, 90, 189
left-hand limit, 392, 435
left-hand scalar multiplication of 
vector, 130
lemma, 283
light cone, 251–252
limit
of function, 390–394, 434–435
of sequence, 382–385, 434–435
of series, 388–389, 394–396, 434–435
line from parametric equations, 304–308, 
345–350
line in Cartesian three-space, 345–350
logarithmic coordinate planes, 279–282
logarithmic functions, 273–282, 413–416
logarithms of reciprocals, 274–279
“log” key on calculator, 278
log-log coordinates, 280–282
M
magnitude of vector, 55–57, 62–63, 131, 182, 
198–199
major semi-axis, 253
mathematical rigor, 2
maximal domain, 214–215
midpoint between two points, 15–18, 122–125, 
175–176, 197–198
minor semi-axis, 253
“mirror-image spirals,” 41–43
mitosis, 382
mixed vectors and scalars, 148
multiplication of functions, 225, 400–401
N
naming angles, 21–22
natural exponential function, 266–267, 411–413
natural logarithmic function, 273–274, 413–416
negative angle, 24
negative direction angle, 38, 63, 179, 184, 203
negative eccentricity, 257
negative radius coordinates, 38, 153, 179–180, 
184, 203–204
negative magnitude of vector, 63
nonpositive reals, 276
nonstandard direction angles, 38, 153, 160–161, 
203, 206
O
oblate ellipsoid in Cartesian xyz space, 332–333, 
335, 426–427
oblate sphere in Cartesian xyz space, 329–331, 
334, 426–427
obtuse angle, 22
offbeat angles, 23–24
one-to-one correspondence, 63, 212, 400
onto relation, 212, 399–400
open interval, 5, 172–173
open surfaces, 336
ordered pair, 3–4, 174, 211–212
ordered triple, 113–114, 195–196
ordinate, 25
origin of Cartesian two-space, 3
originating point of vector, 55
P
parabola axis, 254
parabola directrix, 254, 408–409
parabola eccentricity, 256, 407–408
parabola equation, 260–263, 410–411
parabola focus, 253–254, 256, 408–409
parabola geometry, 249–252, 407–411
parabola in Cartesian three-space, 
350–357
parabola vertex, 253

Index  587
parameter, 304, 307, 419–420, 424
parametric equations
from graphs, 314–317 
in three-space, 345–372, 428–431
in two-space, 304–319, 419–424
parametric method, 346–347
partial sums, 377–378, 432–434
peak amplitude of wave function, 285, 
416–419
peaks of wave function, 285
peak-to-peak amplitude of wave function, 288
period of wave function, 285, 416–419
perpendicular bisector, 232
pitch
of helix, 364
of spiral, 42
planes in Cartesian xyz space, 320–323, 
424–425
plot
of arithmetic sequence, 375
of geometric sequence, 380–381
point of inflection, 29
polar complex-number plane, 102, 191–192
polar complex vector power, 105
polar complex vector product, 104–106
polar complex vector ratio, 104–107
polar coordinates, 37–54, 156, 179–181
polar cross product, 83–85 188–189
polar direction of vector, 62–63
polar dot product, 79–82, 187–188
polar magnitude of vector, 62–63
polar model of complex vector, 102
polar negative of vector, 67, 185
polar product of scalar and vector, 75–79, 
185–187
polar-to-Cartesian complex vector conversion, 
103, 193
polar-to-Cartesian coordinate transformation, 
45–46, 181, 184
polar two-space, 37–54
polar vector difference, 66–68, 70, 185
polar vector sum, 64–66, 69, 185
“pool rule” for axis orientation, 115, 195
positive or negative infinity, 29
powers of −j, 94–95
primary circular functions, 23–30
principal branch of tangent function, 47–48
product 
of functions, 225, 400–401
of scalar and vector, 73–79, 130–131
projection point
in cylindrical coordinates, 152–153
in spherical coordinates, 160, 165
pure imaginary quantity, 93
pure real quantity, 93
Pythagorean identities, 33–34, 179, 288–289, 
303
Pythagorean theorem, 8, 117, 174, 254
Q
quadrants in Cartesian two-space, 6–7, 173
quadratic equation, 350
quadratic function, 350, 353–356
quartic function, 357
Quod erat demonstradum, 82
quotient of functions, 225, 400–401
R
radar display, 38–39
radian measure, 22, 176
radius
in cylindrical coordinates, 152–153
in polar coordinates, 37–38, 179–180
of sphere, 327
in spherical coordinates, 160
range of relation, 211, 214–215, 407
ratio of functions, 225, 400–401
real domain, 226
real-number coefficient, 91
real-number domain, 226
real-number line, 3–4, 92–93
rectangular coordinates, 7
rectangular three-space, 111, 195
rectangular xyz space, 111, 195
reference axis 
in cylindrical coordinates, 152–153
in spherical coordinates, 160
reference plane 
in cylindrical coordinates, 152–153
in spherical coordinates, 160
reflex angle, 22
relation, 39, 173, 180, 211–228, 399–400

588
Index
reciprocals of exponential functions, 267–271
restricted domain and range, 243
reverse-directional commutative law for cross 
product, 146
right angle, 22
right-hand limit, 391–392, 435
right-hand rule for cross products, 86–87, 189
right-hand scalar multiplication of vector, 131
rigor, 62
rigor mortis, 62
S
scalar, 73–79
scalar times vector, 73–79
secant function, 30–31, 34, 177–178
secondary circular functions, 30–33
second-degree equation, 158
semi-axis, 253, 260
semilogarithmic coordinates, 279–282
sense of helix rotation, 367–368
sequence, 373–398, 431–434
series, 374–398, 431–434
similar triangles, 16, 46
sine function, 25–26, 33, 177, 285–290
sine wave, 26
singularity, 29
source set, 211, 214, 399
sphere in Cartesian xyz space, 324–328, 
425–426
sphere radius, 327
spherical conversions, 164–170
spherical coordinates, 159–170, 205–207
spherical-to-Cartesian coordinate conversion, 
164–166, 206
spherical-to-cylindrical coordinate conversion, 
169–170
spiral from parametric equations, 306–307
spiral in polar coordinates, 41–43, 221
square 
of cosecant function, 292–295
of cosine function, 286–290
of cotangent function, 298–301
of secant function, 292–295
of sine function, 286–290
of tangent function, 298–301
square root of negative real number, 90, 94
standard form of vector, 55–57, 128–130, 182, 
198–199
standard unit vectors, 139–140, 200–201
straight angle, 22
straight line in polar coordinates, 40
straight line segment, 18
subtraction of functions, 224, 400–401
summation notation, 385–388, 434
sum of functions, 222–223, 401–402
surfaces in three-space, 320–344
surjection, 212, 214–215
symmetric-form equation, 345–346
symmetric method, 345–346
T
tangent function, 28–29, 34, 177–178, 296–301
terminating point of vector, 55
“tightness” of spiral, 42
time as a parameter, 307, 424
trigonometric curves, 285–303, 285–295
trigonometric identities, 33–34, 179
trigonometry, 21–36
two-space function, 216–228, 400
two-space relation, 211–228, 400
two-space inverse relation, 229–248
U
unit circle, 21
unit hyperbola, 262
unit imaginary number, 90, 189
unit vectors, 139–140, 200–201
VW
variables 
in Cartesian three-space, 111–112, 194–195
in Cartesian two-space, 3
in polar plane, 37–39 179
vector, definition of, 55, 182
vector basics, 55–72
vector difference, 60–61, 71, 135–136
vector product, 82–87
vector sum, 59–60, 70, 134–135, 137, 
140–141
vector times scalar, 73–79

Index  589
vectors
in three-space, 128–151
in two-space, 55–72
velocity vector, 61
Venn diagram, 214
vertex of parabola, 253
vertical angle in spherical coordinates, 160, 206
vertical-line test for function, 216, 400–401
vertical semi-axis, 260
XYZ
x component of vector, 56
x-linear semilog coordinates, 279–280, 282
xy plane, 56, 112–113
xz plane, 112–113
y component of vector, 56
y-linear semilog coordinates, 280–282
yz plane, 112–113
zero vector, 71

